Senna, the interim director for
LESC and secretary designate
Mariana Padilla from PED, um, I
will try to keep this as brief
as possible, given that we only
have an hour. It's quite a long
motion, uh, but let's go ahead
and jump into the purpose for
today's hearing. I know we came
to you in July to talk about
where we are in Martinez Yazi,
and since then,
The plaintiffs have filed a
motion with the court, which is
very extensive. Now I want to
Reiterate that it's just a
motion. So today we're just
going to be going over some of
what was in the motion, but the
court hasn't actually scheduled
a hearing yet to date.
And there's really been no
action taken on the motion. It's
simply kind of a signal of what
the plaintiffs are thinking at
this point. Back in 2018 when
the original order was made by
the court, we had advised you
all to think about your specific
roles within addressing the
lawsuit's findings. So what
should the legislature be doing,
which should PD be doing and
what should schools be doing?
You'll see that kind of
Sprinkled throughout the rest of
the presentation about things
that you have done as a
legislature, things that PED has
done and things that schools
have done and also to think
about in this motion, there's a
big absence about what schools
should be doing in this space.
It's mostly been catered to what
the legislature and PD should be
doing. So just to to keep that
framework in mind as we go
through this presentation.
To summarize the motion,
He, uh, the plaintiffs have
declared that
The state has
The noncompliant with Martinez
Yazi and 3 major categories. One
student outcomes, efficiencies
with the department, and a lack
of a remedial plan.
Uh, the order that the
plaintiffs are requesting is for
LESC staff to create a
multi-year plan.
Uh, going all the way to 2030
for compliance. And I'll let
John talk more about that in his
presentation.
Just to go over briefly over
some of these non-compliance.
Um, arguments from the
plaintiffs, they mostly looked
at performance from 2023, which
at the time was, you know, one
of 2 years of assessment data
that we had. They know that, you
know, we still have high clonic
absenteeism, we still have
achievement gaps, low graduation
rates, low proficiencies, but
what's interesting is since that
finding, we have been tracking
that these gaps are narrowing,
particularly for some of our
at-risk groups. And so, I think
it
continued monitoring will give
us a better picture of whether
those investments you've made
have started to pay off or not.
The other non-compliance that
was cited by the court were
deficiencies at PD one, talking
about a lack of implementation
plans.
turnover
Lack of a system for
accountability the department
has put out an action plan from
2022, but as yet to update that.
I'm excited to hear from
Secretary Padilla about uh their
progress on that. They have
increased their staffing
significantly from the time of
the ruling by about 100 FTE.
The accountability structure has
changed, notably because of the
change in the test, uh, but as
you are all aware, we're still
trying to get some functions
like getting money out the door
quickly. Um, the department is
taking steps to that, but I'll
let the secretary speak more on
that.
Most of the planet, most of the
motion talks about this idea of
a remedial plan, saying that
there needs to be more directive
funding.
To make sure that there's
funding that's insulated in the
event of an economic downturn
and to address things such as
teacher quality. But you'll see
in the graph here is um an
update that we've made from
Where the AIR study in 2008 had
said that we needed to fund
schools at, and as you can see
in the dark SEG line, we've
actually exceeded the inflation
adjusted target.
Now mind you, the court didn't
say that this was the measure we
should use necessarily, but it's
a good tracker of the progress
that we've made in funding
schools operations to date.
Uh, another violation was
Um, the performance of Native
American students, notably that
the outcomes have been dismal.
We haven't implemented the
Indian Education Act.
There's been a lack of targeted
funding.
What we do know is that
proficiency rates have stayed.
Pretty flat, but what you'll see
in the
Right side is that fewer
students are being tested. So it
looks like proficiency rates may
be going up, but in fact, we're
just testing fewer students in
the same number of students on
that bottom line are still
remaining proficient.
And their native for English
learners, there was concerns
about outcomes still being
dismal, even when they were
participating in state bilingual
or multicultural education
programs.
There is a lack of on-site
monitoring and visits or
oversight of EL programs.
What we do know is that um our
EL students do have a large gap,
and when they are both
identified as English learners
and low-income students, that
gap is even further from their
peers.
Another violation was uh the
performance for students with
disabilities, um, once again,
just saying they're inadequate
services for special education.
There's no training for IEPs, a
lack of a uniform process. PD is
already in the process of
putting together a uniform IAP
system and you as a legislature
have.
Uh, appropriate funding for
that. They've also begun to work
with the new office of special
education. But one thing that we
do know on a regular basis that
is that
The amount of special education
funding that you're appropriated
isn't being fully expended at
the local level, which you can
see in this graph.
As well.
Concerns from the plaintiffs
noted there was inadequate
services for at-risk students,
interestingly, they said there
was insufficient
pre-kindergarten services, which
As you are aware, we've made
massive investments in the early
childhood arena.
I won't go into a lot of detail
because I want to get time for
questions and for fellow
presenters, but I do want to
also just note that we've been
tracking at-risk expenditures at
schools and how much has been
generated through the formula,
and much like special education.
The money that you've put in
isn't fully being expended or
accounted for, if it is being
expended on at-risk services. So
that is, that is something that
needs further, further study
there.
The motion also talks a little
bit about teacher recruitment
and retention, saying that
there's still high vacancies and
turnover. There's not enough
teacher pay even though we've
gotten to the national average
on teacher pay.
They're still inexperienced
teachers at schools and we don't
have a diverse population.
Um, you have made notable
strides, um, and of course, the
work is never done, but I think
it's interesting that the motion
does not give a lot of credit
for the legislative actions or
state, um, there's a discussion
about preparation for teachers.
We have seen a
And a rebound in the number of
people going into teacher
preparation programs. But as I
was thinking yesterday, you
know, your, your Cadillac option
of teacher residencies is only
churning out about 200 to 300
residents a year.
It take you 100 years to replace
the whole workforce at that
rate. So,
To their point, it's not at a
rate that's fast enough.
Overall, this is sort of um
Detailed, um,
Highlight of what the plan
should entail according to the
plaintiffs, but I'll let John go
into more of this.
Uh, in his presentation, and my
last slide is just to leave you
off with a question on
governance.
In the original order, the judge
said, actually, PED, you have a
lot of authority.
You can take over schools, you
can tell them how to spend their
money.
I think what's kind of
difficult, given the current
situation is, it's a very much
like a nuclear option, right?
Are there ways that we can sort
of have intermediary approaches.
You know, not having this
complete hands off, but not
having the super heavy headed
approach, but maybe that
Goldilocks.
Medium
To start moving the
Needle on student performance.
And with that, I'll turn it over
to John to talk about his.
Presentation. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Sonny. Uh, thank you,
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee. I appreciate the
opportunity to talk a little bit
about uh a brief that we
actually presented to our
committee, the LESC back in
September after the motion was
initially filed, so I'll kind of
walk you through this document.
It looks like this if you have
it. I was really hoping that
Sonny was going to say more
stuff. So I'd have to say less
stuff, but I'll do my best to,
to fill in the gaps. Um, as
Sonny said, the, the motion is,
is just that at this point, the
court is not um set
The date has not made any sort
of ruling on the motion, um,
And so this brief primarily
talks about what the motion
actually asks the LESC and its
staff to do, uh, if the motion
were to be granted. So I won't
take a lot of time either,
hopefully you'll, if you have
some questions, we'll have
plenty of time to answer those.
I just wanted to point out a
couple of, uh, I think,
important things. One is that
the motion does not call on LESC
or staff to develop the plan on
its own.
It is, uh, it calls on LESC and
staff to lead the process of
developing that plan.
Um
The the motion states that
creating this comprehensive plan
requires the coordinated effort
among educational leaders, state
and tribal government officials,
education experts and advocates,
and other participants in the
state's educational system, and
of course the PED.
So our interpretation is staff
at this point is that if asked
to do something like this, it is
not a a staff developed plan,
its staff coordinating, um,
All of the stakeholders in the
education environment to come
together to do that. That's at
least our interpretation at this
point.
Um, the motion also gives a lot
of credit, I would say to you
all and uh specifically to LESC
members as having um expertise
to be able to do uh to to
develop this plan. The LESC
staff is the appropriate body
because it is the essential, it
is essential that the
legislature be involved in the
development of a comprehensive
plan. And so, again, this is
sort of a nod from the
plaintiffs, I think that the
legislature, while having done
uh a lot of things to address.
The findings in the court in the
initial findings and conclusions
of law that it hasn't, um, maybe
had a large enough role in
developing the plan for the
state as a whole. I just, I
brought with me today, uh, you
all get this from us.
Every session.
Uh, statute, statute requires
the LESC and and staff develop a
an annual report for the
legislature, and this is, this
is last year's we're in the
process of doing this you'll get
this at the beginning of the
session. This outlines all the
work of the LESC during the
interim, and the, and the work
and research that staff does,
uh, to help the committee make
decisions about budget and
policy.
Um, during the session. So I
just wanted to, you all get a
copy of this and so if you, if
you've stacked it away in all
those pieces of paper that you
get during the session. This is
what it looks like, and you'll
get a new one, come January.
I wanted to talk a little bit
about uh the timeline and and
Sonny sort of alluded to this.
There is a timeline in uh the
motion that calls for a draft
plan to be developed in
consultation with, with the PED
secretary by May 1st, 2025.
By July 1, 2025, the state would
present the plan to the court.
And then, um,
It's, I, I wanted to point out
to this it's very specific that
the motion is also identifying
the need for staff to consult
and collaborate with
representatives from the state's
23 Indian nations, tribes, and
pueblos and developing the plan.
I won't go through all of this,
but on the bottom of the second
page, you'll see a breakout, um,
sort of a summary of the
motion's requirements. They've
they've broken out a number of
different requirements that the
plan should include.
Um, when it, when it's developed
and you can see those here.
And then, um,
So the timeline as Sunny
mentioned earlier, is that the
motion would require,
essentially,
Some goals set for each of these
categories.
The metrics by which to
determine whether or not you're
making success. I mean, being
successful in implementing the
plan.
And then having quarterly
reports from 2025 to 2030.
This is more uh something that I
mentioned to our committee
because it affects its staff on
us as staff and potentially the
committee itself, but I
I did talk a little bit about um
if if granted, the motion would
require staff to pick up a
pretty heavy workload, right?
We, as I, as I mentioned, in
addition to the, to the report
itself, we actually go around,
uh, staffing our committee
during the interim, just like
all interim committees do. And
so we do a lot of work helping
uh our committee to
Study education and make those
budget and policy decisions if
tasked with this, that would
mean either potentially the need
for additional staff and
capacity.
Or shifting some of that
capacity, the current capacity
to doing this work instead.
Mhm
Um
I talked to you about the
timelines, given the, given the
legislature's usual session
schedule.
Uh, the timelines outlined in
the motion are pretty
aggressive.
And uh
It's something that, given that
the court hasn't set a date, um,
I'm assuming and PD may be able
to speak to this too, that
there's going to be some back
and forth between the plaintiffs
and the defendants. Um, this is
a pretty aggressive timeline and
doesn't seem realistic to us,
given all the work that we have
to do for you in the lead up to
the session and during the
session, we'll, we'll see uh
what the court decides if it
decides to rule on this, uh,
what those dates look like in
the final version.
And then lastly, I just wanted
to talk a little bit about um
our work in general at at the
LESC because, uh, although some
of you sit on LESD and some of
you visit us every once in a
while. Uh, I wanted to, to
To remind you all that this is
work that staff does on a pretty
regular basis.
We we developed.
And shared with LESC, what we
call a roadmap for improving
education, starting 2 years ago,
October of 2022.
And um on the last couple of
pages of this brief, you'll see
some of the work it has and how
we've distilled some of that
work into these 4 big categories
about um what are the, what are
the important things that the
legislature should be thinking
about when improving education.
As Sonny mentioned, educator
ecosystem, and this is about
teacher pipeline. It's about
high quality preparation. It's
about high quality induction.
It's also about making sure that
students see representation in
their
Teachers, teachers that look
like them, which research says
is very important.
So that educator ecosystem is,
is extremely important.
We talk about academic design.
Um, one of the big components of
academic design, a couple of
things right now actually are
structured literacy.
Ensuring that teachers are one
prepared to develop, I mean, to
deliver.
High quality
Literacy instruction.
But also that schools have the
resources and materials they
need to be able to implement.
And so that that teachers can
apply what they learn, um, for
students. The other piece I
would say here and we've talked
this interim a lot about middle
school redesign, uh, for those
of you familiar with sort of
how, how outcomes flow.
You generally see outcomes
improve through elementary, even
to 6th grade.
And then you start to see this
sort of dip in middle school,
and it's sort of this this
problem that everybody's trying
to solve all the time, and we've
been, we've been working at it
for a long time and, and had a
report presented to our
committee uh about engagement
and belonging, but also high
quality instruction. So that's
part of that academic design
component.
Making sure we call it whole
child education, but this is
about and, and you're gonna hear
probably throughout the the
session a lot about uh safety.
And the first thing that comes
to mind when we talk about safe
schools is about physical
infrastructure, right? Making
sure that door is locked and
that we have security and um we
have systems in place to let
people know when something's
going wrong, and all of those
things are really important.
But what we also talk about when
it comes to safety is that
students actually feel safe when
they come to school.
That there is that they feel
belonging in that building that
they feel that adults care for
them and that their support
systems, um, counselors and
social workers.
That actually supports students
in their day to day outside of
those sort of catastrophic,
catastrophic events that we all
want to avoid.
And that has to do with whole
child and there's some other
pieces there.
And then lastly, these
overarching systems that
All of us need to work properly
in order for all of us across
the education to to do our jobs
well. So we're talking about
data systems.
Um, school funding formulas that
um are sufficiently funded and
adequately and appropriately
distribute that money.
Um, improving and clarifying
roles and responsibilities, and
you, you heard Sonny talk a
little bit about that. Is that
in order for the system to work
well, you all can appropriate a
lot of money and implement a lot
of laws, or I'm sorry, pass a
lot of laws, you need the
department.
To be able to implement and
oversee, you need school
districts to implement
appropriately. You need every
teacher in every classroom to
have the supports and resources
they need, as well as the
accountability to make sure that
they're doing their jobs
appropriately. So just talking
about uh the overall system. And
then, of course, again, capital
outlay, school buildings, school
safety technology,
transportation, all of those
things that sort of work in the
background, but we need to
Then to function appropriately
in order for the system to work
well.
And I, and again, I only point
those, those four categories
out, uh, to show that this is
the work of LESC on a regular
basis.
This is what we do. We're very
proud of the work that we do,
and regardless of whether the
court grants this motion or
whatever that final version
looks like, we'll continue to do
that work for you so that you're
able to make good decisions uh
when it comes to funding and
programming. And with that, Mr.
Chair, I'll stand for questions
and pass it on to us. Secretary
designate.
Good morning, uh, Mr. Chairs and
members of the committee, thank
you so much for inviting me to
be here this morning to present
alongside um Sonny and John, I'd
like to first thank both of them
for being such incredible
partners, um, thought partners
in the work that we do together
uh for education.
In New Mexico. Um, I've been
asked to come this morning to
talk about how our um FY 26
public school support budget
requests, addresses, um,
Martinez Yazi.
So I believe, yes, you all have
that presentation.
So, um, just as a reminder, the
2018 court ruling.
Um, pointed out, uh, that New
Mexico needed to address some
very specific things, um,
including low graduation rates,
proficiency rates.
Um, and reading and math and
rates of college remediation,
and of course there were 4
specific student groups named in
the lawsuit economically
disadvantaged English language
learners, Native Americans, and
children's children with
disabilities.
Um
So this next slide shows some of
the the court findings, some key
findings just a reminder, there
were um over 2300 findings in
the lawsuit. So this slide just
shares some of those findings.
Everything from increasing
instructional time and quality
of instruction, uh, decrease
achievement gaps for at-risk
students.
Enhance college readiness and
preparation, increase
accessibility of culturally
relevant curriculum, expanded
health and wellness initiatives,
data-driven resource allocation,
increased access to school
meals, academic accessibility
for students with disabilities,
personalized academic support,
enriched instruction through
through community engagement,
closing gaps in college and
career.
readiness, increase the number
of qualified teachers and
expanded training and resources.
I'm highlighting just a few.
Of the over 2300 court findings
in this lawsuit, but I just want
you to have those in your head
as I talk about how the budget
supports these things.
So, I also wanna remind and
build on what Sunny already kind
of covered.
There are many key education
initiatives that that we
together at the state have
implemented over the course of
this administration since 2018
regarding this lawsuit, so I
will not read all of these to
you, but you can see that
there's incredible investments
that have been made everything
from what we've done to expand
and reach universal pre-K for
our students and expanding the
entire early childhood education
system and to ensure
we have dedicated funding.
Together we've increased
learning time, we've addressed
in a very comprehensive way, um,
improvements to literacy.
We have invested and worked to
support and build our educators,
um, and they're, um, then both
the number and the quality of
education that's happening in
our schools.
Really investing in our teacher
pipelines. We've made
significant investments in
Indian education. We are
supporting our and.
Compensating our Native American
language teachers, we have
universal um high quality meals
in schools, uh,
The career technical education,
the list goes on and on and on.
So I just wanna say this because
we need to remember, although we
have this motion that says that
we have been noncompliant. There
are many things, many, many
incredible things that have
happened at the state we are not
done, but it's important for us
to be aware of the things that
we have done.
The next slide highlights just
the funding side of that, um,
since 2018, we've increased
funding for K-12 schools by 1.3
billion. That is significant.
Um, as Sunny mentioned, we've
increased our um educators
salaries. We've increased our
tier levels. We've um invested
over $100 million in extended
learning annually, um.
And again, um, invested in
school meals. It's just a quick
sort of snapshot of the um
increased budget.
That we've invested in in the
state.
Um, the next slide, um, also is
now a focus on our, our public
school request for FY 26.
Um, so what we're looking at is
an overall proposed increase in
this budget of 4.4% from last
year. This does not include
compensation. So what I'm
sharing with you today, um, does
not include any sort of um
compensation for our school for
our educators and school
employees.
Um, this PSSR request represents
a 6.2% increase in the general
fund.
Um, and then it, you will also
see some key initiatives that we
are proposing move from
non-recurring to recurring.
Those things include community
schools, out of school time, our
learning management system,
which is Canvas, um, school
safety.
And our education acts black uh
bilingual, multicultural, and
Hispanic education acts, as well
as moving, um, universal meals
and components of special
education into our recurring
budget.
So this, um, the way we have
structured our uh PSSR this this
year is really focused on
academic outcomes for our
students. So we've put these
things into buckets. So this
bucket to improve educational
outcomes. These are the things
that we've identified that are
effective in addressing um
educational outcomes for our
students. So as you see.
Um, 60 million for K-12 plus.
50 million for Indian education.
This is a significant increase
for Indian education, which will
allow us to direct funding not
only to our school districts and
charter schools, but also
directly to the tribes, Pueblos
and nations to direct the
funding themselves to support
academic outcomes for students,
um, an increase in math, STEM,
and outdoor learning
initiatives. This year we did
not have funding in the budget
for math. And so this is an area
that we obviously.
feel like we need to have
funding, um, to address, um,
academic outcomes in math.
We have 7 million for our
education acts that do not
include um Indian ed.
5 million for highly qualified
instructional materials that we
know have the biggest impact on
learning.
Uh, 3.3 for um um our
multi-layered system of
supports.
Uh, 1.6 for a standardized
gifted screener, which really
allows us to make sure that we
have equitable access to
advanced academics for our
students.
And then, of course, financial
assistance for advanced
placement and international um
baccalaureate testing.
So I'm trying to go quickly, um.
I want to talk about outcomes if
we're telling you what we want.
I wanna make sure I share with
you why we want them, that they
actually are resulting in some
outcomes for students. So I want
to highlight that we have seen a
big uptake in K-12+. So from um
2023, 24 school year, we had 542
schools engaging in K12+.
And this academic year, we,
we've seen a big increase. We're
at 735 schools. That's a
significant increase of um
schools that are taking part in
this program that are not only.
Um, increasing the amount of
instructional time, but that's
also teacher preparation time.
Um, we have over 3000 students
participating in outdoor
learning, which we know is
incredibly engaging. It helps
with systems thinking and really
develops um student
environmental literacy.
We have um increased college um
support and readiness through
the AP and IP exams. So again,
big increases in the number of
students that are taking these
exams and typically um uh
students with lower uh
socioeconomic status would not
have access to these important
programs and exams without
financial assistance.
The next slide talks about
outcomes of our education acts.
So with the Hispanic Education
Act, the the the investments
that have gone into those
programming. We've seen a 45%
increase in Hispanic first-time
freshmen retention rates and
higher education institutions.
And um almost 95% of students
that participate in this type of
programming, say that it makes
them feel good about their
identity, um, and engagement in
school.
Same thing for black Education
Act, we're seeing higher
retention rates in um higher ed
institutions and investments and
programs that really connect
high school students to higher
ed.
We're seeing for bilingual
multicultural education Act, um,
66% of English language students
are um earning their state seal
of bilingualism and illiteracy.
This is significant. We're
seeing gains.
Um, academic gains for um for
our Native American students in
particular.
And again, we've seen a really
big increase in overall funding
in Indian education.
Um, in general.
So the next slide shows a
continuation of our request
around structured literacy.
Again, this funding, um, is
focused on training our teachers
and structured literacy, we're,
um, training all elementary
school teachers and are now
moving into our middle school
teachers. This helps support
model schools, um, support
literacy support schools, this
funding also.
will be a continuation of our
summer reading program and
additional investments and
coaching and high impact
tutoring.
The next slide shares some of
our outcomes related to these
investments.
Um, first of all, I'd like to
talk about our summer reading
program. We are really excited
about the outcomes that we saw
in this program and, and I want
to thank you for that incredible
investment for our students.
This summer we established 117
summer reading program sites
that provided instruction in in
a 4 to 1, uh, student teacher
ratio, um, and these programs
ranged from 3 weeks to 8 weeks
around the.
State.
Overall, our students saw a
10.92%.
Growth in their literacy
proficiency as a result of this
summer program.
Um, with some student groups
really seeing much larger
improvements such as our Native
American students saw an average
growth of 16.95% and there um
after participating in this
summer program, and this is
significant as we look at other
students nationally who did not
have opportunity like this
summer reading program. The
national summer slide, so the,
the loss of summer of reading.
proficiency this summer
nationally for students was uh
20%.
In New Mexico for students that
did not participate in the
summer reading program saw a 6%
loss in their literacy
proficiency over the summer.
This is typical when students do
not have.
Opportunity like this, in
learning, they typically see a
slide backwards in their
proficiency.
Um
And then as far as our high
impact tutoring that is
happening year round, we've
already um had the opportunity
to work with 7000 students
statewide, um, and then in terms
of our growth as a state. We've
seen a 4% overall increase.
In literacy from the 2023 school
year. And then I want to
highlight some of the some of
the schools listed there on the
bottom right, who have really
just had incredible growth in
literacy.
So with Hurley Elementary, we've
seen growth from 39% to 75%.
Um, San Lorenzo Elementary from
20% to 63%.
Albuquerque Collegiate School is
at 68% proficiency and uh Rio
Guina's charter school, um, has
moved from 17% to 59%. This is
incredible growth in literacy.
We know that these programs
work.
Um, the next slide focuses on
special education.
Um
One of the things that we have
identified as a critical need
for investment is really
focusing on our IEPs, um,
ensuring that we have um a
unified um template for IPs to
make sure that they are being
completed, um, correctly and
that they're being implemented
fully for our students, um,
we're requesting funding to
build out a statewide system
that would allow us to do that.
Um, we currently have
have numerous variations of an
IP form. Um, many of them are
well over 100 pages. It makes it
incredibly difficult to
implement these um IEPs when we
have such diverse and um not
very efficient, IEP um forms
themselves. This um system will
also allow us to make sure that
as students move from school to
school, there's no gaps in.
implementing their services and
supports their IEP will be be
accessible regardless of what
school that they're at.
Currently students who are
moving have um large gaps in
that support where they moved to
a new. Um,
We also are uh have the $5
million for special education
teacher pay differentials. We're
addressing 360 vacancies in
special education currently.
Um, so these stipends are
allowing us to recruit and
retain those teachers.
We're requesting $4 million for
a specific initiatives such as
the stay in school project, uh,
parent university that allows us
to educate our families, uh,
statewide behavior behavior
initiatives, work study programs
and other specialized programs
for our students with
disabilities, and then also
we're requesting some funding to
increase um our staffing in the
office of Special education.
So the next slide talks about
some key outcomes that we have
seen with our state in school
programs and so we started these
programs as pilots and um
Demming and in Farmington, and
we've seen a really um
incredible increase in
graduation rates and overall
student performance as a result
of these programs. Um, and
Demming, we saw an increase in
graduation rates for our
students.
with disabilities from 442.6% to
74%.
In graduation, that's
significant. And for Farmington
from 32.9%.
To 63.1%. These programs address
attendance. They address
interventions for students that
that are struggling in their
classes, their behavior
supports, work study
opportunities and um
opportunities for um for job for
jobs post-secondary. Um, what we
are looking to do is extend this
program to additional.
The next slide talks about our
funding ask for um a focused on
graduation rates.
So we're requesting 41.5 million
for our career technique.
I'm sorry, career connected
learning. So these are
innovation zones, our work based
learning, and CTE.
20 million for out of school
learning and high impact
tutoring.
And 10 million for school
improvement and transformation
for students that are designated
in need of support.
And then 8 million for community
schools.
Um, the next slide is just
highlighting the uh impact that
these programs have on
graduation rates.
So we know that internship
programs improve attendance.
They they improved graduation
rates and they improve overall
um student performance.
Um, we have, um, just over 3800
students enrolled in work-based
learning?
And we have over 5100 student
interns that participate not
only in summer internships, but
also through innovation zone
work.
Um, and we have over 17,500 CTE
concentrators, and this is
really important because our CTE
concentrators, those students
that have taken 2 or more
consecutive courses in the same
subject.
Or, um, have a 95.777%
graduation rate. Again, this is
significant in comparison to our
state graduation rates.
Um, and then for community
schools, we know that our
community schools, um.
students that are in our
community schools have higher
proficiency rates and graduation
rates. For example, we have a
12% increase in 4 year
graduation rates in the 2021,
2022 school year.
OK.
Next slide talks about our
efforts to improve attendance
and student well-being.
Uh, the first item is 50.7% for
healthy universal school meals.
10 million for attendance
interventions and behavioral
health supports and restorative
practices.
10 million for family income
index, that is really focused on
removing barriers that prevent
students from attending school.
4.2 million in school safety,
and 1.5 million for family
engagement, um, support for our
students in foster care and our
students um experiencing
homelessness as well as supports
for economically disadvantaged
students.
So now for some outcomes related
to our attendances work.
Um, we have, um,
Through our, our granting
process of our attendance funds
have allowed schools to hire
attendance intervention
attendance interventionists, um,
institute early warning systems
provide uh attendance
intervention teams that are
supporting students and as a
result, you can see there on the
slide that we have seen um a
serious um drop in our chronic
absentee rates. This is
significant.
For for our students.
Um, we also see that our family
income index schools are also
seen improvements in attendance,
family engagement.
And learning programs.
We've increased our healthy
universal meals, uh, this year
we're reaching um over 58
million meals projected for this
academic year.
And our efforts around school
safety, John had talked about
really improving overall school
climate.
Um, making sure that our
students feel safe and the
surveys that we do with our
students, um, we are seeing that
we are making growth in that
effort, and we have um over 700
schools utilizing our school
panic buttons.
Uh, the next slide and addresses
educator, um, ecosystem.
We're requesting 20 million for
our educator fellows program.
20 million for our clinical
practice.
Uh, which is in our in our um
2024 Gro award.
5 for school leader professional
development, 5 million for
teacher professional learning,
and 2.3 million for educator and
administrator pre preparation,
induction, and evaluation.
As for our outcomes, our
educator fellows program has
grown the number of participants
from 40 to 4092.
Um, these are, these are
educators that are being grown
and trained locally in their
communities, and these are
educators upon graduation that
will stay in their communities
as uh we have 70 districts
currently around the state that
are participating in this
program.
We also have our principal
residency pilot program, which
is funding 26 principal
residences mentorship and
mentorship education and
preparation.
And then the last item is our
agency operations, you heard
Sunny mention, um.
In the motion that there are,
um, issues related to some of
the department operations. And
so this ask is really getting
that.
Um, a lot of this sort of need
to improve the operations of the
agency, something that I am
tackling um with, with the
agency leadership.
So we're requesting 4 million to
um upgrade our licensure portal,
our licensure system is
incredibly important, not only
for ensuring that we get our
teachers in the classroom, um,
that that they're highly
qualified, but that we're also
able to track any issues with um
licensure suspensions are
revoked revocations.
Um, we're requesting 3 million
for data quality supports 1.3
million for our student
assessment data collection,
which will allow us to collect
data directly from the school's
um vendors.
Um, which will help us to get
that data much more quickly and
to reduce any sort of errors in
that uh data collection process,
and then 1.1 million for school
dashboard and reporting portal.
This will allow schools the
ability to access their own
student assessment data as they
need it, so they can go onto
this dashboard, access their
student assessment data and
utilize that as part of their
instruction.
The next slide talks about some
of the um agency operations
outcomes that we are um
realizing today.
Um, our, our KPI for the
department for turning around
our processing our funding out
to schools is 22 days. Um, the
The 4th quarter of FY 24.
are a number of days for
processing payments was 2016
days, the first quarter of this
fiscal year, we are at 13 days,
so we are working very hard to
meet and exceed our KPI, we know
that it's important that the
department process funding
quickly that we get it out to
the schools and students.
Um, as part of that process,
we've automated a lot of our
IGAs and contracts and our
accounts payables processes.
Um, and last year we updated our
um star system to the to the new
Nova system, which is allowing
us to more effectively collect
our data, uh, last year's
rollout was a bit bumpy, but
this year, um, we have been, uh,
meeting our deadlines, our 40th
day data account uh which were
in undergoing right now is going
incredibly well. We're getting
great feedback from our school
districts and charter schools,
um, regarding that process.
So, um
Something that's not on the
slide, but I would like to point
out is that.
The department is really.
This this academic year, doing
some new things around
monitoring of how funding is
being spent.
We have an effort that we have
been um putting together with
the support of the US Department
of Education to um monitor
school spending related to the
title programs, so that is
something that is rolling out
right now. This is uh something
that the department has not done
in quite some time.
But uh we are going to be doing
and are in the process of doing
right now. Um, the monitoring
that is being done for our
special education funding
through the Office of Special ed
is something that also has not
really been done effectively in
this state, so I just wanted to
share with you that the
department is really um taking
on those responsibilities, this
academic way, this academic year
in in a new way and something
that um we are.
Excited to to move forward with.
So with that, I will stop and I
think all three of us are
available for any questions you
have. We're gonna get the
questions real quickly and, and
so, uh, there's only 42 people
on the list. Um, so we're gonna
stay on time. I have 3 people on
the list we got behind
yesterday, so we're gonna really
track time today. I, I want you
to think about something before
we
Well, before we come back and is
How do we hire?
A high-powered law firm.
To handle the Yazi Martinez.
And get it out of the
Tossing it over here to this
attorney and tossing it over
there to that attorney. So think
about that, come back, represent
a small.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you all three and thanks
for the great collaboration
we've seen this entire summer. I
think it shows in the work that
you all are doing together. Uh,
Mr. Chair and presenters, few
quick things. One, I understand
that there's interest in
utilizing the family income
index tool to help guide our
at-risk district funding.
That's very exciting is that
being explored.
Mr. Chair and Mr. Chair, um, so
LESC has a proposal, our staff
has put forward a proposal to
excuse me, our committee.
That would use the FII um
mechanism and, and very briefly,
FII essentially a determines um
poverty at each school level,
which is very different than our
current at risks that we use
federal data to determine
poverty at a district level
currently. So family income
index data allows us to identify
poverty at a school level, uh,
using that mechanism, we think
we'd be better able to identify
poverty at a district level and
direct funds that way.
It's part of a three-part
proposal to our, to our
committee that includes
Uh, funding for um essentially a
student, low income students.
A separate, uh, factor that is
different than what we do now
for English learners currently
English learners are wrapped in
to an at-risk factor, and this
would pull that out so that you
have funding specific for
English learners, as well as a
proposal to increase funding to
the secondary factor. So 7
through 12th grade and maybe
even 6th grade.
To support those things that the
legislature and that we hear
from uh superintendents are very
important when it comes to
secondary engagement, things
like career technical education,
as well as performing and fine
arts at the secondary level.
That's great. Thank you, uh,
kudos. I think that it holds a
great deal of promise and madam,
uh, secretary designate, I
appreciate your
Uh, emphasis on the FII pilot
and if a credible plan to
utilize that from PE is welcome
even as we've struggled to sort
of utilize the pilot funds for
several years now, noting that.
Uh, Mr. Chair and presenters,
glad we talked about the career
technical education, uh, an
internships. This is an area of
great success for the state. I'd
like a commitment that all um
parts of the state that are
utilizing it now.
Are not cut.
I will, I'm frankly concerned
that there seems to be a
reduction.
In the proposed budget. It's
been wrapped into some other
things.
That's very concerning to me,
given the success we've seen
around the state in which I'm so
very proud that the county I
come from has been one of the
state leaders.
I struggle to see how success
would be punished.
As opposed to be rewarded and
spread wider throughout the
state. So I'll just sort of note
that.
Um
Mr. Chair, um, presenters,
the, um,
As we dig more into the motion
and understand potential
implications.
We're on course to be at 5
billion for our public school
support budget.
Within 2 years at the rate of
growth that's being proposed and
that upper levels,
To potentially be asked to go
there next year. Is that fair?
Everybody's shaking their head.
Yeah,
that's the numbers that it, it
seems like. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you all.
Um, with our growth in Medicaid,
I think we have to collectively
put on the table, we're reaching
sort of upper fiscal limits.
Um, not in ways where we've,
we've overstretched and we have
to cut or anything bad like
that. We just have to be very
clear.
Starting, I know it's been
before and continuing now that
we're quickly, we're sta we're,
we're looking forward into a
place where
Our
ability to invest new dollars,
particularly recurring dollars.
Needs to be scrutinized very
closely, and that takes me to
the motion.
It seems like there is a
scenario in that motion where
that ability to uh scrutinize
and collectively make those
decisions would be outsourced to
the court in sort of a
In one scenario. I, would that
be?
Possible. Would that be accurate
or not really?
Uh, Mr. Chair, I'll make a
comment and I think John wants
to respond as well.
The uh
Court, the motion from the
plaintiff says that if this
remedial plan does not
meet its intended goals that
there will be a request to move
to a consent decree.
Type process.
Uh, I think that, you know, I
expressed this during the task
force meeting for LESC's funding
formula group.
We've been very focused on
addressing deficiencies from the
case from 2018. 1 example is the
transportation formula.
Right, we have really tried to
take what the um
Testimony has been on
deficiencies and tried to make
adjustments here and there and
when you try to fix one bug,
sometimes you create more
problems, um, in the, in the
overall.
A system and
And I think that one thing that
might be potentially problematic
to your point.
is if we're so focused on just
addressing deficiencies we may
be forgetting the bigger
picture.
On how to um holistically
improve the system as a whole
rather than.
And a piecemealing our approach
here. So there's an inherent
risk in
And letting this become a
judicial mandate, but I do think
that the court when it made its
motion was very careful to say
this is a legislative and
executive function. And I think
as much as we can, we need to
Think about this, not just in
the context of looking at one
particular issue and trying to
fix it, but how does it affect
the entire system.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Liu, thank you.
Um, I unfortunately have to step
out for a brief engage I'll be
back shortly. I, I appreciate
being able to go early. Thank
you for that summation. I think
that brings us back to what
we've seen this entire interim
and going back really to, to
last year, which I want to thank
you all for. It's closer
collaboration, really robust
communication, uh, and I think
one of the things that I'll take
from what Mr.
described and I'm sure I'll have
the chance to visit more, is
that, um, yes, there are risks,
but it perhaps only puts more
importance on what we're doing
now and as we build together for
next year's budget to really
take some of the final and
toughest and biggest steps after
we've invested $1.3 billion new.
We have continued work to do,
but we're in a better place to
sort of do it together. Is that
sort of how you all are
approaching it?
That's great. Thank you very
much, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you. Just remember members
get your questions and let's
make your answers as short as
possible because we don't want
to get an hour or 2 hours before
he did yesterday.
Uh, you want to run timer, I
don't really want to run timer
representative Seriana you're
next, and then Armstrong and
then Senator Gonzalez. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman, and I'll go
quick and I just first want to
thank LESC, um, what an amazing
staff you have and, and you work
so hard for it's just like LFC,
but they are top notch. So, um,
On, on page 17 of
This presentation, I think it's
PD. Um, so the at risk.
We have, well, for attendance,
so I'm focused, I'll always be
focused on attendance because we
don't have the kids there.
They're not gonna learn in all
these great things we're doing
doesn't help. So you've gone
down to 32.8%. That's great. Are
those primarily at-risk kids?
Are they all
Um, Mr. Chair Representative,
you know, I.
We, we don't really, I don't
have that in front of me. I can
dive into the data and tell you
exactly what those students are,
but I think as we we think
about, you know, the vast
majority of New Mexico students
fit within the Martinez Yazi uh
student subgroups, you know, I
think it's safe to say that that
we're we're definitely hitting
that and as we look at using
things like family income index
to address attendance, that's
how we know we are hitting that
population that.
You just mentioned. OK. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
and I believe the family index,
income index is vital. We have
to get the money to where it is
absolutely needed. Yeah, it's
great to put it everywhere, but
we have to hit it where it's
needed, and that's what this
does, um, and I have, I guess I
want everybody to understand,
trying to get teachers is hard.
Teaching is hard these days.
It's not like when we went to
school, you know, we were nice
to the teacher or good to the
teacher. I, I was talking to
some of my students recently and
they were saying we were, we
would never be a teacher cause
we remember what it was like.
We were like, and so getting
teachers is not something easy,
but in the ones we have, we have
to continue to train. And I
think at the university level,
we have to make sure we have, we
are training them for literacy.
When they come out in math, when
they come out, they have to be
ready to teach our kids at the
level they need to be taught.
Um, after school programming, I
think that's vital. I was just
at Kennedy the other day and
there were kids were saying,
this is why we come to school,
not so much to learn, but for
the after school, but however we
get them there.
It's important. So we need to
make sure we're still funding
these afterschool activities,
and the summer reading program.
My, I was talking to my
constituents, their kids that
are going to them are doing
well, and they're continuing to
read and they're excited about
reading. I gave him some books
for my kids. So the what you're
doing, nobody can say we're not
doing a whole lot to help our
kids, but we have to be able to
get him to school, and that's
vital. So everything you're
doing is what we need to do. So
thank you for what you're doing.
Thank you for your hard work,
all of you, all three of you,
and
Everybody who works on this,
and, um, I just think we're
doing the best we can. You guys
are doing the best you can. Now
we got to get our kids to
school. Thank you.
Representative Armstrong. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
for your presentation. I, um,
uh, I appreciate, uh, Mr.
Senna's comment about you doing
all of this work so that the
legislature can focus on the
funding and the programming, um,
i.e. 180 day situation that
we're in right now, the
legislature is the one that
should be focusing on that
programming. So anyway, just
wanted to mention that. Uh,
Sonny, why are we testing fewer
students and, and how do you
know?
that information.
Uh, Mr. Chair, the, that is,
that was a comment mostly for
native language testing um for
your math and reading and
science, it's still above 90%.
So just for native languages, we
are testing fewer students and
Um, it doesn't appear to be that
the proficiency rates are
changing very much and they're
very low.
Thank you for that. I, I, I
misunderstood that a little bit.
So, um, um, uh, secretary
designate Padilla. I was curious
on the literacy, um, structured
literacy that we rolled out this
last summer. You guys did a
phenomenal job doing that, um,
but you highlighted four
schools. I would like to see a,
uh, just information on all
schools that took place.
And what their increase was and
uh just so that we can see that,
I mean, highlighting for schools
is great, but the amount of
money we spent, I'd like to see
more information.
Mr. Chair Representative
Armstrong, we had New Mexico
Highlands University did um
analyze our assessment data,
they analyze the program in
general, they just finished
their work and so we're getting
that all together in a format
that we can share with all of
you, so we'll be able to share
with you in great detail what
happened um by um by each of our
um literacy sites and um the the
various student assessment
results. Perfect. Thank you so
much for that.
Because it's, that is one area
that I think that um um I, I
support the idea, uh, I, I know
that you all know that all
schools are not created equal.
And that transportation is an
issue, um, and so I believe all
of these schools that you
highlighted are kind of in
larger towns and so uh I just
want to make sure that we
remember that all schools are
not created equally. Uh, I, uh,
reiterate what uh Representative
Small said on the CTE and I know
you all know transportation's an
issue.
Uh, the funding for
transportation is, is killing
some of my schools right now.
Um, I wanted a little more
information, Mr. Chairman, on
the title funding reporting. So
from my understanding, so
special education would be
possibly one of the title
fundings and so, um, I had a
sister-in-law that was a special
education director, and she said
the amount of paperwork.
Was uh enormous, horrendous. She
actually ended up quitting.
Because uh she was held
accountable for all of this
paperwork that she said was
repetitive, and I just want to
make sure that, of course, I
want to hold schools accountable
for the way they're spending the
money, but I also, uh, know that
the reporting and the paperwork
that they have to do right now
is time spent not teaching.
And so I, I'm, I'm a little bit
concerned about that because we
already have that. So can we
make it better? Can we make it
easier? Can we make it, um, not
as, as burdensome. Uh, the other
thing is, um.
Just the the the data.
I, I couldn't find it in the
report, but I know you talked
about a special appropriation
for data. We, I was on the
school board for 15 years, uh,
Mr. Chairman and Magdalena and
uh we changed.
Programs, we changed reporting,
we changed everything, you know,
almost like you change your
underwear and it was just
We could never stick to anything
long enough to actually get a
result and data and information
that was actually crucial, we
change and then the, the data
changed. And so if we could just
stick to something.
For a little while, uh, and make
it easier on our schools and our
teachers, I would be forever
grateful. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
I take it you're in support of
the constitutional amendment
that came out of the Senate.
Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you uh Chairman. Thank you
to all.
I guess I'll start off with um
From the court.
And the plaintiff who exactly is
Responsible. Uh, Mr. Chair
Senator Gonzalez, the, the
lawsuit is against the state.
Um, uh, the public education
department, um, is the agency
that is.
Being sort of the state's
response to that and so, um.
Would you like to elaborate on
that, but, but the the.
The lawsuit is with the state of
New Mexico.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and uh, uh, you
know, just seeing a as an
observation and also with um
You know, some experience
behind.
I think we really need to, like
if you're responsible.
As far as the legislative
Education Committee and as far
as the L of Sea, I think they
need to be going through you.
You know, to where
So we're not
You know, in in differing uh
ways uh trying to get to the
same place.
You know, and then that's that
way we have a focus, you know,
to
Where it's at, you know, at all
times, and, and by no means, you
know, that doesn't mean that our
other
Oh
You know, as far as LFC or the
education committee are not
doing their part. I mean, I
think we have to narrow it down
to to get it to one.
You know, the other part that um
uh these are small things, but
um for this year,
How many requests and this is
addressing recruitment is uh how
many requests and how many have
we done on teacher reach.
And the, the reason I'm asking
is because, you know, the larger
the school district, more
options.
A middle-sized school, they
still have options. When you get
to the real small rural areas.
It's options are very, very
small, you know, and if we're
talking about recruitment, and
we're talking about retaining.
You know, and we say that we
want to put out the best
qualified individuals into as
much as to all parts of the
state, you know, some of them,
the problem is housing, and you
know, and if we don't address
that, you know, we're not
getting that part.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator Gonzalez
regarding teacher housing, um, I
sit on the public, uh, uh, PSCOC
as do my colleagues here, and we
have seen a significant increase
in the number of applications
for teacher housing, so we know
that it's a need. The program is
focused on our rural
communities, so there are
communities such as Riodoso, who
recently applied who do not meet
the requirements of the of that
housing.
uh
program, but we have seen a
significant increase in the
number of applications we.
But, you know,
For example, with uh mortgage
finance Authority.
We go into a project.
And then it's built.
You know, and my
Question still is how many did
we do last year?
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator, we can
get that information to you, but
we believe 5.
You know, every 6 districts
that's an option that we have.
And if we really want to get
into helping, you know,
different areas where the need
is.
You know, that will work.
You know, they uh the other part
that I wanted to bring is some a
presentation.
Several parts, you know, like
you have the outdoor learning.
And uh that is on page 14.
So do we still have funds
available on that?
Mr. Chair, Senator Gonzalez, we
do have funding this year for um
the outdoor learning program.
And uh the last part that I have
because
You know, I'm a firm believer on
this and uh
This is one of the components of
the many components to try to.
Achieve what we're trying to get
is uh anywhere where you have um
This is on page 17.
And you have 78% of family
engagement activities.
I really feel that we need to
expand anywhere where you have
parent. I mean, if you see that,
And they understand and they
know what the school is going
through.
They're an asset to us, you
know, plus the biggest asset is
taking it home and helping their
Their child, you know, and uh I,
that's one part that I really
see that we have to work with.
The other part that I want to
bring is that
With education.
Change is constant.
Because we did a 20 years ago.
It doesn't mean that it'll work
today.
And I'll just give you an
example.
As a family member.
Within transportation.
And uh there's a bus stop.
In APS.
And the child lives like maybe 3
blocks.
Further.
No one lives in that area where
the buses.
You know
And I inquired.
And the answer was because
that's the way we have done it.
That's the designated. We have
to change that kind of attitude.
And I just left and right, and
what works, you know, what was
working last year, you know,
maybe those kids are gone and so
you do things a little
different.
The other part is that I think
we really need to get serious
about transportation.
I mean, we have been a, you
know, with a very weak system.
As far as, you know, we need
more buses, let's get more
buses, you know, and work with
us. The other part is just
looking at the expense of that,
you know, there's a big push for
electric buses.
I, I think that is great, can we
afford them, you know, and with
buying one, can we buy 2 or 3
more for?
Or they're needed.
You know, so, uh,
Um
Again, thank you, thank you for
your presentation and uh we'll
continue working with it. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you for the presentation this
morning. Uh, let me profess this
comment by saying that I know
you, you're new on the job and,
and don't take any of this
personal, but when I think about
The progress that we've made
over the past since 2018 since
the decision was made in Yazi
Martinez, uh, I, I think a lot
about
The quote that Albert Einstein
is given credit to is that
insanity is doing the same thing
over and over again.
And expecting different results.
And I think the lack of a plan.
has led us to this point.
The lack of a plan, the carousel
of different secretaries has led
us to this point.
And that the discussion should
not be about let's hire the best
attorney to fight this case.
We should be leaning on the PED.
To establish a plan.
We have been waiting, I have
been waiting.
As a, as, as, as a member of
this legislature.
As a tribal parent representing
many other tribal parents for
any type of plan that the PED
can muster.
And year after year, legislative
session after legislative
session, I've waited. We've
waited.
And here we are sitting today
without any type of plan, even a
draft, not even a anything.
And we can talk about how much
we've spent and what we're, what
we may be doing and ideas and
concepts that maybe in some
cases PED may want to take
credit for.
But
The reality is that a lot of
those measures
Legislative measures led by this
legislature.
But then PED says, oh, pat us on
the back publicly because we
thought of this.
It's not that way.
That it's because we are
bringing the message from our
parents, from our communities,
as those that live in those
communities.
That we have to take charge of
how we're going to do this. And
so,
I should be supportive as a
Democrat of this Democratic
administration, and I should
have, have been proud of our
moonshot that was acclaimed
several years ago, but at this
point, uh, I'm not, I'm
dismayed, in my honest opinion
now is that I've always been
My allegiance has always been to
the community and the kids.
And not one person and not one
party.
And so I think again that the
discussion should be that how
are we going to put pressure on
PED to give us a plan.
In the last 2 years of an
administration, how are we going
to lean on you to give us a plan
so that we understand that this
is the direct path forward so
that we as community members
representing our communities and
our children.
Can feel well assured that we're
not just trying to win a court
case.
We're trying to make sure that
our children succeed.
And so, again, please don't take
those comments personally
because I know that while you've
worked in, in, in the governor's
office that you're new to the
secretary position, and I
applaud you for that and I wish
you the best of success, but I
think we have a lot of work yet
to do. The only form of
consistencies that I've seen
over the past several years is
that of again of the compliments
given to LESC and the, the
direction and of former
director, uh, director
uh
Here ornament.
And now Mr. Senna, and I
appreciate that, that leadership
that you've provided. And, and,
and study. I mean, you've always
been consistent in your
reporting and objective, I
believe, in your reporting and
how you report things out to us.
But just simply one question
for, for Mr. Mr. Chairman and,
and, and to the secretary is
that in our last budget,
There's a budget of $25.5
million in there.
20 million for Indian Education
Act.
5 million for children from
Navajo and Zuni descent and then
the rest is for teacher
development.
How is that
How is that money directed
towards
LEAs and how is that money
directed towards tribes.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Linte, thanks for your comments.
I'd I'd like to first address
your comments about a plan.
And, um, and just remind the
committee that we have a
strategic plan, the agency has
updated that strategic plan
numerous times, um, and our
latest update to that plan will
be coming out very soon and so
um.
The majority of our students in
this state are represented in
Martinez Yazi, uh, student
groups, and so I just wanted to
clarify that uh.
We do absolutely uh take the
planning process, um, seriously,
and that we have rolled out
numerous um updates, um, as for
the Indian ed funding.
That funding is available to our
school districts and charter
schools, they're able to apply
for the funding as well as our
uh tribes, Pueblos and nations
are also eligible to apply for
that funding to be utilized in
educational programs. And so
that's how that funding is is
utilized. And thank you, Mr.
Chairman and secretary. So I
guess to, to be more specific
than the plan I'm talking about
is not your strategic plan for
the department, but a Yazi
Martinez plan.
And how the courts requested of
the department.
So, so again, as Mr. Chair
Representative Lente, we are
approaching all all of our
students in the state of New
Mexico are impacted by this
lawsuit, and so as we think
about what we're for students in
New Mexico. It really is a
holistic approach. We're
addressing all students.
In the state of New Mexico and
in that way we are addressing
the lawsuit.
I presented our budget as well.
RPSS budget is focused on the
Martinez Yazi lawsuit. I cannot
think of really any part of this
budget that does not address uh
the lawsuit. Mr. Chairman and
and secretary, I would beg to
differ that the, the lawsuit
itself has 4 plaintiff groups,
not the entire state. So let,
let's make sure that we make
sure that we can keep that
clear, but also
And my final question, Mr.
Chairman, and thank you for the
time to secretaries that
regarding that funding for the
Indian Education Act.
How are those outcomes then
captured to show that funding
is in fact leading to
initiatives that will directly
impact in outcomes.
So, Mr. Chair Representative
Lente, the funding is spent as
determined by the Indian
Education Act, so there are
specific uses of that funding
that support.
Language and culture programs,
um, uh, there's so, so that's
how we know they apply for the
funding. They report on how they
utilize that funding, and that's
how we're able to to identify.
OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you Secretary.
Good question, Representative
Senator Sheer.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. First,
I think we're gonna need some
medical attention cause I'm
gonna agree with
Both representative Sarayana and
Linte, so hand me your phone.
I'll call 911.
But first, uh, uh, Sonny, can
you pull up your slide deck to
slide 5.
Because
That one
struck me as odd.
But I mean, yeah, right there.
So,
Does that say we're closing the
The gap because
The higher income students are
becoming less proficient.
Mr Charius.
Wow.
That doesn't seem like a good
plan.
So
Um
And, and also in this is for
The entire panel there.
Um
We talked about all of the new
programs, all of the cool stuff
that we're doing. The one thing
we didn't talk about was
teaching.
Uh, we talked about structural
literacy, but, but I know that
our teachers, and this is where
Representative Sean comes from,
that most of them don't feel any
respect. They feel like quirks.
They're not teachers.
Let the teachers teach. I think
that would be a good first step.
Let the principal lead the
teachers, lift the
superintendent be the clerk.
So quit making the teachers not
teach. I think that's really
important, uh, thing there.
Um
The uh
The whole idea that we've got
such learning loss. I've taught,
uh, some are learning, learning
loss. I've talked about this
before.
And it's immediately said, no,
no, we can't afford that.
Uh, year-round schooling. When I
say that, everybody freaks out,
we can't afford to pay teachers
who're around. We don't have to.
Uh, we can look at other states,
year-round schooling everywhere
else in the world.
is 9 weeks on and 3 weeks off,
so you don't have the learning
loss. But then you can also put
4 cohorts of students.
In a school because only 3 of
them are in there at a time. So
you've, you've got uh less
facility costs, uh, you're
paying for the, the, the
facilities in the summer anyway,
so stick some students in there
in the summer.
So the, the year-round school
doesn't have to be so freaky.
Uh, uh, you know, we're not a
poor state, but what we are is
we're a frightened state. We're
afraid to do things. Well, let's
get over that.
Year-round school solves a lot
of that, uh, learning loss.
It also gives kids the chance
to, to
Go wherever they want to go on
vacation when not everybody else
is there, OK?
Uh, 9 weeks on, 3 weeks off. You
can look at Colorado. We don't
have to go really far and pull
it up on their website. You
don't even have to leave the
state to learn about it.
Um
I think that's uh that's an
important thing.
But the things that that I
really want to bring out is when
Governor Richardson was the
governor.
Uh, we, we, what I call raid the
permanent funds so that we could
improve education because we're
45 or 46 at the time. And so we
went into the permanent fund, we
took money out.
And
We went from 47, 48, 49.
And and for me that there's two
sad parts there. A, the whole
program failed. We put more
money in and we're still putting
more money in, and we continue
to put more money in.
Thanks to oil and gas, by the
way.
And
We're just getting worse. Money,
money is not the issue.
Money's not the issue. Something
else has got to happen.
But the other thing that I think
that we did is we started this
serious top down approach
instead of letting school
districts.
Run their schools, we should
give him the money, but let them
run the schools, let them figure
out how to improve that we
should give them the task.
Each kids to read.
But what I see now is with the
increasing top-down effort.
It's like a hammer. We keep
beating the, the, the nail into
submission instead of trying to
let it grow as a tree and, OK,
no, uh, let's reverse that.
Let's go, uh, grow it instead of
beating it into submission with
the top down.
So
I think that the higher income
students losing proficiency is
an example of us beating the
From top down, beating him with
a hammer.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
The guy goes.
Mr. Chairman, sorry about that.
I had a phone call coming in my
earpiece, but uh
Madam Secretary, welcome. I hope
your tenure is longer than the
printing of your cards.
Uh, and that brings us to a
point. It's really hard to build
stability in your top person.
I'm, I'm actually one of the
uncertified CPAs for unit public
schools.
As a school board member, we are
no longer doing anything except
oversight of finances. So, uh,
it's one of those, it's a little
hard to see as a budget builds
in this all in my 2nd day on
this committee.
How hard it is to see the, the
needs.
And refer back to the outcomes
of the question I have, Mr.
Chair, is actually, um,
In
age
613, where you're talking about
the, and I, and I really like
this, uh, special ed, um, is
really important in my district.
Uh, and I like this, um,
From that that you've made this
pilot, and I'm wondering with
the 74% outcomes that you
currently have, how long and
when are we going to implement
that statewide. It goes back to
uh Represent Armstrong saying
that, you know, we keep
changing, we keep changing, we
keep changing, except we're
still 51st in the nation, but I
like this outcome because if we
can help our SE students, I
think that gives us something to
direct that we can see an
influence in.
Uh, and I'm just wondering how
long
This pilot is gonna last. I
should know that from LESC do
not, but I'm just wondering, uh,
do we have projected timeline
that we're gonna offer this
statewide to the districts
academic our request is allowing
us.
areas.
And thank you for that Miss
Stern and designee, and I loved
your wingman. I have a lot of
respect for him, uh, but on
those 17 or
I guess we're starting at the
most need and going up, is that
how we're doing, uh, inviting
him to the table.
Good deal. I appreciate that and
then my last question for you.
She's probably happy, uh, is on.
We're talking on, it's on page
21, the Nova uh data stars to
Nova and
Uh, being on school board, we've
always heard that we do a lot
goes back to certain.
Uh, in Armstrong's saying
change, change, change, uh, a
lot of the staff is always
complained on the use of all the
data, uh, when we go from stars
to Nova, is that all actually
gonna be inputted and
A, um, I guess.
Applied, a lot of the teachers
see that they do stuff with no
Results, you know, they don't
even know what it's for or what
it's gonna do to change their
job, and I don't know enough
about no I did stars, but is
that program gonna be better for
us as far as to give detail back
to the teachers on what needs to
change or is it just gonna be
another accountability
that we must meet with the day
received it by the end of May,
um, early June, um, of this
year, so, um, and so.
Yes, the data system.
dashboard interface that would
allow a teacher, a prince thanks
for that and I appreciate that
it's uh
More timely system that was
another fear that they had it,
you know, a lot of the stuff we
would get in the next
Year, not in the current year,
so that helps and I, I'm gonna
say Miss Charon, I'm ending with
this, uh, it's on. Usually you
have more teachers.
In the legislature
This time I think you have 3.
School board member, I'm still
currently on UNI school board,
but uh we have 3 that have
participated in the school board
at least but uh appreciate it.
Good luck to you. I hope that we
can keep you long term, at least
for another few years cause it's
remember.
In compost and then Senator
Sinndle, you'll have a 2-minute
time limit. Thank you very much,
Mr. Chairman. Just quickly, uh,
I fully support your upcoming
confirmation, uh there's a lot
of work ahead of us, and then uh
what I would like to ask is that
maybe we spend 2 or 3 hours
together to talk about a lot of
these issues that we started the
conversation uh regarding uh
before we started with this
presentation, so if we can
schedule that and that's
basically all I have right now,
Mr. Chairman. Quite a bit of
work ahead of us, but uh.
I'm encouraged and uh we're
gonna move forward altogether.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you for the presentation. Uh,
just quickly, I know on your
Report on page 9, you talked
about the Indian Education fund
and 84.5 million invested since
the fiscal year 20, uh, these
are through the PED process
directly to the tribes. And then
so the, uh,
Request that you have for the 50
million.
Is, was that part of the, the
trust fund that's been discussed
or what's the plan going forward
with that? Is it the same or is
request would provide students.
It would allow them the
autonomy.
Um
Uh, I think we talked about that
issue yesterday, I think we're
we're, we're gonna struggle a
lot with that. And so we're
gonna have to figure it out. I
mean, for Native American
students, I mean, we put the
money in the Navajo doesn't
apply.
Doesn't help the kids.
And whether it's a grant,
whether it's a reimbursement,
but it, I mean, we gotta figure
that out. You look at the
numbers and, and you see what
the, what happens, but
You know,
I'm glad somebody gave me a
piggy bank cause we we spent $5
billion on education. I mean, we
cracked open the piggy bank, and
then we cracked it open again
when we got involved in the
lawsuit.
And when we got involved with
the Yazi Martinez lawsuit.
The legislature reacted, and PED
reacted, and the school
districts did not.
And so
I don't know what's gonna take
to get the school districts to
do their job.
So we can get out of this before
it becomes a consent decree.
Which the advocates in and the
plaintiffs want for us to have a
consent degree so they can say,
you're going to fund this
initiative, and you're going to
fund this initiative, and you're
gonna fund this initiative, and
the consent decree, and where
we're gonna be 20 years later.
I'm trying to figure out who's
the youngest person in the room
is in here. Maybe representative
entia or Representative Dixon,
maybe they'll represented Wuhan
may be the only ones around and
we'll be under a twenty-year
consent decree.
We can't do that. I asked you a
question in the beginning.
Instead for you to think about
it.
How do we hire a law firm?
That can handle all this, and it
may have to be on the
legislative side.
Because
I forget who was our first
attorneys, Charles, do you
remember?
And
Montgomery injured and where
they, they were hired by the
exec.
And then we had another set of
attorneys, Briel
Anaya and that was at the
Attorney General's office,
right?
Yeah, and then
I mean, robust rail and, uh, I
mean they did water suit them
and.
I mean, we don't have the, the
attorneys that we need, right?
And, and so,
The question is,
The legislature is going to have
to step up and hire the
attorneys.
And, and it may be a big number.
I mean, what are we fund them at
5 million a year?
it's been about 500,000 a year.
But this last year there was not
an appropriation for it.
And and so,
We're gonna have to figure out
how we hire attorneys in the
legislative and the exact.
And get us a good set of
attorneys because
We're not getting anywhere.
And the courts have come back
and pretty much said
legislature, you're gonna have
to fix this yourself.
But the school districts aren't
complying with the fixes that we
put in.
We give them money through K
through 12, or maybe some of
them want to do it and some of
them don't, right?
And and some adapt quickly and
some don't adapt quickly and,
and they're chasing the money.
So I mean,
I want to see a budget
recommendation for a set of
attorneys that have experience
in educational lawsuits.
That we can pay.
To handle this for the state.
Cause if we don't do that, we're
never going to get a handle on
this. And we're gonna keep
hearing 20 years later, we're
gonna be in a consent decree in
doing this, so.
It's either time to
take the bull by the horns and
say, let's spend money so we can
figure this out because
The court seemed to be agreeing
with us on what we're doing when
we first, when they first sent
the set of rules out, but now
we're not doing that. And so,
Mr. Chair, I will say, uh, the
public education department, we
do have attorneys, uh, it does
cost about a half a million a
year, uh, for their work.
Um, and so we do, we do have
attorneys and we've had
attorneys and well, apparently
it's not working because we're
still in the same place we are.
An attorney general, the
Attorney general.
Or they call him the Justice
Department now.
has taken over and they've
gotten nowhere.
And, and we spent money and
we've gotten nowhere with
attorneys and, and so you better
figure out how to fire hire.
A good set of high.
Class powerful attorneys in
education.
So we don't end up
Sending 7 billion on education
and still being 50th.
Hopefully we don't adopt another
state, the 51st.
And so, uh, you gotta figure
that out. It's got to happen
that LESC has got
If you need to sign this task.
There's a blank check. Go get me
a set of attorneys that can get
us out of this lawsuit and.
And let's move forward, but the
legislature is going to have to
take control.
And Madam Secretary, this is
nothing on you. This is a high
turnover from
Cabinet secretaries and no one
really wanting to do it, and
everybody's saying, I want to
take care of children and
education and and nobody taking
the, the bull by the horns to
resolve the issue, so.
That, that's the number one
thing, but I mean, $5 billion to
be 50th.
In your, in your request.
I did not see any increases for
insurance and for pay. So the
executive is not recommending
any increases.
Or pay, and I know that.
Uh, imm imsia or I forget who
handles the insurance and
acronyms drive me nuts these
days. Uh
that we don't have that increase
for insurance, 10% increase
across the board, and they want
10% a year for 5 years, that's
I don't know what the number is,
but I did not see that in your
request, right?
It is in the request. I did not
include everything, the request
for us in this presentation was
to focus on the components that
address Martinez Yazi lawsuit,
which is what I did. So in the
percent increase that I, I, um,
stated to you at the beginning
of the presentation that
includes the,
it does not include compensation
that that just means we haven't
got there.
yet. This is not our final PSSR,
um, but, uh, yeah, I just want
to point that out. It does
include health and risk. We're
only 30 days late.
According to the statute.
I mean,
that's how, that's how it rolls.
I mean, we can send a letter and
decide who's right and who's
wrong at some point, but, I
mean, we have to work together.
This is the earliest that we've
ever got it. I appreciate that.
It really helps us get a handle
on that worked hard on that and,
and again I don't know what you
came in at the last minute last
year was with 200 initiatives
for 200 and
For $500 million. It was
outrageous. We couldn't even get
through all the initiatives that
that P did. I mean, I, I'm, I'm
to the point where we may have
to put a grading system in LEF
in LFC.
For PED
Are you performing right? You
kind of do that with Legistat,
but I mean, we're gonna have to
really figure out which
departments in PD are failing
and which are not working, and
put a grading system in and say,
Where are you failing? I mean,
you're part of the problem too.
Uh, we can throw money in the
legislature, and we can throw
policy at it. But if, if your
agency is not performing.
Then we're gonna have to figure
that out. Mr. Chair, we do have
performance measures that are
set by the legislature that we
do work to meet and I talked
about that with our API as well,
the 22 days, so we do have
performance or performance
measures uh that are set by the
legislature.
It may just review those again
and the grading system A through
F, and see how that works. But
something's got to happen.
I mean, we talked and, and we
talk all the time, you know, we
don't really have teachers that
are ready to go into the
classroom.
It seems everywhere we go from,
from the kids coming from
graduating are not ready to go
into college, and the colleges
are reteaching the kids to get
them to, to college level, and
they're coming out of college
and then we're putting all these
training programs and, and all
these initiatives, and we don't
have the right program.
Uh, in place and the UVA.
I think that was Tennessee,
right? UVA sunny Virginia.
And, and we paid all this money
for this program and send a lot
of people to it. And then it was
seemed like it was working
pretty good, and then we asked
the university to duplicate
that.
And gave him the money to do
that.
And we have nothing.
And so we're gonna have to work
on this. I'm not asking for a
response.
Yeah,
I, I wanna just be clear that um
PED should be accountable for
the aspects that we have
authority over, but we do not
have authority over all
components of this lawsuit or
all components of education. So
we need a shared accountability.
We need accountability with our,
our school district and charter
schools, we need accountability
with our higher ed institutions
that are responsible for.
preparing our teachers, the
legislature, we all have shared
accountability here and, and I
will be.
The first person to say, you
know, absolutely the department
should be held accountable for
what we have the authority and
oversight of.
But by no means is it all under
um, it's not all means, but if
you're not getting the money out
in time and SCG money and then
I don't know why you're asking
for more money when you had the
money and you didn't get it out
on time, now you need more money
too, cause you said you didn't
get the money out on time.
That's, that's something we're
gonna have to discuss.
The biggest thing that bothered
me in the entire presentation is
You are not having an initiative
for graduation.
We know that
The 8th to 9th grade is where
most kids drop out.
And there's no initiative for
those.
Kids, I can't remember the
numbers, but they did a study a
while back and it was 2200 kids
that dropped out in between the
8th and 9th grade that they went
back and tried to retrain it or
get him back into the school out
of the 2200, 122.
2
No, no, about 122 went on to
graduate from that point.
But to get to the national
median, right? We only need 2200
more students.
That's a small number, I mean.
And Gallup gets 100 and Grants
gets 50 and
Las Cruces gets
200 or 300, I mean, if everybody
shares that and getting the
2200, we're not at 50th anymore.
Uh, I, I mean, as a secretary,
I'd ask you to work on that as
hard as you can, cause if we
change the mindset that we're
not 50th.
That we're winning, right?
And the mindset that New Mexico,
we are a smart state.
We just got to figure out how to
get them there and life happens
to a lot of things and a lot of
kids and every kid is different.
How do we get to that?
Number of 2200 more students,
and that gets us to the median.
We got to 1000, we maybe be
around 40 something.
If we, one of the priority
budget is graduation, improving
graduation, it's on it's on
slide 14 and slide 15, and um,
you know, we are working very
focused on graduation rates. We
are, we have very ambitious
ambitious goals of exceeding the
national graduation rate. This
is a, a major, major priority
for the agency.
I mean, 2200 students is a small
number, I mean.
Uh, how do we get there, right?
What does it take us to get
there. And then, if the school
districts aren't gonna
participate.
We're gonna force them to
participate cause.
They're the ones that that have
to help us win, I mean.
I hear you. It, it, I hate to
use the acronym of of football
team, right? Like either one in
the state, right? We're not the
winning this team. We win a few
games, we don't win them all.
And and we're never in the top
rankings.
How do we get ranked?
Figure out how to get us there.
I mean we know that if we focus
on the things that we make a
difference, and I'll give you an
I gave you many examples in this
presentation, but I'll share one
more that is not in this
presentation. It has to do with
our child poverty rate in New
Mexico.
Recently, it came out, um, that,
uh, New Mexico has moved from
50th to 22nd in child poverty.
And that's because of all of the
investments that this state has
made.
And things like health insurance
coverage, um, our improvements
around food access, all of our
programs that are intended to
support and address poverty or
making a difference from 50th to
22nd.
That is something we should be
celebrating in the state.
We are doing the thing. We're
doing the things, but how, how
would we keep doing the things
and how do we make the districts
do the things that they need to
do to make us get there. I mean,
everybody says, oh, we don't
want districts don't want
oversight we should be
independent. We should be
allowed to make our own choices
when, when we allow that nothing
happens.
We slide. We slid from 46th to
50th
and so I mean that's something
you're gonna have to get a
handle on, so, I'm on board with
the with the accountability then
it yeah.
OK, I, I think you're gonna have
to struggle. I mean, we see this
in CYFD.
I mean
Middle management runs
government because they know
we're only here for a short
time.
And and changing an agency is
hard to make that change inside
an agency as as a cabinet
secretary, because the
entrenchment in in what they've
done in
I mean, in this administration
with the turnovers, many
secretaries that we had, there's
no
Steady steering of the ship that
that they can manage him.
Mr. Chair, I, I think, uh,
For those of you who know me,
uh, you're probably surprised
that I haven't talked before,
because I talk a lot, and I've
been, and I've been, uh,
Thinking about all the things
that you're saying, and a lot of
it, a lot of what you're saying
points to a couple of things.
Um, one is, how do, how do each
of you know?
When we've done the job.
If I, if I ask each of you,
When has education worked?
You all might have different
benchmarks for what that might
look like.
It might be a certain graduation
rate.
It might be that we're 46th
instead of 50th or 35th instead
of 50th.
We all have these different
marks, right?
So, part of the issue is we've
not yet determined.
Or agreed on some sort of
benchmark for what progress
looks like and for how you can,
you can say that as a state,
we've been successful, right?
And, and I'll go back very
quickly to date myself a little
bit uh to No Child Left Behind
in the idea that 100% of
students would be proficient,
right? That was a lofty and
aspirational goal. Anybody who
worked in a school, knew that
that was maybe too lofty because
kids bring all sorts of
challenges. That doesn't mean
that they couldn't improve and
get better and get very close to
proficient, but the idea that
every single student, regardless
of demographics, background,
special education status would
be proficient.
was um somewhat disheartening to
folks who work there.
But it was a goal that people
agreed on, or at least they told
us to agree on it.
And so part of this is, is
determining
As a state and to, to, uh,
Secretary Padilla's point about
uh shared accountability.
Can we agree on, on benchmarks
about what progress looks like.
And, and what success should
look like?
The other piece of this, and
this is not to to endorse the
plan, but it is maybe to think
uh for us all to think about.
How do you sustain progress if
you're making it.
Despite any changes that
happen across government, right?
Whether you have a state school
board, a secretary, people come
and go. We will all come and go
to your point, maybe
Representative Lente will still
be here, you know.
Yeah.
There should be some guiding
principles, some guiding
benchmarks and metrics.
That help
Whoever sits in your seat and in
our seat.
Determined that we're still
making progress or not.
And then to your point about
accountability,
That's when you step in, because
I think we all feel frustrated
at times that
You've, you've, you've
appropriated money.
You've passed some laws, the
department implements programs,
and there's somebody out there
that isn't doing the thing that
we want them to do.
But until we've identified what
it looks like to do what we want
them to do or not.
It's hard to step in. So we have
a federal accountability system
that gives the department some
levers.
But they can step in and say,
you're not meeting certain
requirements of the federal
government. PED can do that. As
a state, we know that outside of
those designated schools, there
are a lot of other schools that
are maybe not the worst, quote
unquote, based on student
assessments, but still need
support and still need to
improve.
But we haven't determined what
that should look like, so we're
not able to support them
appropriately or to hold them
accountable, because we're not
even sure what their job is, the
description is. So I think the,
the bottom line here is, um, and
we've, we've brought forward our
roadmap to our committee and
stay committed to our, to our
job as staff to continue to, to
dive into data but not just look
at where we are today, but also
help the committee to understand
where they need to go and where
schools need to land.
Before we can determine whether
or not they're actually making,
making progress, and then
potentially having some shared
agreement and accountability for
what success should actually
look like.
And I think that's, that's still
more work to come.
Uh, and I, I use my father's
acronym. My kids are in the
school districts are just like
my fingers on my hand, they're
all different, right? And each
one is a performs a different
function and how you use it.
So you gotta figure out how, how
you do that. But when I, when I
grade this stuff, I, you know, I
talked to the superintendent uh
what do you think about this? Is
it working? And Gel has adapted
McKinley County's adapted quite
a bit of this.
upfront and, and he'll, he's,
he's upfront with me. I don't
say I'm in a grudge, rage on
your graduation rates, like,
what's working and what's not
working.
And he's pretty vocal, as you
know. Just say what's working
and what's not working, and then
you Zuni's completely different.
You don't ever hear much out of
them.
And what's working for them and
what's working. And that's a
pueblo tribal school district.
That probably needs a different
type of support in Gal McKinley
County, even though Gal McKinnon
County has more Native
Americans, um.
So I mean, it's they're
different, and each one is
different, and each school is
gonna be different, and each
principle is gonna be different
in, and so uh we gotta figure it
out.
At the end of the day.
We gotta figure it out.
Does anyone wrap up something.
Or just say goodbye.
Uh, Mr. Chair, thank you for the
opportunity. I do want to just
make two comments. Um,
First
Everything is a priority,
nothing is a priority. It's
something that uh Kerry Wright
from Mississippi, the
superintendent there.
Said, so I, I would really
encourage you to think about
that.
There's only so much we can do
and focus on and do well. And I
would really encourage us to
really think about what are
those key things we want to do?
Secondly is to John's point,
We care about what we measure.
We might be measuring.
Graduation rates of at-risk
students. That tells us one
thing, but I think the next
level of performance measures
should be
percent of at-risk students that
have access to a
CT concentration course of 2.
Right, that actually is an
actionable performance measure
that you can actually hold the
department accountable for
saying, well, did you do it?
As opposed to just looking at a
measure of what the outcome
should be.
So thinking about how we look at
performance in a more actionable
way.
And to John's point, maybe
having a plan around it.
I think we'll get us to that
stage of, did you do our job and
do we get there?
Thank you. Uh, one thing that we
got to participate if we talk
about CTE, right? We got to
build the building, we got to
build the program. And then we
got to furnish the material.
And sometimes we forget about
everything we need to do, and we
think about a big shiny building
with the CT sign on it, and
forget about what, what it takes
to get the
The other part of it done in
completion CT. So thank you guys
for your presentation and time,
Madam Secretary.
I'll call you, Madam Secretary,
cause I don't see a problem with
you getting appointed, uh.
That, uh, we got a lot of work
to do in the short time.
Thank you.
Alright
John Clark, the guy that
abandoned ship and left.
And then
Brendan, you're gonna start us
off and you informed him that
10 pages and over.
Results in
Hello Don.
under tabsy.
Price in volume.
I learned the budget from Don
and John. Good morning, Mr.
Chair, committee members. My
name is Brendan Gray. I'm an
economist at LFC.
I'm gonna kick off this budget
hearing, uh.
With, um, yeah, so I, we're
behind tab C. I'm gonna be
starting off with uh a short
presentation of a report that
looks like this.
One page front back.
Should be uh pretty quick and
then I'll turn it over uh to our
state investment officer at the
State Investment Council, uh,
Mr. John Clark.
So this performance spotlight is
going to be a little bit like a
traditional legistat where we
hone in on one particular
performance issue, uh, at this
agency.
Uh, but before I do that, I
wanted to uh start with some
broader context of SIC in
general. I'm sure that John will
get into this.
But over the last 20 years or
so, the total assets under
management uh from SIC have.
By my estimate, quadrupled the
number of FTE managing those
assets have increased.
Uh maybe 5, so basically
remained flat over the last 20
years. And the point that I'll
make in general is that overall
agency performance continues to
be very good for most of the
large funds, they're meeting
their long term benchmarks, and
they're doing that in the
context of tremendous increase
in responsibility, really being
good stewards of public money.
One of the uh performance
challenges that the agency faces
is reflected by the chart on the
middle of page one.
This is really the impetus of
this performance spotlight. And
what that chart shows,
Is the average 3-year returns
for the land grant permanent
fund, that's in blue.
And then the severance tax
permanent fund, that's in red.
And what stands out to me when I
look at that chart.
is how the severance tax
permanent fund.
Quarter after quarter lags the
land grant permanent fund.
And as you all know, this is
very important because the
severance tax permanent fund is
the place where the legislature
is putting tremendous resources
to improve the state's long term
fiscal health.
And this performance gap is
gonna be very costly over time.
As a severance tax permanent
fund increases rapidly over the
next couple of years, uh, the
those costs are going to add up
and add up if that performance
gap continues. Uh, this
estimate, uh, this analysis
estimates based on uh Craig
estimates that by FY 50, the
cost to the severance tax
permanent fund of this
performance gap will be $11
billion and the recurring
general fund costs
in FY 50 will be in the ballpark
of 370 million in recurring
losses to the general fund,
because the severance tax
permanent fund is smaller than
it could have been if it had
been matching land grant
permanent fund returns.
So this is an important issue to
keep an eye on, something that
we track very closely every
quarter in our quarterly
investment reports.
Um, and, uh, what this report
finds in line with previous
research, that the reason
there's a performance gap.
I, uh, because of um investments
that the legislature has
directed SIC to make at below
market, they get below market
rate returns.
There's 3 large programs that
generate this performance gap.
Uh, first is the New Mexico
Private Equity Investment
Program. This makes headlines
from time to time, SIC partners
with venture capital firms,
which then make equity
investments into New Mexico
startups.
It's about 450 million, uh, in
the severance tax perm to find
about 4% of the fund.
There's also the New Mexico
small Business Investment
Corporation, the legislature has
um required SIC to invest 2% of
the severance tax permanent fund
into that program, about 150
million. And then lastly, the uh
small business recovery loan
program created in the pandemic,
uh, about 120 million.
I'm gonna focus now on the
private equity program as I
start to conclude, and if you
turn to page 2 on the report,
there's a table that shows the
asset allocation and you can
take a look at that if you'd
like, but I direct the
committee's attention to is the
the line that says New Mexico
private equity.
That's the private equity
program, you can see.
The land grant permanent fund
allocation is 0% and the
severance tax permanent fund is
4%. That's one of the driving
causes of the performance gap.
And you'll see underneath that
the negative 7%. So, over the
last 5 years on average,
This program has had -7% returns
to the severance tax permanent
fund.
And that acts as a drag overall
in the performance, contributing
to uh that chart that I talked
about on page one.
When this program was created,
the legislature gave SIC two
mandates.
The first prong of the mandate
was to generate investment
income to the severance tax
permanent fund.
And as that 5 year returns would
indicate that may not be being
met.
The second mandate was to
generate economic development,
create jobs, invest in New
Mexico companies.
The paragraph on the bottom of
page 2 covers that prong of the
mandate.
Over the last 5 years, SIC's
fund manager estimates that the
program is created about 1800
jobs, so it is meeting that
mandate.
Uh, but what we find is that
those jobs are more costly per
job than other large economic
development programs. You can
see the cost per job estimate,
the general fund cost per job
estimate on the chart on the
bottom of page 2.
Comparing private equity
program, film tax credit, LEA
JTI.
And so, um,
The opportunity costs are high
for, for two reasons. First is
that that first point that I
made about the foregone general
fund revenue to the foregone
general fund revenue.
And the second is that from an
economic development
perspective, we may not be
getting the biggest bang for our
buck by making these types of
investment.
So, um,
Chair, I am about to conclude my
remarks, but the last point I
want to make is that this
performance spotlight is very
high level, uh,
Ask, uh, presents a lot of good
questions for future work, um,
for example, uh, what do these
programs look like in other
states? What's the actual return
on investment, both how many
dollars are we getting back?
What's it generating in the
economy, uh, what's the need out
there? What do businesses need
for capital? Are we meeting that
need? Are we exceeding that
need? Uh, what industries get
that, I, I could go on and on.
Um, and so I think there's a
great opportunity for future
evaluation of these programs.
Not addressed here, but, uh, at
your direction, happy to
facilitate that.
For that, I will pause and now
we'll transition to the budget
presentation from Mr. Clark, uh,
the LFC budget materials are
going to be behind tab 3 and the
agency code is 337 and you
should have his presentation in
front of you.
Thank you very much, Brendan,
and thank you, Mr. Chair and
committee members. It's a
pleasure to be with you here
today. Uh, again, I'm John
Clark, I'm the state investment
officer. I'd like to briefly
recognize, uh, some of my team
members who are here today. Uh,
we have, uh, Vince Smith, who is
my chief investment officer. Uh,
we have uh Brent Ship, who is my
chief financial officer. We have
Charles Woolman, who is our
director of communications and
legislative and client affairs,
and we have Don Iglesias, who is
our chief investment operations
officer.
Uh, I also would like to extend
my thanks to the LFC staff. Uh,
we had a number of
collaborative uh conversations
in advance of this that I think
led to, uh, improvements in the
presentation you just saw and
the presentation I'm about to
give. So, uh, really appreciate
that, that coordination.
So, uh, before going into the
slides before you, I just want
to talk a little bit about uh
some of what Brendan mentioned
because I don't have any slides
specific to uh the New Mexico
Private equity Investment
Program.
So, first off, uh, I absolutely
admit that the historical
results do not live up to
expectations, both in terms of
fiscal return and in terms of
return uh in economic and job
performance to the state. The,
the way the program used to be
structured was we gave all of
the money to one in-state
partner and relied on them to
pick the best companies to
invest into. The problem was
they weren't a national partner.
They didn't have a ton of
experience doing this.
And it was a very small
portfolio. It didn't have
diversification.
When you're doing venture
capital investing, you have to
have diversification, because
you end up with a lot of losses
and with a few big wins then
over, hopefully overwhelming
those losses. If you're
investing all of your money with
one manager and that manager is
putting most of that money into
a few companies, it's just not a
recipe for success, and that's
what we've seen.
That program started to shift in
2016 and we no longer uh
continue to fund that one
in-state partner. Unfortunately,
those decisions that were made a
decade or more ago are still
with us, still on our books. Uh,
we have made a significant shift
towards diversifying and
investing with a wide variety of
managers, and in the last two
years, we have made a further
shift of really going out and
working with national venture
capital groups across the
country.
country that have significant
experience and track records of
success. That's key because it
is really easy to fail in
venture capital. You need to
work with groups that have been
there, done that, and proven
that they know how to invest in
good companies. We're doing that
now and we're focusing much more
now on the double bottom line of
both impact in the Mexico and
fiscal return in a way that just
wasn't quite happening
previously. Previously, the
focus
this was really more on just
trying to get the economic
return. We believe that we can
get both and over the last two
years, we have invested,
including some pending
commitments, about $700 million
into more than 20 venture
capital groups, and we have
momentum that we've never seen
before. We have top venture
capital groups from around the
country approaching us and
saying, we want to be partners,
we see opportunities to invest
into New Mexico, we see
opportunities to bring
And some of our portfolio
companies to New Mexico. And
that's something that has never
happened before. So, I think the
way the program is structured
now is both radically different
from how it was before, but it's
also a recipe for success. And
the reason we made this change
is we went out and talked to the
areas that had success in doing
this. We know that there are
several areas that have done
this well for, uh, for decades
and they've seen success. We
know that it's the Bay Area,
Silicon Valley, New York,
Boston, Austin.
So we went out and talked to
them and to find out how are you
doing this? Why was it
successful? How can we do that
here? And they were very open
and willing to talk to us. The
changes that we've made to the
program, were the result of
those conversations. So we think
it's headed in a great
direction, but these investments
we've made over the last few
years are new. It is going to
take quite a while before we
start to see the success.
Meanwhile, we will still
continue to have those old
decisions from a decade ago on
the books.
As well, Brenda mentioned the
small business Investment
Corporation NMSBIC.
They were set up uh under
statute years ago to get 2% of
the severance tax permanent
fund. When it was a much smaller
fund. I don't know if 2% is the
right amount now. Uh, I'm not
prepared to weigh in on that
today, but it's a question that
I think uh you as legislators
and uh the staff of the LFC
should be looking into is 2% the
right number because they, they
provide a very valuable resource
in providing loans to small
businesses across the state.
But at the same time, they're
only providing about 0 to 2%
returns. And so as long as that
program is in place, it will
continue to act as a drag on our
performance, and that represents
about 2% of the entire severance
tax permanent fund.
And then additionally, there was
the COVID era, uh, small
business loan recovery program.
Obviously, that was set up in
the depths of COVID when we were
in an emergency, the likes of
which we've never seen before.
But the way the program was
structured and how the New
Mexico Finance Authority has to
administer it.
It was set up without requiring
any collateral. It was set up
with terms extremely favorable
to businesses, and we are
expecting significant losses in
the many tens of millions. That
represents an additional 2% of
our sovereign tax permanent
fund. And that is going to act
as a negative drag for the life
of that program, and that will
continue, that program will
continue to run for the next 10
years.
So we're trying to make
significant changes for the
parts of the program we can
control, and we think that will
see significant improvements.
But that recovery loom program,
which at this point it's done,
it's out the door. Nothing to do
about it now. We'll continue to
act as a drag.
And then there's the issue of
the small business Investment
Corporation, which you get to
decide what's the right size for
that.
Now moving to uh the
presentation.
Uh, I'm, I'm gonna skip through,
uh, uh, a couple of these
slides, um, slide one is just
kind of the history of the
council. I just want to
highlight that we are overseeing
investments totaling over $58
billion and it's not just the
permanent funds that we oversee,
we manage 12 different funds. We
also manage uh investments for
25 different clients across the
state.
Uh, uh, and they've invested
over $2 billion with us.
Uh, the next two slides, 3 and
4, just list the 12 funds that
we, uh, manage, and that's just
for your reference. I'm not
gonna go through and cover
those.
On slide 5, I'm not gonna go
through this in detail, but you
can see a pie chart just showing
the breakdown of all of the
assets that we manage. Clearly
the land grant permanent fund is
the largest, with the severance
experiment fund and the early
childhood education and care
fund coming in 2nd and 3rd.
On slide 6, this is really what
I want to get to. What is the
impact that we're having and
that we're going to have in the
years to come.
So this fiscal year, we're
sending over $2 billion in
distributions back to the state.
I know you have a lot of
agencies coming before you
saying we're different. Well, I,
I, I used to be on that side. I
was with LLC for 7 years. I
heard that a lot. We actually
are because we generate
significant revenue for the
state. We are part of how you
pay for all of the other agency
budgets. Slide 6 shows the
impact that we're having
specifically on K through 12 and
early childhood.
Our distributions back to the
state cover more than 25% of all
funding for K through 12
education in the state. Our
distributions cover 58% of all
funding for early childhood
programs.
On slide 7.
We then start to look at the
future, and we have to talk
about oil and gas revenues.
So you've, you've heard, you
know, reports from economists
from oil and gas industry
experts saying there's going to
come a time about 10 years from
now, where we just won't be able
to drill new wells fast enough
to offset the decline rate of
existing wells. So what do we
do? Well, while I was at the
economic development department,
working on the strategic plan,
I uh tried to see can we
diversify the economy quickly
enough to offset those losses.
Uh, the answer was no, partly
because of timing, we thought
Maybe we would have 20 years to
do it, and the experts were
telling us, no, it's more along
the volumes of 10.
But furthermore, it turned out,
John, let me catch you one
second. Can you put the
presentation up so those people
on Zoom don't start texting me
and saying we can't see the
presentation.
Mr. Chair,
yeah, I don't think we can see
it on Zoom and we had a snafu on
our end, so we don't have it
available to present.
Just to snap you.
Uh
So, so, Mr. Chair, so it, it
turned out that if, if we wanted
to diversify the economy quickly
enough to offset those oil and
gas revenue losses.
We were, uh, the economic
development department would
have had to take its
record-breaking, uh, job
creation years and do 4 times
that every year for the next 10
years. That just was not going
to be feasible. And the reason
is, as you can see on the slide,
it's not an economic issue we're
facing so much as it is a
revenue issue. the oil and gas
industry represents about 3% of
employment, but in direct
revenues represents 24% of
general fund revenues. And then
once you include related income
and sales tax.
tax revenues, it becomes over
30%.
So then moving to the next
slide.
What do we do about it? Well,
You all passed, and the governor
signed Senate Bill 26 last year.
At the time that it was enacted,
we weren't sure exactly what the
impact would be, but we knew
that it would provide a
significant offset for those oil
and gas revenue losses. Well,
you can see on the graph on the
left now how that's working, and
you can see that uh in yellow,
this is now the windfall
revenues that are going to be
coming into the severance tax
permanent fund as a result of
that legislation. The graph on
the right
the dramatic increase in the
revenues that we will be sending
back to the State General Fund
each year over time as a result
of this legislation that great
bar is what we would have been
sending without this
legislation, and then you can
see the dark blue line is with
it, and that difference is
incredible. Down the road, we
will be sending in additional
billions of dollars back to the
state.
Simply because of this
legislation, to take some of the
current windfall invested and
then return it on a smooth
annualized basis back to the
state in the future.
So on slide 9.
Uh, here's just a quick quote
from a press release that was
put out by DFA and it was based
on the work done by the
Consensus revenue stimating
Group, and the estimate from
Craig is that by 2039, SIC
distributions back to the state
will eclipse oil and gas
revenues as being the single
largest source of revenue to the
state's general fund. That's
just 15 years from now. My hope
is to still be at SIC 15 years
from now, and I'm thrilled that
I could potentially see this.
something.
And there's another benefit that
I don't think has received
enough attention. So your
economist at LFC estimated that
the work you started to do back
in 2019, to take some current
windfalls and sock them away,
invest them for later use.
took about 37% of the of the
volatility out of the state's
general fund out of the last 5
years. They also forecast that
for the next 5 years, the
passage of 26 will take an
additional 55% of volatility out
of those revenues. That's
phenomenal. It has the chance to
take us from being one of the
highest revenue volatility
states to at least mid pack and
potentially on track to become
one of the lowest volatility
states.
That provides so much more
ability for you all to do budget
planning and perhaps at some
point be able to uh gradually
transition to multi-year budgets
where, so the agencies can plan
better.
So going on to slide 10, where
do we see this going in the
future. We can see a comparison
here between fiscal year 2024
and fiscal year 2050, and we're
projecting by 2050 that our
distributions back to the state
will be about 1/3 of all general
fund revenues. It will eclipse
income taxes. It will be on par
with all sales taxes. That's
really significant.
But in order to get there, we
have to make sure that we're
operating effectively.
We just eclipsed $58 billion in
assets under management, and
that now makes us the 2nd
largest sovereign wealth fund
organization in the country.
Second, only to Alaska.
Now, that's incredible. We
really oversee a world-class
resource.
We are not yet a world-class
organization. We are on the
path, we are working internally
and with our council to make a
variety of changes. We're
talking to national experts to
adopt best practices, but we
also need the right budget and
the right staffing.
You can see on slide 11, uh, our
operating budget, uh, actuals
for last year and budget this
year and next.
We are different in that for two
reasons, we can't do simple
incremental budgeting for SIC.
The first reason is that as our
assets grow, it means our
management fees have to grow as
well. We do not make individual
purchases of investments. We do
not go out and trade stocks and
bonds, uh, we go through
qualified investment managers.
We have to pay the management
fees as the assets grow, our
management fees to them have to
grow approximately.
proportionally. That's not going
to grow at a 3% a year rate.
But also we need appropriate
staffing levels. I really
appreciated the fact that
Brendan pointed out, uh, that
over the last 20 years, our
staffing has increased by about
5, but our essence of their
management have about
quadrupled.
And you can see on our next
slide on slide 12, uh, a graph
of what this looks like. Until
this year, we actually had fewer
FTE than we did 15 years ago.
When we oversaw $12 billion. And
the problem is we can't simply
add an additional 0 to the
checks that go out the door.
There's a lot more that goes
into it.
And on slide 13, my last slide,
uh, just wanted to highlight a
little bit of what all goes into
it. There are additional
contract negotiations. There
are, uh, there's a lot of
additional due diligence with
each thing that we're investing
into. We have to track all of
the investments, and you can see
these graphs on the right hand
side show the incredible growth
in new private market
commitments that we have to
track and that we have to go out
and find, but also total number
of active private.
funds because we have to stay on
top of those. We have to make
sure that they're continuing to
perform. We have to make sure
that the managers are holding up
their end of the contract.
We have to make sure that we
have the appropriate staffing.
We have the appropriate IT
resources to be able to manage
this money effectively. If we
don't, if our effectiveness
drops by uh uh our performance
by even a couple 10%. That is
hundreds of millions of dollars
less.
In the the bank each year. It is
tens of millions and later on
hundreds of millions less to the
general fund each year.
We generate revenue for the
state in order to, to do that
most effectively, we have to be
the most effective organization.
As I said, we're working on a
lot of things internally and
with our council, but we also
have to make sure that budget is
not standing in the way.
So thank you very much. I'm
happy to answer any questions.
Uh, we only have a list of
2.
So
3.
It's growing. Senator compost.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman, if uh we could go to
slide number 12, and that
basically uh goes back to your
point, uh, SIO Clark as we deal
with the AUM, uh, growth, and we
also see, if you will, the need
for staffing in order to get
there in a couple of issues. The
first is going to be oil and gas
as we see that might plateau in
the year 2030, and then with the
investments you're making in the
return to the state.
When do you need these FTEs in
order to go ahead and keep up,
if you will, with a comparable
piece of ensuring that our
investment has its maximum
return.
Sure, so Mr. Chair and Senator,
great question. We can only grow
so quickly. We, we started off
with a small staffing, and when
I came in, we had 22 filled
positions, uh, we have, uh, an
offer about to go out the door,
uh, to get to 28.
We have 37 authorized because we
got 6 additional for this year.
I, I don't think at this point
we can probably grow beyond that
within the next year and a half.
So we're not asking for
additional authorized FTE right
now. What we're asking for is
funding to make sure we can fill
those positions because what
happened, uh, for the current uh
fiscal year is we were
authorized for an additional 6
positions, but there was zero
increase in the 200 category for
those positions. And I
understand why historically, we
were
not doing a very good job of
keeping, uh, a low vacancy rate.
We've started to make dramatic
improvements in that because
that's been a huge focus for me.
And as I said, I've been there
now 10 months, and we've gone
from 22 FTE to 28. I think we
can get to 37 and at that point,
we'll re-evaluate what our
staffing needs are, but right
now we just need to make sure
that we have the money to
actually fill those positions.
So, Mr. Chairman, if I may just
uh as a follow up, when we
really talk about the
comparables for compensation.
And, and what it's gonna take to
go ahead and fill those
positions, uh, what
The dollar figure are you
talking about when it comes to
attract, if you will, those
qualified individuals uh to fill
the FTEs.
So Mr. Chair and Senator, uh,
that's something that we're
actively working on with the
council right now. We hired a
contractor to do uh a national
study to see what are
comparables are for these
positions because there are not
really very many people in New
Mexico who do this. We, we have
very few investment
institutional investment into
individuals. Personal investing
is very different. In order to
retain and attract the best
people, we need to make sure
that we're paying appropriately.
And we have lost people to other
public funds in other states
that are much smaller.
So we know that we are
underpaying. The question is by
how much, and we should be
getting a report back in the
next month or so, uh, telling us
what our compensation needs to
look like in order to be
competitive. And as the 2nd
largest sovereign wealth fund
organization in the country, we
should be competitive. We should
demand that this organization
become world class. And part of
that needs to be retaining and
attracting the best people.
So, uh, Mr. Cha, as we go
forward SIO Clark, uh,
Our future then definitely
depends if you will, on the
investments that we continue to
make.
It also means that these FTEs
need to be filled, and most
importantly, that we're able to
to retain them, as you indicate
you'd like to be around for
years as we see the uh
investments grow and, and again,
as we see, if you will, the
transition from dependency on
oil and gas into other forms of
uh of revenues. Uh, this
definitely is uh a significant
area for all of us. So again,
Mr. Chair, thank you very much
for the presentation, and I'm
glad you pointed that.
out and whatever we can do to
support that, uh, please count
me in on that as well. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Represented Lu Han.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, thank
you. Um,
Clark.
For all your insight for
everything you're doing and your
commitment. I think it's really
what I heard from you the, the
most and if we can retain and
keep you in the state of New
Mexico and turn SIC into this
world class um
Agency that would be incredible.
My question, uh, I mean, Senator
Campos asked a couple of those
about the staffing ratio. So
along those lines,
How much money, if you, if you
will, are we losing by not being
fully staffed.
Mr. Chair.
So Mr. Chen, Representative, it
is probably something in the
ballpark of 10s to 100s of
millions of dollars each year
because we are struggling to get
enough money out the door. We
only have 2 people overseeing
the entire private equity
portfolio as an example. That is
both national private equity and
the New Mexico program. Two
people, we also have a very
small team of attorneys and they
are trying to negotiate against
extremely highly paid attorneys
on the other side.
who are looking for every
opportunity to gain an
advantage. So,
We, if, if we were proper,
properly staffed, uh, we would
probably be able to generate
hundreds of millions of
additional dollars each year.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So that's
money we're leaving essentially
on the table. Uh, we do have a,
I, I want to commend your staff
and, you know, we have talent
here is what I'm saying, and we,
we wouldn't see these numbers if
we didn't. I think the
investment with your leadership
is, is quite warranted,
especially when we're having
conversations even yesterday, we
were talking about oil and gas
and setbacks and those sort of
things. But if we invested in
this agency, then we can
compensate for for some of those
issues. And I really wanna, um,
You know, focus a little bit on
SB 26, and what we did there. Is
there any room for growth there.
Um, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chapresentative, uh, that
was our, our question going into
the analysis. Um, so I, I tasked
uh uh Don Iglesias with, uh,
heading up the analysis on that
to see how, how close did SB 26
get us to where we needed to be,
and I was very pleasantly
surprised coming out of it to
see that under most scenarios of
what is expected to happen with
the oil and gas industry. Uh,
our distributions back to the
state, uh, will be able to comp
ate for any future losses, and
then we, we can actually grow
the general fund. So,
we can't just turn off the
spigot, uh, uh, for oil and gas.
That's not gonna work. Uh, but
again, under most realistic
scenarios of what's likely to
happen, uh, we will be able to
step in and more than offset
those losses and provide the
state with a stable and growing
financial future that we've just
never seen before.
Thank you so much. I, I, I
really commend you for that and
for the in-depth information. I
was in a um
And IPack
uh committee a couple of weeks
ago where Don gave the overview
on that Miss chair. It was just,
it's a phenomenal, it's
incredible. I hope we can look
at ways to grow those types of
funds or to, you know, in, in
resolving some of these issues
that we have, we're
Where the budget committee,
right? So, I just want to
commend your staff again and
your commitment to our state and
your, uh, leadership and your
insight to how we can do this.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Uh, represented Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
I'm, I'm wondering, um,
Thank you for the presentation,
and I apologize for stepping
out. Um.
The
Uh, increase of revenue, um,
distributions in the future that
will potentially offset some of
the oil and gas, um, future
losses, um,
How else are we
How else is the state investment
council looking to
Offset
Oil and gas losses. So outside
of just us relying on investment
returns. Are there other ways, I
mean, you've sort of talked
about the
Private equity, but
What's the general philosophy or
thought?
So Mr. Chair and Representative,
uh, the way I see it, we really
have two functions. One is with
the vast majority of our
portfolio, trying to get the
highest possible risk-adjusted
returns to make sure that we are
making wise, prudent decisions
that also uh get us enough
returns to at least offset the
oil and gas losses. But the
other piece is, how can we best
impact New Mexico, and we're,
we're taking a look at that, uh,
of how we can do that better
than we've done it before.
including, um, our director of
the uh real estate asset class
is even taking a look within the
existing statutory framework,
are there opportunities uh to
potentially get involved in real
estate, uh, here in New Mexico
to help push projects forward
that both would help the state,
but also still provide us the
return that we're expecting. But
in terms of the New Mexico, the
New Mexico program, the private
equity program.
We, we have
Committed about $700 million
now, just over the last two
years, uh, to venture capital
funds that all have made a
commitment to invest in New
Mexico, and we're seeing not
just a willingness to do that,
but more and more interest in
doing that. And, and that's been
incredible. Uh, I had the
opportunity, uh, a few weeks ago
to be part of an event where,
uh, I was there with
representatives from the
Economic Development department
in meeting with about a dozen
heads of venture capital groups
from around the country and in
one case around the world. And
they came away from that event,
saying, I had no idea what was
going on in New Mexico. And I'm
going to start taking a look at
potentially investing here. That
was just a few weeks ago and
now, uh, multiple venture
capital groups that were there
have already started discussions
with the economic development
department about trying to bring
some of their portfolio
companies here, uh, without
anything else needed from us,
but just
that word out and showing that
commitment that we've been
making, but also the commitment
the state's been making through
uh it's variety of economic
development programs. So we're
starting to work far more
collaboratively with the
Economic development community,
uh, than we ever have in the
past. And I see that as part of
my mission.
Thank you, Mr. uh, thank you.
That's
That's wonderful to hear. Um,
Do you have thoughts on um, so
is this the disbursement or the
amount going to the NMSBIC. Is
it around 35 million a year with
the with the 2% Mr. Turn it very
significantly because there are
some years that they don't get
any and then some years that
they get a significant portion.
So it's, it's really better just
to look at it as that it it's 2%
of the entire 7.
tax permanent fund, um, and that
whenever it falls below that in
a given year, then we have to
send out an amount to get them
back up to the 2%.
Thank you. I'm wondering sort of
how the
How that fund interplays with
what we, the legislature created
that NMFA for the venture
capital investment fund. And I
know that there are differences
in how they work. I'm just
curious if there are
modifications potentially that,
I mean, it would be easier for
the legislature to modify the
one at NMFA, um,
If there are modifications that
we could make that would make
sure that they work in tandem
and sort of stacked together if
you have thoughts on that.
Sure. So, Mr. Chair and
Representative, they, they serve
two very different functions. So
there is a need for both uh debt
as well as equity, and the
NMSBIC provides a valuable uh
debt option, uh, at, at lower
rates than they could usually
get in the private market. So
they, they provide that valuable
function for uh small businesses
that either can't or just really
don't want uh private equity
investments, uh, the equity
investment uh that the
legislature put into
NMFA was fantastic. That was,
that was a significant shift in
how the state uh tried to uh
approach building an
entrepreneurial ecosystem.
And
Unlike our venture capital
program, they are much more, um,
Impact focused. They're not as
focused on returns. They are
also much more flexible in the
types of businesses that they
can invest into. They can invest
into a wide variety of
businesses, whereas our
underlying statute really
focuses on science and
technology. And so we tend to
invest into high tech
industries. So, I, uh, I think
they are complementary. I, I
don't see at this point that
there is much duplication. And
we also work very closely
together. I have a meeting
coming up with uh SBI.
I see, uh, we're frequently
talking both my staff and I
talking with NMFA talking with
EDD, uh, we are starting to
discuss potential solutions to
some of the existing
shortcomings of in the state of
building the entrepreneurial
ecosystem because what we are
still really lacking is
experienced entrepreneurs in the
state. So we need ways to both
attract experienced
entrepreneurs, but also to help
train New Mexicans to become
Experienced entrepreneurs. We're
trying to do that with some of
the investments that we're
making through our portfolio.
We're working with some managers
that are uh both bringing in
experienced entrepreneurs,
bringing their businesses, their
startup companies with them, but
also uh some uh some of the
investments we're making are
into groups that are taking
experienced entrepreneurs and
using them as mentors uh to help
locals, but that's just us.
There does need to be more of a
state effort and so we're in
discussions.
with the economic development
department, NMFA, the governor's
office, what to try to come up
with some recommendations of
what else should the state
consider?
Thank you. um, thank you, Mr.
Chair. Last question. Um,
For a lot of times we use
metric, the job creation metric.
When we're evaluating the impact
of funds. Are there other
metrics that we should actually
be using.
So, Mr. Chair and
Representative, historically we
only measure job creation for
our New Mexico program and
that's something that we've
begun to change. So we are
starting to evaluate the total
economic impact of the state,
and that's critical because we
could be uh having some small
startups that are high tech
creating enormous uh fiscal
economic impacts to the state,
but maybe they don't need more
than 20 people. And that's an
important thing to measure. So
we're starting to measure that.
We, we won't have all of these
results.
for probably another month or
two, but we're starting to do
that on our side as well, uh, I,
I actually, I just reached out
to your chief economist
yesterday that I'd be interested
in having a discussion with the
LFC economists about how we
could potentially take a deeper
dive into the cost per job
comparison information.
When
I started that comparison
information back when I was at
LFC. I admitted at the time, it
was not an apples to apples
comparison. It's not quite
apples to oranges, but the
phrase I used back then was it's
oranges to other citrus fruit.
There there there's some real
differences, not so significant
that it's not valuable. It's a
lot better than the nothing that
we had before. But I think
there's some better ways we
could try to do it that would
make it more comparable across
programs, but also give you a
better picture.
Of really how effective and
efficient these various programs
are.
Thank you so much. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
We're talking about the citrus
relationship
We're talking about the citrus
relationshiping small.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, thank
you to Mr. Great, really
appreciate the presentation and
uh the way you've emphasized
sort of areas to focus on and to
um look forward into it. I think
that's really helpful. Uh, of
course, uh Mr. Clark, Mr.
Iglesias, and to the team, just
a quick moment, you know, it was
Miss Iglesias and Mr. Clark, who
a very long time ago, or maybe
not so long, uh, repeatedly told
me price and volume as I was
working to
understand better about our
budget. And so thank you for the
roles that you all have served.
And now the incredibly important
and exciting roles that you're
serving and leading within the
state. It's really exciting to
see. Um, Mr. Chair, uh, first, I
wanna, um,
Ask a couple of questions about
areas that you both have noted.
One with the SBIC, um, and also
a little bit around sort of
What are evolving and emerging
vision is, um, so, um, do you,
do we, is there a
It doesn't sound like now, but
can we work towards an
independent SIC perhaps an LFC
and other recommendation for the
right percentage level for the
NMSBIC.
You know, this is, this
historical piece that we've been
passed down, noted that there
were very significant challenges
in the past. One of the
liabilities, Mr. Clark, that you
are sort of the drags
essentially that you've noted.
Um, can we ask you for
recommendations and sort of
potentially a buffet about what
that should be moving forward.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
we're, we're happy to work with
the LFC economists and, and have
those discussions. Uh, one thing
very related to that that I'll
note is a statute requires us to
give 2% to SBIC. It allows us to
invest up to 11% of the
severance tax permanent fund in
our New Mexico program. We do
not because at this point, with
the size of the severance tax
permanent fund, we don't think
we can make enough prudent
investments to get to a
71%. And so we are choosing to
keep it at a lower level of
about 6% because that's what
seems right size to us at this
moment.
Mr. Chair, uh, also happy to
provide that, that suite of
options. Um, one note to uh
Representative Dixon's question
earlier, when this, when SBIC
was initially created some back
of the napkin. It was in the
tens of millions in terms of
size in the early 2000s. Um,
and, and now it's probably
costing the severance tax
permanent fund the year of the
year in cash flow around the
tens of millions. So, you know,
it's changed quite a bit and I
think, uh, happy to provide
that. Thank you, thank you both.
And actually, that goes into the
next question which is, um,
We should probably consider a
lower cap on the all-in amount.
If it's words that you just sort
of shared and you've helped
explain Mr. Gray, and we know
from LFC that
That the up to 11% that decision
exists administratively in a
future world and Director Sali,
thanks for appreciate flagging.
As this grows with our massive
investments that are a core part
of our state's fiscal stability,
a future administration saying,
hey, I could do, you know, 11%
of a very, very big number.
That would be, so let's
consider, maybe we should
consider a cat that is lower
than 11%, sort of all in is
that.
On your radar screen.
Mr. Terran, Representative, our
council has already set a cap of
9%, uh, so we can't go above
that, uh, but we'd be happy to
have discussions about, uh,
perhaps a cap that you might
find more appropriate than the
11% statutory cap. That's great.
That's great. Mr. Chair, also,
uh, to point out the question
that I flagged at the end of my
presentation. What's the need,
you know, can we get out and see
what, how much capital is needed
uh by startups in New Mexico
companies, and can we start to
build
that potential cap, uh, off of
that.
Analysis.
Um,
Mr. Chair, that's my, that was
really my final question and I
think you just, if the point is
perfect. We have the opportunity
and this presents.
An essential way for us to
economically grow, diversify,
address our challenges, the
state benefit and the vice
chair, I think, you know,
leadership as long with others.
Essential here, so that's great
that we're, we're not doing,
we're not proposing changes in a
vacuum, we're ready to fill a
Important and perhaps growing
need, but to do so prudently.
Um
Can we do that? What's our time
frame? Because it seems like
this upcoming session, a 60 day
session is really uh an
important opportunity for us to
make some of these changes.
Mr. Turner, Representative,
we're happy to have those
discussions. One thing that is
going to be a little bit
challenging is we are just now
starting to see real, real
momentum in having these
national venture capital groups
come to us saying we're
interested in investing in
Mexico. So it's a little hard
for us to gauge what that.
Uh, what that right level should
be moving forward, but I, I
think we could probably arrive
at something that should work
for us, but also give you more,
uh, higher level of comfort.
That sounds great. Thank you
both. Thank you again to the
team and to all of the team
that's part of this. Thank you,
Mr. Thank you, uh, John, has,
has Deloitte
been over to see you guys about
the state pay study.
And and where we should be
paying people in the right.
Mr. Chair and Senator, so no, I
did see the results of their
study and
Just taking our accounting team
as an example. They, they looked
at how accountants were paid.
Our accountants are not normal
accountants. Our accountants are
fiduciaries, and they have to be
have specific knowledge and
investment accounting. It's
radically different. So, uh, and
the comparables for other people
in my agency, uh, many times
they weren't able to come up
with any. So, uh, that's why
we've hired um there's one
company, uh nationally that just
does this. They, they are the
gold standard.
For doing, uh, comparisons on
pay at both public and private
investment institutions. It's a
company called McLagan, uh, so
we have hired them to do a
compensation study and uh we'll
be presenting that information
to our, uh, counsel, uh, in
early December.
Yeah, could you get us a copy of
that I'd be interested to see
what they, what they come back
with. Mr. Mr. Chair, I'm happy
to do that.
OK.
Yeah, it's interesting because
I mean
You're the highest paid person
in the state, I believe.
You know who's the highest paid?
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, there, I
believe there are a few higher,
uh, including my deputy.
Including including my deputy.
So it is, it is not uncommon at
all for chief investment
officers at organizations like
this, uh, to be paid more than
the person who acts as
executive.
Yup. OK.
Uh, on the venture capital, I
mean the, the cost per job is so
high, right?
And and I mean, what is our
return? I mean,
Senate Bill 26.
Set us up, right? And I mean, if
we really want to think, we
really want to set New Mexico
up. That should be our focus,
right?
How do we take the volatility?
Out of the budgeting process.
And in what amount?
more in
Investment in that would.
Would speed that process up,
cause we're 33% not volatile.
What gets us to the 50 50 50
mark.
So, Mr. Chair, again, we have
dramatically changed the
program. A lot of the results
that you're seeing on the Kasper
job relate to the decisions that
were made a decade ago by people
who are no longer with us, I
see, uh, the, we used to give
all of our money to Sun Mountain
Capital and the job performance.
It was pretty abysmal. Uh, it
was not at all what we would
hope, and we're not getting the,
the fiscal returns either. That
stopped in 2016. So we haven't
been giving them more money.
We've really shifted how we give
out money based on how these
really successful areas do it.
How the Bay Area, New York,
Austin, Austin, how, how Utah
has done it. And so we have high
hopes for the job creation
moving forward. But again, we
just started uh making these new
investments, um, uh.
A little less than 2 years ago
in force, and so it'll take a
little while for that money to
actually get out the door and
result in job creation, but
we're doing the things now that
have made all of those other
places successful and made them
hubs for entrepreneurial
activity.
Yeah, and are you dealing in the
biosciences and the venture
capital.
Uh, Mr. Chair, we, we, we are
somewhat, it's not one of our
primary focuses, but uh we are
making occasional investments in
that space. I mean, that's where
the
The losses are high and the
riches are.
Even higher. Um,
I mean, that's what's really
dragging down our returns is
that in the in the real estate
sector. Why is the real estate
sector
So much in the negative on
Brennan's report.
So, Mr. Chair, real estate
nationally has really taken a
dive in the last few years, uh,
primarily because of commercial
real estate. Uh there during
COVID companies realized, uh, we
don't need all of this
commercial real estate space,
we're going to pull back. And
even now that a lot of people
are back in the office. A lot of
companies have still realized,
well, we don't need people to be
back in the office full time. We
can have people working across
the country. We can have people
working locally, but just
working part-time from their
homes. And we don't need the
level of space.
that we did before. And so as a
direct result of that, uh, the
commercial real estate sector
has taken losses in the last few
years. And I know represent a
small disc and then referenced
investments in small businesses
in New Mexico, I mean, I mean,
that's the sector that you'd
probably invest in in New
Mexico, right? Because no matter
what you talk to economic
development and say well, we
need a building.
Respect building for to bring
him in, right?
And that's the commercial
sector, but are you going to put
the right building, right?
So, Mr. Chair, for, for that
reason and many others, we don't
make any direct investments into
any one company or one project.
So, uh, I don't, I don't like
the idea of us being involved in
deciding we're going to put up
this building because we think
it would be helpful. That one
building is a big risk. Uh, back
when I was doing economic
development, I saw a building
that seemed like it would be a
perfect, uh, place for companies
to locate. It was in the middle
of Albuquerque. It was up to
date. It had all the
structure in place, that
building sat vacant for about 6
years before they finally had to
substantially slash the price
and have a, a little tiny
private college move in. So,
I don't like the idea of the
state and certainly not SIC
being engaged in the business of
picking individual buildings to
build on spec. So we, we don't
do that. We invest into funds
that invest into a variety of
infrastructure projects.
You just don't want to blame.
I don't want that either.
That's what it comes down to. So
I, I mean,
I, I really want to see that
payroll report and see what it
comes out because I mean if
we're outclassing or sizing,
we're gonna be in different, you
still have a million dollars on
spending.
200 level money.
That should get you through the
next year, Mr. Chair, at this
point we are borrowing money
into the 200s for this current
fiscal year, but the million out
of vacancy savings that you had
last year.
We have, Mr. Chair, we have been
successful enough at hiring this
year. We have gone through that
and we are in the process of
doing a bar out of the 300s into
the 200s. And, and tell me why
you, why do you think you need
that massive growth in the 200
levels.
When it seemed like our returns
are.
All right, I mean, they miss
what we're investing. Mr. Chair
goes back to both what Brendan
said and that over the last 20
years, our assets under
management have about
quadrupled, but until this year,
our staffing was flat, and now
as of this year, it's just up by
5. And we need appropriate
staffing to be able to do
everything to get the money out
the door, but also if you get
that money out the door
prudently to make sure that we
have enough people giving eyes
on the contracts. Make sure that
we're doing enough due diligence
on these.
investment managers before we
hand them over state money.
And then also on the back end to
make sure that we have enough
staffing to monitor the
contracts and to monitor the
investments. We also have to
make sure that our accounting
team is appropriately sized
because they're not handling $12
billion in and out the door now,
they're handling $58 billion in
and out the door. So,
We are significantly
understaffed or a public fund
fund of our size. Just this year
we eclipsed the Texas Teachers
Permanent Fund to become the 2nd
largest sovereign wealth fund
organization. They're authorized
for 114.
We're authorized for 37.
So Mr. Sir, I would submit that
we are significantly undersized.
Uh, I'm not here today asking
for more FTE because it's gonna
take us a little while to get to
the 37. I, I want to do very
careful, thoughtful growth, but
we do need the funding to be
able to hire those 37.
I thought Don can handle all
that for you.
Uh,
no, I, I completely agree,
right? And, and so we just need
to understand where you're
headed and what direction you're
headed and what the cost is
gonna be in comparison to the
Texas ERB retirement, right?
I mean
You know, if New Mexico over the
last 3 years hasn't set itself
up, right? And you were at LFC
when we went to.
The bumps in the road and the
dips in the dives and the and
the curves. I think Don was
there too.
I mean, that's really what we
really need to target our
investments, right, is, is
whatever happens to oil and gas,
I mean, setbacks could pass
tomorrow and we'd say we need
500 million, you got to generate
it. How are we gonna get to that
number, right?
And Mr. Chair, that is our
absolute primary focus.
That's good and and start
thinking about how do I get to a
higher number to get to 50% of
my budget is in.
Investments, returns in general
fund, and how quickly can I get
there?
Because that changes the whole
scenario.
As we move forward. Absolutely,
Mr. Chair. I know that's a big
asking to go from 33 to 150 in,
that what investment does that
take to get that 5% on how many
billion? 50 billion.
Mr. He's gonna take a little
while, but, uh, uh, we're, our
goal is to get the highest risk
adjusted returns and part of
that is discussions with our
council, uh, about how we view
risk and volatility and then
also modeling out what impact
that has on returns back to the
state, uh, because if we were to
take on significantly more
volatility, what is becoming a
very stable revenue source would
suddenly start to be a little
bit less stable. So we want to
model that out and see exactly
what that looks like. So we're
in the
of doing exactly that, that has
to be the most stable investment
that we make in order for us to.
To gauge what our returns are
gonna be, so I was watching the
Netflix movie the other day.
And it says that this IC invests
in film.
Mr. Chair, we used to, uh, that,
that's a program that ended, uh,
I believe over a decade ago at
this point. Um, but it was
created back when the industry
was very nascent and it needed a
lot of help to get going, uh,
there were 2 in a separate film
programs under SIC, uh, both of
those have been defunct now for,
I believe, over a decade.
So I need to update my Netflix
like
see what's new on Netflix. I've
seen that and I, and my question
would have been, right? Are they
taking your investment,
guaranteeing the payment with
the
Film tax credit to pay back the
That, that was gonna be my
question, Mr. Chair, that's what
used to happen and there were
some issues with that and we
stopped doing it and that
program no longer exists.
That's good. And we'll have to
tell Netflix to take off the the
modeling.
Um, no, I think that's, I'm glad
you're there, John. I really am.
I'm glad to see, I'm glad to see
you and Don succeed.
Come out of LFC and to see.
Young people and and people
succeed in in agencies. I mean,
I hope we can do that all over
the state because
I look across the board and, and
I'm gonna use a wing. We have
all these secretaries and
they're all aged out and the
knowledge is not there.
And, and me as the legislator,
you know, Don came to work for
me. She went to more successful.
Adrian, there, there's a whole
slew, and we have to build
those.
Don't realize we have to build
those within the legislature, if
you want cabinet secretaries and
we want LFC directors and we
want LLC staff to do that I
mean.
You are some of the success and
in
It's come out and, and now in a
leadership position in an agency
and that, that's what we need as
we age out.
As we age out there has to be
that knowledge of what's
happening in the legislature,
and LFC but this may be to you,
LFC is a good place to get a
start and better stay with us as
long as you can, um, but there
always be greener pastures.
And, and somebody's got to be
the Secretary of Health.
Somebody's got to be the
Secretary of Economic
Development.
And somebody's gotta be there
with knowledge.
And if you don't have that
legislative knowledge.
In that process knowledge in the
agencies.
I mean that is a big curve, and
maybe that's why we're seeing a
high turnover of because.
They come from other places,
they come without the skill.
Senator Rodriguez, thank you,
Mr. Chairman. I just wanted to,
um, tell you I can't agree more
with the comments you just made
about the staff. I worked with
John, uh, when you were at
economic development, John, on
the film industry and the bills
and so on, and went through a
little bit of the school of hard
knocks there, but we made it and
I just wanted you to know how
much I appreciate that. I agree
with our chairman that, you
know, this whole thing about you
and Dan and others who had moved
up, truly improves the morale.
It's about morale, how can we
let employees?
know through fact, right? That
they do have a place to go that
they don't have to remain at the
level they are, they can
continue to move up and and be
appreciated and and get
compensated accordingly, and so
um just oh and the the chance
for an upward mobility is so
huge when you're working, you
know, people work, they have
families and it's a struggle.
It's, it's real sacrifice to
come to work when you have so
much going on at home, but you
know what, the chance for upward
mobility is a great hope for
people.
And I'm happy that we can see
that here and you and Don and
many others. So thank you for
that and thank you, Brandon, for
your work. Thank you, Senator.
Thank you. One real quick
question, Sun Mountain, are they
still in your, in your
investment portfolio because we
transferred them 50 million for
I don't know how many years I
think senator Cisneros ran that
bill, Mr. Chair, they are still
in our portfolio because their
investments are still active,
uh, so they will be in our
portfolio, uh, until they are
able to, uh, hopefully
successfully exit.
The companies that they're still
invested into, uh, but uh for
now and for the foreseeable
future, uh, they are still
there. Uh, we are not sending
any more money their way.
And when did that stop?
We stopped using them. So they
were our exclusive vendor,
essentially, uh, until 2016, we
stopped at that point.
And, and how many years do you
think to tie up that Mr. Chair,
I think expectations back then
would have been that it would
have already happened by now,
but uh it is taking a while to
exit the remaining companies
that they're invested into, uh,
I, I hate to hazard a guess. So
I should watch for the Netflix
series.
But we, we are still hoping for
the best for the companies
they're invested into.
Center would
So it's uh it's uh
Bank examiner came in to look at
your books today. Would they
tell you to divest of some of
these?
Uh, Mr. Chair and Senator,
Uh, divestment is really tricky.
So we, in many cases, including
private equity, we, we can't
just divest. We would take, uh,
an immediate loss, a lot of
these investments are set up as
long-term investments, and we
can't just move them around the
way we can with, uh, for
example, stocks and bonds. Uh,
so it, it's, it's tricky, uh,
real estate as well, you know,
we, we're seeing a downturn in
real estate, but is now the time
to get out when
It's at its low point? No, it
probably makes sense to hold on
to those and wait for the upward
swing. So we try to take a very
long term view, uh, to make sure
that we're not exiting when
things are bad, because we want
to make sure that we're trying
to buy low and sell high and not
exiting at the worst possible
moment.
I don't think I got the right
answer, but thank you.
I'll ask your question in a
different way.
Uh, I mean, what, what answer
are you looking for, Senator
Woods?
What I'm asking for.
Is when a bank makes bad
decisions and puts the
collateral out there.
Uh, a bank examiner will come in
and say,
You divest of this, this is a
bad investment. It's pulling
down your investors.
Your investors, your, your, your
ability to be a sound bank.
And because of that, divest from
that.
And, and
Do something different. It's a
prudent thing to do.
But
I'm sitting up here and I'm not
sitting over there, so I
understand.
I can't see around the whole
deal.
Yeah
I'm sorry, go ahead. Sorry, Mr.
Turnin, so we, we are
continuously taking a look, uh,
with
Uh, outside experts that we have
on contract, uh, we have both a,
a general expert as well as uh
experts by asset class to
provide us with that sort of
guidance and we're continually
looking at does this amount of
investment in this type of asset
class makes sense, uh, within
that asset class, uh, below that
did the investment strategies
make sense and we're continually
updating those. So every 3
years, we go through a process
of completely re-evaluating how
we handle.
an asset class and make updates
and recommended changes to the
council. So we are going through
that process with the help of
outside experts on a regular
basis.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
OK. Thank you guys. Appreciate
it.
No, we're gonna hear from the
looting.
training system that Senator
Sheer wants to transfer.
So the chair's prerogative,
we're gonna move DOT till after
lunch.
So 1 o'clock, so you guys know.
Because we ran late yesterday
and we're trying to catch up and
stay on track.
Sam, you ready?
There's a rail runner late, is
that why they're late?
soon to be the Gallup Farmington
railway.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Sam Liesman and I am a
program evaluator with the LFC
Program evaluation Unit. Uh,
today, I'll be presenting a
progress report for the 2019
program evaluation, cost
effectiveness and operations of
the New Mexico Rail Runner
Express.
Uh, the report looks like this.
It should be tab D in your
binders, um, and it's linked on
the LFC website for those of you
following along on the webcast.
Uh, before I begin, I'd like to
thank Director David Harris of
Transit, the Transit Rail Bureau
at NMDOT and his staff, uh, for
their cooperation on this
report, as well as Director
Robert Gonzalez, Tony Sylvester,
and Connie B. Hill from Rio
Metrom Regional Transit District
for their cooperation.
Uh, as I previously mentioned,
um, this progress report is a
follow-up to the 2019 program
evaluation, and that evaluation
included a series of
recommendations designed to
address and reverse the rail
runner's long term decline in
ridership prior to the pandemic.
Uh, these recommendations
included prioritizing capital
projects that would improve core
service and developing
strategies to attract new
writers and improve rail runner
efficiency.
The goal of this progress report
was to assess the status of the
program evaluation
recommendations, monitor changes
in the train's financial health
and ridership after the pandemic
and produce new analysis on the
rail runner's climate impact.
To begin with the report summary
on page one, the onset of the
COVID-19 pandemic interrupted
transit operations across the
country. The New Mexico rail
runner was no different. With
Rio Metro Regional Transit
District. The train's operator,
halting train operations for 51
weeks.
Since restarting operations, the
rail runner has seen one of the
best ridership recoveries of any
commuter rail systems in the US.
However, further ridership
increases will be difficult due
to an increase in telecommuting
in the Santa Fe and Albuquerque
areas. The low population
density of the rail runner
service area and a long-term
ridership decline.
Infrastructure projects such as
increasing allowable train
speeds could increase ridership
but provide marginal benefit for
high costs in many cases.
Rio Metro is in a strong fiscal
position and predicts no budget
shortfalls for the train through
FY 31.
Aligned with the 2019 program
evaluation recommendations, Rio
Metro has completed or is
completing several capital
projects designed to improve
core Rail runner service, such
as the construction of
additional train sidings which
allow trains to pass each other
and reduce delays.
However, Rio Metro is currently
focusing on replacing the
current rail runner operations
and maintenance facility, which
they estimate will cost $58
million.
Well, the operation and
maintenance facility likely
needs to be replaced. The
current scope of the project
will limit Rio Metro's ability
to use federal and local funds,
as well as staff capacity to
undertake core service
improvement projects.
Lastly, low ridership is
currently threatening the
emissions benefits of the rail
runner. Historically, the rail
runner has reduced net carbon
dioxide, or CO2 emissions.
However, low ridership and
service expansion means that
since the pandemic, train
operations have generated
several 1000 more tons of CO2
than replacement vehicle trips.
Well NMDOT has overestimated the
rare runner's CO2 savings in
prior years.
Capital intensive infrastructure
changes such as electrifying the
rail runner or replacing it with
a bus service would reduce
direct train emissions but come
at costs ranging from 10 to 100s
of millions of dollars.
Turning to page 3, I'll begin
with a brief background on the
rail runner.
The rail runner entered full
service in December 2008, and
currently serves 15 stations.
You can see the rail runner
route as well as the location of
those stations in figure 1.
Rail runner funding was
authorized as a part of the
Governor Richardson's Investment
Partnership, or GRIP bond
package and construction costs
and right of way purchase for
the rail runner amounted to
roughly $400 million. It's shown
by chart one, NMDOT will
continue to make final payments
on those bonds through FY30 at
an average amount of about $195
million annually.
And I do have to issue a
correction here. The report
states that none of this
remaining bond debt is callable.
However, we just got some
updated information from NMDOT
staff yesterday that the final
two years of payments, uh, about
$61.61 million dollars in total
is callable, um, and the rail
runner portion of that debt
corresponds to those columns for
FY 2029 and FY 2030 on chart
one. So that amounts to about
$34 million in payments and of
that 34 million, about 31%
5 is principal and about 2.5
million is interest payments.
Turning to page 4,
And MGUT owns all rail runner
assets but contracts with Rio
Metro to actually operate the
train.
And in turn Rio Metro handles
long term planning and
administration, but
subcontracts, actual day to day
operations and maintenance to a
private contractor for Chag
Transit Services.
Turning to page 5.
The reports first finding is
that rail runner ridership has
recovered better than most rail
systems, but further increases
will be difficult. Nationwide
transit systems of all types
have struggled to reach
pre-pandemic ridership levels.
The average commuter rail system
had 2024 average monthly
ridership, only 65% of its 2019
average monthly ridership in the
first half of 2024.
Comparatively, the rail runner
has seen a strong recovery.
As shown at table 1, the rail
runner has the 2nd best recovery
of any pure commuter rail
system, only behind the Utah
front runner.
And has the 8th best recovery of
any commuter rail system in the
US. Turning to page 6.
Rio Metro has adjusted service
and cost to adapt to the
post-pandemic environment,
driven by a comprehensive study
of new ridership patterns and
preferences in August of 2022,
Rio Metro added additional rail
runner trains and significantly
reduced fares and while
disentangling the impact of
these policies from the general
post-pandemic recovery is
difficult. Line A on chart 2
suggests that these policies did
have an impact. As Rail runner
Monthly ridership increased by
18% between July and August.
2022.
In addition, the rail runner's
failed reduction, fare
reductions means that a daily
train commuter saves about $5200
annually in vehicle operating
costs compared to driving every
day.
Moving to page 7.
Despite this recovery, further
increases in ridership will be
difficult.
As mentioned previously, Rail
runner ridership had declined
steadily prior to the pandemic.
With an average monthly decline
of about 500 riders. You can see
this downward trend in chart 3.
Further increases will have to
work against this trend.
Additionally, turning to page 8.
The rail runner operates in a
sparsely populated, relatively
low vehicle traffic area.
Conditions not conducive to
transit ridership.
For example, table 3 on the
bottom of page 8.
Shows that the rail runner has
the lowest population density of
any of its pure commuter rail
systems in its service area.
Further, as shown by chart 4,
the rate of telecommuting has
roughly doubled over the past
several years in the Albuquerque
and Santa Fe areas.
This represents an obstacle
towards increasing commuter
ridership.
On page 9.
The report notes that while
there are infrastructure
improvements that could increase
ridership. These improvements
will be costly and sometimes
yield only marginal
improvements. The 2019 program
evaluation noted that increasing
allowable train speeds to 89
miles an hour from 79 miles an
hour for the 1 to 2 express
route would reduce travel times
by about 5 minutes, and
increased annual ridership for
that route by about 9000 riders.
You can see that calculation in
table 4.
However, turning to page 10,
Doing so would cost at least $22
million and increased total
annual rail runner ridership,
not just ridership on the 102
Express by only 1.2%.
On pages 10 and 11, the report
identifies other projects that
could increase ridership either
by increasing train frequency or
reducing travel times. On page
11,
Table 5 provides a summary of
these improvements and their
cost. For example, increasing
speeds on all rail runarounds,
not just the 102 Express would
cost $85 million in track
improvement and the purchase of
new locomotives, but only
increased ridership by about 8%.
Turning to page 13.
This report's second finding is
that the rail runner is in a
strong financial position, but
capital spending could be
prioritized more toward
improving core Rail runner
service. Like many transit
agencies, Rio Metro has seen
large cost increases over the
pandemic. 31% per revenue mile
between 2019 and 2022. Turning
to page 14.
Most of these increases appear
to be driven by the
implementation of positive train
control or PTC, a federally
mandated signal system.
In FY 24 PTC maintenance costs
comprise about 11% of the rail
runner's operating expenditures.
The GAO recently completed a
survey of PTC maintenance costs
for commuter rail systems. And
you can see by figure 3 which
they produced in their report,
that that 11% figure means that
the rail does have higher PTC
maintenance costs than other
commuter rail agencies. We put
them close to the maximum. But
this is likely due to the
train's relatively long track
length uh for their overall
budget.
Turning to page 15.
The main sources of revenues for
the rail runner are federal
formula and discretionary funds,
$57 million in FY 24 and local
grocery see tax revenues, about
20 million in FY 24. And you can
see the full breakdown of rail
runner revenues in chart 6.
Unlike many other trade agencies
and despite the cost increases,
Rio Metro does not predict any
budget shortfalls through FY 31.
Turning to page 16.
You can see the changes in
revenues.
Including Rio Metro's fund
balance and cost in chart 8,
showing that the rail runner
will have ample revenue and cash
on hand to cover costs through
FY 31.
Between 2019 and 2024, Rio Metro
completed several projects
designed to improve core train
service, including the
implementation of a signal
system in downtown Albuquerque,
centralized train control that
will reduce travel times by
about 5 to 10 minutes. All of
these projects are in line with
the 2019 program evaluation
recommendations to focus on core
service improvements.
However, turning to page 17.
Rio Metro is currently
prioritizing the replacement of
its operations and maintenance
facility.
As shown by figure 4, the
current facility is outdated and
does lack adequate facilities
for conducting indoor train
maintenance and storing
materials safely and securely.
However, Rio Metro's current
project plans amount to $58
million. And this focus on
replacing the maintenance
facility at such a high cost
necessarily takes staff and
financial ability or capacity
away from projects that could
directly improve core rail
runner service.
Turning to page 18,
The report's final finding is
that low ridership reduces
potential rail-runner climate
benefits. Public transit like
the rail runner offers the
opportunity to reduce carbon
dioxide emissions by replacing
private vehicle trips with
transit. However, in FY 24,
ridership and service levels
meant that the rail runner
generated 2000 more tons of CO2
than it offset, and ridership
would have had to be 23% higher
for the train to actually reduce
emissions. You can see this
phenomenon in chart 9.
On page 19.
While the rail runner did offset
CO2 prior to the pandemic and
MDOT has calculated the
emissions savings of the rail
runner in prior years using an
overgenerousus assumption of the
train's fuel economy.
This meant that while NMDOT
calculated that the rail runner
reduced carbon emissions in
fiscal year 23 by roughly 7750
tons, updating the fuel economy
shows that the rail runner
actually produced 2700 more tons
of CO2 than replacement vehicle
trips.
Turning to page 20.
As chart is shown by chart 10,
increases in fuel efficiency for
the private for the typical
private car in New Mexico over
the next 10 years will worsen
this problem. With the number of
excess emissions generated by
the rail runner projected to
increase by between 23 and 40,
48% by 2035.
Capital intensive infrastructure
changes such as full
electrification of the train or
the use of battery powered
locomotives would reduce direct
emissions to zero.
However, turning to page 21.
Each of these changes would cost
hundreds of millions of dollars
to implement and in some cases,
carry significant drawbacks.
Table 6 lists the estimated full
costs and drawbacks for each
potential zero direct emission
infrastructure project. For
example, fully electrifying the
train would reduce train
emissions to zero, but would
cost $360 million to implement
fully and would still generate
emissions from non-renewable
sources on the power grid.
Lastly, turning to page 22.
At current ridership levels, a
bus service akin to NMDOT's park
and ride would reduce carbon
emissions.
However, according to LFC and
NMDOT analysis, a replacement
bus system would cost tens of
millions of dollars to start up
and run annually.
If you'll now turn back to page
2. I'll discuss this report's
key recommendation.
Rio Metra Regional Transit
District should adopt
performance targets for key rail
runner efficiency and
cost-effectiveness metrics,
including but not limited to
operating costs per hour and per
mile and passenger trips per
hour.
Use performance targets to drive
strategies and goals for cost
savings and operational
efficiency in concert with
initiatives to attract
ridership.
Re-evaluate the scope of the
unfunded portions of the
operations and maintenance
facility to free up agency and
financial capability to fund
core service improvement
projects.
Develop pounds of carbon dioxide
emitted per rider as a
performance metric and use po of
carbon dioxide emitted per rider
to guide decision making around
long-term strategy and train
operations.
Lastly, Rio Metro Regional
Transit District and the New
Mexico Department of
Transportation should develop a
plan for prioritizing core
infrastructure improvements,
taking into account
opportunities to maximize added
ridership at the lowest cost.
And I'll now turn the
presentation over to Director
Harris and Mr. Sylvester.
For there and it will be on the
screen as well.
Uh, thank you, Sam, uh, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
I'm Dave Harris, executive
director of Motor Programs at
New Mexico DOT. Uh, we
appreciate, appreciate LFC's
analysis and their perspective,
um, and we are taking it to
heart and uh understand uh their
points of view. Um, but looking
at it, we appreciate our
partnership.
Um, and the stewardship of
RailRunner with our partners at
Rio Metro Regional Transit
District, um, DOT is the owner
of the asset, and we provide
oversight of any capital
improvements, um, and changes to
the railroad, and
Just one of the main points
before I turn it over to uh Mr.
Sylvester from Realo Metro RTD
is that, um,
As Sam pointed out the um a lot
of the, the rail runner
ridership depends on gas prices.
Um, pre-pandemic, the historic
numbers show that for every 10
cents,
In uh
Fuel increase over $3. Ridership
would increase 10%.
Post pandemic, what we're
looking at is for every um 50
cents over $3.50 dollars to 60
cents over $3. Um, ridership
increases 10%.
So, if gas prices went to 360.
Um, we'd have a leveling out of
those carbon emissions and an
equalization of the carbonate,
that would increase ridership
enough where there would be an
equalization between carbon and
emission emissions of people
driving alone versus taking
RailRunner. If gas prices went
to 420, we'd have a reduction in
the carbon emissions if people
used rail runner. So we
appreciate um the analysis and
we appreciate Rio Metro's
attempt to add service.
And um,
To add service and look at a
better travel experience for all
of their riders and um we think
they've they've achieved that,
and um they've made it.
Rail Runner Express, a very
affordable option that's there
and an asset for New Mexico and
the uh Rio Metro, uh Rio metro
area.
With that, I'll turn it over to
uh Tony.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, um,
Director
And Sam, thank you very much for
giving us some time to respond
to this uh update to the report.
We appreciate it.
I'll let go Mr. Harris's
comments on the LFC and the
participation in us completing
this analysis and working
through the analysis with us. We
did learn some things through
this.
And we're confident that the
report will result in some
actions by RMRTD and the
RailRunner.
When you bring this back to our
board of directors.
But I like to do, I try to keep
time short. We understand we
only have a couple of minutes
here. I have a quick
presentation I like to do, which
takes sort of a higher level of
view of our activities over the
last 4 or 5 years since the last
evaluation.
We did take those evaluation
recommendations to heart. And
what I like to do is just go
through some slides that talk
about the overall picture of the
New Mexico Rail runner Express
as it is now.
The report pulls out some
specifics about improvements
that we should work on as an
operator the Mexico Rail runner
Express, we hear possibly from
our riders, from the public.
From our operators, from
everybody throughout the core
that's involved in the rail
runner about their experiences
on the train.
These aren't just on the train
themselves, but these begin when
people entered the parking lot
when they entered the platform,
are these parking lots safe? Are
they lit? Are they well
maintained? Are they are
customers and passengers
comfortable there.
These benefits and impacts sort
of continue when the, the
passenger gets on the train
themselves.
Are there amenities on the train
there to keep the passengers
productive like our Wi Fi
system. Are they comfortable?
Are they safe? And is it a
friendly environment by our
staff and our ticket agents and
conductors.
A traveler experience itself
does the train get people to
their destinations on time. The
answer is yes. We're very
effective, 98%, 97, 98% on-time
performance.
If you're a wage worker going to
an hourly job where you have to
punch in on time performance is
critical. So this is a critical
factor for us to uh focus on.
And then finally, the experience
of the writer at the end of the
trip, connecting with their
buses, whether it's provided by
our system, but by NCRTD.
Santa Fe Trails or by the city
of Albuquerque. What that
environment like? So what I'd
like to do is just go quickly
through some of the improvements
we made since 2019 to address
these.
Uh, one of the main areas as the
report reports out and Sam
emphasized that the capital
projects.
Each of these capital projects
resulted in either travel time
savings, travel time
reliability, or increased
amenities along the rail runner
system for our passengers.
Uh, the positive train control
was completed in 2020. That was
a $65 million project aided by
the state infrastructure bank
loan that we
Had assistance with from the
state and the DOT to get.
There's a huge lift by us. We
went into pandemic, and during
that time we worked.
Um, sort of full force on
getting the Alamedaci and the
Broadway siding in places.
90% of our corridors single
track, which means one train,
one direction at one time unless
you're at a sighting.
So these sightings are critical
for us to avoid delays caused by
Amtrak and BNSF.
Centralized traffic control
reduces travel times and that
main quarter of downtown
Albuquerque, but also allows
Amtrak to have its own platform,
a platform 3. Amtrak often runs
late, off his schedule, and they
are a common sort of source of
our delays.
Quiet zones, crossings, roadway
crossings, and
Trail and pedestrian
improvements, particularly in
the town of Berne Leo, where a
high number of people walk
through that community are
important to the safety and
efficient efficient running of
our corridor.
Moving on to the next slide.
Oh
Sorry.
Really? Yeah, I'll, I'll get
there soon enough.
All right, we have the capital
maintenance effort for us as
well, which is essential for us
to keep our trains and tracks.
Uh, operational, so our trains
can arrive at the destinations
on time. This is also the
NMDOT's rolling stock and assets
that we are taking care of and
managing and keeping in state a
good repair, so they reached
their urban life.
Uh, full urban life, uh, useful
life benefits.
And then on the next page,
We have our operations and
policy changes. This really
relates directly to people's
access to the train when they
can get to the train and the
fares and the other operational
policies that we have in place.
These were directly related to
some surveys that we conducted
an analysis of the fairs and
ridership that we are getting
over the last couple of years,
and we believe the adjustments
actually were successful in
maintaining and encouraging
additional ridership to show up
during a tough and challenging
time to get transit ridership on
our trains.
And then finally
Um, as Sam pointed out, our
ridership is doing well
comparatively, we're very strong
compared to our peers. This
includes places like you saw on
the first page, San Diego,
Portland, and so forth, uh, 2
29.4 million passenger miles
traveled along the corridor.
This is largely the I-25
corridors. So these are miles
relatively safely to say that
they were taken off of I-25.
And then in closing, I don't
need to reiterate the financial
status, um, we are in strong
financial footing compared to
other transit systems and we
look to appear that way, at
least through 2031 as far as our
budget projections go. These are
as the graph pointed out on page
15, federal sources, state
sources, um, I'm sorry, federal
sources, GRT from the four
counties that contribute to the
New Mexico rail runner, and then
fares and fees that we get. Uh,
there is some funds from
DOT CMA funds, and carbon
reduction funds that are very
important to us, but there are a
small part of our overall
budget.
So thank you very much for your
time and we'll stand for
questions. I notice you want us
to increase the gas tax so we
can increase your ridership. Is
that correct?
Um,
Representing Chatville. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, so did I understand that uh
From what you said that the
Amtrak runs on the same size of
track as the rail runner, rail
runner is interchangeable.
Um, Mr. Chairman, uh,
representative, yes, that's
correct. We, we shared our track
uh between basically Berlin and
I-25 with the track crosses.
So, uh
It would be awesome if you
shared that track all the way to
Ratone and some
could get on there and, and
write it to Albuquerque and, you
know, we've we've got a lot of
Uber. It used to be that when
you got there, if you didn't
park your car there when you
came, we had to find a taxi or a
bus or something, and I think
you guys have probably dealt
with that song, Uber has also
dealt with it some, but if you
have a way to
Get somewhere when you, when you
get to the bus station, I mean,
it'd be pretty nice to be able
to catch that thing and the
right tone and uh I know there's
been a lot of fear that they
were going to close down the
Amtrak, uh, route that goes to
Ratton, but
Some of us nortaous wouldn't
mind catching that thing and
going to Albuquerque and not
have to drive, so.
Um
Hope, hope you keep the thing
running and.
Lengthen it out a little bit.
Mr. Chairman, Representative,
thank you very much. We'd love
to look at that. Representative
Armstrong. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Uh, when I worked for
Speaker of the House Dawn trip.
I used to ride the rail runner
from Albuquerque to uh Santa Fe.
The, but I always had to leave
work early.
To catch the Amtrak to catch the
train back. And so I see on, on
your schedule here that most
people
Um, say that it's an
inconvenient.
Schedule
And so the, the other part that
I would think might be
inconvenient is the
transportation once you get
there.
And so, um, have you ever
thought about uh expanding to,
you know, rent bicycles. When
you get to the Santa Fe or the
Albuquerque or the whatever, or
are people doing that now, and
have you changed your schedule
to meet that, uh, I know a lot
of people commute from
Albuquerque to Santa Fe and
Santa Fe back, so, uh, I just
was curious about that.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Armstrong, the table that you're
looking at in our presentation
was done during our service
analysis.
So based on that information, we
did additional midday and
mid-afternoon trains and
Saturday and Sunday service. So
that was the information that we
used to fuel our transportation
and schedule changes. Suffice it
to say there's always room for
more service, and I think one of
the, one of the challenges we
have is how much operations
funds do we have to put more
service out, um, and sort of
balancing that with the
ridership increases. Uh, we're
confident that the more service
we put out to a different
degree, we'll get more
ridership.
And make it more convenient for
people like you.
Um
We have been continually working
with our transit partners along
the corridor. There are
currently 63 or 65 bus
connections between Santa Fe and
Berlin that meet our trains.
Um, one of the problems that
we're having, the local agencies
are having including Santa Fe
Trails, our staffing trains. So
a lot of the service since COVID
has been pulled back between
North Central Transit District
reducing some of the routes.
City of Albuquerque changing
from 15-minute headways to
30-minute headways, so we
believe um when transit funding
comes up where these routes can
be fully funded. This network
will be even stronger than it
was before.
The city of Albuquerque just
rolled out um scooters in
downtown Albuquerque, rental
scooters, um, which make it very
convenient to people to get to
and from the stations. Um, we
encourage our local agencies
and, and communities to help.
Develop those projects
themselves for us to implement
that across the entire 9
jurisdictions that we're in is
sort of beyond our capacity, but
we appreciate that, that
suggestion.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr.
Chair, uh, Representative
Armstrong, that the state is
also looking at exploring
partnerships with Uber and Lyft.
As well to provide first mile
last numb a perhaps the way
they're doing it in other places
is a pride maybe a $3 to $5
subsidy per trip, um, we're
just, there's, there's some uh
red tape and getting over trying
to fund that private entity, um,
and some of the ADA issues that
an Uber and Lyft driver uh might
have in providing service to
someone uh who may not be as
able-bodied.
Thank you.
Represented Baca and then
represented Lente you bringing
up the caboose. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, and I will be quick.
Um, I do have a rail runner
station in my district called
Sona.
Um, so it's important to me,
especially as we project 11,000
new homes in Las Sonas, OK. So,
I, I just want short answers so
I'm gonna be very
On top of the commuters, what
are some of the reasons that
families are not using and
utilizing the rail runner more,
something that
Cause
I have my, my thoughts on it
because we wanted it to be a
Experience
Not just for commuters.
The second thing that I
Uh, want to really talk about is
the
Um
The
Running around certain events
like when we have these concerts
at Oleta Amphitheater.
I mean, the park to the soda, I
would much rather make it both
safer and as far as more
convenient if we're able to be
very intentional about
scheduling.
It's not only gonna make our
highways, it's gonna keep as far
as traffic.
But I think that we have to be
very intentional, and I'm gonna
echo off my, my colleague, uh,
Representative Chatfield.
We have 2 of our universities
right there along the that that
we have in New Mexico Tech.
And we have Las Cruces, and uh
my kid that drives back and
forth to cruise all the time, it
would be very helpful.
If we couldn't just be very
intentional about, you know,
what it stops the quarrel. Stop
out there and to see or or uh
not as far as uh.
Do in Cruises or down there as
far as by, you know, Elphin
Butte. So I, I think that if we
do that and we target it as an
experience, and we do that, I
think it's pretty good. I won't
take more time. I do want to
touch an offline with you guys.
Because I think it's important
because it fits into safety, if
Because I think it's important
because it fits into safety, it
isn't economic development, and
I want things that are going to
bring our families and have our
families do things together. Mr.
Chairman, thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, gentlemen, for the
presentation, uh, like
Representative Baca have 44
stations in my district, Sand Di
Pueblo 2 in Bernalillo, and 1 in
uh Cuhua, Pueblo, and I wanna
first thank you all for the
improvements in and around
Bernal Leo to make pedestrian
safety uh uh priority that means
a lot to the town. Uh, I'm glad
to see the, the demographic
breakdown or at least in terms
of the data on page number 4 in
regards to why people aren't
writing it, and just a brief
comment, uh, more personalized
is that we
in along that, that corridor
right there and my kids and I,
we always just wave the train
when it rolls by, right? And,
and I, what I've noticed is that
especially when it when it's
going southbound from Berna Leo
taking off in Albuquerque, the
plume of black smoke that comes
out of that thing is enormous
and it, it lasts for a long time
and it makes me wonder when
we're, when we're waving at the
train and no one's in there,
like what's, you know, what are
we doing and what can we improve
on. So thank you for this and I
hope that we can get more
ridership and hopefully clean up
that black smoke. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Real quick before I leave the
room, uh, the gentleman behind
me rides a rail runner, right?
He's lost his Cadillac
converter. Last week they busted
out his window.
Uh, I've heard other stories of
that and
And just talking to some of our
staff cause I did pick him up
one day and I was picking up
Adrian at the rail runner. Those
commuters, right? They're saying
that you dropped a car.
And that
Now everybody's got to sit side
by side in COVID kind of changed
people wanting to separate from
each other, so that's some
issues, but you never dealt with
how we're gonna handle.
The, the pollutants coming out
of the train. I mean, that was a
a presentation. I didn't see any
recommendations or hear anything
on how you're gonna deal with
it. Uh, Mr. Chair, um,
Mhm
Just to note, um, so the, the
current emissions issues with
the rail runner are a function
of both ridership and service.
And so the goal with the
recommendations specifically
related to adding a performance
metric for pounds of carbon
dioxide emitted per rider is to
provide more information when
Rio Metro and NMDOT make those
decisions about whether to
expand, contract service that
they know how that's going to
impact and hopefully improve the
emissions status of the rail
runner.
Yeah, but either to improve the
emission statuses on the engine
either.
a module on there or clean it up
or you go electric.
And, and so those are the
voices, choices that we're kind
of faced with in the future,
right?
I mean, what's DOT's thought
process on cleaning the
emissions. I mean, we heard all
kinds of stuff yesterday on
setbacks and carbon emissions
and who the biggest pollutant
was and if you watch the rail
runner leave town, I mean, you
don't know if you're following
a, a Kenworth or the rail runner
is a black smoke pours out.
Um, Mr. Chair, um, what Sam said
is correct, you know, and if gas
prices go up.
Ridership goes up less, there's
more carbon reduction for the
Types of trips. However, from
the technological side, there
are um options out there.
They're not fully matured yet
electrification of the whole
line would, would, you would
need catenary for the whole 100
miles, which would cost upwards
of half a billion dollars to do,
and then we have tenants on our
railroad of BNSF and Amtrak who
don't, aren't electrified, we'd
have to accommodate that as
well, um, which would probably
just raise the cost because the
catenary would.
Need to be um elevated, um
higher than it normally would.
Um, but there's also, uh, we're
at the
first stages of uh hydrogen
powered locomotives which um may
would would at the moment would
would likely have a very big
issue of going up La Bajada as
well. Um, so there's some issues
there, but as the technology
matures, it's something we're
looking at, and we also have um
15 years left on the current
useful life of our current
rolling stock. So, um, there's
also a choice.
That needs to be made there for
some costs for rolling stock we
have, which is in good working
condition.
And Mr. Chair, one additional
comment and so you'll note table
6 on page 21 lists all of those
options. Um, director Harris
mentioned, um, hydrogen trains,
uh, another emerging technology
is battery electric trains, um,
but they're only deployed in 2
commuter rail systems that we
know of right now in the US.
Uh, and the proposed range for
those is 65 miles, so well
under, you know, what a full
trainlin to Santa Fe Depot would
run. Um, so there are certainly
options out there. Uh, but as I
discussed in the presentation
and is going into more detail on
these tables. They are
expensive, still an early
deployment and in many cases
have significant drawbacks on
their own.
I mean, we, we talked yesterday
about doing the environmental,
doing things for the environment
and cleaning up the environment,
and if this is the biggest
polluter and the ridership's not
at the numbers, I mean.
It's looking at a bull's eye,
straight at it, and what
investment, I mean, I don't
know, I came in 2009 and I
forget what we owned in bonds
then, right? And they said,
we're gonna pay them off in
2025. And I said, I probably
won't be here in 2025. Good luck
with that. And then I keep and
we keep refinancing those bonds.
And, and, I mean, the bond
rating companies are really
watching DOT's bonding.
I mean that is a detriment to to
the state's budget, and so we're
we're as we're watching for it,
I mean, I wish we would have
just paid those off and not
refinance, refinance, refinance,
but we did it and you can't try
over spilt milk as you move
forward, I mean.
I don't have a problem with uter
line. I mean, they're good. I
mean, if the employees and an
employee discount, legislators
are not allowed to write for
free. I don't think Senator
Rodriguez, I've never rode the
train and she's never rode the
train and and so those are
certain things, but we don't,
we're not in that commuter area.
And in the staff that does ride
the train that I know about, I
gave you the issues, right? And
you're not gonna resolve the
crime issue of
Penny and Cali converter,
breaking a window for 50 cents
in the cup holder.
Um, but those are things that
you need to be aware of in in
how you do that, because
If it costs you
3 $3000 for your Cadillac
converter.
And, and what did you really
save that year in riding the
train.
You know
Probably not a whole lot, even
if you can get a Catholic
converter.
I mean, that, that, that's some
deterrent to to that, I mean,
and then.
I, I see the problem is it was
never really at the right
delivery point. Probably should
have went to the airport, it
probably should have went down
University Boulevard by
By uh
Football stadiums and the
basketball courts and the
baseball stadium.
To deliver mass transit. It's
just.
of history, but I mean,
I wish you good luck, but you
gotta figure that out.
Thank you guys.
Thank you, thank you. We have
lunch in the back for
legislators, so.
Uh, who provided the lunch
and Marco.
I'm sorry, Marco, what did you
say you were cheating at?
Daily pay, what's daily pay? Are
we getting paid today by you.
It's a loan to pay every day.
