chair just trying to get my my
stuff together here.
Um, today, uh,
My name is I'm the
Legislative Finance Committee
for the Healthcare Authority,
sitting next to me is uh Kelly
Clunch. She's the LFC analyst
for the um early childhood
education and care department.
And Department of Health, um,
So what we're gonna go over
today is just kind of a high
level summary.
Of what you all did during the
session, um, where's the funding
at.
Uh, just get a better
understanding of what you did
and what we kind of need to look
for.
Uh, going forward as far as
whether or not the executive and
how the executive is, uh,
implementing, um.
Things that we've done
So I'll start off, um, I'll be
looking at a
OK.
Thank you for your patience. I
think we're, go ahead.
All right, Madam Chair, uh,
thank you very much. So I'll be
going over, you should have a
total of 5 handouts in front of
you.
Um
One of them that is in front of
you looks like this. It says
health and community. And then
there's another one.
That's a table.
It says healthcare authority.
OK, Grace, I, I believe Grace
has um
So represent cases you're
missing this healthcare
authority one.
but not offended are.
OK.
No
We'll get this worked out.
Anyone else short, you should
have 5 different um
Handouts.
I feel like this is a party
game.
I just know I'm gonna need him
to be able to follow.
Who has what?
OK, I, I hope we're
OK to go now, so sorry about all
this, but you've been around the
legislature long enough to know
it's a hurry up and wait
business, so hopefully we're
ready now. Go ahead, Eric.
All right, Madam Chair. Again,
I'll be going through the one
that says health and communities
at the top, and then there's
also another one that uh says
appendix R um healthcare
Authority. These are actually
pulled out of our post session
review, um, that we write at the
end of every year.
Uh, and so if you want to find
these documents and, and the
documents for any other uh area
in state government, you can
always go on our website, um,
and you can find the process
session review, gives you a wrap
up of everything, uh, across the
board.
So starting off with Health and
communities, uh, it's been a big
few years.
For health and communities, um,
We've done about $2.3 billion
that's B with a billion with a
B.
Dollars, Medicaid provider has
everything from hospitals.
To behavioral health.
To, uh,
Maternal and child health,
physical health, all these
providers we've, we've injected
a lot more money into the
system, uh, than there had been
even 3 or 4 years ago.
On top of that, we've also
increased um.
Non-recurring funding.
By a total of about $733 million
just this year alone.
Um, and you can see a breakout
of that in this table here that
says 2025 Healthcare Authority
non-recurring appropriations,
and I'll go through a couple of
those in a few minutes here, but
that just gives you an idea of
Magnitude of, of what, um,
The legislative body has done,
you all have done in terms of
trying to build uh a better
health for New Mexicans.
Um
But one question that I, I, you
know, I posed this the other day
to LFC.
Uh, is
What is our system going to look
like in 5 years, given all of
this investment from the
legislature, and I think that's
going to be a big
Part of maybe what this
committee wants to look at is.
You know, depending on, you
know, what your priorities are,
but I think this is gonna be a
big part of what you're gonna
want to do is to look at this
and and to say, well, we put all
this money in here now.
Uh, what are we getting for that
money? Are we getting better
outcomes? Are we, um, having
Art is behavioral health getting
better or people being housed
or, you know, all of these
things that uh
I
Super important to um Medicaid
and, and the rest of the system.
And so going back into this
health and communities, um,
You have the
At the bottom, you have that
table.
Um, it just gives you an idea of
the impact that Medicaid has.
Medicaid is everywhere in the
state, Medicaid pays for
services in schools, it pays for
your DD waiver, which you were
just talking about, it pays for
behavioral health services.
It pays for hospitals, uh, a, a
big share of the hospitals.
Right now, there's about um it
says 838,000 and actually if the
more recent um projections we're
down to about 814,000.
Uh, enrollees in Medicaid. Uh,
we get about $9 billion in
federal revenue.
Uh
For Medicaid, and then we spend
about 1.5 $1.6 billion in
Medicaid, um, in pure Medicaid,
uh,
Uh, in general, fund revenue,
and then there's about 480.
Uh, through the system from
other funding sources. And I'll
get into that a little bit more
in my later presentation on how
that all works.
Moving on to page, it's actually
says page 18, it's the next page
in your, uh, thing here. The
healthcare authority financially
is the largest state agency,
will receive about $15 billion
of federal funding from all
sources, including 2.1 billion
from the general fund, and a
3.5% general fund.
Uh, on behavioral health alone,
the legislature appropriated
about 350.4 million in
non-recurring appropriations to
the authority.
Um, enacted the behavior health
reform and Investment Act and
created a new behavioral health
trust fund.
Uh
Behavior health providers will
also receive about 26 million
just this year in uh provider
rate increases. And that
actually makes us, this is the
3rd, uh, time that we've done a
rate increase for behavioral
health providers, and that
actually.
In total is about $90 million
and it makes us
Pretty well compensated across
the board.
Um
During the legislative session,
you'll also see on the sidebar
there, I'm not going to go into
too much detail on there, but
you'll see where it says chapter
2,
Senate Bill 1, we established
the Behavioral Health Trust
Fund.
And then chapter 113, which was
Senate Bill 88, established the
Medicaid Trust Fund.
And um the Medicaid trust fund
is actually set up to try to um
deal with some of the issues
that we foresaw coming down the
road with the federal government
and we can get into some of
that, um.
More
Um
I'm not gonna go over this one
too much more in depth, but I
wanted you to have it so that
you can read it on your own as
things come up. I know folks
are, uh, go ahead. Senator
manager Eric, I think that we
struck.
If you look at um chapter 113,
the Medicaid Trust Fund.
I didn't think we kept in the
reversions.
I thought when we ended with the
bill.
Senator Sheer and I at the state
Investment Council, a percentage
of the interest.
Uh,
I would have to go back and
double check that, yeah, but I
think it was, I think what it is
is it's the reversions over $110
million so the general fund
keeps a certain level and then
it's a certain amount over that,
but I, I can go back and double
check that, please. OK, thank
you. Sorry.
Yep, no problem. With that, I'm
gonna switch over to the, the
appendix R.
Because this is, we are numbers
folks and we do the numbers, uh,
this is
Where you can see where the
actual meat and potatoes of, um,
the, the recurring funding kind
of came in during this last
legislative session. So the way
this table is set up is you'll
see that there's a bolded
numbers at the very top, for
example, the medical uh
assistance division, which
that's your Medicaid, your, your
main Medicaid program.
Uh, you'll see the bolded
numbers at the top, that 1.37
billion number there.
That is your uh last year's
operating budget.
And then all of the numbers that
Kind of follow beyond that are
things that we added or
subtracted in parentheses.
From that operating budget.
And then, so, for example, in
the medical assistance division,
if you look at line 4.
Uh, we continued half-year rate
adjustments from FY 25 for
primary care, maternal and child
health.
Rate maintenance in phase 3
providers, and we added about
$8.8 million to last year's
operating budget uh for that.
And remember, this is just the
general fund amount.
And so if you multiply that,
Um, you, you also get the
federal.
Uh, online 5 continue half-year
rate adjustments, early
childhood education and care
fund for maternal and child
health. We did 5 million there.
Um, we also did rate increases
on line 7 for program for the
program for all-inclusive care.
And on line 8 we did um assist
assisted living facility rates.
Uh, going down the line 12. We
also did
You got, you might remember from
the session that there was a lot
of discussion about uh.
Nursing facilities and the
rebasing and so we re-based the
rates this year, uh, for about
$9 million there might be
another shot at that again, next
shot to rebase those, uh, next
year. That'll be something that
we'll have to um look at, given
the current.
Uh, skipping down to the
developmental disability support
division.
Uh, on line 31, we updated
Medicaid.
Um
Oh, there was more utilization
in the system for DDSD and so
that that is costing us about
$20 million. That's actually
something that we want. We want
more utilization, qualified for
rider rate adjustments, uh, we
did about $26.2 million for
those provider rate adjustments,
the secretary talked about that
quite a bit during her last
hearing, if you want to talk
about that a little bit more, we
can, um, line 34, we did another
4 million for enrollment.
growth, you remember a few years
ago, uh, we all but eliminated
the waitlist, um, and so this is
to try to just kind of tread
water and keep uh folks, um.
To keep that waitlist from, uh,
growing again. And then again,
you'll see that down in Medicaid
behavioral health, um, that we
did another $6 million 5.7
million dollars for behavioral
health uh rate.
Flipping to the next page, I'm
gonna skip down to the income
support division.
Uh, line 67, we filled vacancies
and reduced uh vacancies. They
were having a hard time keeping
up with their
Um, case load that they had, and
so we increased funding for
So that they could hire more
staff, uh, to keep up with that
caseload.
Um, and then just on line 76
there, you'll see that the total
general fund amount for income
support, which includes like
your TANF benefits and your SNAP
benefits, that increased by
about 17.2%, which is a pretty,
pretty remarkable increase.
And with that, I'm gonna stop on
that boring you guys with the
numbers. Um, but I am gonna get
a little bit more into the
numbers on, on this handout that
gives you the non-recurring.
Funding
And I just wanted to point out
some of the bigger chunks that
we have in here.
And you'll notice that a lot of
this stuff, it doesn't
necessarily say behavior health
investment and Reform Act, but
there's a lot of pieces in here
to that um SB3.
Uh, bill that we passed to
reform the behavioral health
system.
Um, and you'll see online for
there we did $50 million for
behavioral health priorities
based on uh uh local government
plans to come back, um.
I'm sorry, regional plan.
For different pieces within the
behavioral health reform and um.
On line 8, you'll see that we
did $28 million for transitional
behavioral health facilities and
certified community behavioral
health clinics, those certified
behavioral health.
Community behavioral health
clinics, those are those
evidence-based kind of they
provide all of the different
wraparound services for
behavioral health.
Um, within the system and
I believe that
Healthcare authorities already
stood up like 7 of them. I
believe there's another 5 or 6
that are planned to come up, uh,
in this coming year, and we're
wanting to continue doing more
of that, so that's where that 28
million is for.
Uh, we did 11.5 million for
regional mobile crisis and
recovery response intervention
and outreach teams and that's on
line 9.
Um
Couple more through here. I just
wanted to kind of point out some
of these bigger ones.
Um
Go to line 21 on page 2 for
startup costs to build capacity
for housing providers for people
experiencing homelessness and to
build capacity. We did $36
million for that.
Uh, and,
I think that was about it. But
if you go all the way down to
the total and excuse me, I said
$735 million total in recurring
or sorry, non-recurring funding,
um,
For all of these different
items, uh, throughout the
system. And what you'll see is
if you look at this in more
detail, is that most of this was
for capacity building and, and
to build up the providers so
that they can then
Um, bill Medicaid, um,
sustainable, that's that piece
of it.
Uh, and with that, Madam Chair,
I'll go ahead and stop talking.
Um, and I'll pass it over to for
the comment.
Thank you, Madam Chairman's
Committee again, Kelly Clinton
the Legislative Finance
Committee, um, I am the analyst
for the early childhood
department, uh, and I have been
the analyst for AG long term
services, Department of Health,
and a few other small agencies.
I have accepted a new role in
LFC to uh we'll be seeing a
little bit less of me. I'll no
longer be the analyst for DOH or
aging. I'll be running
operations for all of. Thank
you. I agree with both of those.
So, um, like Eric will be
standing.
Like Eric will be going through
the handouts, which are in our
post session review. The first
one you'll see is titled Child
Wellbeing at the top.
And the second handout is the
high level for the early
childhood education and care
department.
Now I will say, um, you got a
pretty darn good presentation
from Gerginski yesterday that
went over so much of this, so I
feel like.
I might be following a pretty
good act that you already
learned most of this, so I'll
keep it short on that piece, and
Rachel did a really good job
already giving you as well, so
I'll just note that this is our
document for both early
childhood session, and you'll be
able to go through this at your
leisure.
And then the high level is our
financial documents yesterday,
majority of the revenues for the
early childhood education and
care department come through.
A mixture of revenues, but a lot
of it is state support, but not
necessarily just general fun. A
lot of it from the early care
and education fund, we get a
fair amount of state general
fund that is not land grant
permanent fund left that um
totals almost 900, a little over
900 for this department, and in
this area since we were spending
about 10 on these programs and
now we're we're very short of a
billion dollars. So I've been
through the entire growth of
this period.
A lot of that revenue has been
coming from the trust fund. As
you know, your, this body um
changed the allocation of the
trust fund and we're not gonna
be seeing any new revenue to
what the corpus can currently
handle. Um, and then we also
changed or you all also changed
the inflow of so you're not
going to see big gangbuster
revenue increases from that
trust we've kind of.
We've invested those now, we're
stabilizing the programs, it's
kind of that big gangbuster
growth we've seen in the last
few years, we will see growth a
little bit coming from the learn
future growth, but it's not
going to be in, so that's gonna
be, you know, a little bit
different, but I will say, you
know, majority of that money is
going into the pre-kindergarten
program, home visiting the
family and other programs in
early childhood, but those are
the big.
cost centers.
On the good news, we just
released a report, uh, two days
ago from the LFC reevaluating
our pre-kindergarten program,
and we are seeing some really
impressive results. Um, I hope
to get that actual evaluation in
a really good report, um, it's a
follow up on an evaluation we
did a pre-K that was nationally
published um in journals, so
it's really good research. It's
showing that we are seeing.
sustained growth in math and
reading literacy for continued
reductions of special education
designation we continue school
for pre-kindergarten, college
attendance. This is not to be
um.
Overly enthusiastic, but this is
not things other states are
seeing. So we're doing something
really right, um, that's really
working for us and so the big
growth, a lot of the growth in
this funding for the last few
years of the year so that
parents have full care coverage
and also invest um, there's a
lot of other policy decisions
that will link more for Medicaid
to increase. So we used to have
around a lot of growth in all of
these programs. Now, the
question I'm always gonna get
from you, from everyone is,
well, if we're serving more and
we
invested more. Why are we ranked
50th? I know.
I'm gonna get that question. I
see that, and I will say that.
We have just a lot of and to
change population level data, it
more years. And remember that
those reported pieces. Now, I'm
not saying that our job is done.
We still have a lot of quality
assessment that we need to
continue because um early
childhood is all about, it's not
a silver bullet.
It's meeting families where
they're at and providing that
quality level and we have to
consistently be on that
continuous quality improvement.
Otherwise, the, so we this is
something that is going to be a
never ever ending conversation.
We're always gonna have to stay
on it and make sure that we're
delivering the, um, and with
that, you know, I
I could go over the numbers, but
you guys can read it, and I
don't want to take up too much
of your time.
amount of chair if I may, uh,
before we move on, so I, I, um,
Yup.
OK, OK. Thank you.
So if you could turn on your mic
and say that so that the, the
millions of people listening
know
uh LFC is correct, but I did try
to go back through the annotated
amendments.
To find out it was taken out
once, and then it was put back
in, but I can't tell when it was
put back in. So maybe you can
help me figure that out. Thank
you very much.
So are you ready for questions?
OK.
So we, who doesn't have
questions? OK, we will, we will,
we
OK, so, OK, so we will start
with Senator Block and work our
way this way and um
4 minutes. No, I don't,
doesn't. Yes, she was listening.
She gets a big cookie. Go get a
big cookie. Thank you, Madam
Chair, but she wrote her
questions down to give me.
So we'll start with 4 minutes
and see how we're doing on time.
All right, thank you, Madam
Chair. Uh, thank you for, for
the brief, um.
You know, my, my time in public
office, um, whether a
commissioner or senator have
been a huge advocate, uh, on
some of these programs, but I've
also
Um
From an analytical and empirical
data standpoint, like, like you
said, and I appreciate you
talking about, hey, the numbers
are lagging behind.
Um, whether or not I believe
that doesn't matter. Um, the
numbers are what they are, where
we're at.
And I'm glad we're talking about
this now, compared to uh the
previous briefs because
For me, when it looks when we're
looking at the behavioral health
and the substance abuse, uh,
issues. We're attacking from the
back end, the tail end, which
isn't helpful, and I think we
have to really focus on
Uh, the root cause analysis and
get to the problems early by
looking at trends and data
analysis, I think you would
agree with that. So, you know,
the child will being to me,
that's step one in making sure
the young boy or girl.
As a quality of life, quality
education, and plenty of
opportunity to go do, you know,
great things to be a productive
citizen, so we're not spending
money on the tail end like Nick
was talking about in the other,
uh,
Health secretary was talking
about. So when I, when I see
the, the numbers here on the
chart, and, and you know where I
think you said that for me. Um,
I'm having a hard time
understanding.
And help me out here. It's not a
gotcha question.
But just give me your opinion,
because I want to hear your
opinion on we're spending more
and more money per child.
And yet we're getting
The data isn't showing that it's
working.
What, what else if you are king
or queen for a day, and you
could just change policy and get
it done.
Is, is it, what, what are the
main issues driving this? Is it
poverty? Is it a lack of father,
lack of mother? Is it low
income? Is it poor schools? Is
it drugs and crime in the
street.
Um, there's so many variables
that go into this and, and I'm
trying to get my arms around it
because we just love these kids
and we want them to to do well.
No, no one at this table,
Republican, Democrat,
Independent, whatever you are, I
don't really care.
We all want these kids to be
healthy and and have great
lives.
And yet we're spending billions
of dollars.
From an early age,
All the way to adulthood, maybe
a more experienced age, dealing
with these problems and I'm just
trying to figure out.
What, what are, what are we
missing here to really solve
this problem because quite
frankly, we'll never solve it in
my goal is to put you out of
business.
Uh, in a perfect world.
So
help, help us out, help the
public out who was just so tired
of seeing these bad numbers and
all this money invested and we
just don't seem to be getting
anywhere.
And and it's awful. We want to
do better. What, what can we do
better in your opinion, to solve
this crisis.
Thank you.
Thank you so much. That there's
a lot of questions for, I'll
start with, I'm always a queen
for the day, um, and hopefully
don't put me out of business
cause I, I work for the
legislature, um, not for no I,
I know, but I,
but just as an as an opinion,
I'm not gonna hold you to it,
but you deal with this a lot,
yeah, I do, um, you know, you
know, when we think about early
childhood, I wanna say it is not
a silver bullet it's gonna
gonna fix everything.
And the problem is, is when we
think about early childhood,
sometimes people just think of
it as one thing, right? Like all
these programs are equally good
at the same thing, and that's
not necessarily true. It's a
system of services. So childcare
assistance, for instance.
It is good.
Outcome wise at improving
family's economic status because
they're able to put their child
in a safe environment where they
can work or go to school. That's
where it changes outcomes.
Pre-kindergarten is really good
at choosing changing, um,
educational and literacy, um,
outcomes. Home visiting is
particularly good, depending on
the model and the quality of
implementation about helping
support family stability.
And I think when we talk about
it, we, people think, OK,
childcare does all of those
things. It, it doesn't
necessarily change the outcomes
on everything and so it is in
the system of systems of
stacking those services, and we
have been
Over the last few years,
incrementally growing it so that
we could grow it with
intentionality. We have seen in
other states where they have
gone universal in these programs
in a year, and they can't
sustain the outcomes because the
intentionality of training the
workforce and building the
programs and the curriculums has
just been too rushed.
So when we think about early
childhood, we have to continue
to invest our dollars in the
outcomes we want to change and
hold the quality of the
implementation of those
programs. So if I were to say,
Yeah, you haven't seen
everything fixed overnight.
It's, we have been incrementally
intentionally building it.
And so some kids have not and
some families have not received
those services.
We also need to continue to hold
the line on quality and making
sure that we're implementing to
Fidelity on the models. If we're
not implementing to Fidelity,
we're not going to see the
outcomes. And that's gonna be a
forever conversation for that
piece. And so I think my answer
would be that.
There these programs work in a
system, and if a child only
receives one of them, they're
gonna only receive the outcome
of that particular program is
delivering.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. I, I think that the bottom
line is it's important to
constantly evaluate these
programs to see where we are,
um.
You know, I put my name all over
SB 1 and 3.
It's all
the bell go? Yes, the bell went
a good 2 minutes ago.
I, I didn't wear my hearing
aids. I'm sorry. Um,
should I throw a paper airplane
when your time is up, please, if
there's a second round I'd like
to reattack. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank youentative Chavez.
I had the same question he did
Representative block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you guys. So, I guess I kind of
had a similar question to
Senator Block, but it's
different in a way specifically
to behavioral health.
So I know that there was a
recent study, I don't know, I
read it in a paper somewhere
that we slipped from 31st or
something to 44th.
And so I believe I heard today
that we're like 2 years behind
in data gathering. So, can do
you expect a significant
increase.
In access and affordability and
all these things that go into
behavioral health in general, in
a couple of years, because I
would hate to come back here in
2 years and be like, OK, well,
can't use that excuse now, you
know. So can you tell me a
little bit about that and what,
what specifically we're, we're
looking toward to actually
change the outcomes instead of
just access or just one portion.
Uh
Ma'am chair and representative.
Yeah, so I think, you know, with
this much investment,
We have to, we have to, um.
Assume that we're gonna have.
Better access to make that push
very hard, um, you know, this
body as the oversight.
Uh, of the executive branch has
that responsibility to, you
know, I see myself as a staffer
of of this body and um we have
that responsibility to oversee
and make sure that these dollars
as they go out, do lead to
better access and hopefully down
the line.
That access uh leads to better
outcomes, um, in terms of the,
the ranking.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you.
for that. And I, I agree, but I
think that when it comes to our
legislative priorities.
We like to say, oh, well, we've
been working for something for
20 years and we have no, no real
outcomes.
And so when, I mean, I hear that
every day, every single time I
come to this committee, it's
always like, we've been working
on that for 12 years, but
It's like, what, what's the
change that needs to happen?
Because if it's, we're gonna get
punt it to the governor, because
the governor changes every 8
years or 4 years, then maybe we
need to be a little more
deliberate on how we appropriate
dollars and maybe we need to
say, well, if you're not going
to make changes, then we're
gonna cut.
The governor's staff budget by
50%.
Right? I think there needs to be
consequences. So I'm just
wondering, do you think that
such consequences would actually
matter to outcomes in the state.
I know it's kind of a loaded
question, my bad, but I'm sure
you can answer it.
Well, I'm not sure about the
later part. I'm not gonna get
into that, but the
But, but I, but I do think, I, I
do think, you know,
It's, it's what we've been.
This is sort of unprecedented
funding. Um, we've never had
this kind of funding, and I
think that kind of gets to your
earlier point of like, you know,
we've been working on this,
working on this for a long time,
but we never really had the
funding to do a lot, and now
we're seeing that, um.
But I think
Moving forward, what we have to
do is, we have to do the things
that are.
You know, poor principles.
Looking at the performance.
Getting better data.
Um, doing the evaluations.
Um, making sure that
Programs are being implemented.
To Fidelity
Making sure that um.
We're doing all those things
that are, you know, in the
literature everywhere else.
They kind of say like, you want
to improve a system, a
behavioral health system or
whatever system it is.
You have to do those types of
things, the, you know, the value
on a regular basis. Thank you.
And yeah, it's a systematic
approach that we need to take,
definitely, but
Yeah, it's just, it's really
scary to me when we, we spent $2
billion on something and we
don't really see anything, at
least in the immediate impact.
So I just think it's something
to look at and uh yeah, I don't
sit on the finance committee, so
I have no say on that, but I can
definitely talk about it in the
interim and in the committees
that I sit on. So thank you both
for your presentation. Thank
you, Madam Chair, for indulging
me and uh yeah, I mean, I'm not
saying cut the governor's budget
by half, but it kind of piece of
common wisdom around here is we
come up with these.
Programs, and then we severely
underfund them and then we say,
well, it didn't work. Well, it
didn't work cause we never did
what we needed to do, and it, it
makes it really hard if you pass
a bill and it's underfunded.
And then, you know, 5 years
later you come back and say,
well, we need to do this, say,
well, we already tried it and it
didn't work, so I think we're
famous as a legislature of good
ideas that we don't ever allow
to grow into because we don't
feed and water them, so
representative Anaya, Madam
Chair,
couple of things, um.
That really resonate with me,
one that we are an oversight
body, which is very interesting.
I know, um,
Black caucus and I were talking
about the fact that we need a
full-time paid legislature to
make sure that we can stay on
top of some of these things, but
in the spirit of, um, the
accountability and oversight
piece, you know, um, under the
hospital access and
sustainability, um, paragraph
that you have in the.
Overview. Um, I'm glad to see
that there's a little bit more
oversight, but one of the
presentations that y'all had
done to us, for us, I think last
year or maybe 2 years ago at
this point, was actually about
getting really specific about
the oversight language within
the budget to make sure that our
dollars are um stretching as far
as we can. Um, so I'm wondering
specifically when it comes to
something like reimbursement
language, right, which is pretty
general. It goes to a lot of
different things, a lot of
different entities. Do you have
any recommendations for some
type of language or policy that
would get us from these really
general reimbursements and have
some kind of measurement pieces
for more specific investments
and data collection.
Um, so I'm actually gonna take
this cause it revolve.
So as many of you may know,
Department of Health has to both
allow thee.
Um, the legislative finance
committee has been unable to
receive any data from that and
the Department of Health
believes that a legislator has
to be able to receive that data
so we can do that analysis. So
that would be a substantive
change that the legislature
could do to help us deliver on
the over, what is that
particular um recommendation
then, um, so I believe it's in
two sections of statute. Um, I
have
contacted your staffer, uh,
Andrea, and it's something that
we are happy to work with this
committee about it.
Um, I don't think it would be a
massive change. I think two
different statutes to allow a
thank you for that and it just
um
You know, I've been talking with
some experts regarding our
oversight and as it turns out,
legislative Finance Committee
does not have a general counsel.
General counsel is.
genre.
Case, at least that was what was
told to my experts um so and we
don't have, we don't have a
general counsel, so, so the
departments can say,
We, we can't do this and we
don't have any lawyers to say,
wait a minute, we think you can,
we just have to go along with
what's what the executive says,
which is the problem. I mean if
you're gonna, I, I'm a broken
record, I'm gonna be a broken
record, but we have no way to, I
mean this all pair claims data
has been a bugaboo for I, I
wanna say 10 years. I don't know
if that's right. A good 8
anyway, and, you know, the fact
that the legislative finance
committee has to
Right, the healthcare authority
to get money, I mean to get
numbers so that we can do
legislation is beyond ridiculous
and it really ties our hands as
a legislature when we're
shooting in the dark because we
can't get, I mean, it's, we
would love to make data-driven
decisions, but we can't get the
data, so particularly around
healthcare, so thank you for
those questions, representative.
That, that, that is a rumor,
although I hear it's never been
used or not been used in the in
the ages of electricity.
I was a nerd and I was looking
at the law the other day and I
went, huh.
This is interesting. Yes, we do,
we prefer to work in a
collaborative um capacity
Representative Chandler. This
is, I'm sorry to jump in, but
there's another issue that comes
up where the governor strikes
language in our budget.
That has the potential for
changing the intent of the
appropriation, and we do nothing
about that.
We don't override it and we and
it's also improper because the
question is what is the line
item veto for. Either you line
items and veto the whole thing,
or you, you, when you change the
intent, you've rewritten the
legislation, that's not a veto.
Um, so I, I'm just putting it
out there. I'm not sure why, but
it struck a chord that I find.
Really irritates me, Madam
Chair, as well from, from here
on out we're gonna be the uh.
Was it Robert, um, this morning
who said he's gonna not
cantankerous, the person we're
gonna be the persnickety
committee that's always on.
We're the legislature, we got.
We, we have some power to, so I
will go to Representative Kates.
Uh thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you. I, I love having
representation from judiciary
here at the health committee, so
thank you very much and, and I,
I'm sure this is not what you
thought we were going to be
talking about today, so thank
you as well for your
presentation. I, I, I'm gonna
ask hopefully a simple question
at first, which is we have a 17%
increase in income support.
That is more than just snap,
correct?
Madam chair, that's correct. And
is the 17% Eric, and I don't
know if you know this is it
based on increased numbers of
individuals served or increased
services. Um, a lot of it is, if
you think of it in terms of kind
of
Going back, I think.
The pandemic.
You had a ton of people that
came onto the rolls, you had,
um, a department kind of falling
behind in terms of.
You know, having like a long
wait list and that sort of
thing, and I think
A lot of this was the kind of
catch up.
backlog in terms of, but now
we're kind of catching up and
getting them to the staffing
level, um, OK, thank you, Madam
Chair. So really it is an
investment into our agencies
themselves that had been um
underfunded and under amount of
FTEs to be able to process the
amount of services that are
required.
Is that, is that the 17%
increase or I, and I know that
that that's a broad, unfair
question. So let's say that
first, Eric. I, I, I get that.
I'm asking for a generalization
of 17%. It's your job to count
the minute numbers in there and
so it, I understand that it's an
unfair question I'm asking, but
I'm looking for a
generalization, increase people,
increase investments in FTEs for
the agencies that serve those.
People were increased services,
or a little of everything. It's,
it's mostly increased FTE for
the people that are services.
OK. Thank you so much. I just
because we we had a lot of
discussions here and I'm gonna
take my next 2.5 minutes, I'm
hoping, um, to, to just clarify
what we said, um, your roles
within this legislative process
are to oversee the budget, make
sure that the dollars are in the
right buckets, make sure.
That the dollars reflect the
policies in which have been
signed and passed and
implemented and also follow up
with data reflect back to the
legislation and making these
decisions. You are not creating
policy, you are not um
obligating policy and um and you
are not, um.
Uh, a part of that policymaker.
Is that, is that a uh uh uh uh
an over assumption of what what
your roles are currently. I'm,
I'm trying to clarify for the
viewer who's heard a lot of
information.
Uh, Madam Charid, I believe
that's roughly about it, right?
Um, I, I think our role is
Primarily it also has an
oversight piece to it, which is
looking at performance, looking
at um evaluate. Sometimes we
make recommendations on policy,
but you all are the final
deciders in terms of. Thank you
so much. I want to sneak one
more question in. So I ask you
this every time. I would like to
see.
Um, the MC I like to see data
based on the performance of our
MCOs based on their RFP.
So I would love to see LFC to
take the RFP for the MCOs and
say these are the things we
require when they apply to BR
NCOs, and how are they doing it
on directly reflected to the
contract in which they are, I
think that that is very
important in our quality
processes, and I just like to
say thank you and I appreciate,
uh, congratulations on your new
role, um, I'm looking forward to
working with you and from the
time.
Uh, Representative Robocaro
there.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you very much for your
presentations. I came in at a
time under a previous
administration when all we were
doing was, um, trying to cut
programs, cut funding, cut, cut,
cut, because we were in an
economic crisis and our funding
um was we had no rainy day quote
for um.
I don't like using the reference
to rainy day fund, but we didn't
have any type of reserve, and
so, uh, I appreciate coming
forward, Madam Chair, to this
period of time when we've been
blessed with.
Revenue and um so the next
question for us has been how do
we um utilize the um the revenue
in a way in which we don't go
back to those time periods when
we have crises, and then we have
to um act.
in a difficult manner, and so I,
you know, the, the creation of
the funds has been to protect
and ensure sustainability and
longevity and make sure that our
populations continue to be
served in the best manner.
Possible. So I appreciate um how
you've taken that role seriously
and assisted us in being able to
do that in a very intentional um
way, and I like the terminology
that you used about the fidelity
of outcomes because there comes
my question.
So my question, you know, and we
spent a lot of time on data and
I appreciate the people that my
colleagues that raised the issue
about data and I also as a
researcher, understand that it
takes a certain period of time
before we can assess, evaluate,
and apply the data appropriately
to our next steps, and, and to
be able to provide uh
information to ascertain whether
there's been um
Uh, measurable outcomes or.
Ways in which to measure how
effective our funds have been
used and so on, all of the data
is really important and it takes
time to build that up, um,
because there's a lot of
variables that goes into that,
so I appreciate that part.
My question is, what are the
measurement tools currently in
place.
Um, and, and how often do you
affect, I mean, um,
How often do you evaluate their
effectiveness.
That's part of it. And then how
are those measurement tools.
tied into um the outcomes as
they relate to sustainability.
Is that, does that make sense?
Thank you, Madam I'm sure that's
one question.
From, from my black and my
operate the same.
Um, so
When we look at early childhood,
there is a lot of different ways
we evaluate it. First of all,
um, for certain programs, they
follow national models.
That then are required to
several tools inside the
department, um, that measure
different things across
pre-kindergarten and childcare
assistance, LFC childhood that
we report out quarterly.
Um, and we do report cards for
every major agency quarterly
that are really based into, we
hope, what we hear back from you
all as measurements of what you
want to see, um, affects change.
And so,
Those are kind of core
components of how I, I look at
early childhood outcomes, and
then on top of that, we do at
least 1 to 2 evaluations on
early childhood, almost every
single year. So this year we did
an update and in August we'll be
doing what we report which looks
at a universal look of both
domains of how children are
doing across certain things, and
also, and so there is a plethora
of documents coming out of LFC
for these big spending areas
that are oversight intended.
Thank you. And Representative
Chavez is.
Lep represent uh and senator, I
have to apologize. The Madam
Vice Chair said, let's do 12:30,
and I know folks want to get
Home as soon as they can, so I
apologize.
Oh,
my apologies.
Thank you. Um, thank you, Madam
Chair. Um, so,
Um, with regards to,
you can tell I was really um
very interested in Senate Bill 3
and Senate Bill 1, and on, so my
understanding of that Senate
bill is that there will be
things that would have money
that would have otherwise been
reverted going into the, going
into the, the behavioral trust
fund. And one of them, as you
point out, is um
The trust fund.
Ongoing distributions from
changes made to the early
childhood fund, but then there
are other funds, right, that
that instead of reverting to the
general fund will go to the
behavioral trust fund. Is, is
that right?
Yeah, so, uh, the early
childhood education and revenue
from
Yeah.
So part of the revenue.
About half of that revenue
stream was taken to go into the.
The, uh, Medicaid trust fund. So
you've got to revenue might be
recurring revenue.
to, to, to build those funds to
a level that they're actually
going to generate enough money
to, to make a difference in the
funding.
So, so, but I also understood
that there were that there were
Um, some funds that would
otherwise go to the general
fund.
Or the, uh, or, yeah, that we're
Um
That would go to the behavioral
health fund if they would have
otherwise been returned, is that
that's not correct. I think what
you're referring to, Madam Chair
and Senator, is the, there's a
So state agency regularly revert
funding
agencies that's a very small
amount, some agencies, uh, so.
Typically what, what happens to
that funding is it goes back
into the general fund and we
spend it again next year. It's
included in our
And so with this bill does, as
those agencies revert, revert up
to 110 million. After that,
anything that's above that goes
into the trust fund. OK, so
that um so my question is, is
given
How we set up the funding and
assuming that we're gonna have
to backfill probably from
federal cuts so that we won't
have as much um money to put
into the
The behavioral health trust
fund, what do you estimate or or
or is the
Are you guys estimating
A timeline for when that fund
will actually, cause I know it,
it we have to have 3 years.
Pass so that we can do the
average, but what do you, when
do you estimate that there will
be some distributions from that
fund.
We're not fully funded work that
we're trying to do over the
interim to to get, uh,
projections for those two funds
to come back to you. Excellent.
And then um I've asked for this
so many times, and I went
through all of this and I didn't
see it again. How much is spent
specifically on alcohol.
Prevention, treatment,
Um, programs.
Because it's not, it's never
broken up in behavioral health
calculations to just focus on
alcohol. I understand that a lot
of times it's alcohol plus.
In fact, most times it's alcohol
plus, but, um, which is, is
fine, but isn't there any way to
get the data on how much we
spend on alcohol treatment
programs.
Um, Madam Chair, members
committee, so because of
substance use disorder it.
It's
It's not tracked that way in our
financial systems. Um, I will
say that LFC right now is
finishing up a
medication-assisted treatment
evaluation some of the alcohol
misuse from opioid treatments,
um, but it
It's just not
It goes into the same funding
accounts and is delivered to
those providers coming in and
it's almost always co-occurring,
so it's a really hard number to
put our finger on.
I know we've asked so many times
and it just seems impossible to
get the data. However, um, one
thing just to tie those two
pieces together is if we were to
raise the alcohol tax and divert
that money rather than to the
general fund, but to the
behavioral health fund or to a
separate alcohol harms reduction
fund, um, it would affect the
projections of when we get this
fully funded, right? Uh, that's
that's senator.
It, it, I'm sorry, I didn't hear
it. Uh, we're gonna have to have
a hearing test on the Senate
side, I think they're, they're,
they're having trouble. Um, so,
so just out of curiosity, I'm,
are there ICD 9 codes
specifically for alcohol or
vers, I mean, not that we have
an all payer claims data, but
someday, someday, um,
I'm just curious and Madam
Chair, that's, that's totally a
possibility one day if we can
get some.
Claims data, we could possi uh
AUD treatment. OK. Thank you,
Senator Stephanics, uh, thank
you.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you both for uh assisting
us, but I would like help
teasing out those amendments in
that um
Senate Bill 88 later. Um, I did,
uh, forward to Xander, he did
forward out to our committee
members.
That's all claims pairer
database is available just to
look at.
Doctors, um,
Charges for certain.
Procedures, prescription costs,
etc. It's not necessarily for
the data that you all would
want. So we should, it should
take, it's a transparency
website, but we should
Make a statement, and I'm not a
voting member, but we should
make a statement about the
request. Um,
Or if LLC receives the
information in assists this
committee.
That's I just, I laughed because
it's, it's, I think we've done
this strongly worded letter
every every every interim, we
can just put a ditto on and a
new date and
show that maybe if we put it on
a uh.
Letterhead from a litigator that
might help.
Um, do you have one in mind
we're we're getting a little uh
Maybe punch drunk here or
something, I don't know. Um I'm
finished. OK, send it to uh
I go home,
but it's Lopez.
Thank you, madam Chair. It's,
it's after lunch, so you know
it's, it's part of that.
Um, first of all, thank you very
much for this information, and I
think this will lead our
committee to have many more
discussions, much more
discussion, um, as as as well as
we get more into the interim,
um.
On some of these issues. I just
had a couple points of
clarification.
And it's for me, but also maybe
for the public.
Um, as they
The the list where it says um.
The Healthcare Authority
non-recurring appropriations,
um.
Um, I think it's line 27. It
mentions to deliver services and
for grants to federally
qualified health centers,
counties, municipalities, etc.
Um
For 24 hour crisis response
facility.
And um, Madam Chair,
Yeah.
I think if my memory serves me
right.
Many of our federally qualified
healthcare centers don't.
You know, place crisis response,
um, so is that part of our
intent to.
Began to put something like this
together.
And I only ask that Madam Chair,
because of a FQHC in my
community, we've looked at doing
some type of uh emergency.
Like not an ER, but like an
urgent care center of some sort,
and it's always has the funding
issues, and then just lacked it
lack just to kind of carry on
with that too, you know, FQHCs I
think are under pressure with
regards to the funding issue out
of the feds, you know.
Mm
It sounds good, but 7.5 million
is not much money either, even
just to start. So Amy, back to
my first, I mean this, this goes
on and more for questions for
me.
Is that what I think the intent
was um for us to put that money
in there, Madam Chair, I think
that and vice chair, I think
that could be the, I think that
it could be used that way, you
know, I think.
This is part of the the behavior
health reinvestment Act, you
know.
I think we're still working out
a lot of the details as far as
how that money is going to get
distributed and worked out.
Uh
You know, the executive
committee just met for the first
time on local governments are
supposed to do, uh, or, um,
local regions are supposed to do
planning, uh, coming up in the
future, and once they do that
planning, they can then apply
for funding if they to center or
whatever is is um whatever
service it is is missing within
that local community HC or
whatever, and they could do it
at a FQHC, but I, I think that's
kind of where that's headed.
Hey I appreciate it, Madam
Chair. Um, and for those FQHC is
a federally qualified healthcare
center, and there are about 200
of them in the state of New
Mexico, depending what community
you are, but that's all I'm
gonna change. Thank you.
Thank you. And that brought me
and I was recently at a
conference on behavioral health
in Phoenix in
Late June 111 degrees. I don't
know who planned that, but it
was a lovely resort. But anyway,
so we were, we went to a um and
Senator Hickey and
Representative Hochman v. Hill
were also there with me. We went
to, I'll call it a call center,
although it wasn't really um
Arizona is doing some really
innovative things around
behavioral health, um, and what
this call center was, was some
would call in 911-988 um or
their direct number for
behavioral health crises and
what they are trying to do is
set up um
what they call firehouse model
where it's not that it's like
our ACS in Albuquerque where
it's staffed 24/7. It's not
staffed when you need someone,
cause when you need someone,
it's too late to get staffed, so
to have 24/7 staff that can go
out and as I said, our ACS I
always get wrong Albuquerque
community.
Services, and I usually get that
wrong. So they have that, so I
think that's something that
would be really, meaning we're
not gonna have it in Union
County. Let's, you know, I mean,
there's 70 people and 70 cows,
and so we're not gonna do it
there, but, but some of our, I
know that Dona Anna County is
really lacking in in some those
kind of emergency and it doesn't
take the place of a place to
take people if they need to be
treated, but it's a, it's a way
for folks not to be sent to
jail.
with the behavioral health. So
I'm just throwing it out to the
universe and um
Things for us to think about
that we can do some of that
firehouse model staffing, um,
and I think in the long run, it
will show that it's, it's very
um the return on investment is
great because as I said, those
frequent flyers, there were
people who were averaging more
than 365 emergency department
visits a year, and we know what,
you know, what a broken toenail
at the emergency room costs, so,
so something to think about. So
we are on to our last.
presentation
Um, and Eric, I'm not we, we
pretty much went into behavioral
health, so, um, you, you can do
this next presentation, how you
excuse me, whatever you deem
appropriate.
All right, ma'am Chair and
members of the committee. So
I've got a um
Another handout, it's like I'm
draining, uh, drowning you guys
in handouts today. Apologize.
Um, looks like this.
I'll wait for those to get out.
Thank you, Kelly, and
congratulations. You will be
missed, but I'm sure you'll be
doing important work.
And don't be a stranger.
So while she's passing those
out, finishing that up, um.
You know, I was asked to do this
presentation. I sort of wish I
could have done it for you guys,
you know, just to open up your,
your week this week, but we had
overlap with LFC and it was kind
of hard getting the schedules
together because that was our
intent was to, but we, we are
the stepchild. We don't get
first crack at LFC folks, so.
And so, um,
You know, some of this is going
to be a complete review for some
of you.
Um
There are some of you on this
committee that you could
probably teach me a thing or two
about uh Medicaid and behavioral
health.
Um, but then there's some of
you, I, I think that are
somewhat new to this and, and
hopefully you guys, uh, some of
you get something out of this
and um
That'd be great. So, I wanted to
start off just by saying like,
you know, why is Medicaid, uh,
so important, um, to this state.
Well, about 38% of.
Residents qualify or are on
Medicaid.
Um, in the state, and that's a
huge number, and we have a much
larger share of people on
Medicaid then um.
We find physical health,
behavioral health, all kinds of
other services, uh, through
Medicaid. And so, and we're also
funding um things such as the
schools you brought up the
FQHCs, um, hospitals and um all
these local clinics that we have
all over the state. A lot of the
funding for those um
Businesses or whatever you want
to call them organizations.
Comes from Medicaid, and so,
This is uh an important area
that um.
I wanted to just bring that up.
So going into the um page 2 on
the in the slide deck.
Medicaid, what is Medicaid? It's
a joint federal state uh
healthcare program with certain
national standards and wide
latitude for state policy
differences through Medicaid
waivers. In New Mexico, Medicaid
covers low-income individuals,
uh, including the elderly,
disabled families and children,
pregnant women, and very low
income adults, uh, without
children.
Uh, moving on to slide 3. I'm
gonna go through it kind of
quick cause I know I'm standing
in between you and the end of
the day, um, Medicaid uh 101
slide 3 managed care
organization.
It's a commercial insurance
company, you'll always hear us
talking about the MCO's managed
care organizations, uh, it's,
it's
A company that the state hires
in order to manage.
The care of uh all many of the
folks that are on Medicaid.
But they don't manage all of the
care of everybody on Medicaid,
you've also got fee for service,
which is essentially the
healthcare authority pays
directly uh for individuals for
services, um, that are on
Medicaid and most of those
people on fee for service are
Native Americans and they can
either choose whatever MCO they
want or they can be um served
through fee for service.
Um, estate plan, that's each
state develops its own Medicaid
program within federal
guidelining guidelines outlining
services covered, eligibility
criteria and administrative
processes, and then we also have
the waiver, which is a special
permission granted by the
federal government, uh, to
states to deviate from standard
Medicaid rules for experimental
or innovative, uh, I'm gonna
like for.
Actually, he skipped slide 5
because I already gave that to
you in the um previous.
Uh
Projection, but you can't or in
the previous presentation, but
you can't see um
And
Larger format of
What the states, um, Medicaid
enrollment and spending. So
moving on to slide 6 key cost
drivers, uh, enrollment, uh,
especially in managed care.
And I, I put this.
table on the right hand side
here.
Um, just to kind of give you an
idea of um
The monthly costs.
Based on actual enrollment.
And the monthly costs based on
the department's um
Uh, January projection, uh, last
year, and you'll see that.
There's quite a bit of a
difference. It's um about $40
million more than $40 million
every month.
The reason why that's important
is because if uh HCA, the
department is projecting a
Higher spend amount, a higher
amount of enrollment uh
throughout the year.
Then what is actually going to
occur.
We can end up with having $100
million in general fund or
whatever, $50 million in general
fund set aside for uh a higher
Um,
Projection.
Where we could have spent that
money elsewhere, and so, uh,
we've been working quite a bit
with the department over the
past couple of years to try to
get these projections a little
more um realistic. You'll see
that, you know, uh, throughout
most of last year they were
projecting it an actual increase
in enrollment, but if you look
at the prior page we actually
had quite a bit of a decrease in
enrollment, so
That's, you know, we're tying up
money where maybe it shouldn't
be, um.
Other things that
Drive costs MCO rates,
healthcare prices and inflation.
Um, members use of services and
the federal medical assistance
percentage or the FAP that's the
rate at which we um
The federal government matches
us for every dollar that we
spend.
Moving on to slide 7.
More detail on what the federal
medical assistance percentages,
um, the federal government's
reimbursement rate to the states
for state expenditures on
Medicaid, the rates dependent on
the population served with
differing rates for children,
income levels, expansion.
Then you have your base and
enhanced rates and changes each
year based on the state's
economic performance.
Per capita personal income.
Um, and you can see on this
table on the side here, the
different rates that we get for
different populations within
Medicaid. I think the big
takeaway here though is
Essentially what we do is we
come up with a, a blended rate,
um, which basically takes the
average number of enrollees that
are in each of those groups, and
then um averages that out and
comes up with a weighted uh
amount so our um FY 25 blended
rate was around 77.71%. Why is
that not so important because
it's tiny change to that F map.
have huge uh budget acts for the
state. And so, I think we
Went down by 1% last uh two
years ago and I think
The costs of the state about.
Uh
You know, 60 $70 million so
it's, it's pretty expensive when
when those changes, they do
change.
Um
Based on
The state's economic
performance, um, compared to the
moving on slide 8, Medicaid
enrollment, uh, for May 2025
Medicaid enrollment was at
814,000.
Included about 278,000 in the
expansion group.
475,000 in the Medicaid-based
population, that's the group
that qualified for Medicaid
before we expanded it through
the Affordable Care Act, um, and
then
About 370,000 children.
And then others with a partial
benefit.
So what are the key to financing
um components that come into
Medicaid, what are those revenue
sources, of course, general
fund, we're always talking about
it. Federal funds, you know,
this is something that we're uh
Watching like a hawk quite a bit
right now with
The Federal government, what
they're doing, um, you know, uh,
director Saly just did it, uh,
presentation for the LFC last
week on federal funds. Um, I do
think that we'll probably come
to you guys, uh, in the next
month or two with.
Um, talking about federal funds,
especially once more of this
reconciliation bill stuff kind
of.
Uh, gets a little bit more
worked out and we have a better
idea of what um to actually
expect over the next
next.
Couple of years, but we're,
we're watching those, uh, very
carefully, uh, county supported
Medicaid fund, tobacco
settlement fund, UNM hospital
transfers, they transferred
money to
Uh, or Medicaid program.
Uh, other agencies such as DOH
bring in money various matching
rates. Now we also have the
healthcare delivery and Access
Act, uh, the year before last.
Um
That's the, the hospital
provider tax. You bring in the
tax.
Match it with Medicaid and send
it back in the form of directed
payment or rate increase to
that.
We got a slight 10.
Medicaid spending has grown from
just over 5.6 billion in FY 17
and this just gives you
A breakdown where the the main
finding is um managed care is a
big chunk of it, uh, they're on
the left hand side.
Um
We spend a little bit on
Medicare.
Uh, you can see it at about 11%
of our funding goes to Fee for
service again, that's that
direct.
payment for services that goes
directly to uh individuals, and
then we spend about 8% on the DD
waivers, and then on the right
hand side there breaks down that
pie a little bit more.
Um, the MCO or the Medicaid MCO
programs.
About 36% of everything that we
spend on MCOs goes to physical
health.
Or actually, I'm sorry, that's,
it's about 66% that goes to
physical health.
Um, and then you can see it
there.
And then managed uh Medicaid
managed care spending on
services. This breaks down that
pie even further, um, so you
could see that.
You know, we spent about 1.3
billion on a hospital services.
Actually, this was done prior to
the HDAA and
Uh, once we do get that new
data.
kind of look at this, you'll see
that that number will probably
Probably get close to doubling
um in terms of how much I'm not
gonna to be labor that one.
Uh, slide 12, this gives you uh
an understanding of the recent,
some of the recent rate
increases that we've done.
Kind of across the board.
Yeah, that, that comes out to
about 2.3 billion, 2.2, 2.3
billion that we've done in rate
increases, that's all funding
sources, so the maternal and
child health, we've done about
432 million over the last 3
years.
Um
We did the big, again, the HDAA
hospital rate adjustments, uh,
and then
This year we did that 3rd round
of behavioral health and then we
did the program for all
inclusive care.
Assisted living facilities and
nursing facilities.
Uh, moving on slide 13, I'm
gonna jump into change gears a
little bit, jump into the
behavioral health piece of this.
Um, what is behavioral health,
the term behavioral health is a
broad term covering both mental
illness and substance use
disorder. I think everybody's
got an idea of what behavioral
health is, um, I'm not gonna get
too much into that.
But there are a few other terms
that you can read on.
On your own about what we
consider serious mental illness,
um,
And serious emotional
disturbance in talking about
behavioral health. So what are
some of the, the main services
under behavioral health, we have
uh counseling crisis
intervention I'm on site 15
homeless outreach, supportive
housing, certified behavioral
health clinics.
And other children his behavior
of health, we have
multi-systemic therapy,
functional family therapy.
Oh, so this is the behavioral
health for foreign and
Investment Act, so that's your
Senate Bill 3 that you just
passed this year.
Um, so,
One thing I want people to
remember is that that bill
actually repealed the behavioral
health purchasing collaborative.
That was the collaborative that
we used for years and years to
pay for.
Um, and to try to organize all
of our behavioral health funding
that got replaced by this new
executive committee.
Uh, that just met on Tuesday for
the first time, so that's um
That's an important piece of
that requires the administrative
office of the courts to conduct
sim mapping, um.
And I, I don't know how familiar
folks are with sim mapping, but
it's basically
Uh
Basically it looks at the
continuum of services that are
available.
within the criminal justice
system.
To provide services for people
that have behavioral health uh
issues. And so basically what it
asks those local governments to
do in those regions to do is to
Figure out where their gaps
essentially are within their um
systems of care for
People who have behavioral
health issues and are involved
in.
Requires this, this, the um
The state or the administrative
office of the courts to convene
regional meetings to create
behavioral health plans, and
also to report progress on to
the legislature, and I believe
uh they came and
provided some of that to you
earlier in the week.
Um
And you can see some of the
appropriations that we've
already gone over.
So what are some of the needs
and gaps again, and uh
representative block he had
brought this up earlier that um
the rankings, these are those
rankings that you had, uh,
discussed um there on slide 17.
Um, that we've kind of slipped
on.
And that we need to work on
going forward now that we've got
this large investment into
Medicaid.
Uh, slide 18.
This is
The collaborative agency, the
collaborative is going away now,
um, some of this funding, uh,
is going to just be distributed
directly from the healthcare
authority now.
I think they're still working on
what exactly that model is gonna
look like, but I just included
this slide so that you could
see.
That's where we were
Um, and I think that
The healthcare authorities still
trying to figure out like where
we're gonna be, um, in terms of
How we get um
Flight 19, you can see Medicaid
behavioral health spending
growth, you see that we've uh
increased spending.
Um, over the past few years, uh,
behavioral health.
It's like 20 you can see the
Medicaid for behavioral health
spending.
You see that we spent about half
of it on outpatient services.
Um, and then about, you know, a
smaller amount on uh inpatient
services.
And to detail there.
And with that, Madam Chair, I'm
gonna go ahead and stop talking.
Uh, and all.
Thank you, Eric, um, so.
questions.
in the block, Lopez.
OK.
OK, we'll start with represented
block, Trilous and then
Representative Gates. Thank you,
ma'am I'm sure I'll be quick.
Just wondering, so Medicaid
recipients.
It's increased.
With
In the last few years. Can you
tell me what percentage or how
many people it's increased over
the last few years.
I know that might be somewhere
in your, in your presentation. I
must have missed it. And then
also in that question, do we
expect a decrease?
In Medicare recipients in the
next few years because in my
opinion,
People should be lifted up out
of Medicaid, right? That's our
goal. So I'm wondering, do we
expect that.
So those two questions.
Right, ma'am. So if you go to
slide this table that looks like
this here.
There's a, there's a lot on
there, um.
But if you look at the line at
the top, that's your enrollment.
So if you look at
A FY 14, we had about 616,000 on
Medicaid.
And then after that it started
climbing quite a bit, and that
was because of Medicaid
expansion under the ACA.
And then you had kind of a dip
for a while kind of leveled off,
and then we increased quite a
bit.
During the pandemic.
almost up to a million.
And then dipped off again. Now
we're at, now we're actually at
about 814.
The most recent numbers, this
slide hasn't been, isn't totally
up to date, but
Uh
If work requirements, um, come
in from the federal government.
I think that's what you're
asking about some of the other.
Um, provisions that are
being considered through the
reconciliation bill at the
federal government. Yeah, we do
expect, um,
Enrollment to continue dropping
off further.
That's, that's, that's kind of
it.
Sure. Thank you.
Scentricity.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um.
I expected that question to go
longer if I could uh.
And with regards to the on page
17, the needs and gaps.
Um
things and, and maybe, uh maybe
it's encompassing the idea of
improved data and analysis will
tell us where to focus our
efforts.
You know, I've been working on
an alcohol, um,
Zyrtec or whatever excise tax
increase.
Um, for quite a while now and
I've learned a lot over the
years I've been working on it.
And one of the most upsetting
things that I learned was of the
enormous health disparities that
exist with regard to alcohol um
misuse.
And one of them is um Native
American people.
They drink less, but their
health outcomes are so much more
severe than other groups, um.
Hispanics, white, you know, it's
just, it's just shocking and um
And we've never ever done
anything to deal with it, the,
the piece that was vetoed this
year that would have directed
um.
Money to, to addressing that
health disparity was, um,
was vetoed and so when we talk
about this, this enormous
investment that we're making.
How
How can we measure, well,
That study was um was really
important, but I haven't ever
seen the state, um, look at that
issue. Um, is there a way of
looking at that issue and, and
looking at success both
directing resources toward it
and then looking at success. Um,
Because
Obviously, I mean just it's an
obvious problem.
Yeah, I, I think, you know, AUD,
um,
In terms of
Alcohol related deaths, for
example.
You know, it's quite a bit worse
than opiate use disorder. It's
quite a bit worse than all the
others, honestly, and it's, it
doesn't get enough attention.
And we're still a nation. We are
number one in the nation on
employment related death. And so
it, it is, yeah, you've been
worse in the nation for a pretty
long time, um.
Um, as far as I
I think the data goes back to
Uh, and so it's something that
we really need to be uh looking
at more. I do think, you know,
the department has been talking
about or healthcare authorities
has been talking about coming
out with a behavioral health
needs and gaps, and now it's
releasing that, um.
Next week at some point, or
maybe it's the end of, I, I
think it's actually next week at
some point. I'll be looking at
that very carefully to look and
see.
Um
Where are those needs and gaps
are, we did it last year.
Um
There, there are a lot of things
that are kind of missing out
there, and I think, um, but I, I
do think if the department's
done a better analysis on that.
Um, we can start to get kind of
a better
Or hands around.
What services are missing.
And where are those services
missing?
And then start looking at
strategically trying to place
those services in those
communities that um were missing
and overall.
of service
which is the intent of Senate
Bill 3
and so hopefully we will get
that.
We will get that done, um, but
it just struck me cause I
You
This, um
There are gaps we already know
about.
And we haven't, um,
We haven't done anything about
it and, and one of these things
is improved data and analysis.
Do you
be able to rely on other studies
too, not just our own data.
Um, but the health, the health
disparities stated that's out
there, it's really important and
I hope that um let's see, looks
at that as we think about um
moving forward with the money. I
mean we're already making a huge
investment in the whole idea of
the behavioral health um trust
fund is to continue to not just
let this investment die because
that's been our history. We, we
have, we do well in the budget,
we invest, we start all these
programs, and then we have to
cut and we, we build them again
and we have to
They were surprised we don't get
results. Um, and so
Sustainability is gonna be key
to to this investment working
out. I, I think we've tried, uh,
Pretty hard over the past few
years, and, you know, I think
director Salley would
He's always giving us this
speech, but it's um
You know, I, I think that
Legislature a lot of times wants
to get a lot of things done
really fast, right? So,
Sometimes
folks are really pushing to do
8% growth, 9% growth across the
board.
And I think what we've kind of
realized though, if you look at
our revenue project, oil's not
always gonna be there. It's
gonna flatten out.
At some point, right? And so,
What we've done, what we've
really tried to do is throw
government a little bit slower
so that we have 7 years.
Continue growing at that.
5, 6%, right? So that we are
sustainable over the long term,
and I, I, I do think the
legislature, this body has done
a lot.
To try to get
Um
are funding a lot more stable.
No, I'm not an economist, I
can't get into a lot of details
on that, but that's, that's, uh,
Something that we, we've really
tried to, and I agree with you.
I think that every I've been
here since 2019 and I think uh
Because of what had happened
earlier when they were dealing
with it.
2008, I believe was nightmare.
cuts, I think that this group
may be a little too conservative
sometimes, but it's very focused
on that and I think that's
really important that we
continue it. And I really
appreciate the presentation that
was accessible, um, and, and
comprehensive. Thank you. And if
you can never get the alcohol
data.
Um, I unders I, I, I want to
include the code.
The the co
addictions too.
Um, I just want to know how much
you spend on alcohol.
On an alcohol.
of alcohol
reduction it should be an easy
question, and it's hard to get
at, so I'll try and work on
that, sorry. I, I know I've been
we've been seeking it for 5
years and I finally concluded
it's just not in the way that
the data is collected. I, I was
shocked that I, I had a video.
And
Thank you. But if we can, I, I
would like to see a signature
talking about Native Americans
and when we bring in the health
service. We can't get numbers
from groups that we fund.
It's gonna be really hard to get
data from federal and the the
the 638 clinics that are run by
the tri I mean because the
funding is so um all over the
place. It's, it's just another
layer of
Harness to get at the data. If,
if you would like, I'd be happy
to share a study that was done,
I can't remember if CC or.
I, I did not remembering who
offered the study about the
health, health disparities for
Native Americans in the
Southwest. Oh yeah, specifically
around um alcohol and how they
measured.
How much, how much people drink?
And what did the health outcomes
was very disturbing.
And that's why I say that's.
That tells us it's a problem.
Yeah, we can verify that it's
here, but I don't think you can,
you have to verify it. I think
you just look around.
Thank, thank you, ma'am.
Uh, representative Kate.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, thank you, Senator.
Uh, so I'm, I slide, we're gonna
go back to the slide that we've
seen a couple of times like.
5
as a as somebody who deals with
stats.
See if you can answer this
question for me. It says that
38% of the New Mexico population
is covered by Medicaid.
Why do we have so many groups
who sit in front of this
legislature from the medical
community.
tell us it's 55.
Uh, so
If you look at FY 23, we got
really close to about 50, um,
during the pandemic.
I think folks are looking at the
older data and
citing that
It's gone down quite a bit over
the past uh couple of years
since the pandemic has unwound.
It's a great explanation. Thank
you so much. And um I just have
to put in my two cents as
individuals who are looking um
at this presentation online on,
on slide 10, we do see a $5.6
billion
growth.
And medicate spending since FY
17.
Although I do, and I'm sure that
it's an accurate number because
it comes from Eric, um, but, um,
I just wanna bring it to the
attention that
Uh, Medicaid behavioral health.
And, um, and, and every
governmental office was
devastated in 2013, 14, 2015.
So, uh, we, we are only 40% in
some of our behavioral health
programs that were devastated
that time over 10 years ago, and
it's part of the reasons why we
fight to reststaff our state
agencies as well because they
were
Just uh brought down to the
bone. And so, uh is that uh true
number of growth? Yes, it is,
but it's based on something that
was horrifically underfunded.
drastically and quickly, so it
took more funding to just be
able to um get it up to the
speed that we're at now. So I
just needed to put my little uh
op ed piece here before in my 5
minutes. Thank you, Eric.
Thank you Madam chair.
where Caballero.
and I'm having a hard time
finding.
I was going with my questions,
so maybe you can help me. I'm
trying to find um where
I, I would locate, um,
Social workers.
And how social workers are under
in particular the fun.
I thought it was on page 64.
Um, and my, my question has to
do with what the
General.
So we know the role and function
of social workers, um.
In terms of providing um
a vast spectrum.
Except for diagnosing.
They're, they're, they're not in
that particular spectrum.
So, um,
I
I'm interested in seeing.
Now our services.
That are going to children in
particular.
And receive, um,
These particular
Services.
With the restrictions that come
from
Uh, Medicaid-related.
subsidies to the state.
In terms of the trust fund
itself. Can the fund
Legitimize those expenses
without falling of uh
restrictions because of the
leveraging with, with, uh, in
the subsidies from Medicaid.
If that makes sense.
Thank you, ma'am.
Ouch chair and uh representative
if I understand your question, I
think what you're asking is
Whether or not that kind of
offset the costs for children.
Uh
At this point, I don't, the idea
behind the Malish a recurring
revenue source.
Or medicate itself. So,
In terms of children that aren't
or people trust fund to cover
children.
Madam Chair, so then we um.
We use the same.
Parameters or guidelines or and
definitions associated with.
Medicaid in general in in the
creation of the trust fund. Is
that what I'm hearing? Pretty
much, which is the same criteria
Madam Chair, I think that trust
fund, it, it's meant to be
matched with.
Federal
So it's, it would probably, that
would probably be be out.
The use of that fund.
So, Madam Chair, so then we're
locked into that.
Medicaid, um, general.
Restrictions and Roaming
criteria, all of that that's
associated with Medicaid. We
can't create our own.
Uh, because we are a state match
I think we could, um, you know,
if, if we found that.
Tons of people are falling off
of the Medicaid rolls because
of, I, I think what you're
getting at is like the federal
government stuff, right? Um, a
lot of people are falling off, a
lot of people are losing care
through the coverage through the
um.
Exchanges
Uh, um.
You know, it might be something
that we have to look at later.
Mm if we receive some sort of
guidance or I mean, we
If we're setting up the fund to
fill gaps, and also to address
those that are on that fine line
or that, you know, just a few.
Um, criteria that knocks them
out.
And if we realize based on how
the federal government is
moving, that we need to fill the
greater gaps, but and changing
that type of criteria in order
to keep them within the um
The coverage
Um, I'm wondering if we can make
recommendations and perhaps find
some way, maybe through that
federal government fund
committee that's working, that
could be one of those uh areas
that they could look at and make
recommendations perhaps on how
best we as policymakers can fill
the gaps, can break down the
barriers, uh, open up the
criteria because that's our
intent, which I believe in the
discussions that was part of our
intent, without realizing the
severity of
what we were facing at the
federal level.
So if you could, that would be
my recommendation I think it's
something we're thinking about
right now is,
you know, we are thinking about.
Coverage gloss from Medicaid,
that's, that's something that
we're definitely that's
something I would recommend.
Thank you. And and just as
Medicaid is a federal program.
We can't, we can't say, well,
you know, we're gonna do 1095%
of poverty, that that's all. So
if we decided to do something,
it would be state general funds,
it would not be, there's no way
we can massage the Medicaid, um.
That's what I'm referring to,
Madam Chair of the state, that
that would be, but there also is
the chip, Children's Health
insurance program and I'm not a,
I don't know a lot about that,
but that's another insurance
program for children and
And we, it's hard for us to plan
when we don't know what's gonna
happen on the federal level from
hour to hour, so we just have to
stay ready and uh
Fingers crossed. So with that,
I, 00, I'm sorry, signature.
It's OK, just to, I think that's
and I don't know how to turn it
off.
Sorry, Madam Chair, just to, I
think a question to ask.
Um, current, current numbers for
Medicaid is we're 814,000, so
there's about 8000 persons
who've dropped off.
Recently.
And the last numbers we have.
So, and I think we just
mentioned um are these persons,
where are they going?
Right, um, that's, that's a
great question. Uh, I've been
looking at this too, and Madam
Chair, sorry, uh.
You know, it's, it's been, I
mean, if you look at the, that
chart, um, since the time of the
pandemic, we've had that big
drop off. We haven't seen that
big of an increase.
Nearly as big of an increase on
the exchange and so the big
question has been where, where
have they gone? Have they gotten
jobs, maybe some of them, um,
but I, I don't know, and that's,
that's been a big question, um,
and I think we're gonna have to
start.
Answering that question as as
this uh federal reconciliation
thing kind of moves through.
No, and, and that's just a
question to ask, Madam Chair. I
mean, and again it goes back to
FQHCs and some others, um, maybe
asking some of them as we go
through looking at who's picking
up the slack.
Because if you're on Medicaid,
are you on that cliff?
Right, where you've made just a
few extra dollars that you don't
qualify, so that means you drop
off on that too.
I mean, there's there's all of
those, those different.
There's other consequences to,
uh, Madam Chair, Senator, you
know, um, as people come off,
you.
Also kind of reduce your risk
pool.
On the exchange and in Medicaid.
You're, you're also, um,
Probably gonna start seeing
increased uncomp, that's a real
concern too. So that's, it's,
it's all.
You know, these people don't
just go away, they, they still
need services, they still need
care, they end up at the
hospital or whatever and
they're, there's gonna probably
be No and Madam Chair, I mean,
yeah, this is a political
statement, but it sounds good
that numbers are dropping.
But we still have to figure out
how to take care of people and
children, and that's where you
have the homeless and all of the
others, all the other.
Uh, communities that need
support, so it may look good
right now on the numbers that oh
yeah, right on, but we're gonna
have to make up a difference
somewhere.
Thank you.
Thank you so much, Eric. Thank
you public for paying attention.
I'm wondering, it happened
yesterday, that side of the room
is empty. I don't, it does it
stink over there or I, I don't
know what's going on. We'll have
to investigate that, but thank
you all for your, for being
interested in this, and we will
see you in um Las Vegas next
month. So thank you. Happy
Fourth of July and safe travels.
We are in recess adjourned
whatever we are.
Uh
