little bit about your experience
of becoming a school
superintendent as you introduce
yourselves. Awesome. Yes, ma'am.
Uh, was, uh, started as a
science teacher, got in high
school.
Uh, right next door, moved into
the office as an assistant
principal, uh, worked a year at
a mid school as a principal and
then back to Goddard High School
for principal for, uh, 7 years
and then into the
superintendent's chair, uh,
currently, so, uh, like I said,
family came from a family of
educators and um that's what I
know, so I, you know, again, I
appreciate y'all's time in and,
and energy into this for us
today. Thank you.
Good afternoon, uh, Mr.
Chairman, and, uh, members of
the committee. I'm Sharon
Rowley. I am a first year
superintendent. I asked Jessica.
I didn't respond to her email at
first because I thought she made
a mistake, so I emailed her back
when she was persistent and
said, you do know I'm a first
year superintendent. So
superintendent at Portalla
schools, um, my experience is
I'm 34.5 years in education, um,
I started out not like most in
elementary.
education and then uh made the
jump, the dreaded jump to
secondary, um, because
apparently that's where you go
if you want to, uh, move up. So
I, I, I have about, I can't
remember 1415 years in
administration, um, literacy
and, and math are very important
to me and I always wanted to
bring that elementary view up to
secondary, uh, so it's, it's
been super fun, um.
I think that's it. I don't know
how I became a superintendent.
It was a surprise to me as much
as it was everyone else, so.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, my
name's Lee White. I am the
superintendent of schools in
Loving, and this is starting
year 28 for me in education.
Year 8 as a superintendent here
and there in loving.
I was, I started out my career
early on, um, in the, uh,
private industry sector and
decided that I needed to seek my
fame and fortune elsewhere, um,
and so I've, I went into
education.
Um, obviously the fortune hasn't
arrived yet, but uh I don't know
if the fame will ever arrive, so
therefore, um, I, I began my
career as a special education
teacher.
And, uh, did a lot of coaching,
multiple sports.
And then got into the
administration realm, and I was
blessed to have been able to
serve as a principal at every
level from elementary to middle
school to high school, as well
as an alternative school
principal, so.
Um, pleasure to be here and be
here with all of you today.
Great. Thank you all. So you can
see just from our sample of 3
here, the paths into
superintendencies can be pretty
varied, but it is one of the
most vital roles that we have in
our schools as part of the
systemic structure. So with
that, we'll move into our next
question. Um, the state has made
very significant investments in
structured literacy over the
past few years. This has
included required professional
learning via letters training,
additional funding, policy at
the state level and through PED.
Um, how has this effort
influenced liter?
the instruction in your district
and what additional supports or
policy levers could enhance
implementation and student
reading outcomes and we'll start
on the end down there with
Superintendent White.
Thank you for that question, um,
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, um, to me, statewide
literacy has been supported um
through the structured literacy
initially it was rolled out, um,
several years ago or a few years
ago as as a competitive grant,
that's how it first came out and
uh um so it was below some below
what's considered below the line
funding and when it was
initially rolled out, um, school
districts applied for that money
and some received it and
Hopefully I've been doing well
with, with where they are at
with that, um, also into this,
this piece came letters and
letters provides the uh.
History and the um information
behind the science of reading.
Um, from the, uh, National
Reading panel back in 2000 came
up with 5 areas of breeding and
that's what letters builds on.
It is a literacy piece and
training teachers on how to
understand the whys behind
literacy and why it's important,
why, why it needs to be, um,
enforced and, and.
Brought out um at every grade
level and so the the training
itself is some phenomenal
training. It's some great
pieces, some great instruction
comes with that.
However, there is an unexpected
costs to districts that came
that that did not come into the
funding, um, part of that came
behind because you now have to
get your staff trained in that
um it it was rolled out each
year. I believe we're into the
uh middle school area now with
that.
And so you have to have your,
your staff trained on that, um,
it's about 3 hours once a month,
they have to go through this
training and it takes 2 years to
go through and so in doing so,
teachers are receiving this
training, at least in our
district, out of contract time,
so we're now having to pay for
them.
To be um trained outside of the
contract hours and so that's
where that that unfunded piece
comes from is that it's costing
us as a district that you now
have to set aside funding for
that, um, we're lucky enough
that we, we're able to do that,
um, I believe in the science
behind it, but the out of out of
out of.
OK,
time costs, um, can be expensive
depending on the size of your
district.
And so it it it it can be a
burden to some districts,
especially if you're, you're
struggling, um, in your area,
the economy, etc. it can be
struggle and so um I do believe
that uh
All of our newer staff as well
as our especially our all
certified staff needs to receive
this kind of training. I think
it's important that they receive
that.
I would just think that would be
possibly better served if this
was provided through teacher
prep programs at the higher ed
level, um, through a CES
programming, something along
those lines that it would be
pushed toward towards that
because once we get them.
They now have a license that
says you're certified to teach.
But then we're telling them, no,
you're not, you have to get this
before you can really be
certified to teach. So.
That's just my take on it, so
possibly being tossed back.
Thank you, Superintendent and,
and Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, um, just so we're
all, you're going to hear a lot
more about literacy tomorrow,
but part of the changes that you
all just passed as a legislature
do include that educator
preparation program alignment
through House Bill 156, so I
just wanted to kind of add that
lens to this. That's a new
change, and so you'll hear more
about literacy tomorrow. Um,
we'll move to the middle,
Superintendent rally. My invite
was definitely not a mistake.
You have lots of experience in
education, even if the
superintendency is newer and so
we all know and value that, um,
how, so you talked a lot about
the implementation, how that
looks, but I'd love
Superintendent Riley if you
could speak to, how is it
influenced literacy instruction
in your district. What is it
actually looking like now that
this training is a part of it
and we're expecting that
elementary level educators have
received this. We are moving
into that secondary kind of
phase of implementation, but
what does it mean? What does it
look like? How is it changing
the student and?
future experience of teaching
literacy.
Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee, um, thank you, are
the way things look in Portalis
is a little bit different and um
some of you may know that I, I
did have some opposition to the
bill that came out earlier this
year and we were, we were pretty
vocal about it, um, I want to be
very clear that we support, um,
the structured literacy piece,
and we support that
implementation in Portalis.
That's, that's not an issue, um,
if I'm anything, uh, starting in
elementary, I
I, I think that the basic pieces
have to be there and I, I think
I see what you see that that is
lacking in some districts. Um,
we actually don't do the letters
program.
Which is interesting just
because uh Portalis has always
had its own program, and we are
able to, to waive that. Um, the,
the biggest piece for us is that
we and excuse me if I look at my
notes, but I don't want to miss
any part of this. Um, we're very
much in favor of this, but I,
I'm not in favor of throwing out
the instructional practices that
we already have and that are
evidence-based, um.
There's, uh, you know, there are
supportive, a variety of
theories that with the practices
that we currently use. And even
though we did show frustration
with that previous legislation,
I think it's important that
everyone know that we have to be
grounded in the evidence. Some
of the things that
I guess we'd use the word we
disproven, um, shouldn't be
censored from a teacher's tool
kit if unless they are
completely disproven, um,
professionals still need to make
decisions in the classroom,
especially when you see success
and our scores in Portalis are
not perfect in any way, but we
definitely see a higher growth
than the state average. The, the
biggest piece, and I'm not sure
I'll say it correctly, um, but
the, the biggest piece
that we saw in that legislation
that I, I want to be careful
that
We value the other pieces is
that it outlawed some tried and
true practices. It completely
outlawed them, which I, I've
never seen that in my entire
life of education that you would
take a strategy and say you
can't do that. And what it did
for us in Portalis because we
partner with Eastern New Mexico
University, and I don't, I don't
know, you know, how much you
know the history.
Of that, but, um, gao Pinel is
the foundation of Portalis and
why we have a strength in
literacy. Again, I don't, I
don't want to bloviate that.
It's, it's, it's not, um,
We're not knocking it out of the
park, but we are definitely
seeing better growth than the
state level and, and a lot of
other school districts and Ms.
Pennell is a piece of that, and
that's that balanced literacy
piece. And so,
I want to make sure you
understand that when we showed
opposition to that, it, it
wasn't because it's a bad thing.
It was because you were taking
away from us our ability to do
the things that we're working
for us. You were outlawing it,
and if I read that bill
correctly, it would actually
have taken, uh, like if Lee was
a student teacher for me, for
coming from Eastern New Mexico
University, he would not be
allowed to.
use our, uh,
Our basil or for a lack of
better words, are instructional
pieces.
Just because of what that bill
said, we would, we would be,
and, and I don't know what that
would do to our MOU with Eastern
and with all of the things that
we have in place and so I know
I'm not giving you the nitty
gritty that, that you asked for,
but I wanted, I wanted to make
sure that you understood that
we, we totally value that, um.
We need, as, as Lee said, we
need the time.
And the financial support to
implement this fully.
You know, so enough said about
about the balance literacy
versus structured literacy. I
don't think that should be a
fight. Um, I think we're all in
the same wagon trying to do the
same thing and just a slightly
different word or a slightly
different, um, approach
shouldn't be um outlawed, but I
do ask that we get the time and
the financial uh support to
implement. I
feel a little bit different
about um.
What you're calling letters
training versus, you know, what
we do, just and maybe that's my
elementary background. I feel
like it is so important, so, and
it needs to be part of every
district's structure to be an
elementary teacher of certain
ages, you need to have that
background. I've even had some
teachers kind of fuss with me
about, I'll give you a good
example. I had a teacher I had
to move, um, this year there was
a placement for her and they had
to move her up to 5th grade
while she is a
literacy teacher, and she has
all of this background and she
can teach anybody to read, she
said, What am I going to do up
there? I said, Oh, honey.
There's still kids in high
school that need to learn how to
read. It's not just, you know,
5th grade, definitely. So, um.
For me,
I thank you for having that
structured literacy piece. I
just ask that you find us the
time and the money because I see
the importance of it because I'm
right there with you on that,
but I also ask that you don't
knock us out with the pieces
that are already working like I
said, I, when I read the final
lines in the the original bill.
I could not believe that we were
gonna outlaw any other strategy.
Like I've never heard of that in
my life, and I say that so
respectfully because I respect
all of you, but I would ask that
you, uh, take a long look at
that. Like I said, 34.5 years, I
guess I
I got the, I was gonna say I I
angered the gods with my
comments, but, uh, uh, I'll,
I'll leave it at that. I've,
I've got my scores. I've got
some things, you know, that we
could look at, um, but time and
money, I, I wanna follow up with
what Lee said. That would be
very important. We want to
continue, uh, the literacy
piece. Just please give us a
tiny bit of wiggle room within
that and then give us the time
and the, and the finances to
support that.
Thank you.
Alright, thank you,
Superintendent, um, in the
interest of time, and we are
gonna talk a lot more about
literacy tomorrow and we can
kind of get into some of these
other components around what's
actually happening in
implementation and how that's
looking across the state, um,
but I'm gonna move us to our
next question, which is around
math, which we know is just as
important and nationally the
context is that we haven't
figured out the science of math
and exactly the same way that we
know we have around the science
of reading and so not just in
New Mexico, but nationally we're
kind of looking.
For what do we need to do about
math instruction to really
improve that basic early
numeracy and then it's very
sequential, right, in terms of
the knowledge building that
students need if they miss
components early on, so teacher
training is a part of this. What
are we going to do about math?
So with that, um, what are some
promising practices or obstacles
that you're encountering and
improving student math outcomes,
and what are your initial
thoughts on further guidance or
investments that could be
helpful to do what we need.
to do in math.
And I'll start with you, please.
Miss Sherman, members of the
committee, that's it's just that
question right there, just that,
OK, um.
We thought we'd so I was just
solve it right now and get it
over with. Um, I tell you that's
an interesting question.
Um, I was having a conversation
with my instructional leadership
team, probably about a year ago,
and I asked almost that exact
same question. We spent all this
time and all this money on our
reading, which we have to be
able to do that. Oh must hear me
say that at all, but we have, it
almost seems like we, we swing
so far, we'll swing this way and
then we'll swing back this way.
And we'll really focus all of
our attention here and all of
our attention there.
Um, you, you said something just
a second ago in the question
that I think can't be
overlooked, um, at all in this
state in specific I mean
specifically for us here in
Roswell, um, when you said
teacher training, um, we're
probably bringing in uh of our
new teachers this next year, we
will probably bring in probably
35 to 40% of individuals on alt
licenses that have never gone to
teach college and even those of
us that went through.
the educational programs and sit
there and what, what in the
world are we doing in this? This
is the, the, this, I'll never
use this, this is not beneficial
at all. We'll surprise. It is
beneficial. And so when you're
bringing in a group of
individuals and yes, they bring
a unique skill set from industry
or from, uh, whatever it is that
they're doing and their passion
that they're bringing, many of
them lack the basic
understandings of how and where
and why we were taught to teach
the way we
Um, that being said, um.
Our math is, is, is in a bad
spot. um, we, we can look at it
many different ways. I know one
of the key things for me is, is,
um, an alignment piece. It's,
it's hard for us whenever you
have a secondary group that's
teaching at a particular way and
you have an elementary group
that's going a different way and
that that's why it's key as a
district if you want any type of
sustainability, you have to get
uh a broad approach and that
they have to go together. They
have to work in cohesiveness
with
I think one of the, the
conversations earlier kind of
went a different direction with,
with algebra 2.
Um, the, the intent is not to to
the best of my knowledge, the
intent isn't to, to eliminate
the need for the higher problem
solving skills and the thinking
skills, it's to find a different
venue for those students to
demonstrate that that is there.
And when you're looking at, at
coming up with a different math
textbook or math curriculum, you
know, those things are
important, but the other thing
that I think is important too
is, is to judge up and say, OK,
what are we using as our
baseline standard for this as a
state, New Mexico, what are you
going to
use that says our kids know
math, what, what test are you
gonna use at each of the grade
levels and then acknowledge
that.
And let's go do it, figure out
what test you want to use and if
you know, for at the high school
level is at this, and we talked
about it during the break a
little bit that we have to be uh
cautious that we're not looking
to, to, to pigeonhole people
into one particular area, and,
and then you, you go and you're,
you're basically teaching to the
test, um, I think, again, one of
the, the key things that I've
seen on, on all of what we've
talked about and that we're
going to continue to talk about
is the sustainability piece and
the train.
peace. So if we're going to come
in and work with our teachers
and we're gonna ask them to do
things a different way. We have
to give them the time and the
ability to do it. And then as,
as building administrators and
district administrators, we have
to have the key pieces. We need
some training too as to, OK,
what are you looking for? You
know, instead of just a pass
fail rate.
Or a particular score, you know,
there, there are other measures
that you can look at that says
that this teacher and that this,
this program is working. Uh,
we're, we're fairly guilty just
like mini districts of, um, we
have a base curriculum, and we
can supplement with different
things, and then you run into
the risk of, um, well, this is
where, this is the latest
greatest piece right here at
this building, and it's working
great. So then all of a sudden
everybody runs that direction
and we've missed another group
of individuals that have the,
the
The duly elected authority and
that's the school boards to
select the curriculum or select
the textbooks via the the budget
approval process, um, to have
some say so in what you're
doing, um, so, you know, those,
some of those are, are my
Uh, things that I run into, um,
but I think if, if I had one to
hang on to, it would be, it
would be sustainability, uh,
across and then, and in
alignment, so.
Sorry, I was everywhere on that
question.
Thank you, Superintendent. I
will go down to Superintendent
White on the ends around what
are some promising practices
that you're seeing and improving
math outcomes, what would be
helpful as we try to figure out
the state policy direction on
math.
Thank you for that question, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee.
We were blessed, um.
A couple of years ago to partner
in a pilot project that CES is
put on and so we're part of a
pilot projects it's called the
six-year study and within that 6
year study we are actually in
the middle of, of math and
working on our math training and
math improvement and so what's
working and that what we see can
work. We're trying to model this
to where it can be rolled out.
Statewide, region-wide, whatever
the case may be, but to, to
actually delve into where we
Lacking in math and what can we
do to improve that and so
through this this study.
Um, each district that's part of
this, there's 13 of us, each of
us that are part of this are
assigned a coach and then you
have an entire group, um, that
comes in and they actually come
into your math classrooms and
they go through and they work
with your math teachers, they
coach them, they work with them,
they pull them out and then we
have um quarterly trainings for
our math teachers, and we at at
hosted sites and so our our
teachers are getting year round.
CD, um, through this study and
uh we we are starting to see a
change in the way we are looking
at our math because a lot of
times.
Um, you know, as was mentioned
earlier today that, you know,
you have a wide
Array of kids inability when
they come into a classroom in a
math classroom, you've got those
that don't have the ability, uh,
maybe lower elementary level in
a high school math class all the
way up to an advanced level and
in the same math class. So how
do you address that um through
proper, um, diversification and
breaking things up and chunking
things the way it needs to be
because math is truly
foundational.
Math is foundational and it
builds upon itself year after
year after year to get to a
point.
I'm a math person. I love
everything about math, but not
every kid loves math.
Not every teacher loves math.
They just don't. That's just
our, that's, that's human
nature, I think.
Um, I don't understand it, but
I, I think that the maths should
be understood by everybody, but
that's not a, it's not that way.
It doesn't work that way. But
we're finding that, that this
program is truly going to make
some inroads because we're
delving into the problem and the
deep-seated piece of where our
students starting, where are
they at currently, and how do we
move them from point A to point
B, and what is that process?
this whole process is working
for us.
And so we're hoping to be able
to roll this out and come back
to all of you, um, in the near
future to be able to say we now
have a program that has worked
in 13 different districts and
here's that program.
Here's the way it works. I think
that's the way it's gonna have
to be that you're gonna have to
start somewhere and see if
something works and give it the
time to make sure it works
because you don't wanna just, if
it didn't work this year, throw
it out and let's do something
different.
Because every time we sold
something out year after year
after year, you've never given
it time to see if it truly
works. So I want to see if this
truly works to see, see if it
makes sense long term.
Thank you, Superintendent, um,
and Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I just wanted to, you
all have been looking at math
for a couple of years, and so I
wanted to add a little bit of
context here. One of the things
that we learned last year
whenever we looked at that is
New Mexico's math scores, they
actually are increasing through
5th grade and then they're
beginning to drop once students
hit middle school and so in 5th
grade is where we actually see
the highest and whenever we
talked with national
researchers, it was really
interesting because a lot of
other states reached their peak
in 3rd grade and begin to drop,
but we're actually getting a
couple
4 years there
And so interesting for us to
kind of think about the targeted
component because I heard in
there some components around
quarterly training, coaches,
cohorts, and knowing what grades
you're actually looking at and
what courses you need to address
as part of this conversation,
and I add that context because
you've particularly got an
elementary school focused
superintendent rally, and so
what have you seen um around
improving student math outcomes,
promising practices, and what
would be helpful.
Thank you, Jessica, Mr. Chairman
and, and members, there's so
many things I could talk about
here, um, but I have a really
strange thought that I hope you
will entertain and I don't know
how you would ever do it, but,
um, you know, spending 8 years
away, I'm a portalis person.
I've been there for a long time,
even though I was.
You know, raised in Santa Fe,
um, I've been there since 1986.
I, I diverted it for 8 years to
Fort Sumner and um, being in a
small community, uh, something
that I was able to do
accidentally, you know, that
happens sometimes is, you know,
finding, uh, my programs were
very succinct because they were
small, where mask actually it
wasn't just math, it was every
subject. When I would have
students come in that were
outside of my OK 9th grade.
goes here, 10th grade goes here,
blah, blah, blah. I had grades 6
through 12, uh, keep in mind,
um, and I might have a student
come in from out of state or
somewhere else, and I would have
to put them and don't shoot
arrows at me, but I would have
to put them on an online
program. So I would do something
like a genuity, but I try to do
it differently and make sure
that there was a teacher there,
um.
Assigned to them and with them
to support them at all times. I
am very much a teacher person,
like teachers are better than
computers, right? Like we rock,
we run the world, we, we're
everything. However, every
single year in every single
subject, especially math, and
this was back in the EOC days,
right? And of course exams, you
guys remember those. So every
single time my little group of
um oddball kiddos.
I'd call it, kids from out of
state, lots of them were kids
that had failed, right? Or
something had happened, so they
were a tad bit of a motley crew.
My kiddos in the motley crew
group.
That were on the online program,
always, every single year scored
higher.
Than the kids with the rock star
teachers and let me tell you
what I believe it was year after
year after year watching this
and having to run any kind of a
credit recovery program myself.
I learned that as Lee said, I
mean, we know that math is one
on top of the other, on top of
the right, it is very orderly
English is cyclical.
Language arts is cyclical. It
goes around and around and it
works together. Math is not. And
so I always saw stronger scores
in those math kiddos, and you
know what my belief is, I think
one of the biggest problems we
have in math is attendance,
because I missed this lesson and
I missed this lesson and I miss
this lesson. So what I'm
suggesting to you is it's the
how.
Not the what and what you could
do about that, I do not know,
but the how would be if I keep
telling my teachers, if you
could find a way that every
single time a kid misses that
you make sure they get that
lesson, somehow.
I think we could
Shoot to the moon.
That's I have so many other
things to say, but I'm, I, I am
not a math person.
But I would almost say that
qualifies me more because I had
to climb and scrape and right
and figure out how to teach the
kiddos, and then I felt like
when I was teaching, I was
better at it because I knew what
they're struggles were. And I
cannot tell you what kids who
miss chunks, whether they're
having bad attendances or
whether they're having a family
issue, right?
It matters. So I, I would
suggest you to really think.
Out of the box on the how and
not the what.
Thank you, Superintendent. Lots
for us to do on math this year,
OK, uh, the next one I'm
actually just gonna ask one of
you this one just I'm looking at
my, my watch here, um, so with
changes to instructional time in
recent years, there's growing
interest in understanding not
just how much time students
spend at school, but how that
time is actually used, what is
the school day? What is the
school experience look like for
your students and for your
teachers, and so Superintendent
Luck, um, could you describe
just kind of your district's
general schedule. What are
students.
spending in core academics
versus kind of specials around
this is related to that
engagement and attendance
conversation, um, but also what
does teacher time look like?
Yes, ma'am. Thank you for the
question, uh, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, obviously
teachers could always use more
time to prep and to plan and to
train, uh, and that is the, the
$20 million question is how do
you pull more time out of it in
a day that already their demands
are so great.
Upon them, uh, currently right
now our high schools are on a
modified block schedule, which
means that we're going to see um
8 class 8 classes they have
every other day it's an odd day
and an even day, uh, and they
attend class every other day,
uh, to those classes, um, the
that would be my two,
traditional high schools, my
alternate schools, my UHS and
early college that you heard
about this morning, uh, they are
on a traditional block schedule
with 4 classes at a time-ish,
uh, the
to college, they're picking up
college classes as well, um, I'm
gonna stick primarily more with
my elementary and uh my med
school. It's a traditional
model, uh, 8 to 305-ish, uh,
give or take, um, and the, the
majority of that day is
scripted. Uh, we have 10 number
of minutes that we need to spend
in our reading, and then we have
10 number of minutes that we're
going to spend on math and the
rest of it gets chopped up, uh,
and again, it is not near enough
time to give the attention to
the histories and the sciences
and the specials.
Um,
it just,
And I don't, I don't like.
I don't like the term it, it's
the way it is because it's
always been the way it is, but
unfortunately right here, that's
one of the things that we're
running into.
And it, it is, um, it's
extremely pleasing when we see a
a curriculum or class, uh, or a
program that comes in and just
straight up demands of the time
because the kids are thriving
and we've noticed that in one of
our arts programs in our
elementary schools, uh, that it,
it has worked you saw some, some
uh artwork as you came in a
while ago and that entity has
stepped up and really just said
we're going to take more time
because you're going to give us
more time.
Uh, we've seen that a little bit
with some of the STEM, uh,
initiatives that we've had with
the, the Cal Ripken labs, uh,
and it's again when you, they,
they are all great pieces of the
puzzle, but when that, that, you
know, that puzzle is only so big
to begin with for, for something
to get more right now,
unfortunately, it feels like
something has to get less.
Um, we have said as the
superintendents group that the
better is better and that more
is not always better. And, um,
you know, we're, uh, here in
Rossville, we, we do receive the
additional funds with the K-12,
uh, money, uh, we're at 193
days, uh, and, uh, you know, we
have, we have seen some results,
uh, out of that. Do I think that
it is a 100% because of the
additional days, um, I don't
necessarily wish to go there. I
think I've got a phenomenal
staff and, um, I don't know that
given the same.
amount of opportunities at 183,
they wouldn't do the exact same
thing.
Um, but I think as far as, um,
you know, utilizing more time
for the teacher, the teachers to
have that, uh, but again, um,
You know, you, you, you still
want to make sure that you're
compensating them for the work
that they're doing and there
therein lies one of the biggest,
the biggest problems.
Thank you, Superintendent. Um,
this next one I'm also just
gonna ask one of you this, but
you might wanna all speak to it
later in Q and A, you're gonna,
I want to make sure our
lawmakers have plenty of time
with you all too, and then I
have one closing question for
all of you. Superintendent
White, um, so the legislature
updated the state equalization
guarantee, our state's public
school funding formula this past
session, making changes to the
state's at risk index, creating
a standalone factor for English
learners and changing the factor
for secondary students, your
middle and high school students.
How have these changes impacted
your district? Do you have any
initial ideas on the services,
programming or student supports,
your district might bolster um
or change as a result of those
funding changes.
Thank you for that question, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee.
Most of you know that are
sitting on this committee, um,
I've had conversations with you
over at risk.
Um, including, uh, this
committee itself is the
leadership committee of this,
this group.
Um, I've been looking at the
at-risk formula and how it has
affected districts throughout
the entire state for the last 11
years.
And uh this is.
As most superintendents in the
state will say that you know
more about at risk than anybody
I should ever know, I guess, and
they, they make fun of me
because I.
Constantly advocate for a change
to at risk this year
accomplished that.
Um, our district for 11 years in
a row continued to drop in
at-risk funding every year. It
was the only district in the
state of New Mexico that dropped
in at-risk funding every year
for 11 straight years.
Most districts did the up and
down, up and down hours dropped
continuously for 11 straight
years until this year.
And with the change we are now
able to implement some things
that are much needed in our
district. We continue to grow in
at-risk numbers, be it eel
population.
As well as special needs
population continues to increase
as well as those students who
are struggling, um, be it
economically or just struggling
in general, um, that don't seem
to fit in any box, but they're
just struggling academically.
And so this additional funding
for us.
Uh, means that we are now able
to add um support services for
our EL population at every level
will now have somebody in every
building that is an Eel support
specialist in every building.
We're adding additional
classroom teachers, um, to lower
our
class A or class loads so that
we don't have heavy class loads
anymore and so it's working for
us we're able to make that we
also have TSO endorsed teachers
at every grade level in every
school.
Um, that we have in our district
and so we, we, we pay for that
TSO endorsement in our district
so we pay for every teacher to
get TESOL endorsed in language
that's a language arts teacher
and so we pay for that and we
require them to get TSO endorsed
because we, we think it's
important that they have those
strategies and be able to do
that, um, for the students that
we're serving. We have about 20
to 21% Eel population in our
district. It just continues to
increase most of them are
monolinguals.
And so when they come in they're
struggling with that language
barrier, um, but you need to get
past that and have the
strategies to be able to do
that, so TSA's been able to help
get past that as well as being
able to add some additional um
FTEs to be able to support the
at-risk students were also
increasing our special education
staff members to be able to
support the added needs from
these these suits that we're
getting, we're getting more
severe and profound students.
Um, than we've ever had before
and so.
Um, this funding is, is, has
been a blessing for our district
and we're able to do that and
implement that and hopefully
we'll be able to see added
improvements for years to come.
Thank you.
Thank you, Superintendent.
Before I move to my last
question, Superintendentuck or
Superintendent Rally, any
burning thoughts you want to add
on the funding question.
She
Yeah, I saw a lot of notes being
taken, so I thought they, they
thought they might wanna jump in
on that one too.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, um,
we, we experienced a different,
um,
Outcome with that funding, and I
don't think it was intentional.
I do thank you for uh being
cognizant of those needs, um,
Portalis, uh, last at, at our
last funding date received
3,160,979, and this year we
received 2,768,598. We took a
$392,380 hit.
here's what I think is happening
and maybe it's just, um, in the
details.
There are some kids not being
identified and, and because it's
not like graduation cohorts, if
you're familiar with those, the
principles and, and, and all of
the people involved to get to
actually look at those numbers
and they can narrow that down to
names, and they can chase that
student down and find out the
truth and prove out what was
happening with that student.
We're not seeing any of this.
For example, a student that's
not claimed on taxes anywhere.
We're not seeing that at risk
amount. Um, there's the 3
indicators they have to have so
there's gaps in there somewhere,
and, and because of Portalis's
makeup and I don't know if it's
because, you know, we have two
pretty large children's homes,
um, there. I don't know if it's
that, but kids are not being
identified and, and lastly, my
biggest, uh, point besides the,
the money, I want to know who
those kids are so I can go find
them and give them the services
that they need.
It's very important to us there.
We talked and talked and talked
about that, so if there was a
way, and I, I tried to bring
this up before and I, I was
told, I think someone spoke
about it at Budget and I was
told that it was fixed, but, um,
there were some things that were
fixed, but we're still missing
kids somewhere, obviously, um,
so I, I'd ask that you look at
that and see if we can see those
numbers, find an alternate way
to show that, um, especially
with baby this Children home
population, things like that
where kids aren't
inclined.
Thank you.
OK. Superintendent luck is good
on that one, so I'll ask my
final question here, um, what
keeps you up at night as a
superintendent. You have a whole
audience of lawmakers here. Um,
what do you really want them to
understand about your work and
your community's needs and
Superintendent Lock we'll start
with you.
Yes, ma'am, uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, I, and
I was almost gonna say this a
second ago, but, um,
You have a group of
superintendents that are
committed to the job and they're
committed to the, to the craft.
They recognize the, the work
that goes in with, with the
legislators and the money that's
being poured into it by the
taxpayers and that there are
people that are working 2 and 3
jobs so that, that we can do
what we do. Um, and one of the
biggest things for me is to make
sure that, that we're doing what
we're supposed to be doing with
the money that's being given to
us.
Um, that we produce a product at
the end of the day that does not
have to rely on an alternate
display of competency to prove
that they're willing to, that
they should be walking the
stage.
To be able to go to our local,
uh, businesses and our, our
industry in town and say we've
produced a, uh, we've produced
somebody that you can take and
train up and make them, uh, a
good worker for your, your
business, um, to, to have
individuals that are, are sound
within the community that can
have their own businesses and
work in their own jobs and do
their own things, um, and, and
that's a tough one because when
you're, when your tasked with so
many different things all at
once, it does sometimes get a
little bit on the
overwhelming side.
And then you have a flood or you
have a, a wildfire, or you have
a tragedy in town where you lose
one of your 15 year olds or a
6-year-old or a 3-year-old or
one of your staff members.
And you, you, you know, that you
have to realize that all of
those things kind of come into,
they make up the whole that,
that you're working with and,
and that's, you know, you're
just, you're kind of trying to
outrun the fire on a lot of
days, uh, and a lot of days
you're just hoping that you can
survive the fire whenever
you're, whenever you're doing
that. Um, but I think as, as far
as where I'm at, uh, it's, it's
just recognizing that, uh, you
know, you're, you're not always
going to be perfect, pick your,
pick your 3 or 4 things that you
want to make sure that you're
that you're
ready to die for on those those
situations, uh, that you've got
a good, uh, working relationship
with your board and that you're
in tune with what they're
looking for. And that, um, you
know, that you're doing the will
of, of what the people have,
have got you in that job to do,
which is educate kids, take care
of the resources and the money
that they're giving you the
opportunity to work with and put
out a good product. So those
are, those would be my big
things.
Thank you. We'll just move down
the line, Superintendent Raley,
what keeps you up at night? What
do you want lawmakers to
understand about your role in
your work?
I don't know if you want to
understand it, um, but, uh, Mr.
Chairman and members of the
committee just, it's been a
tough year for us in Portalis
and as you may know, we've had,
uh, multiple deaths, children's
deaths, and it, it's been
difficult. I started my first
year out, um, this year, the
week before school starting with
a, a student shooting, um, and
we, we buried a uh D level
special ed student in his, uh,
he hadn't graduated, but the
family asked, I think this is
important for you to know, the
family.
that we borrow, uh, excuse me,
lend them a um graduation gown,
and he would have been a senior,
and we buried Damari, um, the
week before school started. It
just continued from there, um,
something I've never heard of in
my life, uh, a young lady hung
herself in our bathroom, and
we've been dealing with that.
That was March 26th, and was
deceased, um, my staff saw
things that we didn't sign up
for. And uh
Gave aid and and did all of the
things, uh, several days, not
even a week after that, um, we
lost another student to a car
accident, and most recently, um,
literally.
About a week and a half ago,
maybe 2 weeks ago, um, my
business manager's daughter, 15
years old, shot herself in the
head and killed herself. We've
had a tough year. Um.
There's multiple other things,
and I know that lots of
districts have had dealt with
those kind of things. It's
difficult for me to even talk
about.
Much less, you know, wow, have I
stayed up at night thinking,
what can I do, what can I do?
What can I do different? How can
I fix this? How can I, uh, help
the kiddos.
To know that life is more
important. How can I help the
parents to know how to work with
their kids, that's a piece
that's been really big in my
mind that we talk about schools,
schools, schools, and to me, I
want to talk about families,
families, families, and how we
can help these families and
it's, it's, it's really
impressed upon my heart,
bringing the families in and and
talking with them about how to
talk to their kids, teaching
them how to look at the self.
phones and thank you for what
you did on that teaching parents
that there's a secret some of
you probably don't know this,
you can look at your child's
phone and they don't look like
they have the app on there, but
they do, um, teaching them, so I
mean those things have have kept
me up at night, especially, you
know, with this being my first
year. And, and secondly, I would
just follow that besides, you
know, the tragedy of suicide and
and things like that and just uh
emotional health, just, you
know, overall.
school safety.
You know, and I know you've
looked at that and I know you've
fought for that, but I would ask
that you really fight that
fight. We are living in a world
that is very, very, very
different than any of us grew up
in, and, you know, I would
challenge you to go to each, you
know, to campuses just randomly
across the state, you're going
to find one that's completely
open. My campus when I was at
Fort Sumner completely open and
it they kind of want it to be
because, you know, we've fenced
part of it, but the community
uses that, right? That's really
the only
anything in the town, um, but
some schools that have found the
funds, they have fenced all
around and they have, um, you
know, metal detectors and they
and some don't, and it's
It's just become
A big enough thing that I think
we need to talk about that more
seriously. We live in a world
that has some bad things in it.
And here's what I want to say to
you. Our staff
Our good as gold.
And yes, we have all licensed
teachers, and yes, we have all
of that, but if you don't think.
Teachers have a heart forgets
kids, you go talk to those 3,
then eventually 4 and a student
who gave aid to our student who
hung herself in the bathroom.
You go talk to them, and guess
what? they didn't miss a day.
They didn't ask for comp time. I
kept trying to get them to go
home. They said, no, we're
worried about the other
students. We, we can't do that.
You talk about a heart of gold,
they have it. I want to protect
them, and I want to protect the
kids that are inside of that
building. I, I don't want to
have another incident, and so
please consider um safety,
safety items.
Thank you.
Thank you, Superintendent, and
my heart is with you and with
the portalis community. Thank
you for sharing that with us.
Um, Superintendent White.
Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, that's a hard one to
follow, so I will keep it brief,
um.
I too
I am concerned about.
Um
The fact that
All of us in this room.
are dedicated to ensuring that
our students in this state.
Receive the best possible
education.
They can so that they can be
successful in the in their next
step, be it college career, what
have you.
But oftentimes we find ourselves
discouraged because of some
metric.
That has been placed out there
and we're told we're not good
enough.
When you talk
And look at kids and you see
kids that have been told they're
not good enough.
Day after day after day from a
parent
From a teacher, from, uh, an
adult in their world.
When somebody's told that often
enough.
They begin to believe it after
time.
And so
My thing to, to all of you.
So that I, I
I hope that we can continue
having these conversations.
Because in my opinion it's this
committee that makes a
difference.
For our schools each, each and
every one of you are vested in
ensuring that our kids
Receive what they need to be to
be successful.
We're in it together.
We're all partners in this, and
we have to work together to come
up with solutions.
That will be successful.
I hope that we don't.
Try to do the one and done, the
year over year changes.
And not know whether something
worked or didn't work.
It takes time sometimes to
realize whether something works,
scientists don't give up on a,
on an experiment.
Because it failed the first
time.
They continue over and over and
over again.
Define that
That's what I think we have in
education as well. We need to
find out what is working, how is
it working and why is it working
there? Can it be replicated
somewhere else.
If it can't, what needs to be
tweaked on it to be replicated
somewhere else.
But I don't think any of us wake
up as educators thinking how can
we ruin a student's life today?
We don't think that way.
But I think it's important that
all of us in this room work
together.
For the common cause.
Because I know I've had a job
for the last 28 years.
Because of kids.
That's who I fight for.
The kids I work with.
And I think everybody else up
here does the same thing. I
think that's what we do.
So with that, I'll stand for any
questions.
OK, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, they're happy to
answer any questions that all of
you have.
Thank you committee members.
Representative Cullen
Thank you, Mr. Chair. um, I had
a question because, um, it's a
little bit of my background is a
real rearranged a school board
member for about 8 years, became
a master board member. So my
question is, I know that we've
had a history of high turnover
rate in superintendents, and can
you address that and why you
think that would be?
the.
Mr. Chairman
Representative McCullen.
I think it's, it's, it's a point
where
The training that has gone on in
our state regardless of where
that training has come from.
Um, the, the training that
school boards have, if you
remember back in 2003, House
Bill 212 changed.
The way school boards and
superintendents, their roles
changed, um, and so a lot of the
power got taken away from the
school board in certain areas
but given it back in other
areas.
And so a lot of times you have.
Sometimes they go in with an
agenda that they, they are, you
know, were elected by their
constituents to accomplish
something, um, whereas they get
in there and realize, oh well,
it doesn't always work that way.
I think it's, it's one of those
things where
You know, when you're looking
for a superintendent.
You know, it's difficult to not
only find teachers in this
state.
It's even more difficult to find
administrators and it's even
more difficult than that to find
superintendents or anybody
willing to take on that position
because of that turnover.
And so when you have that
consistent turnover, I think
that's caused some concern and I
don't know that it's just on
school boards and I don't know
that it's just on the
superintendents that have been
in those positions at that time,
I think it's a combination of
everything, but.
Most problems that I found in my
lifetime, come down to two
things.
And that is lack of
communication.
Or lack of training.
If you can solve both of those.
Maybe it's a training issue, be
it on the superintendent, be it
on the board or communication
issue between the two.
Um, sectors there.
Probably could change some of
that, but in my, in my
experience in my lifetime, it's,
it comes down to those two
areas.
Yes, ma'am, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Representative, I, I think
in addition to what Mr. White
said.
I mean, the three of us both
just sat here a second ago and,
and echoed what kept us up at
night and, and just like, like
as educators and you can say
things are so different for
teachers now. Well, just bring
it on up because it, it, it does
have a different feel for
everybody involved in that,
even, uh, uh,
PED, I mean, things are
different for them than it was
20 years ago just because it is
different and, you know, um,
when you start looking at the
way some of the things have
changed and you start to put,
you can only wear so much of
that in, in some for some people
it becomes too much.
And it doesn't take much after
that before they just kind of
say, you know what? I'm, I'm
pretty, pretty sure I'm good.
Uh, you generally don't have
superintendents that are in your
15 or 16. Most of them are, you
know, probably closer to the 23,
24, 25 years, and, and they have
that ability to, to step away
and, and do something a little
different, um, but, you know,
when you're, when you're dealing
with things and, and, and there
is no offseason for a
superintendent, uh, you know,
you still have staffing issues.
You still have, uh, issues in,
in emergencies and different
things like that that go on, so
I think, I think that could be.
part of it too is that, you
know, just like everything else
in the anxiety has ramped up in
other areas, I think that would
be another.
Another area that would be an
issue with the superintendents
as well.
Thank you
And I didn't know if you wanted
to add to that.
Yes, if you don't mind, uh,
Superintendent or excuse me, uh,
Representative Collin, um,
Superintendents, you know, I'm a
newbie, so I'm, it's very fresh
for me, you know, it is.
It is a very difficult job, very
stressful, and it, I, I don't
know how to express maybe to you
the, the weightiness of walking
into a parent's house.
Whose child just died in your
building?
Um
parents were divorced, so I had
to do it twice. First parents
saw me.
Even though I got a lot of
explicit words because of course
it's my fault.
Um, second parent wouldn't see
me.
Everything's actually turned out
better than expected, um, but
the things like that you're
carrying these families around
with you. And I, I heard, uh, an
administrator once say, and this
is so true.
Uh, that when dealing with your
children, it's like someone
stuck a wire up your nose and
just turned, scrambled your
brain.
Um, they're so intense and so
passionate, of course they are.
We all are too. Uh, we know how
that feels. So just the level of
what you're working with and the
weightiness of carrying these
families around through their
tragedies, through their
accolades through everything and
then, and then the stress of it.
I had written down previously,
um, we had some very good
questions and so I really
appreciate um. Hathaway that uh.
To me, some of it is the
disconnect. She had a question
on here for us about the
disconnect.
And I think sometimes what
happens is you're for me, trying
to learn all these jobs and
trying to do all the things, but
I'm constantly battling the
people who told me to do it.
I mean that respectfully. So
I'll, I'll give you a, a, a
simple tiny example. So, you
know, we have a funding formula,
right? We're supposed to be able
to use it, uh, Portalis had a
young man, a little young
elementary man, precious as he
can be, one, the bilingual
spelling bee for the state.
And we had to fight and fight
and fight like 5 or 6 emails.
Even though we sent to receive
the funds back on that trip,
even though we sent uh the link
to the state spelling bee
website.
And you could see his name and
he was from Portalis. That
wasn't good enough.
If you want your funding, you
need to send this.
And so as a newbie, and I mean
it so respectfully, but you guys
make the laws. You, you all work
hard to, to set the stage,
right?
But sometimes when we're trying
to get what we need.
We can't.
Or it's difficult at best, and
for me as a new person that that
and I, I don't want to point
fingers or place blame, but at
the same time.
I feel like you've asked me to
do this job. I would like to do
it for you.
But it's a, it's a big fight,
you know, I don't have time for
anything, like anything.
So I don't need to have to, you
know, continue to ask 5 times
whenever there's something
simple that we should be, um.
funded for and I just think that
um sometimes.
With State Department and things
like that, we, we get.
Not the most pleasant.
Feedback and I, I would, I would
like to see that change. You've
asked me to do the job. I want
to do the job, let me do the job
and so for me that's a big
piece. I, I also want to point
out I just finished with CES,
you talked about CES like, um,
I asked my board if I were to be
hired, I would want to do the
first year superintendent
association through CES, and I
did it.
And we were told that we were
the first, um, group ever versus
cohort that actually completed
without being fired.
So
Some of it isn't just what our
view of it is, it's that, um,
superintendents aren't, aren't
being.
Renewed a lot throughout the
state and that's a school board
issue and I don't, I don't have
anything to say about that.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair,
and I know that I have very
limited time, but so you can I
put you on the list if we have
time to ask you another
question. And, and yeah, if we
can kind of keep questions short
because uh we've got a number of
people who want to ask questions
and, and stuff, though, you
know, I don't want to cut off
great conversation either at the
bad part of this job is I have
to be the bad guy sometimes
soresentative Garrett.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank all
three of you and Superintendent
Raleigh, thank you for the
pregnant reminder that we can be
aces in literacy and math, but
if our kids even what appears
our best behaved kids are going
through trauma, then we have to
deal with that, uh, I'm very
practical questions in your
staffs, what's the preferred
assessment tool for literacy
progress in elementary school.
preferred note, it's preferred.
Oh
Go ahead.
Thank you for that question, Mr.
Chair. Representative Garrett.
For us, we tried to find
something out there and that was
that an interim piece that would
provide us information that
would be a K-12 solution because
I've been all over in my, my
tenure, I've been through
multiple different pieces and
nothing was really K-12 that
really seemed to to fit if you
added so many points to this,
then you knew they would
probably be in the proficient
range if you did this and they
might be there, um.
We have gone to um Renaissance
puts out a math and a um reading
portion piece that is their star
assessments.
And I've correlated that to, you
know, as long as you do anything
with fidelity, if you'll deal
with fidelity, um, we find that
it, it, it does correlate very
well to our proficiency levels,
um, for grades 3 through 8, it
doesn't correlate well at the
high school level because that
is the SAT and it doesn't
completely different pieces and
assessment, but it does
correlate very well with our 3rd
through 8th grade. It's within
10% points.
Of being accurate, so it's the
best tool we found, um, but I
can't emphasize enough that,
that, you know,
The the basic of instruction
becomes, becomes with reading
our math assessments have become
reading assessments if they
can't read the directions on
what or the question on what
it's asking it's gonna be
difficult to even answer that,
so they have to be able to read
at least at the grade level to
even understand how to begin.
And so I can't emphasize enough
that you have to have a quality
phonics program in place.
Moving forward so that those
kids get that phonics piece and
I was like, well, you know, what
about high school? I taught
special education for 8 years,
as I mentioned earlier, and my
first year that was back when
the high school competency exam
was in place, and that was the
piece that you had to pass.
I had 0% of my students pass the
reading portion, my first year
of teaching. I said, that's not
acceptable. It's not right.
And it's because they couldn't
read.
I went out and found a reading
program.
For those kids and was insistent
that they had to give up a
course on elective course and
come take a reading class with
me.
The next year and every year
thereafter I had 100% passing
rate on that assessment because
I taught phonics to high school
students.
So it can be done. You just have
to have the will to do it.
It's not for everybody, but you
just have to decide what, what
are your expectations?
And have high expectations. I
tell my staff.
Pick out the smartest student in
your class and you teach to that
level.
You bring everybody up. Will
they all get there? They might
not, but if you don't teach at a
high level.
You're never going to attain
that level.
That's, that's where I start
with, so thank you for the
question.
You know, I think the, the
biggest thing for us and, and
it's kind of sad that we can't
point to one right now that,
that the three of us can't say
this has been the biggest thing
that's been that's given us the
best results, uh, whether that's
iStation or DIBE or your Lexia
score, um, that's, that's
telling right there and in its
very own. I mean, we're, you're
gonna hear a little bit more
about that for us tomorrow and
with, with the, the entity that
we wish to use, but that's,
that's very telling that there's
not something that, and even you
as the committee.
that, that work with this.
All the time that y'all don't
jump right out and say, well,
what about this or what about
that? Um, but, you know, for,
for us, we're, we have doubled
in our station in, in, you know,
dibbles would be our two.
We're in the middle of switching
from, um, maps to iStation,
possibly. I, I'm confer. I,
there's not a great one. I
firmly believe in teacher,
individual, teacher.
Uh, assessments that they've
built, that they've created all
the way back to the star test
with Renaissance. I think what,
like what he said, whatever they
use, they need to grow, but
there is not a stand out.
In, in the field, in my opinion.
My literacy person, Sarah
Hunton, I'm sure you know her,
could probably give you a big
old list.
Thank you.
Thank you. That's all that's
right now.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Senator Thornton. I've got 3
more on the list before we get
to 2nd ones and we're getting up
towards time, so please keep,
you know, answers concise and
questions tight. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Um, I, I would like to
get an answer from each of, each
of you, um, so what impact
positive or negative, do you
guys expect, uh, integration of
artificial intelligence on the
education system, and I'm asking
this because I see this in the
next 4 to 5 years, is having a
tremendous societal impact.
Things are changing very rapidly
in this uh particular field.
So I'd like to hear from each of
you, uh, what role do you expect
AI will play in the future, uh,
and
In school in curriculum,
training, and, and have you
thought about it? And if not,
something we probably need to
start thinking about.
And how it can impact you, you
know, positive or negative
manner.
Thank you for the question, sir,
uh, Senator Thornton, Mr. Chair,
um,
It's here. We're like, um, and
it's gonna have an impact. It
already has had an impact. I
don't wish to say that that we
better embrace it or else, uh,
it's going to be difficult to
control because I think
sometimes that's one of the
things we want to do is with
something new as well, as long
as we can control it, everything
will be OK. Uh, this is moving
at speeds that we can't even
imagine right now. Uh, I think
it's turning and running from it
and, and shutting the door and
saying it doesn't exist and
therefore we're not going to
mess with it.
I don't think that does our kids
well because that's the world
that our kids are fixing to go
try to be successful in um uh
monitor it, use it, uh, don't
ever leave out the human
element, uh, and push forward.
We're trying to do the best to
get our kids ready to go and be
successful with it.
Thank you, Senator and, uh, Mr.
Chairman, uh, we're doing some
research right now on actually
policy for that, and we have
some training upcoming, um, it's
a school year starts, but in my
view, in several ways, it's
about time that we have
something like this because the
kids have passed us a long time
ago. You ever heard of picture
math? You just put your phone,
you open your, your camera and
it it gives you the answer and
they don't know how. So it's
very math is the hardest area,
you know, to read, you have to
be able to read.
And it's very easy to tell when
someone can't read. And again,
as I said, it's cyclical and you
can start anywhere and still
improve a child's reading. It's
literally the only thing you can
increase on your score by just
doing what it is you're supposed
to do. In math, you have to
learn, right? And in, in
reading, you can just read and
increase your score. Um, I think
it's about time. I'm, I'm trying
to pilot a couple of programs.
There's one called EDA that I'm
working with right now and what
it does for students, um, is it.
It is smart enough to take them
through a process. And so if all
three of us up here were on a
math program right now. It would
ask us a question and when I
didn't answer correctly, it was
smart enough to tell me back
hints.
Do this. Look at the formula. Do
you know the formula? If you
don't know the formula, here's
the formula. Now work the
problem and it, it will.
It's not the final answer, you
know, it eventually, I had a
teacher who tried it out and
said, well, it eventually got
mad and just gave me the answer,
which I knew it would do, and
kids will figure that out too.
However, that's further than
what we've had so far. So my
view of that is that kids have
already passed this and they
already know how to do, you
know, do you ever hand your
child or your grandchild your
phone and say, fix this, I don't
know how to do it. That, that's
where we are and so I, I think
we're gonna have to embrace that
piece, um,
I also
does an attendance piece where
it reaches out to parents and,
and, um, those things are
needed. We have programs that
reach out to parents when kids
are gone, but we need more
because if it, if you say, oh,
I'm so sorry. Johnny was absent
because of this. It'll tell you,
well, um.
Great, I didn't know he was at
the doctor. You can insert your
doctor's note here, and we've
had a huge increase in parent
responses and strangely, we have
found that parents will respond
to the bot, and they know it's a
bot. We've introduced it as a
bot, and they will respond and
be much more telling to the bot,
then they will, um, anyone else.
It's, it's crazy. So, um, that's
been good. It's also helped us.
They will also tell things they
wouldn't tell like, hey,
We, we weren't at school today
because um my dad beat my mom
and we had to go to so and so's
house. Then it alerts the
administration. This is a high
level issue you need to to look
at. We've had a huge increase in
those responses, which means
we're getting more information
again to me, the family piece.
So I think it's about time.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Senator
Thornton,
I think to me, um, it, it, it's
like anything else. We have to
understand that that we have to.
Continue
Emphasizing critical thinking
skills in our students and
making sure that they ask so
that they can ask those critical
questions and understand, um, if
you guys will remember back
prior to AI you'd put kids on to
a search engine and asked them
to research X.
I'd go into it and 90% of the
kids would go to the first.
Peace and that was the verified
research-based.
Peace and they verified it off
of that.
Um, AI has
Grown and will continue to grow
exponentially, um, over the
next.
couple of years
Um, and then some.
And I think with AI like
anything else that, that we have
to be cautious and thinking that
it is the end all to beat all
that it is the only research
piece out there and it's
verbatim that is the truth
that's the actual fact.
Um, because it's, it's, they are
all developed with algorithms
and with those algorithms
somebody had to program that.
Um, and those programs are
created, whether they think
begin to additionally think for
themselves and, and move on.
It's still created somehow, and
what's been in, you know, how
was it created? What was the
thought process behind some of
that stuff, so I think having
those thought processes and
pieces because it's out there.
We are behind the, behind
schedule with it. We have, we,
you know, will we ever catch up?
I don't know because it's
growing so fast and so it's
been.
I don't know that we can catch
up, but what we can do is
continue to express the need for
critical thinking and, and
understanding that having kids
ask the right questions, so when
you're saying kids are cheating
with using AI.
Have them present the material.
You can copy something.
I grew up without computers, but
we had encyclopedia Britannica,
and you could go and you could
still copy a verbatim out of
that. And if they had the
current version, then they'd
catch you, but if they didn't
have the current version or
didn't have the old version,
then they weren't going to catch
you cheating off of that. So I'm
just saying it can be done, but
you have to present it. If you
really want to know what
somebody knows, ask them to, to,
to present it.
It's a complete different spin
on the way you look at things,
be it math, be it English, be it
whatever.
presenting.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair.
I, my concern here is that I
think AI, um, with AI agents
coming out, uh, you can
basically pro they can program
themselves now and it's getting
to the point where you can, if
you ask the right prompt, you
can tell it to code something
for you. You can tell it to do
all kinds of things. And so, uh,
it's getting to the point where
we can actually probably code um
they could probably make AI
agent teachers not to replace
them but to help them in other
words, you could have several
teachers in the room who could
actually do customized learning
plans.
For each individual and it would
advance them at the level that
they're currently as opposed to
one individual doing that, you
could actually code that in and
the AI agent would be your, your
helper if you would. And so I
think there are opportunities
here as well to, to help the
educational system, but I also
think there's, it's fraught with
uh, with problems as well
because people aren't learning
and I don't have the critical
thinking. So it's something
we're gonna have to worry about
and figure out how we're gonna
have to handle that because it's
here and it's gonna continue to
grow. So thank you for that.
Mr. Chair, uh, senator, just
wanted as a reminder for the
whole committee and Tim is
actually out on a on a work trip
right now, but Tim B Bado is
leading a working group this
interim has invited
superintendents and other folks,
charter school leaders and other
education folks from around the
state to participate in this
working group about AI and what
are the opportunities? What are
some of the risks that they're
seeing already with students and
teacher use and and how does the
state approach either regulating
or, or, or how do we use it well
and so Tim and and he'll have a
report for you all.
Later in the cine
Thank you and I'm allowing extra
time because all three
answering, there's no way that
we could do that, so I'm not,
uh, and I appreciate people, uh.
Senator
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much. I think one of the most
important pieces of legislation
that we could ever present as
far as being able to help our
children.
is to mandate that their parents
get involved in their kids'
education.
You're talking about a family
unit of.
That's what gets the job done.
And unfortunately that that's
not possible. It, it breaks my
heart. My sister was an
educator. My grandmother was an
educator. They were both very
involved until the uh until both
of them retired.
Uh, my grandmother was selected
as Teacher of the Year one year.
But she credited it with the
principle of the school where
she taught and the
superintendent.
Because they knew that she was a
very fair person, but she wanted
every kid regardless of rice
color creed, whatever the case
may be, a good education.
But she wanted their parents at
school. She wanted to be able to
talk to them, to tell them what
was going on in their kid's life
because more often than not they
were unaware of some of the
problems they were facing.
So Mr. Chairman,
If we could do that, we would
have, we would be at the top of
the polls as far as what our
education system looks like in
my opinion.
Applaud each one of y'all for
taking on this role. It's not an
easy task. I know that. I'm part
of the.
Artesia public school system
and.
We are superintendent stayed in
place a long, long time because
they knew how important their
job was and how important it was
to keep our teachers motivated
and how important it was for
parents to be involved and that
makes all the difference in the
world.
That's all I have to say, Mister
Chairman. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Senator. Uh, senator
Stewart.
hotel.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Uh,
thanks all of you for the job
you're doing for wanting to
spend your days with children
and teachers, uh, that's who we
are up here either retired
teachers or wanna be teachers or
school board members, etc. so
um.
It is a hard job. I wanna, uh,
fix some things that have been
said though first before I get
to two very quick questions.
For the last 4 years, we have
put money specifically in the
budget.
For early literacy structured
literacy. It started off as 8
million, it's now 9 million.
It's in the SCG. You should be
getting that, uh, at the end of
my comments, I want to know if
you have an idea how you're
spending that.
Uh, secondly, if you're, if
you're not doing structured
literacy, what are you doing
about the 5 to 10% of your
student body that has dyslexia.
Uh, so I don't really like uh
standardized tests very much for
a whole variety of reasons, but
I will tell you that the, the
states are all subject to the
nape, the national assessment
of, of education progress. It's
the only really way that we can
compare the states, and I hate
it.
Um, Mississippi used to fight
with us over being 50th.
Mississippi is now 10th.
10th
Because a decade ago they
started structured literacy, and
they did it in every school, and
they went very systematically
and they trained all their
teachers and they trained their
administrators, and they also
had an incredible person running
the whole thing. She's like a
force unto herself. I got a
chance to hear her at a lunch,
um.
Doctor Mary Wright. So, um, just
phenomenal.
Uh, Louisiana also used to be
down with us. There were 49, we
are 50th. There are 35th for the
same reason. 40 states, 40
states are moving to structured
literacy.
Um
I suggest you listen to the
podcast, so a story.
Uh, it tells the story of what's
happened to the education
community over the last 6
decades where we were sold the
story about how kids learn to
read. That was false.
A fault narrative.
Based on just guessing what the
words were.
So
I, I, I hope we're not OK with a
40% proficiency rate.
That means out of every 100
kids, 60 of them can't read.
Superintendent White, you talked
about what you did in high
school.
We have to change what we're
doing in the schools or we will
not have children ready for the
world.
Like we don't now.
Um, it's not fair to them, you
talk about mental health. Uh,
think about it first, 2nd or 3rd
grader, and, and I tutored for 3
years. I know all these kids, I
say.
I just think there's some secret
code that the other kids know
and I don't, and that's right,
it's the alphabetic code, and we
need to explicitly and directly
and systematic and sequentially
teach that alphabetic code, a
kindergarten teacher needs to
know what she or he is
responsible for. The next
section is the first grade, and
that's what you learn when you
take letters and you commit
yourself to learning structured
literacy.
And the teachers who we've put
through this training, um, all
over the state for the most part
are saying it's the best
training they've ever had, and
then they say, why did, why
didn't I learn this in college.
So that's why we're trying to
get the colleges to get teachers
to understand how to teach every
child had to read, not the 25,
30 or 40% that we're reaching.
It's just not fair.
Uh, so we've put money in the
budget.
For your early literacy. We will
train every one of your teachers
at the elementary grade. Now
we're in middle school and all
of your administrators on
letters that's only the first.
It's thin we're, uh, how you
implement it in the classroom is
crucial. We are training
coaches, we will train your
coaches, Roswell.
Unbelievable. They have a
certified academic language
therapist, that's somebody who
could teach the letters class in
their 33 elementary schools that
I know of, Nancy Lopez one,
they're getting 70% of their
bilingual students proficient.
And uh that much too for kids
coming from poverty. I'm not
making this up.
Uh, so we have to all get on the
same page and I implore you to
use the money that we've
dedicated in the budget so that
we teach everybody how to read.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I was bugging you a little bit
because you said you were going
to get the questions and stuff,
so, OK, um, I had a couple of,
of questions uh and I'll try and
keep the question short and also
kind of responses short. We have
a huge turnover of
superintendents. How do we fix
that?
Remember once to, to start, what
would be your solution for why
do we have such a turnover? Yes.
Uh, that would be my response.
No, um.
You know, I think it, I, I think
it just takes the right person,
and I don't know how you create
that person, uh, you could say
the same thing for, for the
individuals setting amongst you,
uh, fewer and fewer people are
willing to do the job you're
doing.
Um, and it, there's not a
secret, there's not a secret
weapon that goes with that. You
can't, uh, make something not
happen or make something happen
that would encourage people to
do that, um, and, and this
sounds extremely.
Um, clicheish or for people that
are outside of the business,
the, the, there is a decent
salary in it. It's not the
money, um, and I think it's just
you're gonna have to really work
to try to create the environment
for the people, uh, to be able
to one.
Have the freedom to do their
jobs and the support to do their
job and then the ability to help
them correct whenever they don't
do their job, uh, and then hold
them accountable.
like
add to that or
I think for, for me, if you're
looking at that short and sweet
piece of that is.
We
In, in with every educator that
we have, um, there's a process
if they're not meeting the
standards that you expect or the
expectations that you have, um,
then you have to provide the,
you, you have to say, have you
provided the additional
training? Have we done what we
need to do? Have we, we get to a
point. Are we doing that with
our superintendents.
Is there, is there a mediation
point? Is there a middle person
to come in and be the, the
mediator between the board and
the superintendent to try to
find some common ground and
explain the lanes of which there
are.
Here's what the expectations are
for the superintendent. Here's
the expectations for what the
board is, how do we coexist
collectively because instead of
being.
A team of 5 and a team of 1, it
needs to be 1 team of 6.
Or 1 team of 7 if you're APS. I
apologize. It's.
It does have there is that there
is an outlier, so there are 2 or
3 outliers and stuff, but to me
that's where it's gonna have to
be because otherwise you're
going to continue to have that
turnover and it's never going to
get solved it's just gonna be
that rotating door, so it, it
needs to have some kind of um
training piece that kind of gets
to my second question is we
passed.
Legislation to require school
board training and things of
that sort are your boards going
to and getting that training is
that helpful? How does that need
to be modified so that your
boards know what their lane is.
Mr. Chairman, I, I
For us personally, um, I do have
board members that take
advantage that, that, of that
training. However, it's
difficult at times um to get to
those, those, uh, quarterly
trainings that are in
Albuquerque or Santa Fe, um,
simply because they have um.
careers outside of their board
role and responsibility and so.
In order to take care of that,
they're unable to make it, um,
and come on a Thursday and a
Friday because they are working
and can't get off, or they now
have to take vacation time
because their employer doesn't
recognize um civil service, um,
back to that and so they were
forced to take a vacation time
if there was a way to change
that and, and require companies
to say if they are an elected
official, can you provide that
civil service peace.
And accept that instead of
forcing them to use a vacation
time that they, they have earned
for other things. That's one
thing, but you know, there,
there's more training and
there's just as good a training
uh in other areas that needs to
be accepted, um, CES does a lot
of board training as well, um,
but it's not readily accepted,
it's not accepted. We did some
training with our board doing a
strategic planning. We spent 2
days with my entire board and
our community and had huge input
and huge gains to change.
to
readdress and relook at our
strategic planning, and we did
that that was not accepted and
was not approved as a, as, as
training. That was better
training that they received for
that, and they've received in
any of the other trainings that
they provided by the school
board association so I would say
open it up for the additional
training that's out there, you
know, they, they need training
on budgets, you know, or bonding
capacity. What is bonding, um,
training look, what does that
look like?
And so
Allowing that.
No, I think, I think he said it
all as far as and that last
piece right there is pretty huge
locally local hot topics that
could go a long way to prevent
some other issues uh that could
count for.
More training hours would be
huge.
Thank you. I mean we know
consistency in education matters
and when we've got such turnover
in superintendents and board
members that aren't getting the
training or don't know that
their role is not to run the
schools that causes conflict and
the kids suffer and their
education suffers. And so the
levers we as legislators have as
we pass laws, they have to have
teeth and a consequence,
otherwise, you know, there're a
memorial, and we control
budgets, uh, you know, and so.
Please, as you think about
things, help us on within those
two kind of main levers that
we've got, how can we help you
be successful with your kids and
with your other education
professionals with the kids
because I think that's what
we're all looking for. OK,
here's the really hard, tough
question. Others weren't going
to ask.
I'm really concerned as you see
around the country, the, the ICE
raids and other things that are
picking up parents.
Off with nothing. What are you
doing in your district to
protect your kids and your
families if ICE raids came and
showed up and took parents or
you know, uh, what protocols do
you all have?
We've had some uh concerns, uh,
Mr. Chairman, in our area, and I
think it just boils down to
policy. Uh, each district, uh,
we did a, a, a pretty complete
search because each district has
a different policy, um.
I think that's important for
each district to look at. I
don't know that people realize
that that they have to go by
their particular policy, but
I've, I've had some situations
unnecessarily a raid, um, but
we've, we've had, uh, Homeland
Security and the FBI. I've had
them in my office this year. And
so they were very respectful,
um, I think you have to train
and we did train our staff that
no one absolutely no one speaks
to them, they come to.
And uh then we'll go by policy
and honestly even uh some of the
steps that we've taken just to
ensure I've made them wait while
I, uh, discussed with counsel,
but it boils down to policy and
what could be done in one
district may not be able to be
done in another district, but
we've been successful, uh, with
our policy and protecting those
kiddos.
If I may, Senator, members of
the committee, my bigger problem
isn't that they did show up is
that people thought they showed
up.
Or that someone posted on social
media that they went into a
classroom and got a kid or that
because the game in fish
gentlemen that were there for a
guest presentation, you also
have to have green tops, green
bottoms that that must have been
that, and that was more of the,
the issue that we had, um, but
along the same lines, uh, you
know, is, um, you're gonna
follow the law, uh, but at the
same time, uh, a good working
relationship with individuals in
your community as well.
I, I concur with that as well,
you know, just having those open
communication with your local
law enforcement as well, um,
with, with your legal counsel,
um, and making sure that
everybody's on the same page and
that you are all following
policies.
Thank you. That's one of the
things that keeps me up at
night, is worrying about our
kids, uh, Representative Colin,
you kind of got shut off at the
beginning. Did you have another
question?
OK, well thank you and, and I
appreciate everybody's uh
understanding so we get
everybody and try and keep
somewhat on schedule and
everybody gets an opportunity,
so.
Any less comments.
Director or anything. Thank you
so much. This is always very
valuable. I did tell our
director, you know, as we move
forward, partly because we want
to hear from all three on each
topic that there's not enough
time and maybe we ought to
schedule a little extra time
when we have these because there
is such interest in, you know,
how you all are doing because
you are the educational leaders
in the schools, but also in the
communities. Thank you.
Thank you all. Have a quick
transition to the next one if
people need a quick bathroom
break and things, this would be
the appropriate time.
OK, we're gonna start again in
about 2 minutes. So if people
start finding their seats.
OK, if we can get everybody back
in their seats, then we can get
started, please. We're about 25
minutes behind schedule.
OK.
Dr. Hearn, you
Yes.
And, and welcome. I appreciate
you coming over from Portalis to
be with us today.
So I think we got most people's
attention if you'd start the
surgery. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, senators,
representatives, thank you for
this opportunity to be here.
Uh, John, thank you as well. um.
I'd like to start by sharing
that, uh, we currently have a
wonderful even outstanding, uh,
reading clinic, uh, in eastern
New Mexico University in process
right now and this morning, uh,
during the reading clinic, I was
in a meeting with our vice
president and the other deans
from around campus in our
building where the reading
clinic is being housed. Every
single one of our classrooms is
currently being used for the
reading clinic, uh, when we
started 4 years ago.
And I like to brag about this a
little bit. I think, uh, that
we, uh, had some influence on
the rest of the state beginning
reading clinics in different,
um, sites because we started
with some special grant monies
that we had, uh, 4 years ago,
and I think others started.
Uh, 2.
2 years ago I believe. Um,
anyways, we've grown from 13
participants to 80 participants
and uh the feeling, the vibe,
the positivity is, is off the
charts.
A parent's comment, how much
they appreciate how much the
children grow and improve and
how much the children are
excited to read and practice at
home and, uh, we've seen so much
growth and enthusiasm through
this process that we've begun to
seek and we feel that we have
acquired, uh, funding, uh, that
will support a year-round
reading center or literacy
center or clinic, we haven't yet
named what it will be.
Uh, that will not only help the
children in the area, but adults
and older children as well. So
we're extremely happy, pleased,
excited about the opportunities
that are in front of us with
that.
But I preface some of that with
uh while this reading clinic was
going on today.
Um
We had a storm surge of some
sort in the area that blew
something out of our entire
campus and the surrounding area,
and we had to evacuate children
and get them all home safely and
as I was preparing notes to
come, um, we had no electricity
or lighting to to work and the
process, so that's the end of my
presentation, right? No, I'm
just I'm, I'm kidding. So if
that helps us get on track with
time. I'm happy to.
Call it quits right there, um,
but what a, what an exciting and
uh uh time to be alive and apart
of, of educational opportunities
here in New Mexico. I know
things aren't perfect, but that
gives us opportunity for growth
and opportunity for change and,
and opportunity to help the
children in this area, which
we're extremely excited about at
Eastern New Mexico University.
Uh, we're also not only with the
reading clinic, reading center,
we're also, uh, excited to begin
studies and looking at, uh,
numeracy and opportunities to
grow in math in the same way
that the reading has grown in
our area and, uh, we haven't yet
finalized and perfected what
we're doing with reading, but we
want to begin with math as well
currently. Um,
I
would like to share with you,
we, we made a couple of hires
last year in our, um,
Department that's that we call
AFSK. Some people call it the
alphabet department because they
can't even remember those four
letters, uh, so I'm considering
putting them in letters training
as well, um.
But uh it's agriculture, food
science, and kinesiology is the
name of that department and so
we also have, uh, PE
developments. We train the PE
teachers out of that department.
We made two, fantastic hires,
uh, one of them a year ago and
one of them 2 years ago, and
they've begun a program in the
Portalix area and we hope to
expand it to other areas where
they help train not only the,
the children that need the help,
but adults that can
this, the children through
adaptive PE and uh we're seeing,
um, some growth in that area
where we're actually helping
children that did not get help
before, um, and weren't able to
participate at the level they
are now in PE and physical
activity. So I think that's a
tremendous bonus coming out of
eastern New Mexico now as well,
um.
We have a sports administration
program, career in tech
technology,
uh, uh, education program that
are all growing and
strengthening, uh, partly
because of the hires that we've
made and the enthusiasm that
comes from those professors, I
think, um, as much as we look at
programs sometimes, it, it also
takes people, it takes the right
people to make the change and to
bring the enthusiasm and
excitement, and I'm a strong
believer in that and finding the
right match for the right
position.
so that, so that it grows and
strengthens and, and that we
don't fizzle with enthusiasm and
we've been able to do that at
Eastern New Mexico over the past
5 years.
Um, in our educational studies
department we have, uh, early
childhood education. We have 2
certification areas in early
childhood, the birth to, uh,
kindergarten and then, uh, 3K
through 3rd grade. We also, uh,
certify and, uh, special
education and elementary
education. We have a blended
degree where special ed and
elementary education are a
combined degree, uh, we feel
that that helps, uh, train more
teachers in special education.
particularly at the elementary
level.
And then, of course, we have,
uh, different areas of secondary
education where we train and,
and, uh, certify, uh, recommend
for certification as well. We're
extremely, uh,
Pleased and even proud of our
counseling program at the
graduate level, and, um,
I'll
I'll express a little bit of
difficulty that we have right
now with counseling, and that's
finding, um, counselors with the
degree level and the experience
to you, you expressed some
concerns, most of you about
keeping people in superintendent
positions. Likewise, we're
struggling with a few of our
positions and, and one of them
is counseling, and I think it's
because they find other
opportunities that that pay a
little more, um, and that have
more
opportunities, um.
For them outside of uh a
university area, so we're, we're
struggling a little bit with
that. I'm not, not pleading for
anything other than, uh, if you
see and if you, uh, feel, uh,
Yeah
A path that we could take to
search to find, um, I'm open to,
to listen to that, um, anytime,
uh, because we've struggled with
that for over a year now to fill
a counseling position and we
feel if we fill that one
position, like I've mentioned a
few of these other areas that
are growing and strengthening,
um, that, that has potential to
grow what I say off the charts
where we just don't know how
fast and how much it'll grow,
but right now we're using, um.
34 times the number of adjuncts
that we have as full-time
professors on campus, so we need
that help there and counseling,
but it is a strong, good, uh,
program that helps the community
as well.
Um
And to tie in just a little bit
some of the concerns that you
had with, with maintaining uh
superintendents in their
positions. I, I think the future
will, will tell, but I think our
current residency program, which
is just beginning now residency
in educational leadership, I
think that'll help. I think
people will be more comfortable
moving into leadership
positions. They'll move into
those leadership positions,
understanding what it takes.
to be a leader in those
positions. I, I think often
we've had people move into some
leadership positions at at
school districts that didn't
have full understanding. It was
just exciting to have that title
maybe for some of them or have
the an increase in pay and this
deeper understanding experiences
at the administration levels,
plural, will, will give them a
sense of, of what it takes, and
there'll be more understanding,
more buy-in, more experience as
they start.
Rather than, uh, panic, and I
didn't know and nobody told me
feeling so we have great hope
that that these uh residency,
um, leadership experiences which
start, um,
In the upcoming semester will
help with that as well.
Uh,
we're also proud as I'm sure as,
as all deans are across the
state of their internship
placements and supervision in
the schools were excited for
those opportunities, and I, I
would like to share with you
too, having heard and and our
family lives in Portales so we
know some of the, the trauma and
difficulties which have taken
place there recently, uh, our
family, uh, 9 years ago as the
older children began to, to
leave home, uh, my wife and I.
Um, noticed that we had extra
rooms in our house that weren't
there before, and we began to
foster children in our home, uh,
9 years ago, and we've adopted,
uh, we adopted two of the boys
that we fostered, and they both
come from
Severe trauma and uh starvation
and uh abandonment and, uh,
attachment disorders and the
list goes on, um, and at that
point, my wife and I began to
study voraciously, uh, how to
help children of trauma and, uh,
my wife is a certified
counselor, certified school
counselor, and, um, has a
master's degree in adolescent
psychology as well, which helps.
Uh, me focus on what I need to
study and, uh, in the area of
children of trauma, and last
year,
Um, partly because of the
studies, my wife and I have,
have been involved with as well
as what we've noticed in our
communities. We had a special
professional development, um,
conference for 3 days.
That we had, uh, some grant
funding for and we invited, uh,
close to 100 teachers from the
surrounding areas and school
leaders to come join us, uh,
Heather Forbes, some of you may
have, uh, heard her name. She's
one of the national leaders in
publishing, researching, and,
and presenting on the topic of
children of trauma, uh, she came
with us for 2 days.
And presented as did some other
locals who had experiences with,
uh, teaching children of trauma
and how to include training for
teachers in the areas of trauma
because as I'm sure you're all
aware, uh, teaching children of
trauma is different, and they
have a different understanding,
and sometimes when we think a
child is a problem, it's simply
a child that has a different way
of learning and uh we as
teachers, we as teachers of
teachers.
need to understand that so that
we can help those children and
not send them to what we call
time out or school suspension or
special programs, often they're
very gifted, as are our
children, uh, but they don't
have the, the skills to,
uh,
without wasting too much time to
just sit still and pay
attention. They need other
opportunities infused with the
the educational so uh.
I, I mention all that to say
we've begun the process to
redesign our curriculum to
include, uh, trauma training in
our curriculum, and we hope to
have a separate class soon, um,
on trauma itself, but for now
we're infusing trauma training
into the classes, uh, that we
teach on our campus so that
teachers have an understanding
of that. I don't have any
specific numbers for you, but I
would guess from our own
experiences and, uh, paying
attention and visiting the
schools.
And what we see on our own
campus somewhere between 50 to
70, possibly even as high as 80%
of our children in the schools
come from some trauma background
and for some, uh, what we
consider trauma is not what
others consider trauma, and
that's one of the things about
trauma and if I haven't said the
word trauma enough, um.
Let me know and I'll, I'll.
Include it one more time, but um
I don't think we can do enough
with that.
Because it's, it's, it's, and
it's only increasing.
And I'll leave, leave that at
that, um.
And uh
Maybe I'm pleased to say this. I
don't know, but uh
Just to, uh, two weeks ago, I
believe I got my faculty
together, uh, for 3 days
training to, to look at our
curriculum in, in another
viewpoint as well.
You may know that our local, uh,
school district Portales voted
for a 4 day a week, uh, schools
and, uh, uh, they'll be
attending on just 4 days a week
and so we have to make some
adjustments at the university.
We place students in the schools
5 days a week. They're there for
their own training as well as to
help and serve in the schools
and so, uh, our classes now need
to be taught on a little bit
different schedule and our
observations need to be.
Take place a little bit
differently and, uh, our
internships will be different,
the hours that they need to
certify and be recommended for
certification.
Uh
The hours don't change, but our
schedule has to change. And so
we got together for 3 days and
uh um just pleased to say that
my faculty was willing to do
that. It's not easy to do that,
to sit down and it's not as easy
as just saying, OK, you'll teach
this day and you'll teach that
day. We have to make all kinds
of changes and faculty have to
be willing to teach, uh, a
little bit differently as well
as a little bit different
schedule, and they're willing to
do it. They're willing to step
up and, and do what's needed to
make sure that we continue to
serve the schools in
The area and the, the, uh,
children in the area as well.
Um, I'd like to address for just
a second, uh, didn't have it in
my, uh, notes, but listening, I
thought I'd address just for a
second our, um,
Progress with AI. We too are
very concerned about AI for
ourselves as well as for our
future teachers that are going
into the schools and there was a
panic in the streets feeling
early and then we thought and
reminded each other of all the
changes that have taken place in
society over the years, the
simple change that was very
complicated at the time with
calculators. What do you do now?
Children can use a calculator
that none of them will know how
to add and subtract and then we
calmed ourselves down and we
said we can do this. We can help
with this, and we thought we
were getting out in front of it,
but there's, there's no getting
out in front of something like
this, no matter what we do,
we're a little bit behind, um,
but we're, we're putting some
processes in place. We have a
couple of committees on campus
that are looking at best
practices and researching what
others are doing across the
nation and uh we want to be
supportive because as you heard
and you know, it's here, uh, so
we want to be supportive, but we
also want to be appropriately
supportive, so we're not, um,
Um
Uh, loosely without
understanding using AI we want
our students to be educated with
artificial intelligence and use
it appropriately and, and
research with it appropriately,
but also use their own thoughts
and their own words, and so
we're calculating how to put
that into our syllabi and how to
use, um, um, AI and, uh,
encourage appropriate use with
AI and, and uh I just want you
all to know that we as well are
concerned and also, um, excited.
because in a way it's an
opportunity to do something
better and do something more,
but we have to be careful with
it because it also could, uh,
could stymie some of the, the
education.
Uh, processes, uh.
We're in the process, as are a
few other institutions around
the state looking at uh NACy
accreditation for early
childhood, and I've got a
wonderful, uh, director of early
childhood, Doctor Tsitsi
Nayaondo, and uh we just hired
another professor as of
yesterday in early childhood
area, so that doubles our
faculty there, which will help a
lot on our campus and, uh, that
speaks to me that speaks and
hopefully to you as well to the
quality of education that we're
producing around the state.
that we have not only, uh, us at
Eastern New Mexico University,
but others that are, uh, looking
at seriously and we'll have
visits in the next year by the
NACy accreditation body, which
will have us nationally
certified as, uh, early
childhood institutions around
the state.
And we as well at Eastern New
Mexico University are we have
our state visit in the fall and
then uh very soon after, we'll
schedule a national visit to, to
have our entire college of
education and technology, uh,
accredited at the national level
as well and uh.
Obviously we'll be, we'll be
pleased, uh, to be done with
that.
Um, but it, I remind the faculty
that it's an exciting
opportunity to show off. It's a
little bit daunting to have
people on campus, um.
Observing and
Going over all of our syllabi
and coursework and, and what we
present and how we present and
our schedules and so on, but
we're doing good things and so
are other institutions across
the state, and yes, it's a
little bit nerve-wracking, but
it's also a great opportunity to
show the good things that we're
doing. We don't look at it as a
as a as a punishment or this is
what you're doing wrong, we look
at it as an opportunity to show
all the great things that we're
doing and so we welcome those
bodies on our campus when they
come.
Um, I also have opportunity to
serve as co-chair of the deans
and Directors Association for
the state, um, I'm not sure why
my uh fellow deans voted me into
that position. It might be
because I told them to vote for
anybody but me, and so they
decided to vote me in there, but
I, I served, uh, as a co-chair
of that association and, and I'm
pleased to, to remind you, to
let you know, I hope you already
feel this, that as deans around
the state. We, we work very
closely with the, the New
Mexico, um, uh, public education
department. We have a very good
close working relationship and
uh look forward each month to
being with, uh, all of our
constituents around the state
and share with them and they
share with us and we collaborate
and work together. And, uh,
it's, it's been a good
opportunity for me and I think
for all the deans around the
state to grow and strengthen
together in those areas and uh.
Because it came up earlier, I'll
let you know that all of our
reading faculty, our letters
trained and and use uh
structured literacy, but we
also, um, um, use a few other,
uh, strategies as well to make
sure that, uh, children and
teachers have opportunity to, to
learn in the best way possible
for, for them.
Um
And
I think time's up.
Thank you, Doctor Hearn Hearn,
uh, questions from the
committee.
Representative Garrett.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
so much and I, I think we all
appreciate your humor as well.
Um
What
Changes do you think need to be
made.
As as the deans meet when I
went, for example, when I was
trained at UNM and one of the
first residency programs, we had
one very poor mathematics class
to prepare us to teach.
As you gather what is the
consensus about.
What has to be changed or added
to teacher preparation programs.
Well, one of the things we're
looking at right now, thank you
for that question,
Representative, and, and Mr.
Chair, um.
And uh and thank you for, for
recognizing the, the humor as
well. That's actually an area of
research, and I don't mean for
it to come across at times, but
I published a book called, um,
Humor in School is Serious
Business, and I think if we
looked at humor, I'm taking your
question in a different
direction now, aren't I? But if
we look at humor seriously, I
think we could enjoy school a
little more. That's sort of my
focus is if students would enjoy
school, more students would stay
in school. We'd have fewer
problems, fewer discipline
problems, and it doesn't take
but 1 or 2 enjoyable slash funny
comments in a 30 to 50 minute
time frame, um.
Check out my book and you'll see
the reason anyways.
You don't, you don't need to
bore yourself with that stuff.
Um, but we're, we're looking at,
uh, uh collaborating together as
deans to make sure that our
curriculum, um, easily transfers
from one university to the
other, partly to make sure that
we don't have these difficulties
that I've seen more in other
states than I've seen here. I, I
know our deans and others may
feel like it's problematic here,
but I've seen deeper, uh,
problems in other states than we
have here. It seems fairly
simple to me here, but we're
still wanting to, wanting it to
be bad.
so that when students transfer
from one university to the
other, that it's a simple
transfer that they don't lose
credits.
We don't want our students to
delay their graduation, delay
their professional
opportunities. We want them to
have smooth transitions from one
university to another uh whether
it's uh a degree at any level,
to tell you the truth. And so
that's one of the things that
we're working on together and
we've been working on that for a
while. It, it, um, I wish I had
a better answer to make it
easier for some reason, it's
been a little bit of a struggle
for us in the, uh, to, to get
that, uh, smoothed out and
corrected. Um,
I'd say that's the biggest thing
that we're working on together
right now.
Yeah
And uh we've been looking
recently at at funding as well,
how much, um, professors are
making versus teachers because
we are struggling just just a
tiny bit I'll say where I
mentioned the counseling area,
but other areas are struggling
just a tiny bit too. I would
never want anybody to make less
money, but the fact that
teachers are now making more
money. It's, it's almost a tiny
bit comical that now we're
struggling to hire at the
university level in education
because they can, they can make
more money teaching.
in the public schools than they
can with us and uh some of us
still have that public school
teacher at heart and every once
in a while, some of my faculty
will say, maybe I'll go back to
and I don't want to lose those
good faculties. So that's a tiny
thing that we're struggling with
and we're looking at is Dean's
just for now, just gathering
numbers with with no great
purpose other than gathering
numbers and looking at and in
hopes of, of supporting one
another and, and maybe the state
supporting us with that as well.
So thank you for that question.
through
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Doctor Hearn.
Yes, ma'am. Thank you.
kind of a name is that? It's
German and English both. All
right.
So, uh,
I would like you to, uh, comment
a little bit about what changes
you're making with the recent
passage of the requirement that
our educator preparation
programs have got to teach
structured literacy when they're
teaching reading.
So if you could talk about what
coursework you're offering, how
the syllabi is changing. I, I, I
took a little bit of pause when
you said, oh, and we're teaching
other things too, and I don't
know what that is. It might be
those things that aren't
working, um, just throwing that
out to you.
Well, we, we have made sure that
all of our syllabi that include
reading have uh structured
literacy and um
Uh, science of reading in, and
that all of our teachers of
reading are trained in those
areas, and yes, they're required
to teach that and they do teach
those areas, um.
So that's one of the changes
that we've made.
Mr. Chairman, what, what is the
coursework look like? I mean, if
I don't think you've been doing
it all along now, of course,
you're gonna be required to do
it. I, I know that Eastern has
some good professors in the
subject I've seen that, uh,
you've got others that that
don't teach that way. So I'm
asking about changes that you
might feel you need to do to
make sure that every one of
those reading courses is.
structured literacy.
Well, um, I wish I had a
stronger answer for you, uh,
Senator Stewart, yeah, um, my,
um, associate dean is overseeing
that area because it's more
closely related to what she
does, so I, I'll apologize and
say I'm not prepared to answer
that fully, and I don't want to
lead us down a path that I, I
don't have a strong answer for.
I do think Mr. Chairman, that
that is going to be the topic of
your dean's meetings from here
on out because all of them now
have to change their coursework
and they're syllabi, so anyway,
thank you for what you're doing
thank you.
Anyone else questions.
I have a couple of questions.
In your programs, do you have a
program to train CTE teachers on
the pedagogy of teaching their
trade skill.
So, thank you, uh, Mr. Chair,
for that question, um, we, we
do, but I, I think it could be
stronger, and I appreciate that
question and and before I, um,
I'm, I'm gonna actually make a
note right now because I want to
look at that and, and uh have
our, our faculty in that area,
look at that more strongly and,
and get a stronger, uh,
understanding of it. I
appreciate that. Yeah, we
recently hired a new faculty
member in the the CTE, um.
And uh
Yeah, thank you and thank you
and and I don't mean the
question to be a criticism, but
as we're working towards
stronger CTE programs at the
high school, one of the biggest
problems we have people who
understand how to be a welder,
but that's very different from
being a good welding teacher,
you know, and how do they get
the pedagogy about, you know,
sequencing and reteaching and
all of those kinds of things,
and I think all of our teacher
prep programs
don't do very much of that and
as we're trying to move more of
our
uh high school faculty into
being CTE teachers, there's a
different pedagogy that goes
with it, so I appreciate you
taking a note to look at as
something to start building
those programs out and I've
underlined it twice, so I'll,
yeah, thank you, thank you, um,
another question, what's
happening with your college of
education teacher preparation
enrollment numbers. Are they
going up? Are they going down,
staying pretty steady. What's
happened, you know, are, what
are the trends on that?
We are so excited that they're
going, they're going up. I've
noticed a, a nationwide trend of
them going down at an eastern,
uh, they're going up. Um, we,
uh, I wasn't able to print the
information out because all our
computers were down and, and
our um our uh technology people
waited till today. They told me
they would send it over today
and then of course, as I was
getting ready to come,
everything was shut down. But
anyways, uh, the, the numbers
that I was able to acquire are
uh
We've got, um,
Over 1500 students in education
and that doesn't even include
the alt licensure program that
we have going on as well and
not, but a couple of years ago,
we were around 1200 students,
and I've noticed others the
trend is pretty much the
opposite if it was 1500, they've
gone down to 1200, so there's
that sort of secret, um, I
don't, maybe I should announce
it more, but there's sort of
that hidden, uh, if I say too
much, maybe, maybe it, it takes
a different, I don't know,
there.
just that, that feeling of I
don't want to, to brag too much
and then it takes a different
turn, but we're extremely
pleased and proud and every time
the numbers come in, even on a
weekly or monthly basis, they're
a little bit up, a little bit
up, a little bit up, so we're
very, very pleased and proud of
that, and that's why we've been
able to make, uh, one or two of
our recent hires at the
university. Thank you and I
appreciate it and you know, I
hear the same thing at the other
schools in New Mexico, lots of
it, I think, is education is
starting to be seen as a
profession.
that has appropriate salaries
and the prestige is starting to,
to come back. And so I'm hopeful
that as those students move
through that we'll start seeing
them, you know, in our
classrooms more that kind of
brings the next one you
mentioned a little bit the
license program. I'm always very
concerned because they don't
have the pedagogy and some of
the other. If we have fully
trained teachers, those programs
drop off, but if you could very
briefly one minute or so about
the license program.
Thank you. First, I want, I do
want to say, uh, thank you, Mr.
Chair and all of you, uh, for
helping support teachers in the
way that you do, and that has
helped tremendously. It, it, I
know it helps the schools a lot
and it helps the individuals
that are making those salaries,
but in it in turn helps us as
well and makes our classrooms
more exciting, more full, and,
uh, um, helps grow the
profession for all of us, which
in turn,
uh, it helps the children, which
is what we're all trying to do.
And as far as
the alt licensure, um, we're
concerned about it too. We, we
love the alt licensure program
because it, it allows it up, uh,
gives opportunity for people to
be a teacher that probably
wouldn't be a teacher otherwise.
It puts people in the classroom
that work, where classrooms
wouldn't have teachers
otherwise, but we're concerned
for the exact same reason that
it doesn't have as rigid
requirements. It doesn't have as
lengthy of a program and, and so
we have those.
concerns as well, but, um, we do
all that we can to inspire, to
include as much as we can in the
short time that we get. We often
have discussions about it, not
only on our campus, but at the
deans and directors level as
well. We discuss how we can
improve, how we can, can better
support and, and, uh, what are
we doing in those classes to do
a little more, a little better
and, and how can we get them in
the classrooms a little more
with a little more specific, um,
activity that.
is um conducive to what they'll
see and experience in, in the
real life classroom because
sometimes maybe it's the same
sense that we get from the
superintendents that haven't had
the experience of being a, a
superintendent or shadowing a
superintendent, uh, and so they
don't last as long and same
thing with the teacher if they
don't have as lengthy of an
experience and the training,
then it wasn't quite what they
expected and it wasn't quite as
glorious and magnificent and
And people weren't chanting
their names in the halls as they
as they finish the class. We
would love, each of us would
love to finish our class to an
applause. I, I told my students,
I say, if I do something great,
does your teacher applaud me and
if you don't like what I do, go
ahead and boo. You can boo me
boo. And so then I give the
first assignment and you hear
the boo boo, uh, and I said, all
right, I get it, I get it, but
I, I want our teachers to be
applauded and feel good and, and
likewise, maybe a, a
superintendent every once in a
while should be applauded and uh
and uh.
a principle for doing these good
things that they do.
And if we can bring that
enthusiasm into every aspect of
it, whether it's alt licensure
or any part of teaching. I think
people not only, uh,
Be, be, uh, satisfied but more
happy with their positions as
well.
Thank you. And then, uh, two
very short quick questions in
your programs, both the admin
level and the basic teacher do
you teach and talk about
community schools. Do you teach
and talk about ACEs, adverse
childhood experiences, um, and I
asked that I have a friend just
went through a PhD program in
New Mexico State. They were
never even mentioned in any of
his classes.
Um, yes, we do, and I'll make
sure that we do, uh, maybe a
little more than we do, because
I'm not sure how much of it they
do. It, it's hard. I wish as
Dean, I could get in every class
all the time. Sometimes when I'm
walking to a meeting, I step
into classrooms and make sure,
uh, good fun things are
happening and that there's
energy in that classroom and
then there's days and weeks when
I don't get to uh time to go
into any classroom, but, but I
want to make a point of our, our
evening classes and maybe even
pop.
online
Uh, with some of our online
courses and programs to see that
we're doing that. Thanks for
that reminder, yes. uh, thank
you, because, you know, I don't
know how you can be a teacher
today if you haven't heard about
and understand adverse childhood
experiences that our kids come
with and community schools that
are building the wrap around
services around kids, uh, with
the, the problems and trauma
that we've got within
communities. So thank you. Any
other questions, other people.
I saw it was time and it's like
this is the last one, we're
done, yes.
Thank you all. Um.
And, and thank you, Doctor Hen
very much appreciating what
you're doing over at Eastern,
uh, our
Our 4 year schools as opposed to
the, the major universities, the
research universities.
have gotten better marks
typically on teaching of reading
and other things and seemed to
be a little more nimble at
changing with the times then.
Then the universities are, and
so, you know, I, I hope that
that continues and continue to,
to lead the faculty towards
doing what's best for our kids
all the time. So thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Anything
else, director.
Is it
Here on site. So yes, if you
look tomorrow, the Roswell
Summer Reading Program site
visit that will be here. You
don't have to go somewhere else
and tomorrow evening again, we
do have a reception, so you'll
want to plan for, for that
tomorrow evening. If there isn't
anything else then uh we are in
recess until 9 o'clock tomorrow
morning
to this room, come here.
