uh, which also does outreach and
does outreach in partnership
with them, um,
And, and their, their particular
skill, I think, is knowledge of
community and cultural, uh,
cultural awareness and coherence
of the services that they
deliver thinking about the areas
that they particularly focus on
in San Juan County.
Couple of more
Um, interfaith community
shelter, uh, is in Santa Fe, um,
uh, uh, this is one of the
things that they've done that,
um, uh, is a little bit unique
in the state, though not around
the country as mobile shower,
uh, and hygiene supplies. So,
uh, being able to bring a
vehicle and you can see it, uh,
a little bit here, uh, uh, in
the picture on the right hand
side of, of being able to, uh,
provide improved access to
health and hygiene and, and, and
hot showers, which you can
imagine is a
is, is a challenge.
The first mobile shower unit in
the, in the state.
Uh, and then finally on slide
19, uh, Kiwa Family Wellness
Center, um,
recording in progress.
Recording in progress.
First mobile shower unit in the
state. Yeah.
Happy to go over it again.
Um, I think that gives a, that
gives a kind of a quick run
through of everything about our
mobile homelessness program.
Josh, did I miss any dick
anything? Josh says I got it
all. So happy to answer
questions about that.
Does everybody have a question
or let's just see who owns best.
We'll start with you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for this presentation. This
is a really exciting project and
really important for those folks
who, um, are really suffering in
the, in the streets. Um,
I've been doing this, uh,
Little, uh, experiment, I guess,
or whatever. I've been talking
to homeless people and it
started when I saw the governor
do a press conference in front
of a homeless camp. And I
thought she should ask them why
they're there and so I thought I
should. And so I've been asking.
You know, talking to people, um,
who are living on the streets.
And what I have found so far
I've, I've talked to 9, so it's
not a huge, a huge sample, but,
um.
Every single one has a different
reason for being there. There's
no common, I still don't have a
similar story, um, all the way
from losing.
Rental housing, then losing
their job, and that's been all
the way into literally waiting
for an asylum hearing because
that's what they're doing and
they didn't have anywhere else
to go.
Um,
What have you learned about the
causes of homelessness in our
rural communities. What do you
know what the stories are, um,
and I noticed you do have a, a
project evaluating it. Is that
one of the questions you ask or,
or what are you learning? Yeah,
thank you, uh, Madam Vice Chair,
Senator, um, from this survey, I
would say no, but we've been
surveying across the country
people experiencing homelessness
for a long time. And this will
sound like I'm being.
A smart aleck, but the number
one cause of homelessness is
lack of a home.
And it really gets back and this
is urban and rural and it really
gets back to, uh, the, the lack
of places for people to live
that are affordable and you're
really talking about, I think,
um, this is where, um, being
running a health agency with a
background in economics comes in
handy, maybe you're really
talking about an extended
hangover from the Great
Recession. Uh, and the huge gap
in housing construction that
occurred for the better part of
a half a decade. Uh, and, and we
still really haven't recovered.
From that loss of housing that
got built and that's housing of
all prices because, you know,
we, we, we, we often think about
constructing uh affordable
housing, and that's really
important to do, but oftentimes,
and for a long time, today's
affordable housing was 30 years
ago new housing, you know, kind
of mid-market housing, and we,
we haven't been building any of
for a long period of time we
didn't build any of that. We've
now obviously started building
again, but we still have that
big hole in the system. And
And then, then I think you do
have to think about the
availability of housing that is
that is very, very affordable
and we have so much work to do
in, uh, in that space. I think
then.
Probably the most common
misnomer that all of those
surveys around the country and
here and overtime show is, is,
is, it's just really pretty much
not true that people are living
unhoused because that's the way
they want to live. There are,
there are people, you know, for
whom that's a, that's a good
descriptor, but it's a pretty
small portion. It's this set of
barriers that we've talked about
that really prevent people from
being able to to access
homelessness or access housing,
um, the fact that they can't
access housing.
Impacts their mental health,
their mental mental health
impacts their addictive
behavior, their addictive
behavior creates the cycle. I, I
heard, uh, at a presentation not
long ago that, you know, if you
were to create a drug designed
for coping with the ongoing
trauma of not of being homeless,
it would be meth. It's perfectly
designed for that and so you see
that show up over and over again
as we try to deal with this,
this set of of problems.
Just because I, I think we need
to really focus on the root
causes and what it struck me
like not a single person that
I've talked to said they want to
be there.
Um, of course, it's only 9, but
I'm going to continue doing
that. I'm writing up their
little stories. Um,
Do you use telehealth?
Mr. Chair,
you said one of these things,
these units use telehealth. Do
you use telehealth for doctors
or for providers, right? So so
Mr. Chair, Senator, um,
prescribing providers can be
other than doctors. They can be
PAs or nurse practitioners, but,
but mid to mid to advanced
practice practitioners would be
involved in telehealth, yeah.
So how does it work? They go to
the unit, they're getting a
shower, they're, they're talking
to a provider.
Or or somebody there, and then
you realize, oh, these lesions
look like they could be
something serious. So then do
you call somebody? How does that
work? Yes, you want to weigh in
on that I'm going to introduce
yourself, yeah,
yeah, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator, again, my name's Josh
Swark. I'm the policy manager,
but I did manage this project in
my previous role. Um, so yeah,
that is one of the models that
can be used that you can have
basically telehealth, mobile
telehealth, uh, with a provider
that's on the other end of
You know, they're, they're in
their office and they can
basically zoom in, um, and, you
know.
Uh, and, and evaluate these
individuals. I think a more used
model, um, is gonna be when
people actually go out in the
field. It's probably a little
bit more effective because of
that exact thing you're talking
about, some of those things
really are easier to evaluate in
person, but it's important to
have those options, right, of
telehealth, especially when you
have those provider shortages,
if you can't get, you know, you
can't afford to hire a nurse
practitioner to go on your van,
uh, you don't, you're not a
clinical organization. Maybe you
can set this up so that.
That's one of the things that
we've looked at, um, as adding
to a service or maybe getting
volunteers, including volunteers
of, uh, uh, out of state. I
don't know if you've followed
this issue of the medical board,
our medical board, uh, in the
whole not letting or somehow not
allowing telehealth
consultations with, um,
outside doctors outside the
state, which is so undermining
the whole purpose of the
telehealth statute. I don't know
if you
followed that, but I was
wondering, because that might
affect you, you might have
volunteers, doctors in Arizona
who want to help and they won't
be able to because of the
medical board's ridiculous
intrepidation time is up. Oh,
can you briefly answer that?
Yeah,
so um, so to do telehealth in
New Mexico you have to be
licensed in New Mexico. That's
not unusual. That's the case all
around the country. What is a
little bit unusual here is there
are a bunch of states in a
multi-state licensing compact
that, um, best analogy for some
of
You might be the common app for
college applications where you
submit all your materials to one
place and then those materials
get submitted at the licensing
boards. Each board gets to still
make its own licensing
decisions. We don't participate
in that in New Mexico and that
becomes a big barrier, uh, to
providers in other states being
able to do telehealth.
Yeah, but they're also saying
they cannot even
and I know my time's up. We'll
talk offline about this. It's a
major problem.
a test
Yes, it's not a suggestion.
Thank much. Do you have any
questions, sir?
Yeah, we're just 3.
We
Yeah.
We're just gonna go right around
the table.
3 minutes.
I
You're, your mic.
Use your mic.
Thank you. I need an assistant.
So
The $400.
It's only 33% of what the city
has spent $126 million on the
Gateway project.
I mean, just to put it in
perspective and that building is
essentially, if it's not empty,
it's almost empty. You didn't
look into that.
Scenario? Well, again, uh, Mr.
Chair Senator, we're not trying
to deal with homelessness
comprehensively in this project.
This is really looking at a, at
a, at a slice of it. So did the
state put any money into that
gateway project?
Mr.
Mr. Cha,
Senator, I'm sure, yes, I'm also
sure it predated me, so I'm not
very uh conversant in it.
Well, somebody should look into
that. Now the second question.
The C and Albuquerque Street
connect.
Study only. What what is that
briefly in one sentence or less,
it's a and survey around the
effectiveness and and
experiences of people
experiencing homelessness, it's
some of what you saw is similar
to what you saw in the, in the
pit survey data.
So thank you.
So last question, are there any
mobile units dealing with
homelessness in Albuquerque?
Yes.
More than one or?
Yes.
OK, thank you. It's all for the
homeless has mobile units that
do many of these same things as
does ACS.
Thank you, Representative,
welcome. Thank you. Thank you.
Welcome home. Thank you so much.
Mr. Chair, uh, thank you so
much. So, um, uh, I, I deal a
lot with this issue and, uh,
homelessness, uh, in conjunction
with domestic violence. So, um,
can you tell me what systems we
have in place for families that
are homeless or, um, those who
are attending school and, and in
particular with the McKinney
Vinto.
Funding.
So you're looking for for mobile
homelessness services for people
experiencing homelessness due to
domestic violence,
so mobile services for families
experiencing homelessness. OK.
Good
Yeah, I, I can say that we have
a variety of individuals, right?
This isn't necessarily
specifically focused on
families, but we do encounter
individuals. Part of this
project is really creating that
partnership. Knowing that not
one single agency can do it
alone. They really look at their
other community partners to
bring people in. Uh, so for
example, one of our partners
found a family that was living,
uh, in their car in the parking
lot of a Walmart, right? Um,
what they were able to do is
able to talk to the
Folks figure out why they were
there, why they were in that,
that, that circumstance. And
then work with them to actually
get job training, housing, um,
and then eventually got them
permanently housed. Um, so it's
really about, you know, I, I
can't speak to like specific
services and numbers like that,
but it's really talking to the
individual on an individual
level determining what they
need.
And then trying to meet that as
best as you can through sort of
a case management model.
Thank you. So my second question
would be the database that
you're collecting this data and
how many individuals you're
helping and where you're
referring them to, what is that
database called?
Thank you.
So we have a, we developed a
pretty simplistic database
because this was first year, um,
project, and we're bringing in a
lot of partners that didn't have
a lot of experience collecting
data. Um, and we didn't wanna
just sit on the money and, you
know, wait to hire people to
evaluate and create databases.
Um, so we did have a very
simplistic database that has,
you know, brief narratives um
over what each sort of encounter
looked like. Uh, we're still in
the process of analyzing that.
That's gonna take a little bit
of time. I can tell you that.
Let's see.
Give me just one moment, uh,
that we interacted with 3,156
individuals provisionally across
the entire state. Um, and again,
these are folks from all
different walks of life, all
different reasons for
experiencing homelessness.
Thank you so much. Can we have
access to that data?
Absolutely. As soon as we get
that analyzed, we'll be happy to
provide that.
Thank you, Representative.
Representative Royal Caballero.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you very much for your
presentation. I, um, have a
couple of questions. One is, uh,
how,
are all these partners, uh, do
they include veterans groups,
veteran advocacy groups because
I understand that a large number
of those that are, uh, homeless
are veterans, and I'm not sure
how we're coordinating services
with veterans. And I don't see
them in included here.
Yeah, Mr. Chair Representative,
I think that's a good place to
expand. Um, I'm not sure, you
know, they were specifically
involved in the project. I do
know that many of our
organizations did reach out to
them and worked with them, so
they're sort of a referral
source, but not necessarily
veterans organizations going out
on the mobile outreach. I don't
think any of that happened.
Yeah, I think the best way to
think of it would be that there
are sort of two sets of
partners. There's a set of
partners that we have the
contracts with delivering
service, and there aren't
veterans.
organizations in that position.
But when we talk about each,
each contracted partner and who
it's working within its
community. Um, uh, in, in, in
some instances would include
veterans' outreach and those
kinds of things as part of what
they do for the very reason that
you observe.
Thank you. And I, Mr. Chair, I
think it's important for us to
have that kind of data included
here. What is how many are we
encountering and how are the
services being delivered so that
would be, uh, a major request
of, of that I think is important
for a second. Um, the
departments, all state
departments have been charged
with um, uh,
Language access.
So under the Language Access
Act. So I want to know how
that's filtering down to the
service delivery and the
partners
Chair Representative, um, uh,
that very much goes into, pardon
me, the selection of the
partners and the work that we do
when we talk about, uh,
culturally appropriate and
linguistically appropriate
services and that's whether
we're talking about services
delivered in Spanish or in uh
whether the language needs are,
are uh T.
Or deny or those kinds of things
and that's part of what those
local partners do, uh, as, as
part of the work that we do.
Thank you Mr. Chair and finally,
I, um, because I've had to call.
Various departments and various
services on behalf of
constituents. I've noticed that
they're, we're not doing a very
good job of dispelling
prejudices.
Or dispelling assumptions that
are made, um, even over the
phone, you can kind of detect,
Mr. Chair, those tones, but in
person as well. So I'm wanting
to know, and, and I think this
is a department thing. I don't,
I don't necessarily, it has to
filter down. Um, how are we, do
you have a plan in place, a
program in place that, um, will
work towards the front, the face
of the
Service delivery and the
partners ensuring that part of
your page 5 says that in
Albuquerque, part, let's see,
12344 thumb bullets as stringent
shelter policies. So even down
from their top down to that
point, how do we dispel, uh,
what is a plan to break down
those prejudices and
assumptions. Yeah, thank you,
Mr. Cha. Representative, um, uh,
uh, really from a
department-wide.
Standpoint, not just in this
area, I think health equity is,
is and language access go hand
in hand with each other and are
really important for us to deal
with. We've just now finally
filled our health equity
director vacancy, which had been
vacant since I got to the got to
the agency, um, and we're, we're
now building out the capacity in
our language access program,
but, you know, inequity in
health comes from, uh, comes
from, uh, prejudice and, and
racism and oppression and
structural.
issues that you have to be able
to acknowledge and then go deal
with and so that's really the
from a structural standpoint,
what we're going to begin
working on as an agency is how
to, how to understand that, how
to acknowledge it, and then how
to go do specific things that
try to deal with it. We think
working with local partners is
actually one of the most
effective strategies for doing
that. We know that if public
health is something done by
public health people from the
public health building at a
public health department in
Santa Fe. We come out to a
community and tell you what's
wrong with you and what you
should do about it, it won't
work.
And so and so doing work like
this with local partners who've
got those connections and
relationships we think is a, a
critical step in that process.
Your time is up. Thank you. uh.
I'm gonna be tough on this, so
if you can help us, if you can
make your questions briefer, um,
please do.
Representative Chavez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, so I
have a couple of questions and
one of them has a little bit to
do with the database that you're
putting together and I'm
wondering if you're collecting,
um, information, demographic
information.
In terms of race, ethnicity,
age, number of families. OK,
thank you. Um, and then the
other piece is two other pieces.
Do we have a total count of or
as near as the total count that
we can get to of the number of
homeless persons in New Mexico,
Chair, I would, I would say
there are counts.
That are we work as hard, we
collectively the whole system
across the State work as hard as
we can to be able to make those
counts, but I don't think
anybody has ever asserted that
any of them fully capture the
the number of people
experiencing homelessness and,
uh,
um, and then you can argue about
the degree of undercount they,
they represent.
And then, um.
On, on one of the um.
Slides that you have, you have
the the top 5 responses in terms
of why unsheltered people aren't
using, um, the shelter system.
Has there been any communication
with those shelters to let them
know the data that you've
collected so that they can maybe
change some of the ways that
they're doing things so that
unsheltered people do use their
their shelters.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative,
uh, yes, this is the point in
time count data. So this is
shared broadly among all
homeless service providers. Uh,
so definitely the shelters see
this.
Um, and then finally, Mr. Chair,
have they responded to you or do
you know if they're making any
changes to make things a little
easier for folks?
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative, I,
I think Albuquerque is
definitely working on the West
Side shelter, and the other
sheltered systems.
Um, it's an ongoing project. And
I think if I, if I could just
add quickly, um, it's great to
say, well, you should allow
pets.
It it's another thing entirely
for the shelter of of
particularly something like as
big as the West Side shelter to
figure out how in the heck are
they gonna do that, right?
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Representative Herndon will go
to you and then swing back this
way.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and
presenters looking at mobile
Health, one of the biggest
issues that we have is women
having access to mammograms and
in the west in the rural areas,
they don't have access to
tomosynthesis mammograms. We
have to bring in a mobile
mammography machine from
Phoenix. Is this part of your
program to help make
tomosynthesis mammograms most
available to women.
Mr. Sher Representative, it's
not a part of this project, as I
indicated this is mobile from a
homelessness standpoint and much
smaller than in terms of, of the
kinds of investment and
equipment you're talking about,
but that's certainly something
that we can talk about and, and
see if we, if we collectively,
you and I want to make an
investment like that. Well, I
do, and I would like to, I look
forward to that conversation.
And then the second thing in
terms of looking for homes for
people who are homeless, how do
we build up the manufactured
housing department.
And division because what they
do is they make mobile homes and
we have lots of vacant land in
New Mexico. We could put mobile
homes and make them available in
communities. Don't call them
trailers, but call them mobile
home uh communities. What about
that? Have you been thinking
about it?
She representative very much,
um, and whether it's, whether
it's, um, manufactured homes
generally or tiny homes
specifically as a subset of
that. Uh, I think, um, there's
been lots of discussion of
housing first as a strategy. I
think what we've learned is
That if housing first is housing
only, it doesn't work and I,
and, and what it means that we
need to wrestle with is the
successful housing first kinds
of projects and if you think
about uh it was just a story in
the New Mexican about uh uh a
set of these homes in, in Santa
Fe over the weekend. Um, if you
think about doing a cluster of
those kinds of homes. You have
to be willing to go in
understanding that there's a
pretty significant investment
you need to make in an ongoing
services, whether it's intensive
outpatient services or intensive
case.
security,
um, you know, all those kinds of
things. I, I think too often we
sort of leave it at what we're
gonna, we're gonna buy 10 number
of units of some sort and go put
them somewhere and we'll call it
good. And, and I think we've
learned all across the country
that doesn't work and that you
have to tightly integrate
services which are expensive
with that that shelter, but if
you do that, it's extremely
successful at keeping people
housed once they're in that kind
of an environment.
I totally agree and Mark Duran,
who heads up that department and
that division and I are looking
forward to working with you on a
project like that. And finally,
with respect to behavioral
health care, how do you follow
up with homeless people because
behavioral health care is not a
one on incident. It is
continuous.
Yeah, thank you, Mr. Chair
Representative, we're getting a
little out of my lane since
healthcare mostly is the
healthcare our behavioral health
is mostly the healthcare
authority. Um, but I would say
that there are models out there
around intensive case management
and assertive community
treatment that, that do actually
work specifically on people
experiencing homelessness and
the idea of going and finding
them and bringing those services
to them rather than expecting
them to show up at an office
somewhere for services, so there
are models that we use and that
that Medicaid funds and those
kinds of
Things that are aimed at that
work.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair, uh, Mr. Chair.
Representative Vincent.
No questions. OK,
um, Representative Jones.
Yes, thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you Secretary Allen. Thank
you for being here. This very,
uh, very good information. I
appreciate it very much. Last
year I had the opportunity to go
out with Lindsay Fox, nurse
practitioner who worked with UNM
doing street medicine and Jodie
Jepsen, Jepson, I think that's
her name, doing some incredible
work with, um, homeless people
in, in Albuquerque. Um, you
know, we've got this problem all
over the state, of course, in a
rural area like mine, and, and
we're kind of collabor.
on this issue with Luna Grant
Hidalgo counties because we
don't have the numbers. I mean,
Um, ratios, yes, it's big
because, you know, per
population, there, there's a
large amount of homeless, but,
but we don't have the numbers
that would allow for, you know,
maybe a mobile vehicle and
especially not in our own nurse
practitioner. And I, and so I'm
looking for ways to, to
implement this in the rural
setting, and have you had any
thoughts on that? I know you
have us listed. You've got Luna
and Grant listed on your, your
list of the 13 counties that
you're.
13 entities you're collaborating
with, but we don't have street
medicine there. How do you?
Have you got any ideas for us
how we can implement this?
Yeah, street medicine is
definitely more of a challenge.
Uh, since you've seen, uh,
Lindsey Fox in that, in that
group. It is, it is hard to get
providers in those communities
who have the time to go out on
outreach. That's part of why
looking at sort of like those,
those tele, uh, health services
could be an answer in some of
those areas, uh, getting
volunteer providers or making
the investment and finding
someone that really just wants
to go out and do the work with
folks. We do have a good mobile
team out there.
Um, it is difficult for
providers though. I, I will say
that, but the, the team goes
out, you know, daily, they're
out in, you know, little small
cars and delivering services, so
if I could just add to that
quickly, Mr. Chair
Representative, is also why
models that involve community
health workers, community health
representatives, peer support
workers, those kinds of things
who are now all able to be paid
under Medicaid are are really
critical piece of that because
they become kind of a, if I can
borrow a military phrase, a
force extender of being able to,
to, to connect.
Through providers not putting
providers out on the street but
be able to make those kinds of
connections to healthcare
systems.
Um, thank you so much. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. So they're paid
through Medicaid. I, I, I guess
we need to explore that. I, I
don't know that. I know that,
that the ability to, to reach
someone on the street if, if
they're going to stay on the
street and if we don't, if we
can't move them off the street
and provide them a place to live
is critical, and it keeps them
from using resources that other
people need that from being in
the hospitals, for instance,
and, and we, you know, providing
them care before they would even
need to go.
to the hospital. So how do we,
how do we reach people on the
street.
And, and get that covered by
Medicare Medicare, Medicaid.
Sure, Mr. Chair Representative,
just, just briefly, um, it, I'll
just describe sort of a scenario
that's not universal but it
would be kind of illustrative.
You have a mobile unit, the
mobile unit's got people of some
sort. Part of what they do and
you've seen this in the, in the
presentation in some cases is do
registration getting people
enrolled in Medicaid, getting
them enrolled in Medicaid allows
their services and treatments to
uh to be covered. Um, the mobile
unit can do, can then do uh
simple things like wound care,
uh, or harm reduction that that
has
Popular as it sometimes is to
talk about gets people out of
injected drugs and into using
drugs in different ways that
don't generate the same kinds of
uh of, of wounds and, and need
for medical care and the cycle
kind of, kind of continues and,
and tries to work with people at
the street level where they are
with what their needs are to try
to um to provide resources to
provide access to treatment and
provide, as you say, those,
those, those health needs from
escalating and becoming much,
much more expensive when they
show up in an emergency.
room or other settings.
Thank you so much. Just one more
quick thing, um, Mr. Chair, uh,
I just want to say, yeah, thank
you to, to those people who are
providing that care. It, it was
such an incredible experience if
you all ever have the
opportunity to go with them. Um,
I know we saved a life that day.
I have no doubt about it, and,
and, uh, yeah, it's important
work so thank you so much.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Hickey, you have any
questions?
You're saving your question time
for later. You want us to add it
to your.
That's not how it works.
I am too.
Representative Lana Cadena, do
you have any questions? Yes,
thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Secretary Allen and your DOH
team rolling deep today. Um,
it's hard for me to be here and
separate the incredible
programmatic work you're lifting
and the statewide impact you're
building out from the politics
of this summer, um, I spent most
of the summer at the Court's
Corrections and Justice
Committee where it felt like we
were criminalizing.
People that were unhoused, we
were criminalizing homeless.
Shout out to Chair Thompson here
I know within our caucus bases
and others, she said, these are
healthcare conversations that
we're having in a legal
framework that has always failed
families. Um, so I appreciate so
much the depth of, of what
you're doing. I appreciate the
leaders down home in Las Cruces
that have modeled for the
country ways we can do things
right. Um, but yeah, I, I spent
the summer in the special
session, and then I went home to
where in the preceding weeks my
Las Cruces City council
Passed a ban on shopping carts.
A ban on shopping carts that
comes with a $500 fine if you're
found to have a shopping cart
from a store somewhere.
And I have local leaders saying,
right, that this is what we have
to do to get our city safe. Um,
and I, in a second with my
remaining time I'm gonna ask you
if you have room to comment on
that, how are you doing such
important work in the face of a
political climate that is seeing
some people are dangerous and,
and don't aren't a fit for our
communities aren't in our
imaginations of who deserves
safety and how they deserve it.
I'll end with just one little
thing that made me laugh. I have
a dear friend in Santa Fe that
A raised garden bed, big garden
bed stolen from her front yard.
And when we speak to the
assumptions and the stereotypes
made, everybody said it was
those homeless people. How were
homeless people going to steal a
raised garden bed?
Like with what truck or what
shopping cart or what
imagination, and it really
terrifies me that this is the,
the tone and tenor we are
leading with as political actors
because there's real life
consequences and harm to the
folks struggling to find their
way. So if you have any comments
to the matching the politics of
this summer in this
administration to the kind of
incredible programs you all are
trying to lift.
Sure, Mr. Sher, Representative,
I won't probably try to touch
the shopping cart issue at all,
but I will say when we think
about issues that occurred in
the, in the special session, uh,
and some of that political
dynamic. I think, I think we're
all wrestling with a really hard
issue trying to
Trying to be able to hold in our
heads at the same time, the
notion that while not all nor
even the vast majority of, of
people experiencing homelessness
are dangerous. Some are, and
that there are people for whom
we try to make treatment and
services available and, uh, and,
and.
Their inability to pursue that
and its relationship to those
same people committing crimes or
being accused of committing
crimes is a challenge that I
think the governor is trying to
trying to address through a
variety of, of policy tools. I
think we have to be able to hold
both those thoughts in our head
at the same time that we've got
lots of people who just need and
need help and that we can work
to provide that help but that
we've got circumstances that the
public expects us to, uh, uh, to
deal with and,
Try to address and we have to
try to be able to do both.
Thank you Senator uh Pope, let's
go to you and then we'll come
back toward the center here.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And thank you for this, you
know, I had the opportunity and
I applaud some of my colleagues
here who had a chance to go out
on the street and talk with
folks that are out there
struggling and suffering, um,
had an opportunity to spend the
night on the streets with, uh,
Representative Eleanor Chavez a
couple of years ago.
One of the warmest nights I
think in Albuquerque, but you
know, we froze our butts off,
um, and it just goes to what
you're talking about, uh, the
conversations we had, the
environment.
Even the, you know, when people.
Talk about it's not safe out
there. Think about those folks
that are unhoused, but they're
dealing with.
And it goes to show that people
do not choose. It's not really a
choice to be out there. They're
really just suffering and what
they're dealing with.
And so I would just say I think
people need to
You know, be out there, talk to
folks. You can find a way to do
it in a safe way. You can talk
to them in the day. It's just
getting to know them and
understanding what they're
dealing with.
You know, I met someone who
graduated from Yale.
It's on the streets.
Because someone, you know, just
because of what they're dealing
with and what happened to them.
And when you hear their stories,
You realize that.
There's a lot of the similarity
of what we talk about here with
our family members, our friends,
what our constituents do when
they call us. People who are
just on the edge when they call
and say, hey, my rent went up,
what am I gonna do? Where am I
going to live, right?
And so I applaud what we're
doing here, so I'll just be real
quick with a few questions.
Says $4 million for FY 24 for
this project? Is there
additional funding? How long is
this project?
Yeah, thank you, Mr. Chair,
Senator. Um, uh, the, the
project gets rolled into ongoing
funding now that the legislature
provided to the governor. Uh,
she asked for $40 million and
you all provided 20, so there's
still some work being done to
figure out how to allocate um
across that gap, but we've got
resources available for the
project going forward.
And I appreciate that we're
really going to where these
folks who are suffering are,
especially in some of our rural
communities, even Bernalio
County, there's rural aspects of
Bernalio County as well. Um, how
are we effectively
Following up and servicing these
people like as far as like long
term case management. And then
the second question would be
working with our partners, are
we also looking at where
They could get more support or
where we can scale up or, um,
from, from our legislature, from
as far as standpoint from the
state, how do we support these
partner organizations as well to
do a better job. Yeah, thank
you, Mr. Chair, Senator. Um, I
think it's a great, it's a great
illustration of what we've tried
to do at the Department of
Health, which is to say, yeah,
there's this whole constellation
of services and things we need,
but if we wait for that whole
constellation. We're, we're
gonna, we're we're not going to
get things done that we could
get done. And diving into this
element.
Uh, and really focusing on this
population builds toward
long-term relationships which
lead toward long-term case
management, which get people
moved into housing. You have to
have the housing to be able to
do that. So, uh, uh, I forgot
who had raised that
Representative Herndon raising
the manufactured homes, those
kinds of things. We need those
investments as well. We need
then the human investments in
the services that go with it to,
uh, to make that successful. And
so whether it's, uh,
medication-assisted treatment
and public health offices or
mobile outreach through
partners. We want to start
Digging in and doing the things
that we can do, but we really
need you all to step in then and
fill in the rest of that
constellation of services so
that we've got a, a, a kind of a
long-term and a continuum to be
able to, uh to make longer term
impacts on people's lives.
All right, thank you and thank
you for helping me make the
time. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Represented Ferrari.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Mr. Secretary. We
appreciate, you know, um, the
support for innovative ideas
like this, um, and, uh, in Las
Cruces, we have community of
hope, which provides a lot of
services and also places for
people to stay in a protective
area and also then tents to rent
and they're also building uh
more um.
I believe it's going to be free
housing, um, right close to
there. But community of hope,
um, do they receive, um,
Medicaid, um, reimbursements
that would work with um Amador
Health Center.
That could then as they go out
for the mobile, um, units, be
able to build, and then also,
um, like even for smoking
cessation or for behavioral
health, get that support to
people.
Generally no, but it depends,
um, uh, Medicaid, um, certainly
pays for health care services
received by people for people
who are enrolled in Medicaid and
most of the population that
we're talking about would be
eligible, um, for Medicaid.
Uh, there are areas where
Medicaid then through state plan
amendments or through 1115
waivers provides greater
flexibility to make other kinds
of investments now talking
firmly about stuff that's over
at the.
Healthcare Authority rather than
the Department of Health, but
I've got some, some familiarity.
There are states, uh, beginning
with Massachusetts and Oregon
about 2 years ago that got 1115
waivers that provided for 6
months of housing, transitional
housing to be a Medicaid
benefit. Uh, that all happened
while our waiver here was
already in process and so it was
too late, those go on 5-year
cycles and we were too far into
the process to do that. And
those states, honestly, it's
maybe great not to have gone
first because those states are
wrestling with
6 months of housing is good, but
it doesn't solve anybody's
housing problems. So how do you
work it and and how does it
operate on those kinds of
things, so, so we're able to
learn from what they're doing.
So that can be done as a
Medicaid benefit.
um, um, by itself. It's not part
of our Medicaid waiver or State
plan amendment at this time. And
that's different from actual
healthcare services that those
kinds of organizations
could provide her, you know, a
partnership investments that
they make with managed care
organizations and those kinds of
things. Is that what you're
looking for? Yes, thank you.
Um, also, in evaluating all of
these programs, um, is there an
evaluation report yet if the is
that coming out? And if you were
to choose one of these, which do
you think is the most
successful? Oh, Mr. Chair,
representative, uh, uh, the
report is not out yet. We'll be
able to provide it when we've
got that. And I would not try to
pick which of these children is
my favorite.
But the report and evaluation
will help indicate how that
would work. I think I think what
it will do is it will help
provide insight to things that
work and things that might not
work, but I think it's really
important to understand
something that works in Deming
may well not work in intrus, and
that may yet be different from
something we do in Las Vegas.
And so I think the the heart of
this is to really not bring one
size fits all and tell
everybody, well, here's, here's
something you all should do. I
mean, that could, that could
happen. Um, but I think the idea
of being able to meet
Communities where they're
meeting the people that they're
meeting is most important.
Mr. Chair Mr.
Secretary, it's more of filling
the gap in each community. Thank
you.
Representative Thompson.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for your presentation this
is hopeful. Um, I just wanna,
you said some people
experiencing homelessness are
dangerous.
Some people living in houses are
dangerous and many more people
living in houses are dangerous
than people just maybe just due
to the sheer fact that there's
more of them, but I think we
always need to say that, that,
you know, the, the homeless
population, people who are
unhoused, tend to be victims
more often than perpetrators
from what I've read. So, um,
the, the point in time count is
a joke. I mean, we all know
that. I go to national
conferences and everybody kind
of says, well, here's what we've
got, but we know it's wrong.
So
I'm wondering, is, is the
federal government looking at
doing something that's closer to
right, and if not, or maybe even
if so.
Should New Mexico come up with
some way of its own to do
counts. I mean, like I said, I
go to national conferences and
everybody says the point in time
count and then they go on. So,
um, I'm wondering if New Mexico
can do better.
Mr. Madam Vice Chair, I, I, I
think the challenge, and if
you've got thoughts, it would be
really helpful as, so what would
you do instead? Mr.
Chair,
uh,
I don't know.
I'm just saying I'm asking the
question, do we need to do
something I mean if we could
figure out a way to
comprehensively count people in
this space, yes, that would be
great to do. I think in the
absence of that consistently
doing what we're doing the same
way with the same degree of
effort time after time, at least
provides us some directional
information if we're, if we're,
if we're conducting the survey
in the same way and numbers
change from one period to
another.
Even if the numbers themselves
we don't think are are fully
representative of the direction
gives us some insight of, uh, to
what's going on. So I don't
think it's completely worthless,
um, as a count, but it is
contingent on being able to make
an investment in resource that's
similar and have similar
methodology, but I, I think
they're, I think the reason it
is what it is is because there's
a great struggle with how what
would you try to do that would
look different, that would be
more comprehensive. It's a, it's
a pretty tough nut to crack.
Thank you for that. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Um,
Oh gosh, where
So, and the point in time is in
December,
January, January and, and that's
another issue that I have. I
mean, if you're gonna be, if you
are unhoused, you're gonna do
your darndest to get housed
during the winter. So it would
make more sense to me to look
at, at some other point in time
than, than January, which is
probably the one of the coldest
months there is. So just, just
some thoughts. I, I, I don't
have the answer, but.
There are smart people out there
who hopefully could come up with
somebody and maybe starting with
these, these models that you're
using somehow figure out and I
know that you look at, Mr.
Chair, um, um, ER visits and all
that kind of stuff, but if we
could, I mean, there's so many
smart people and we have AI and
all that. I don't have the
answer, but I do ask the
question. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Madam Vice Chair, just quickly,
I think, I think the opposite of
exactly what you outlined is why
I think it's January if you're
In January you're unhoused.
Versus other times of the year
where you that may be open to
some interpretation or or
discussion. I think that's the
thinking behind it being
January.
Representative Royal Cavalera,
you had one quick follow-up
question.
I wanted to just make sure that,
um, everyone that comes in and
receives services either
directly through the department
or filters down to our local
partners that they make sure
that those seeking the services
know what their rights are.
Number one, know the rights and
then have a grievance, uh,
procedures or process posted
somewhere. That's what I wanted
to make sure.
One final point that came up
during the discussion, and
that's about the stereotypes,
the prejudices, racism that you
mentioned.
There needs we need to tap into
the studies that have been done
and maybe perhaps add to our
studies that show
That everybody's referring to
that there's a correlation
between crime and homelessness,
and there isn't. We know that.
I've seen it in multiple
studies. So somehow we need to
dispel those stereotypes by
countering with the data that
doesn't show that there's a
crime and homelessness are
associated. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Um,
I just had a couple of quick
questions.
One, when I looked at the chart,
uh, in a slide, I guess it's
slide 3, the one that.
I too picked up on grant being
surprisingly the most
The highest number, the one that
the other end of it struck me as
Donana isn't even on the chart.
What am I missing something
there? Why, why wouldn't Donana
have showed up on this chart
take a shot at that.
Uh, yeah, Mr. Chair, you turn
off your mic.
Uh, sorry, Mr. Chair, um, yeah,
I mean, that, that is just one
way that we're counting, that
we're looking at homelessness in
rural areas,
uh, certainly Dona Anna probably
has more individuals, um,
because when we're talking
about, again, when we're talking
about rates, you know, that
could be skewed more in rural
areas, the rates could, you
know, fewer individuals, higher
rate though. So that could be
one of the reasons. Um, so
there's multiple ways of
counting those is why that might
not be on.
There that was just one.
Data point that we want to share
with you that illustrates some
of the challenges in the rural
communities and there may be a
little bit of an effect of it's
sort of an inverse of what
services there are. If you're
in, if you're in Grant County
and there's nobody to call but
911, then you call 911 if you're
in Donana County and you've got
3 different places you can think
to call on making that up. Um,
that's the first call you make
and maybe you're less likely to
call 911. So as, as, uh, Josh,
kind of take it for what it is
as a subset of.
The overall picture.
Good, thank you, and that's what
I was going to ask as a follow
up. Was it because there is City
of Hope and maybe a lot of the
homeless issues get dealt with
through City of Hope rather than
calling an EMT. So good. Um, so
let's talk about your budget
then the, the $4 million is, are
you asking for any increase in
that for next year to expand it
to other counties or
increase the level of services
in the existing projects. Mr.
Chair, as you can imagine, we're
in the last, last lapse of the
discussions with the.
' s office on budget and this
along with way more other good
ideas than we have money for are
all in the mix.
You know, I'm, I am struck by
the fact that you're not the
first. Several agencies have
come and said, well, we know
there's not going to be much
money. We've got 120% reserves
in this state right now and
another $200 million coming in
over and above.
I mean, it's, it, it, it, it's
to me just very strange to hear
department say, well, the
governor's office doesn't want
us to ask for more money because
we don't have, we've got a lot
of money. We should be asking.
I, I, I, I just urge you to, to
make the case with the governor
that the legislature, I think,
we can't speak for the
legislative Finance Committee
and what goes through those
people's minds, but this
committee at least is very
interested in seeing this
program well funded.
20 million or you needed 400 and
we only gave you 20. Maybe we
should have, you know, we, we
should go back to that well and
try to get the extra money you
need. Mr. Chair, just to be
clear, the governor's office has
not by any means told us not to
ask for money. It's been more,
uh, you know, the money is not
unlimited, which I think you
would agree with too. And so
it's a matter of how do we stack
all these different competing
interests up and that's the
conversation we're in right now.
Well, maybe instead of 500
million for
Yeah.
What is it, the strategic water
reserve we could go struggle
with 400 million and you'd have
another $100 million for a house
above my pay grade.
OK, one other thing and I, and
I, I forewarned you that I was
going to bring this up, and that
is, um,
Just because we may not have a
chance to talk to you again
about any of these things for a
while.
The the
Information I'm getting about
what's happening at first choice
in Albuquerque, the federally
qualified health center.
With board members resigning en
masse again, the latest cycle.
A 3rd executive director this
calendar year come and gone.
an executive director who is
interim being restored now.
And, and the decisions being
made to close clinics.
To sell buildings, use the
proceeds to pay salaries and
close other clinics. It just
seems like it's total chaos. Is
there anything the state can do
to save first choice from
itself.
7,070,000 Albuquerque area
people, not just Albuquerque. I
mean, it, it includes Los Lunas
in Berlin.
Depend on on those clinics for
services and now they're,
they're, they're threatened,
really threatened. Yeah, thank
you, Mr. Sharon. Thanks for the,
for the forewarning about the uh
about the question. Um, uh,
first choice has been a
challenge for better than almost
all the time I've been here, I
think. Uh, I think it's
important to understand sort of
the regulatory framework that
that are federally qualified
health center lives with. It's
primary oversight agency is the
Health Resources and Services.
Hsa, uh, in, in Washington.
That's who has sort of day in
and day out responsibility for
watching what they're doing,
gathering reports, those kinds
of things. The state has, has
some oversight authority, but
it's relatively limited.
Previously, the Department of
Health, now the health care uh
authority has oversight of sort
of patient safety and soundness.
Uh, a patient patient safety,
health and safety. And it's
really, you know, the
Clinical environment and those
kinds of things it's regulatory
authority you see used much more
frequently in places like
long-term care facilities and
nursing homes and those kinds of
things, is it clean? Is it
staffed appropriately, those
kinds of things. That's pretty
limited statutory authority. Um,
What, what we really don't have
is what Hersa has, which is sort
of comprehensive financial
oversight and those kinds of
things. There was some talk, uh,
and the attorney General
requested this some time ago,
um, uh, that the Department of
Health at that time it would be
HCA now, um, put them in
receivership. Well, that's a
tool that's really aimed at
nursing homes and it's taking
over operation because the life
and safety of the residents is
not being met by the owners. We
would need to be able to go into
court and convince a judge.
that people's lives are at risk
because of disorganization and
mismanagement by the board at
First Choice. That's a really
tough argument to be able to, to
make and I are looking at it led
us to believe we, we probably
couldn't do that. But that's
really the nature of the
challenges it's organizational
chaos as you, as you outlined
and what we really don't have
are state-based tools to try to
deal with that kind of a
circumstance, at least amongst
the health agencies.
Um, so in order to take any kind
of action, you would need to
expanded statutory authority. We
are the healthcare authority or
somebody else in the state and
that's something I, I would.
Put on the table for the board
to consider.
Uh, we do put money. I mean,
it's not like we have no, no dog
in the fight at all. We have a
budget invested in there. They
get Medicaid beyond that. But
this is a resource that, that
people depend on for their
health care, and if it, if it
And, and I have to say, Hersa
has been
Less than stellar in their
oversight of this. They came in
and and did a site visit and
just walked away from it.
There's basically they're
saying, well, this is a, you
know, you people clean up your
mess and they have not done
much.
They have not been able to have
an audit at First Choice for 3
years because the numbers simply
are unbelievable. Nobody
believes the numbers, so the
auditors walk away from it.
And when you have that
situation, you've got a major
catastrophe waiting to happen.
HSA, which could be
Cleaning it up, we have maybe
it's time for a sternly worded
letter from this committee to
hers, right?
Do your jobs, Senator.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Back in, I
believe it was 1993. There was a
similar situation.
Um,
There was a
In action to
maybe receivership is not the
correct word, but there were
actions that take it over and,
um, I, and maybe it is to the
Attorney General. I'm not sure,
but there, there is, there are
likely minutes and so forth of
what happened then and who did
what.
Um, and maybe, uh,
The former CEO, uh, Bob Day
Felice, uh, that's when he left
us when everything started going
south, um, may remember what,
what was done at that time in
some sort some sort of takeover
and rejuvenation capacity. And
so,
All right, I think maybe
Offline or later we talk about
what we can do to unearth that,
uh, history. Uh, secondly, the
primary care association will be
presenting on Wednesday, and I
think we'll have some insight
from them, but I would argue
with the secretary that lives
are at stake. It's just we don't
have a way to record the people
who was serious, exacerbation of
their
Chronic diseases are not getting
care and they're not getting
care are dying.
Literally, um, they, they may or
may not be able to get to an
emergency room, but there is a
significant deterioration of
health on the same level as what
is happening in a nursing home.
And so I think this is a life
and death crisis, uh, in terms
of,
However, the mismanagement
evolved in this situation and
that we should be able to find a
legal basis with some
accountable authority, not like
let Mikey do it over in that
department, but what's the
department and the state that is
going to take it over and then
bring in the talent that's
needed to put it back on an even
keel. The last observation, Mr.
Chair and committee is that
I think we'll hear Wednesday
morning, the funding, while we
raised it for Medicaid.
We kind of threw about 4
thimbles at it in terms of a
bucket, uh, when we raise the
federally qualified health
centers. I mean, they are
nowhere near being able to
maintain retain clinicians at
the, with the money that we pay
for the services, what has
evolved, and so that's the other
prong is as we deal with House
Bill 2 and the Medicaid budget
and, and as we're going to 150
in January and we'll be
considering in January.
We're gonna have to, I, but I
have heard and I haven't done
any analysis, is that basically
they, they get like 200 or 75 or
300 per visit. It doesn't matter
what kind of visit that's, you
know, they, they need somewhere
around 400 to 500 per visit in
order to be able to make it in
today's environment and to
compete
for traction and retention of
their primary care providers. So
I think all those need to be
I'm glad you brought this up.
We've been circling this for a
year and it's not just them,
it's La Familia and, uh, again,
maybe Wednesday, we'll hear
which other ones. El Centro as
well in northern New Mexico is
also struggling. Mr. Chair,
Senator Hickey, I don't disagree
at all with your observation
about the long-term effects of,
of inadequate access to care. I
mean that principle underlies
almost everything we do in, in
healthcare reform. However, the,
the statutory law, statutory.
structure that we operate under
for receivership, um, envisions
an immediacy of that threat and
you or I wishing it were
otherwise doesn't make it true
and, and I, I am firmly
convinced that we would, we
would get laughed out of court
trying to go in and talk about a
clinic for receivership, to say
nothing of the resources to be
able to to do that. I wish it
were otherwise, uh, and, and,
and we would pursue that if it
were. Zander tells me that that
he's already begun working on
doing some research into the
legal.
basis that we might rely on to,
to take some steps. So we'll
look for that. And, and that
action in the early 90s was
actually a court, they went to
district court and got a court
order to take it over. So
that's, that's Representative
Chavez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just
wanted to make some comments
about, um, first choice and I
think some of the other um
clinics as well. I think um
definitely.
Sorry.
Um, I, I agree, um, with Senator
Hickey, we absolutely need to,
um, you know, increase the
amount that we are, um, paying
the providers there. I also
think that we need to look at
paying for all of the services
that those health clinics
provide because there are some
that go unfunded. Um, they see
probably more uninsured than any
other clinics.
Um, in the state, so we really
need to look at that also. Um,
and then the other piece is, I
think we also need to think
about, you know, how do we
address boards who don't
necessarily understand what
their role is in terms of the
kind of training, the kind of
experience and expertise that
they need when they come on to
these health clinics because
it's a huge job. And I think
that's part of the issue at at
first choice anyway. Thank you.
Well, thank you very much. Just
one final comment is to alert
the committee to the, to
something that's afoot, there is
going to be an effort and and
the issue has already been
broached with the Medicaid
office to begin whatever.
Initial steps that are necessary
to develop another waiver that
would parallel the DD waiver,
but would be for 3 categories of
individuals that currently
aren't well served through
existing Medicaid programs.
Seriously, emotionally
disturbed. The substance use
disorder patients and the
traumatic brain injury patients
to try to do the kind of, of
expanded.
Menu of services that would be
available to those people and
their families to try to support
it and to use the Medicaid
vehicle to do that. That that's
something that that's afoot that
could be a big help in dealing
with homelessness issues.
So thank you very much and I
guess you're gonna, you're
staying on here, aren't you? All
right, don't, don't, don't slip
away too fast. So who do you
have joining you? We have all
payer claims database update.
This is our annual update on
this, on the, on why the the
all-payer claims database has
not been developed yet.
and we're eager to hear. So you
have uh Heidi Krall.
The director of the Martinez,
yes. And uh Glydon Martinez.
Yeah, so again, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee,
Patrick Allen, secretary of the
Department of Health, joined by
Heidi Crafel, who's the acting
head of our Center for Health
Protection in Gluden Martinez,
uh, who is our chief information
officer. Um, we've got a
presentation that you should
have, uh, in front of you. It's
being passed out right now.
That you're getting it now.
I'll, I'll speak slower for a
minute.
Um,
And what we want to do is update
you on we're rare on the all
payer claims database. The
database is up and running. Um,
people are able to access the
database, uh, uh, we have done
kind of a soft rollout, so we've
not gone and done a big splash
or anything like that, but
there's a URL here in the
presentation, uh, that you're
able to access and, and, and go
in and look at the data that's
there through the public portal,
and I'll talk a little about
what's there versus what's
there, um, uh, overall, but, uh,
my intent today on slide 2 is
just give you a quick overview
of the data.
its current status on where
we're where we're going from
here. Um, uh, on, uh, slide 3, a
little bit of overview. I know
some of you don't need this even
remotely, but some may and there
may be, may be folks watching on
the stream, um, who do, but, um,
on all pairer claims database
is, is sort of what it sounds
like. It's, it's an attempt to
systematically collect, um,
medical pharmacy, dental claims,
eligibility files, all the
things that go with claims from
all the pairs. Now,
Both of those are a little bit
of an exaggeration, and I'll
talk a little bit about who
isn't included in an all-pair
claims database, but the idea is
to gather all that stuff in one
place so you can learn from
what's going on across all the
payments that are happening in
the health care system. There
are some significant things that
are not in the all-payer claims
database. We don't have federal
programs like Tricare or uh the
Veterans Administration. And we
don't have Indian Health Service
in the, in the claims. We don't
have, um, uh, we don't have
employers.
Sponsored um uh self-insured
plans, uh, which can be a
significant chunk of health
health care claims. It's
somewhat smaller in New Mexico
than it is in other states. Uh,
so we've, we've got that
advantage, but it's a, it's a
chunk that's also, that's also
not there and it's also there's
also some, some other things
like, uh, charity care, workers'
compensation claims, some things
like that that are really fairly
marginal, but that's all not
included in the database, so you
do have to, when you think about
this be, when you go to use it,
you have to be a little bit
thoughtful about.
What what may or may not be
there and particularly if you
start doing things at at at the
geographic level, for instance,
um, you know, if you're looking
at data in Curry County, it's
pretty important to know that
Tricare is not going to be in
that, uh, in that data set and
so it would go across different
areas. If you go to slide 4.
We've tried to lay out sort of
some use cases of, of why you
would want one of these and who
might do what with it and I
won't go through each of these
individually, but for example,
um, uh, providers, uh, uh, can
use it for quality and
utilization and peer group care
comparing themselves to other
providers and identifying, uh,
cost trends and those kinds of
things. Um, uh, payers,
insurance companies, government
entities, those kinds of things
can do comparative performance
of provider networks to
statewide benchmarks.
Uh, how are our different
provider systems doing and where
do we need to engage for for
discussions or or improvement.
Um,
Policymakers can use it to
understand how an investment in
a particular part of the health
care system will work, uh, and,
and how do the, the costs
associated with that play out as
they as they filter out, um,
through the system and the
public health practitioners, uh,
can identify utilization of
healthcare to address, uh,
hotspots and those kinds of
things, um, I wasn't here during
the heat of the pandemic, but in
Oregon we were able to use the
Allpair claims database to
identify emerging trends during
the pandemic. Um, there is
Some fairly significant data
lag, so I don't wanna oversell
the immediacy of data, but you
can use it to be able to
identify those kinds of trends.
On slide 5, I just want to
quickly touch on the timeline,
um, and, and, and, and maybe
this is sort of uh proactively
speaking in our own defense
because I know from previous
discussions, you all have been
thinking and working on this for
a really long time. Um, I think
it's, it's really important to
note that we got an
appropriation to do this work
starting in July.
2019, uh, and we're rolling it
out here in, in more or less
July of 2024, so about five
years later and 3 of those years
were pandemic years. So I, you
know, I would, I would suggest
that, yeah, it's been kind of a
rocky road, but, um, for a
project of this magnitude given
the intervention of the
pandemic, we're not,
uh, it's not quite the same as
we've been working on this for
10 years, which I think is is
kind of what we tend to want to
talk about, uh, on slide 6, just
a quick word about funding.
There is state funding.
Um, that's carried on from 2019
through fiscal year 25, which
we're in now. Um, this, to this
point has been done on a 9010
federal match with 10% of state
dollars matching it. Uh, once we
move out of the development and
the initial acceptance phase,
it'll move to 7525 funding so
the state share the cost will go
down, but the state's share will
go up, uh, and one of the things
that we're asking for in our
ongoing, uh, budget.
Is that ongoing maintenance
cost, uh, that we'll need going
forward.
On slide 7, just a quick summary
of sort of what's in the
database today. We've got about
160,000 claims that represents
all of calendar years 20 through
23 and through the first
calendar quarter of 24, there
are 21 different commercial
payers plus Medicaid Advantage
plans, uh, over that same period
of time and so we've got
Medicaid and Medicare data in
the system, uh, which is a very,
very large portion of the
overall covered lives and
overall claims volume from
statewide standpoint. We have
about 10.5 million lives that
are covered. Uh, so you can see
there's about 25%, excuse me,
um, yeah, about 25% of lives
that are not, uh, that are not
covered for those exclusions
that I talked about earlier, so
it's, um, it's a meaningful
minority, but a minority of
lives that are not, uh, that are
not captured. Um, we've got
annual trend data available for
the calendar years 20 through
23. Uh, and we have a full
database and a, and a public
portal. The public portal.
Um, uh, basically tries to to
capture data queries that are
simple and straightforward and
that are common in those kinds
of things, the full database is,
uh, is much more robust and also
requires a higher degree of um
data security, HIPAA compliance,
data use agreements, those kinds
of things to be able to access
the full, uh, the full database.
Uh, so in the public portal on
slide 8 in a little bit more
detail, um, uh, and you can see
the, the URL for the public
portal there on the lower
right-hand side. I am not going
to try my luck with a demo or
anything like that today. Um,
but we give you some idea of the
kinds of things that you're able
to get from the um from the
public portal in terms of
procedure cost searches, um,
provider costs, healthcare
quality rating data, uh, uh,
where there's a, a geographic
component.
To be able to map services, uh,
and so on in terms of, of what's
available through that public
portal and I do invite you to
take a look and, uh, and
experiment with that. On slide
9.
Um, just some discussion about
where do we go from here, um,
uh, we're going to continue to
work with those who are
submitting data, uh, and try to
work to onboard further further
data providers to close some of
that 25% of the lives gap, uh,
and then work on things like
data quality and and data
submission tech submission
technology and those kinds of
things just to, to be able to
refine that, uh, that process,
um,
We want to work with voluntary
data suppliers, uh, which
includes ourselves as a, as a
state employer, um, providing
health insurance benefits.
That's actually an ERISA plan.
Um, parts of it are EA parts are
fully covered, uh, and so that's
data that we clearly can get
into the system. Um, we'll
update the portal with with more
updates and we expect to do a
launch on the portal coming up,
um, uh, later in later in
September, we'll do some things
like to the questions we had
about language access earlier
expansion to Spanish language
trans translation which should
occur shortly, um,
And be able to continue to kind
of the care and feeding of the,
of the system. So we are, as I,
I, I, I think as I said the last
time we talked about this when
we were down in Cruises, I think
I said we would be up and
running next time we talked and
we are up and running in the
system is available and
accessible.
Happy to answer easy questions.
Heidi and Glynn are here to
answer hard ones.
That's good. And, and this does
break with tradition in that,
you know, for, for several years
now.
Even long before you came, the
report has always been it's in
development, it's in
development, so I was kind of
shocked to find out it's
actually operating, I aim to
please.
Yeah.
Thank you for breaking that
particular tradition. Um, let's
see, let's go this way. Let's
start with you, Senator
Representative Caden is not
here. Go ahead.
And 3 minutes is not a
suggestion.
For those of you who have
questions, if you don't have a
question, don't feel obligated
to conjure one up. We can, we
can just move past you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Ms.
Vice Chair and I have my watch
going, um, very simple
questions, um, I assume that
you're not collecting just the
claim. The claim is what is sent
to the insurance company but
what is paid can be very
different. So I'm assuming that
you're collecting what is paid.
I just need a short answer since
I've only got a little time.
Yes
yes, um.
Secondly,
Are you sharing this raw data
with the legislative Finance
Council.
Uh, not yet, but we should be
able to do that.
OK, so can I take that as a
commitment that you will.
Subject to being able to
conclude an appropriate data use
agreement and those kinds of
things, sure.
Thank you. Um, because the
legislature needs to do its own
analysis of how things are being
spent and, and not just depend
on the executive's
interpretation of it. Yeah, it
would be helpful if they would
do that in conjunction with us
so that we can come up with
similar analysis and be able to
guide them where we think they
might be making
misinterpretations because
that's a thing too.
Well, I, I think they would be
very happy to do that so we can
get to the same conclusions, but
again, the legislature needs to
validate and, and that's what
the legislative, uh, council,
uh, committees function is, is
to is quote oversight, as well
as to then develop help in
developing policy by the
legislators so that we don't
simply have to depend upon the
executive, um, and, and this
would be in particular, I'm just
being straightforward here, and
this would be in particular.
cost of care. So we want cost, I
mean, by private provider by
diagnosis, by all the different
populations. And so what I think
the LFC needs or I've asked them
to do is to assure that all of
your raw data.
Goes over there.
They then can build their own
data warehouse.
And constructed in such a way
that the focus is on the cost of
care and certainly can look at
quality outcomes and what have
you. But we have the
opportunities as you have done
in Oregon previously to
Try and obtain a 3% cost
increase annually in the state
is Oregon is enforcing in 27
with penalties, uh,
Massachusetts, uh, is on the
edge of doing that California is
on the edge of doing it in
spades, so we want to be sure
that we're doing everything we
can to put the spotlight on cost
and care, and so that we can, as
in other states, succeed in
getting, I know it's not gonna
happen this year.
And there are other variables.
But getting towards that 3%, but
the LFC has to have that data.
They do have the talent to be
able to do the analysis of that
data and you might want to talk
to them about that consulting
talent. Thank you Mr. Senator,
just, just quickly.
More or less agree with you. I
think that I, I think
You would agree, I'm sure that
it's not useful for us to say
it's night and for LFC to say
it's
What it's worth, given you
brought up Oregon, the
legislature there doesn't have
direct access to the to the data
so you can cut that different
ways, but subject to the things
we just talked about, we're
happy to work that out. Very
good. Thank you, Senator, uh,
Representative Jones.
No questions. Representative
Vincent.
OK, well, we're moving right
along, we get an extra minute to
representative Herdon.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, I
would just like to know with
respect to the performance of
provider networks, one of the
big issues that's going on in
our state now is the high rate
of maternal mortality. So is
that data in here and, and how
can, what are you doing with it?
Mr. Chair Representative
Herndon, there would be claims
and payments related to maternal
mortality, but that's probably
not the richest source of data
for tackling that problem. I
would say that comes out of the
maternal mortality reviews that
our agency operates that really
dig into each and every maternal
death, uh, to identify
underlying causes and and and
really goes far, far deeper from
a clinical standpoint than any
kind of a uh claims database
would and and we're actually
working right now with the
healthcare authority and with uh
with tribal and other entities
on a more comprehensive strategy
around, uh, around that there's
been a significant federal
investment around maternal
mortality, and it's one of our
top focuses.
Thank you. I'm very happy to
hear that. And then one other
item with respect to the cost of
drugs we have here with us today
some representatives for the
pharmaceutical manufact, um,
PBMs that are here. How do we
work with them in order to keep
the cost of of prescription
drugs now based upon what you
gather in this portal.
Mr. Chair Representative, um,
that's a, that's a, that's a
great question and a complex
one.
Um, and, and I'm going to go a
little bit out of my lane
because this really is more
healthcare authority, but you
know, one of the challenges in
the pharmaceutical system from
pharmaceutical manufacturers to
PBMs to insurance companies and
then the interlocking ownership
across those of all of those is
the system is designed to not be
very transparent, uh, and so
there's lots of questions of
what's the price of a drug,
what's the rebate on the drug,
um, uh, uh, what's the, what's
the paid claim on the drug, um,
you know, I just, I just picked
up uh uh for for somebody else,
uh, a prescription of Paxlovid
yesterday. The list price on it
is $2000. Nobody paid $2000 for
that Paxlovid. I'm just
absolutely 100% certain that
that's the case. Somebody
claimed $2000. I'm pretty sure
that's that's the case. And so,
you know, I think, I think we
should be cautious to understand
that in all peer claims database
will be of limited value in the
face of such a such an
impenetrable and intention
non-transparent system. Now, of
course, I'm going to go say that
and then I'm going to leave the
room before the PBM folks get up
here. So, um, they'll, they'll
have a chance to have you on
that too.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Rodriguez, do you have
any questions? Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Welcome first of all because I
need to read up on all I just
came in a little bit ago. So,
um, I want to thank you for your
patience and understanding. I
had so much on my schedule.
Thank you very much.
Representative Chavez.
Yeah, I, I do have a quick
question, um, on on slide number
4, it's it talks about um.
Data-driven improvements in
access.
Can you talk a little bit more
about that? What do you mean?
Do, are you trying to measure
how many is there an increase in
the number of patients being
seen? What does, what does that
mean?
Yeah, not quite find the
reference that you were. It's on
slide 4 under which category
policymakers.
Oh, I see. Well, so, so, so the
idea would be to use the the
pattern of, of, uh, claims data
to identify where we might have
a need for services. So if you
have claims coming from people
who live in County X and the
providers are in County Y and
there's a significant,
significant gap, you'd be able
to say, gee, why don't we figure
out if we can get a provider for
whatever that service is in
County X so that those people
don't have to travel to County
Y. Representative Royval
Caballero.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you again for your presentation
on page 3.
Uh, and I was out when you.
Made this uh covered this page.
What's not in the APCD system?
Why are these not on there?
Yeah, thank you, Mr. Chair
Representative, the short
version is we only have
authority to require um
participation from systems that
are not covered by federal law,
and there was actually some case
law in the last several years
that, that affirmed this and,
and so, um, if, if something is
either federally delivered or
it's regulated by the Federal
government, which is true for
the private ERISA covered plans.
We cannot compel them to
participate. We can't ask them
to participate, and that is part
of our
Plan to expand, expand that
data. I would not hold out a lot
of hope for things like Indian
Health Service or Tricare, but
there are significant private
employers are covered by ERISA
who, I think we can get into
the, into reporting.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. It seems
to me that we would be strong
advocates to try to get that,
um, cooperation and relaxed,
however way that is, um, and the
reason is that I believe there's
a lot of shared care involved
and shared costs involved. And
it would be, especially in the
Indian Health Service. It would
be really important for us to
have that to analyze, to see how
we can either increase
The level of coverage or care
from any one of these entities,
especially that first bullet,
um, and then kind of look at how
we can then balance that, uh,
and reduce that cost on us,
right? If there's a significant
correlation between that. That
to me is really important. The
second on your last bullet, it's
really important to have that
reference the uninsured.
Because we're all federal
government and state governments
are grappling with the whole
issue of uninsured and why
uninsured underinsured. There's
a lot of categories in that
area, the self-pay is another
major, um, area. So, so there's,
it just seems to me that we
don't want to keep increasing
the dependency on, on state when
in fact, we can begin to share
more on an equitable basis.
Thank you. However, I don't know
if you want to, I think we just
need to be strong proponents,
and Mr. Representative, I
completely agree.
Thank you, Representative, and,
and the efforts that they're
going to be making to get the,
uh,
health, what is it the B well
New Mexico uh insurance policies
included and the state employee
and the retiree. I would hope
that all the, the, uh, what's
the, what's the, what's the
acronym for all the, all the IA,
Thank you, Representative, and,
and the efforts that they're
going to be making to get the,
uh,
health, what is it the B well
New Mexico uh insurance policies
included and the state employee
and the retiree. I would hope
that all the, the, uh, what's
the, what's the, what's the
acronym for all the, all the I
back all of if all of those run,
we'd get pretty darn close
because we don't have that much
commercial in this state. That
would be and the self the big
self-ins.
plans Sandia and places like
that, yeah, and Mr. Chair, the
Bwe plans are fully insured
plans, so those should already
be included in the, in the
database.
Good
Senator Tubman, you have
questions.
I needed assistance. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, and thank you, uh,
Doctor You for being here. I
forgot to thank you earlier for
being here and, uh, thank you
impressed that you finally got
the database up and running. On
page 7, it says 3% are covered
by medic.
C advantage plans.
We have one of the highest
percentages of people over 65.
Why is that only 3%?
Mr. Char representative first,
no doctor, just, just Pat. Um,
uh, and that's Medicare
Advantage plans, which is a
subset of Medicare
for 18 years.
Do you want to speak to that at
all? You're one of the 3%, I was
gonna say, I mean, from what I
understand and it's a small
understanding there, but
Medicare Advantages is more
expensive and so perhaps there's
only a subset of those Medicare
recipients who can afford the
Medicare Advantage. That is a
hypothesis. We'll double check
that number though that number
that percentage is quite a bit
higher in some other states, and
I'm not familiar enough with
that space here to be able to
assure you for sure that that
number is right, so we'll double
check that.
Well then one of the quick
question, uh, Mr. Chair.
So I read an article recently
that said that Medicare
Advantage plans have driven up
the cost of
Healthcare. It didn't explain
why is that?
Mr. Char, Representative, you're
again getting a little out of,
out of my province, but you
know, it basically has to do
with the, the, the narrowness of
the access to services and and
manage networks and those kinds
of things.
I'm sorry I wasn't, it wasn't my
intention to ask.
Difficult questions. Thank you.
That's all I have, Senator, or
Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Thanks, Senator.
The thing about Medicare
Advantage plans, there are
active efforts on the part of
advocacy organizations to talk
seniors out of joining advantage
plans
in I'm not clear exactly why,
because like you, we've been in
it for quite a while, but
I know that I get material
saying, why are you in an
advantage plan? You're just
wasting money and you know this
is padding the profit margin for
these private companies. So
there's, it's not like it's
universally accepted that the
advantage plans are the best way
to go.
Yeah, you're being taken
advantage of some somebody,
it's to somebody's advantage,
but it's not clear to who's,
yeah, Senator Rodriguez, you you
do have a question. We'll go
back to you. Thank you very
much, Mr. Chairman.
Now that I had a chance to, to
take a look at this, uh, Mr.
Allen and staff. Thank you for
your work. I do have a question
and you brought it up, um, Mr.
Chair, about the retiree
Healthcare Authority. I just
wanted to see how that's going
to work. Are we actually in
trying to collaborate the
purchasing power of all these
healthcare plans. I know through
HSD they were doing it now it's
a new healthcare authority. They
were looking at combining this.
Are you working closely with the
uh, the retired healthcare
Authority board on, on
Doing working on all these
things you're working on with
data collection and so on, Mr.
Chairman.
Yeah, thank you, Mr. Chair,
Senator. So sort of
To somewhat different topics to
try to keep straight in terms of
the all pair claims database we
pull in any fully insured plan.
So if the if if benefits are
offered through an insurance
company and sometimes it looks
like an insurance company, but
it's actually a claims
administrator, so you have to be
a little bit careful but if it's
fully insured, then we captured
in the database if it's not
fully insured, then we cannot
require participation in the
database, but we can ask. And in
the case of of locally managed
plants that's
pretty straightforward
conversation in the cases of
things like Tricare IHS, a
little bit more complicated.
That's a, that's a different
conversation than the
conversation about consolidating
purchasing power to be able to
drive the triple aim of better
health, better care at a lower
cost. The retiree health
insurance plan is not part of
what was consolidated, nor was
be well. I think maybe that was
where we got into sort of what's
bewe in or out of they're not in
the healthcare authority. They
are to the extent that they're
fully
Sure insured in the all-payer
claims databases. So there are
two sort of vaguely rhyming
concepts that are easy to
confuse with each other, but
they're really different things.
OK, thank you. I just wanted to
make sure to see where we were
on that. Thank you very much,
Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Senator. Senator
Sergio Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm very
excited about having this data
because, um, and so I've been,
I'm playing um with, with what's
there and it doesn't look very
intuitive, um, or I don't know,
I'm I'm, I'm really, are you
going to have training sessions
for how to use this, or will
there be a website that or a
page that explains
Yeah, so I talked about there
being a a a more of a roll out a
little bit later in September,
and this is going to be sort of
a living thing as we get the
system up and running for
for researchers who want to use
it and those kinds of things and
then start getting it more uh a
more publicly usable and so
we'll be adding features, we'll
be adding intuitivity, um, you
know, training videos, those
kinds of things that'll roll
over time we um decided we
didn't want to wait to get all
that done before we got things
up and running, because this is
this trans
I think, will show us how much
of our money is not going to
healthcare, but going into
administrative costs. Is that
correct?
Mr.
Senator,
um of insurance,
yeah.
I think it's not sort of, it's,
it's not an automatic. I think
there are questions that that
you as a user or researchers
will be able to ask that could
lead you to be able to, to
assert points about that. I, I,
I don't think you could go in
and and sort of put in a query
that says how much of our money
goes to administrative costs and
get that back because what
you're going to get is what did
it cost for a knee replacement
surgery, right? Uh, and, and
you'll there'll still be a lot
of work to do.
To be able to tease from that
some of the kinds of things
you're talking about.
So,
But it will be somebody will be
able to do this from the data is
in the way, the way it's
searchable, because, because the
reason I ask is because it says
um.
There's a procedure search and a
provider search. I mean, it
seems very limited, at least.
At least as I'm looking at it
and that concerns me. Yeah,
yeah, so it will answer many
important questions, but it's
not magic and won't, you won't
answer all of them. So if you
are, if you are, um, as an
example, you have a high
deductible insurance plan that
is a preferred provider
organization that allows you to
pick your provider and you need
to get a hip replacement
surgery. You would be able to
use it to go look and see, well,
a hip replacement at this
hospital costs this much and
this hospital.
It costs that much. There are
other factors that might go into
your decision, but you would be
able to use it to to make that
decision. You wouldn't be able
to tell, well, at this hospital
it's really high, 25% of it is
overhead and at this hospital
that's really low 5% of the cost
is overhead. You wouldn't be
able to get that kind of an
answer, but you'd be able to see
the price difference, um, uh,
across those providers charge
versus what the insurance
companies get reimbursed for?
I mean, what the, I'm sorry,
what I said that backwards with
the insurance companies
reimburse. Yeah, you'd be able
to look at what the, well, you'd
be able to look at what the
actual cost is at those, at
those various facilities.
But then
Broken down between what the
insurance company pays and what
the copays are and
that kind of, probably not, no,
it, it would, it would be who
gets so that you would be able
to look at a provider and look
at what did the provider get
paid for that service and that
payment would be made up of a
component of what was a co-payer
or co-insurance or something
like that and what was paid by
an insurance company. That's
time, Senator. All right, thank
you. I'm looking forward to
seeing it as it's more um usable
and
And I think it is going to
provide a lot of us with
important information,
particularly the legislature.
Thank you, Representative Ferra.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you. I, we've been hearing
more and more about, um,
Billings saying out of network
when people weren't expecting.
They checked their doctor and
all of the different procedures
are supposed to be in network
and then all of a sudden you get
billed with out of network and
then the costs go up for um
patients, um, will this, um,
information be able to help us
understand, you know, who is in
network and so that we don't go
to those kinds of providers.
Yeah, Mr. Madam Chair,
Representative.
Probably not directly. I, I, I
think um
I think the more straightforward
tool that's been used around the
country and I'm not sure what
the legal status is here, are on
on prohibitions on that kind of
surprise billing is the is the
term that they usually use and
that, and, and what most often
happens is you go to an
in-network hospital, and the
surgeon is in network as an
example and it turns out the
anesthesiologist wasn't and you
didn't really get a choice of
the anesthesiologist.
And suddenly you have this $2000
bill or whatever I'm making all
that stuff up, but
um, yeah, and well I'm in the
details and, and really I think,
I think you as legislators,
probably makes the most sense to
tackle that problem head on
versus trying to parse data from
the database that would, would
be inform an individual consumer
decision because that would be
really hard. The, the, the
database would not provide you
the kinds of things you would
need to know to figure to figure
that out.
OK, I understand and um.
Madam, Mr.
Chair,
and Mr. Secretary, with being
able to look at claims, um, can
we tell how many, what the
denial rate is of certain
providers might be as they try
to deny, you know, uh, coverage.
Yeah, so this is, this is a
payment database of what what
gets paid through different
payer systems. However, the
Office of Insurance supervisor
Does manage more of those kinds
of issues of what are what are
what they call market conduct um
practices across insurers and
and would be a different source
to be able to explore those
kinds of issues. Hey, great,
thank you.
Did
Representative Thompson.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So the first question is on page
6, neither the chair nor I know
what C2 funding is.
And C2 funding is the is is
capital funding that we, uh we
have a structure for that we um
that we pursue, uh, through the
budget making process. It's
different than agency operating
budgets. OK, thank you for that.
And I don't know what C1 or C3
are in case we don't care we
just we just want to know what's
here. Um, so, um,
Just out of curiosity, um, let's
see. How, how involved is
synchronous in this, if at all.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Madam co-chair,
you move the mic closer. Sure,
um, Mr. Chair, Madam, co-chair,
we have actually been talking
with synchronous and having
discussions they have approached
us saying, you know, we already
have um hospitals sending us
data and then um they would have
to also send almost, almost the
same data. It's a, it's a
different format,
um, to the APCD. And so we've
been having conversations about
that and how that could
potentially
Work out. We haven't solidified
it yet, but we've been talking
to the map because of course we
get a lot electronic health
records from them. Yes, and just
for those of you who don't know,
it's, it's the state's
electronic medical record. Um,
Warehouse, I guess I'll say
you're on and I am on the board
until the end of this year and
then I'm timed out, um, so.
Mr. Secretary, you talked about
some folks who are mandated to
report to this. Could you give
us like a quick and dirty who's
mandated and who's not.
Yeah, Mr. Chair, Madam Vice
Chair, the, the health
information, um act
provides a requirement that
different uh different providers
that are under state control,
not state control, who are
subject to state law in this
area, not preempted, uh,
provides. So that would be
insurance companies, um, uh, as,
as
Payers that would be health care
providers as providers. It's
really Maura who's who's out and
you're in unless you're
specifically excluded where
federal law preempts state law,
and so that would be, that would
be ERISA, the system that
regulates private self-paid uh
uh systems, and then the federal
systems that we've talked about.
OK, thank you. And then in terms
of getting more people to
report, do you have carrots and
or sticks for those who aren't
mandatory who we maybe could
convince.
Just my natural charm. Uh oh,
we're in trouble.
Mostly, Mr. Chair, Ms. Madam
Vice Chair, mostly, well
certainly not sticks for the
federal for the federal
entities, um,
carrots maybe kind of depending.
It's really the ERISA plans
where we've probably got the
most leverage where we're able
to have a local conversation and
talk about local benefit to them
from having access to data in
the system, those kinds of
things. OK, thank you. And have
you found push, I mean, we all
know that.
Health care doesn't want to be
transparent. I mean, nobody
wants us to know what they're
doing. So have you found
pushback in that way that, I
mean, we want to have.
Like you said, you could go and
look what a total knee costs
across the board, but that's
been really hard to do, and I'm
wondering how much of it is just
trying to keep that opacity.
Madam Chair, I would say that
we've had a very constructive
conversations along the way. But
of course, if for those that are
not required to report, they may
not feel inclined to do so. I do
think it's going to be an
ongoing conversation. OK, thank
you. I can just quickly add to
that is Senator Hickey observa
came here from
From Oregon about a year and a
half ago, where we'd had this
database for better than a
decade and and some pretty um
robust public transparency on
costs of procedures across
health systems. Interestingly,
there, it didn't lead to a ton
of changed behavior. The systems
were happy to charge different
prices in different places, so,
um, uh, you know, it'll be
interesting to see how that
plays out here. OK, thank you.
And then, Mr. Chair, the final
one, it was to kind of follow up
on Senator Hickey. Um, are we
As, as the committee that
oversees healthcare, um, and
we're looking at transparency
and trying to figure out cost
drivers and all, are we going to
have access to the behind the
paywall data.
Um, Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
I would, I would say that
that's biting off more than I
think you're, you're thinking
about. It's a, it's a, it's a
pretty, um, it's a pretty dense
database system that I think
Senator Hickey's point about LFC
having access to it is probably
more practical from a standpoint
of you all come up with
questions and then, uh, LFC is
able to manipulate work with the
data to to be able to answer
those questions. It's, it's,
it's not a sort of a
Off the shelf easy user kind of
a kind of a thing understood,
but we are trying to
professionalize this committee,
so, uh, when, when, I mean, we
have 3 folks where we're, we're
going to keep pushing. So what
we may at some point soon if I
have anything to say, have a
more robust, um, LHHS staff.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
We do have time for a few other
questions, so.
Anybody else have a question,
Senator Hickey?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just to
follow up on some of the
questions that people had for a
little more clarity, um, having
lived in every side of this
business and the data that
supports it.
Um,
The, um,
Uh, in, in terms of the, the
question we should as committee
members be able to ask the staff
who will go ask the
professionals who can go who
know how to manipulate the data.
It's very complex, but it's very
doable. You and I would take a,
take take us a year to learn how
to to do that, uh, type of, um,
Web interface to directly get
the data but we can ask them and
they can do it in 5 minutes, uh,
or maybe a day, um.
The
HCA.
It was formed. I remember it as,
uh, Representative Armstrong
said when asked this question,
what was the purpose of the HCA
and it was to do some logical
consolidating, but mostly to act
as a purchasing agency as the
healthcare authorities do in
other states. And so the, the
question is, and I, I understand
this is an opinion and so forth,
but the, the logic of the entity
It runs the database would
likely be the healthcare
authority because, and they will
be, my understanding, the last
discussion I had in regards, uh,
Mr. Chair, to the IBAC, the
interagency benefits advisory
Council, the four different
agencies which does include the
retirees that it is the uh
not a desire. I mean I think
that the HCA believes that they
have the authority under the 97
law is kind of crazily written
as it is to consolidate all of
them into one purchasing entity
to take advantage of the value
and uh going back to the PBMs, I
mean PBMs are also data that we
can look at that can be pulled
out, but in order to get to
PBM data we are going to have to
terminate all of our contracts
with uh through these agencies
and Medicaid with the their
separate all of them have
separate contracts with the 90%
of the PBMs who control, uh,
pharmaceuticals, and those are
the ones who play the games and
have the lack of transparency.
So there are new pharmacy
benefit administrators. I've
talked about it several times.
We hope to hear from two of
them.
October, who can come in and
literally put 1.4 1.5 million
people, uh, in the combination,
including Medicaid into a single
contract with a single vendor.
These new vendors are much more
transparent. Also, they can
pretty much guarantee you 15 to
20% savings right off the top.
They also use standards against
the rebate, so there's no, uh,
Confusion about how the rebate
games and and aggregate rebate.
I mean all that goes out the
window. They are starting to
take significant market share
from the three traditional PBMs
who control most of the country
and so we'll be hearing from
them, but the point I want to
make to the committee is that we
will have the opportunity to get
that kind of granularity about
what drug, what cost, and what
people and what the trends are
and then begin to use
in some negotiating process.
Again, because of the law of
large numbers and in, in
business, I mean, the larger you
are, the, the more likely you
have to have people who support
the pool to the very sick in the
pool so it's less cost, um, as
well as also them being able to
drive a better bargain. So I'm
trying to loop about 4 or 5
things together here, but the
answers are we will be able to
do a lot of this drill down, uh,
the, the cost of
Care administratively the
insurance companies now are
under a federal, uh, mandate
that they have to spend 85% of
the premium dollar, uh, in a,
uh,
Um,
For
group insurance and 80% of the
dollar for individual insurance.
Now, can we go in and say what
they're doing with that of the
15 to 20%, that's proprietary.
We won't get that. That won't be
in a database, but what we're
spending on in terms of care and
we'll understand the contracting
and who's doing better
contracting and so forth. All
that is knowable and over seal
and that's how we begin to lift
the blanket of
Opaque darkness that surrounds
healthcare is through this
database, and that's why it's so
critical in that we have the
people who are trained in it,
who we can call up and say, you
know, I don't get it. Why does
Lifepoint in Las Cruces able to
charge 800% of Medicare.
For an outpatient facility fee
and others are only charging
150%.
Because they're using bill
charges or charge masters, so it
exposes that whole game and
actually.
A lot of that information is now
public on on the internet
through Rand and the National
Academy of State Health Policy.
So again, going back to
Representatives Thompson's
point, we as a legislature who
are accountable for policy, um,
need to have the basic
information, so growing this
staff wherever they are and
whoever they have, I mean,
whatever, understanding the data
is the way that we can contain
health care costs.
Make health care more affordable
in the state. So I, I, I've
tried to identify one of things,
but the main question I have is
where is HCA ultimately going to
be located and will, if it goes
to HCA,
will you still get the claims
database is gonna be located.
Yes, where is it going to be
located because logic would say,
and you can present different
logic, and that's what I'm
asking you to do that it's in
the Department of Health, it
would seem to me the epidemi
just can go in and get their
information out of the raw data
as well as the finance people
for financial analysis.
Yeah, thank you, Mr. Sher.
Senator, um, right now I'm
really focused on getting the
thing up and now for the next
year while we're in the
acceptance and and user testing
phase getting that all locked
down. I think we do need to have
a conversation between agencies
within the administration with
the legislature about answering
that question. I don't think
it's quite timely yet. I do
think we have to be clear about
it though. We had a budget snafu
this last section, this last
session where a chunk of the
money to finish the work ended
up going over to the healthcare
authority, and we had to get
them.
back from them and that added
steps and process that that kind
of put this uh being able to
tell you what's up and running
at risk. So I think, I think
that is exactly the right
question to have. I think get
us, let us get through the
acceptance and and testing
phase, uh, and then I think we
can all come back and have that
conversation and figure out what
makes the most sense. Thank you.
For them
OK, I had a couple of quick
things. First, thank you for not
only for getting this up, but
um.
For getting Medicare involved by
next year, I mean that'll be an
incredible thing. Was, did you
get it, was that easy to get
them to agree to, to
participate?
Mr. Chair, part of the ongoing
conversation and working with
CMS is always interesting.
OK, but, but, but you anticipate
by next year that they will be
participating as well.
Yes, Mr. Sher. That's great. And
other states, yeah, so that's,
that's great. Um.
I think one of the big
advantages is going to be for
researchers like at the School
of Public Health.
School of public administration,
all of, all of those
people that will provide us with
their own analysis of what's
going on for us to try to do it
ourselves, you know, there's
certain things that we should be
able to do, but I think what
this is going to be is an
incredible tool for for
researchers that then will
filter to us and in a format
that we can use to foreign
policy in the future. So I want
to thank you for that. If I
could just quickly comment on on
that, I think you're exactly
right, and I think thinking
about kind of
The whole range of things we're
going to be able to learn and
know from the system. Um, states
like Oregon and Massachusetts
are really heavily focused on
maintaining the increasing cost
of care matching more or less
the economy, so more and more
the economy doesn't go to
healthcare. We've got two
different sort of opposed sets
of problems here and we'll need
to keep that in mind too because
we're also trying to attract
more providers. We're trying to
provide better reimbursement
rates for providers and that
kind of runs counter in some
ways to managing costs and so
we'll have to kind of walk and
chew gum.
Keep both thoughts in our head
at the same time as we go
forward.
Uh, excuse me, thank you, Mr.
Chair. Uh, I agree, it's where
you spend your money. So when a
hospital charges 800% of
Medicare for an outpatient
facility fee for like clipping
toenails, um, you know, which is
off the charts, um, we can clamp
down on that as a state. We can
pass Indiana's past laws to stop
that, and we can take those
savings and put them into
provider and
I keep pushing the HCA to do
this consolidated purchasing in
PBMs and take the
100, 200, whatever million
savings it is actually more than
that money and put that money
into provider payments since
Medicaid is the main payer in
the state, so that Medicaid
becomes what we cost the cost
shifter normally the cost
shifter is, uh, commercial and
every other state that's true,
but in New Mexico we have a very
unique situation. So the point
is it allows us where to look
for money and stops the
as I've said, a number of
occasions, and you can get this
out of Nash pieces just to the
New Mexico in 2013 was the fifth
most profitable state for
hospitals in the country. 3
lines, revenue, expense, margin.
pulled together by state. Where
does New Mexico come out? 5th
most profitable. Now I will say
they're slipping.
To number 8.
And so there's a lot of money
there that all this data will
allow us then to begin to do
legislation and regulation to
get the money focused in the
right places and not going back
to some other state because of a
national entity. Thank you.
Thank you so much for the
presentation and uh we eagerly
look forward to seeing you again
later this year with updates on
other information. Thank you.
Thank you all for coming.
Uh, members, we, we have an
opportunity now lunch isn't here
yet.
Uh, lunch, lunch is here.
um It's being set up. We
ordinarily have public comment
at this period today, as you
notice on the agenda, it's at
the end of the day, Robert Cagle
had asked to be able to make
more extended public comment
than we ordinarily allow. So I
had asked if he could do it now
and it looks like he's, he's got
material. Can you give that to
the staff, Robert, to pass out?
He's got a, he's been working
for some time on a report on,
um,
Um,
The developmental disability
program, the waiver program, and
um,
Uh, well,
We can't go through the entire
report. I did ask him to bring
hard copies for you to take. He
indicates this, these should be
considered drafts, not the final
thing. He's still working on
some aspects, but he wanted us
to be able to have something and
then I've asked him to give us
maybe a 10 or 12 minute uh
public comment on what he has in
this report so that when we have
the developmental disabilities
program later this week we can,
we can ask some questions with
his background in.
So Robert, do you want to go
ahead and, and start?
Mhm
It's on, OK.
Uh
11 years ago, I did the first
presentation here in Socorro
with the LHHS, uh, committee.
I've been working, researching
for about a year before that. So
this is my 12th year of
researching issues on the
waiver.
Uh, couple of weeks ago I heard
from Jim Copeland that the
legislative Finance Committee
was going to do their on every
eight-year evaluation on the
waiver.
And I went back and reviewed the
documents on it and with the
information that I have been
collecting recently and over the
years.
It it it answered a question
that I've had for a long time.
Which is why with all the effort
that's been done by a lot of
legislators that really care
about the waiver and never can
seem to move the ball forward
and what is the problem, uh, and
I, I know we've had people on
the finance committee that have
tried heartily and never got
anywhere.
And I just got slapped in the
face when I read these
evaluations.
It is absolutely clear to me now
for decades because the first
one was in 2002 when the next
one was 2010, the next one was
2018.
For decades they've been using
these evaluations in the
legislative Finance Committee
staff to pursue a misinformation
campaign and dissuade the
funding of the waiver.
In my research, it is absolutely
clear. I've got documents, uh,
These are supporting documents
of what's in the report. Uh,
when I did the, uh, report in
2021, there were some things
that might, there were no
veracity of my claims. The
people that made those claims
never asked me for the whole
document or the supporting
documents, so they're here now.
Um,
This funding, the refusal to
fund these programs
appropriately resulted in a
30-year civil rights lawsuit
with the Jackson lawsuit, and it
also ended up in the Waldrop
lawsuit.
So for 30 years, a judge ruled
that the care on the waiver was
not adequate. Now, before that,
we'd shut down institutions, we
moved the people under the
waiver. There's this whole
complicated thing about cost
neutrality which the feds say
your waiver has to be cheaper in
your institutions. When we close
our in institutions, we were
inverse and have been ever
since.
They've used that as a measure
to how expensive we are.
The rights ICF and intermediate
care facility for individual is
a right. It's like a nursing
home. If I build a nursing home
and you have Medicaid, you can
come. We have denied them access
to it for through more illegal
moratoriums for decades and uh
through pricing for decades.
When I researched the document,
I found that HSD has had this
thing where they're telling the
feds we're doing market basket
increases with inflation and
pass regulations that said we're
going to do it when we want to.
Subject to funding. Then I did
an IPRA of LFC and said, well,
what's the funding that you've
given them? And they said, well,
they never asked us. This has
been a budget item that we can
just do whatever we want to
depress that and not serve
people. And this has gone on for
30 years and does the
regulations require they have a
waiting list so a person can
determine if I want to be on the
waiver or if I want to be on the
ICF. ICFs are paid based on
cost. You can't control them.
What they get is what they get.
Under certain federal rules. So
the state has absolutely crushed
that. And they've crushed it to
the point where our waiver costs
where all the high needs people
are, are exceeding it, and it
looks like we're too expensive
and it's not. Under our system,
we should be the absolute most
expensive waiver in the entire
country, bar none by a huge
margin. We're not. Um,
The LFC reports have demanded
that we come up with some magic
assessment to lower average
budgets because we're too
expensive based on this false
premise.
The original false premise.
So we went through the Cys
evaluation. They tried to do
that. The only way they saved
any money after all was said and
done was having the lower needs
people being deprived of 24 hour
care which they're entitled to
and ICF institution. That was
the Waldrop lawsuit and of
course they lost. Right now,
last year in the, in the work
plan for the LFC, it said we
need to get some kind of uh
assessment so we can lower
average budgets. It's like a dog
with a bone. They won't let it
go. But what happens is that
that kind of whisper campaign
By the staff that controls our
budget behind closed doors and
has for 30 years to the people
who are on that committee, they
rely on their expertise. They
have to, they have no choice
because there is nowhere else
they can get it in this state.
With that whisper campaign of
they're too expensive and on and
on. I mean, it's just
unbelievable how
And when I read through it, how,
how prejudicial and bigoted it
is.
Um,
If you look at
What's happening in our system.
The incidents of abuse and
neglect and exploitation has
gone through the roof.
Therapists no longer turn it in.
Nothing ever happens. We have
over 1000 cases substantiated
cases in the last 3 years. I
figured half of those would be
in Bernleo County, so I did an
IPR of the Bernleo County
District Attorney, the Bernallio
County sheriff and the
Albuquerque Police Department
and take a guess how many of
those were turned over for
investigation or prosecution
because there are
All crimes. The answer is none.
We entered in the past
administration to an interagency
agreement.
Just just so let me see if I
understand if an allegation is
made of abuse or neglect in a
waiver program
It's the DA that's supposed to
investigate that. No, you under
the law, the abuse residential
Abuse and Neglect Act, adult
protective services posted and
investigate it. They introduced
an agreement where that went to
DOH.
There is no way to get from DOH
to enforcing it when you found
an allegation because they're
all crimes. If you abuse
somebody in a resident or a
group home or a nursing home,
it's a crime.
Now, maybe a petty misdemeanor
may be a misdemeanor and may be
a felony. We've got two wrongful
death lawsuits going on where
there's never any criminal
charges. One of them is Brian
Egoff, who's responsible for
budgets in the state for years,
is now making money suing a
waiver provider because they
weren't had inadequate rates and
couldn't take care of somebody.
That's how pathetic this is.
We have legalized abusing people
in our waiver program. It is now
legal. So, so go back one more,
one more step forward. So
What, where's the breakdown, the
adult protective services has
delegated the the the
investigation to the Department
of Health and the Department of
Health isn't doing any
investigations. Oh no, they do
the investigation. They
substantiate it.
But then they don't turn it
over. OK, so Dan Taggert, I
don't know if he's been on this
talked to this community a lot.
His kid was running wild in
Albuquerque and they kept
saying, well, the agency's
neglecting taking care of him.
He's out in the streets going to
get run over. All we can, we
substantiated the case and then
what? So he finally frustration
asked Terry Cotter, wrote her a
letter and said, what do you do?
And she wrote him back, we're
under no obligation to turn them
over to any other agency.
That's where they end is our is
our law isn't clear. The laws
absolutely clear.
It's a crime.
If you're the DA's office and
you see somebody is neglected a
client and a few several times
and it's a misdemeanor, you're
not going to bother, but when
they've got 10 or 12 of them, so
you think I got a problem here.
We don't have that.
That doesn't exist.
And the reason we can't afford
it is because of rates. If we
did re afford it, we wouldn't
have any, any providers
whatsoever.
During the during the session,
we have this situation where we
had the lawsuit and the
contractors stuff, and we asked
the Senate to put in extra
money, an extra $8 million and
you helped with that, right?
OK. Well, guess what? They lost
the lawsuit. The agency is on
the hook for $1.5 million.
Because they did it illegally.
Their claim, and I think you'll
hear from the person tomorrow is
the state said it was OK, we did
it. And not only that, but we
have moved, there's 5 other
agencies in the southern part of
the state are doing it and we
moved the neediest clients down
because that model provides more
staffing and they get better
service. So now we got an
absolute crisis going on and the
extra 8 million we got in case
that happened, it's not in the
amendment that's going to CMS
right now.
supported living providers got a
rate cut.
Last year, Scott don't told the
committee that we're going to
backfill the AARPA and do, do
that, didn't happen.
My kids' agency.
Come July 1 got a 5% cut.
All right. So, when you do your
Medicaid application,
you have to say what your cost
neutrality is. We, we're putting
the media in and the the other
one at the same time, right?
Well, the institutional cost
that we have to beat is
different than the two waivers
and the Mevia waiver, it says
it's 150, so we're fine in the
DD waiver, the one they want to
cut, it says it's 130, so we're
not OK. I mean, it's
unbelievable. When they asked
the state do you
provide any other waiver
services in the movie I say, oh
yeah, the Los Luas Community
program wants to be a provider,
they can sign up, no problem.
They've the same rate everybody
else. I ask him in the DD
waiver. No, doesn't exist.
Well, why not?
OK, what's going on at Los
Lunas? Well, state
organizational chart, which I
found, has 30 group homes there,
right?
It has the salaries of all the
people there, right? OK, our
rates now are demanding agencies
pay $15 an hour.
And that's the rate, and
actually with the other stuff,
the agencies have to pay that
barely can pay that and no
overtime, not a dime of overtime
can be paid to them, OK? So if
you're short on staff, they cut
the staff, people get injured.
They're getting paid $19 an hour
because they got the state raise
come July 1st, right? Not only
did they get that, but they get
paid vacation, they get their
state benefits, they get their
insurance. 45% of the whole
thing. So we have 25 providers
in Albuquerque or Berlio County
for supported living, 23 run
moratorium because they can't
hire staff. Who in the world
will want to be a staff of 15
bucks an hour here when you can
get 19 bucks an hour and have
more staff per client.
And get all the benefits. Now,
are we reporting that to CMS?
No, we're not.
We never have in the 210
evaluation, it says, well, we
decided to move Los Lunas over
here to facilities management
and hide all those things. So
those, those rates and
everything we've been done in
the cysts and all those
evaluations and stuff that we
had to save money on the waiver.
We're never done over there.
And the person in charge of the
legislative Finance Committee
staff's daughter was there since
around 2000. She's been immune
to it the entire time. So as
every work plan says we've got
to cut costs, the person who's
running the show's daughter is
over there. She is being paid
right now more an hour for her
little job in the office that we
are paying my kids' caregivers.
And we're telling the federal
government the program doesn't
exist.
Well, can you Robert, can you
kind of wrap up what we ought to
be asking when when they come
before us.
Mr. Chair, can I make a uh just
a little bit of an explanation
that when he's talking about the
rates, we don't have
institutions. We were very proud
to close all of our
institutions. But what the, what
the, how it works out now is
that we're compared to states
that do have institutions. So we
have those folks with the high
level of care going into our
costs, making it look like it's
really high, but it's high
because we don't have
institutions. The states that
have
institutions, those folks don't
count for their rate.
Madam Vice, let me clarify
something that's that in this
research, I came up with is,
yes, in fact, we do have
institutions. Intermediate care
facilities are institutions
under the same rule and the same
payment policy Fort Stanton and
those they got paid the same,
their rates were calculated the
same. I on the CMS Max website
and I checked with them every
state in the union has
institutions.
So when we say, well, this, we
don't have the, yeah, we do. And
the growth in right now for
supported living is Evershine
and um the southern part of the
state that takes behavioral
people and uh Matt Paul in
Albuquerque who takes
You know, and he cannot afford
to expand supported living. You
can't do it, right?
So, well, basically, is he's
saying if I have to move forward
and provide services that has to
be in an institutional setting
because you're not paying for it
under the waiver.
OK, how ridiculous is this?
Um,
So what should we ask?
Well,
the, the problem with this thing
is it's so convoluted and
complicated. You know, if you
ask one question, then, then you
get the bizarre answer of, you
know, well we'll just throw out
the smoke and mirror screen and
get back to you and we've been
doing that for long enough.
Um, the reality to fix this
thing.
And how we fix it and go
forward. Um, one of the reasons
I'm writing this thing is that
this is going to LFC.
Right?
The details how for years we've
discriminated against this
population, how we've abused
them, how we've legalized, um,
abusing their care, um,
The um
That this has taken a lot of
work to find out what is the
problem with this. The problem
is, is
This committee is not a full
committee like the Education
Study Committee. It doesn't have
a staff.
Our state has grown. We weren't
in the, in the medical care
business when the waiver first
started, the waiver had a pretty
high percentage of state budget,
right? People can understand it.
In 2006, the legislature's
budget was 3.28% of the state
budget.
In 24, it's 0.34.
OK.
The branch of government that
oversees all of the spending and
assures the citizens' right to
real government services has
been cut by over 90%.
Now I understand some people
believe, well, we want, you
know, contain the scope of
government. The issue is when
you have a few people in the
legislative Finance Committee
staff, they end up controlling
almost $1 billion in spending
for developmentally disability
people. And you have absolutely
no input into that whatsoever.
That is wrong.
And that violates every New
Mexican's constitutional right
to have three branches of
government to have checks and
balances.
And without a legislative staff
that's capable of looking at
those programs and informing you
of the legislature as what the
heck is going on? We have
absolutely thrown away our right
to have any kind of oversight
from the legislature, and it
needs to stop.
I've advocated for increasing
this committee, but it, it, it,
we can't go forward. And what
we're doing this, this system is
getting more and more
complicated, not less and less.
And when you can't reach to a
staff and say, investigate this
before the hearing. I want to
know what's going on. That
doesn't happen.
We put them on the thing, they
come up and tell you whatever
you want and you've got to have
somebody like me who for free
for 12 years has sends thousands
of hours of research, to tell
you the truth, and if I wasn't
here, I'm dead, what happens?
Who knows that? Nobody.
So,
Um,
And
I
she did have a question. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. Um, yes,
thank you, Robert, for your
continued work for so many years
and I guess one of the things,
Mr. Chairman, to, to really look
at is that.
Robert, not only is doing an
extraordinary amount of work,
but he does it from the heart,
not only his brain because he's
got a son, as most of us know,
if not all of us, who's got very
special needs. So he's lived it.
It's not like he's looking at it
from the outside in. So thank
you so much for doing all this
volunteer work, Robert. But Mr.
Chairman, that being said, the
first thing that crossed my mind
is why is it that we can't have
the Department of Health.
And which is where the DD waiver
was until it's transferred now
to the still HSD for me, but
it's Healthcare Authority. Uh,
why can't we have the Department
of Health to answer those
questions, uh especially on the
investigation part.
And why it's not being
investigated and also the, the
healthcare authority here to
answer the questions that have
been brought up to not even
question statements that have
been brought up, brought up
today, so we can proceed with
that because otherwise we hear
it from Robert, but then we move
on. We have so much on the
agenda we need to hold, um,
departments accountable, uh,
after we listen to their side
and see what the problem is, why
is it that we're not
investigating these matters.
There is no
No reason why we can't proceed
the right way, but let's move
on, Mr. Chima. Tell me what you,
you're thinking.
So that, that's one of the
issues that Robert brought up.
The other one is the LFC and the
way the LFC evaluates the
program is based on a faulty
premise that leads us down the
rabbit hole.
And, and, and until we deal with
that faulty premise and the
faulty premise, as I understand
it,
correct me, Robert, if, if I'm
missing it, but what you're
suggesting is that the, that
we're, we're using this cost
neutral.
Factor
And, and, but it's neutral
compared to what? and we're
comparing it to something that
doesn't exist.
That we're comparing it to
institutional care that that
that that doesn't exist and so
it's, it, it becomes very easy
to be cost neutral by holding
down what we're spending on the
program. If we were actually
reflecting on what the cost of
institutional care is we could
be cost neutral with a much
higher reimbursement rate. Is
that the, is that the crux?
That one, that's.
That one? OK, that is part of
it. The other part of it is not
one.
Inch, not one iota in those
evaluations has anything to do
with the quality of care we're
providing people.
They don't talk about, they're
not collecting data on the abuse
and neglect. They're not there's
a thing called critical
incidents, medication things,
hospitalizations, law
enforcement, and emergency
rooms.
Right?
That's all collected. They're
not using any of that. The the
care of people God has nothing
to do with the measurement.
There's a word in any of those
evaluations about how we're
taking care of them. And the
most despicable part of this
thing is we don't even consider
them, uh, their longevity and
the amount of years we allow our
people to live. We don't talk
about the average age of life,
uh, age of death in an ACQ
meeting earlier this year, I
found, I heard that the people
in the Ma waiver were dying
substantially younger than the
deep D wave.
Think about that.
Why? No, no, we don't keep the
data. We don't do it and we
don't report it to you. So when
they go to these other states,
oh they have a much, much
cheaper waiver and they use this
other thing. Well, how long are
they letting their people live?
Are they killing them off
quicker? People here know that
if you don't give them therapy,
they live, they die horrible,
horrible deaths. And I, I want
to read you the dedication on
this. This is gonna be tough.
The past 12 years of advocacy
research, investigation,
reporting or dedicated my son
Eric and his.
Comrades and friends, I'm on the
waiver, who we had to watch die
horrible deaths in underfunded
group homes over the last 28
years knowing he might be next.
This is to penny us, Jeremy G,
Tim M, Danny V, Glennis, and
Gayle S.
Penny died of starvation.
Jeremy G had CP and uh never had
adequate therapy. He turned into
a twisted mess.
Um, he got to where they
couldn't feed him. He was in
agony all the time. The staff
was so undertrained that he
would moan 8 or 10 hours a day
because he was in pain until
they'd finally give him his
sleeping pill he'd wake up the
next morning and he'd go through
it all again until he finally
passed away and that went on for
years.
Tim M uh got sick, staff didn't
know, they couldn't get a hold
of her. She was doing her
full-time job. The only time she
ever saw clients in that agency
was Monday morning when they
paraded him by her. Well, that
was on a weekend, too bad. He
got dehydrated and died of
dehydration, died of thirst.
Well, in reaction to that, the
nurse flipped out and told him
the roommate who was also sick
to make sure that he got at
least 6 quarts of water a day.
She meant cups, not quarts.
He drowned. Glen asked, who had
been in Fort Stanton, had been
castorated at Las Vegas, um, was
sick. They used to send him to
the hospital. When he got home,
he was in pain. He couldn't
explain. he couldn't tell you
what was going on. Finally,
after a few days, they sent a
therapist over to see what the
heck was going on. Well, he came
out of the hospital with a
broken hip. He'd obviously
fallen out of the bed.
So they take him back, try and
refix the hip, right? Then they
send him home and they realize
he hasn't paid for a few days.
OK, so here we go back to the
emergency room. Well, the doctor
says we got to put in a
catheter. Then he realizes oh
Glen never got circumcised and
he's got too much stuff down
there for him to deal with. So
he tells the nurse to
anesthetize it and goes on. When
he comes back, he thinks he's
got, he's fine, he's
anesthetized, and while he's
whacking the end of his thing
off to get the thing in, he
strokes out and dies.
That's why and then we've got
the most recent one, Li Gay, um,
they were understaffed. They had
a staff there that couldn't feed
her. She was in bed. They didn't
feed her. She laid in her own
feces for days after day after
day. She got horrible to the
bone bed sores at one point, and
I've got this was turned in by
the way. One staff asking
another how do I, how do I
repack her wound? Now that's a
nurse thing. A a pressure sore
to the bone, and they're saying,
well, how do I repack it? Right.
There there's not a mention of.
Giving this woman any kind of
pain medication? Can you imagine
this? You've got a hole in your
butt all the way to the bone.
And we're not going to do that.
These are real people who really
died. And the other thing I
wanna say, and, and I've given
this a lot of thought. I'd like
to thank Scott Doan at DDSD.
Scott is dedicated his entire
life to the impossible task of
trying to promote health,
safety, and dignity of the
developmental disabled
community.
And um that's despite grossly
inadequate funding and
administration after
administration that places
absolutely no value on these
people's lives.
That's my
Senator Rodriguez, you still
have the floor. Yes, thank you,
Mr. Chairman. Just briefly, um,
and thank you again, Robert.
The, um, when I mentioned that
we should have HSD and uh now
Healthcare Authority and the
Department of Health here, um,
perhaps we should have the
parties that have been mentioned
today. We can have staff from
LFC so they can hear it directly
as these departments are
actually answering our
questions. The staff, in all
fairness to them too, they, they
get the information.
from these departments. That's
what they bank on. So if the
departments are giving them a
set of information and they're
giving us a different set of
information, then we need to, we
need to, to bring them all
together here and get one piece
of accurate and adequate
information, data, and so on
that we need so that, um, we can
look at this, you know, these
are issues that truly can't wait
anymore. They couldn't wait 29
years ago when I first started
in the Senate, and they're still
here
And just getting worse. Robert's
right. Something's wrong.
Well, Senator, and the, the, the
staff you have overseeing it
aren't the staff at LFC that
does the evaluations like
Rubyana. I can't find her name
on any of them. And and she's
been involved as long as I can
remember.
So I, I, I just can't figure
out, you know, they call in a
few people and say, we'll pull
this stuff we'll go back to the
last one and say, oh yeah, it's
too expensive and let's find out
why. OK, well, why is it? And I
have, I have found out from some
sources that
LFC is in this time of year is
dictating what the budget is
going to be given to them
because we figured it out and
all boats float and we're gonna
give you this much and you deal
with it and it has absolutely no
relationship whatsoever to
needs.
If we funded education like
this. Every time the teachers
got a raise, we closed down
entry to first grade. And if we
did evaluations like that, we'd
look at every school district in
the world and the one thing we
wouldn't measure is if anybody
graduated. That's what we're
doing in the waiver.
Representative Chasey, you're
next.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you, Robert, for your
persistence and dedication. It,
it seems to me.
As I look back and, um,
When we have had catastrophes
going on, the state auditor
looked into it at in-depth. I
know when, um, Tim Keller was a
state auditor, and then he
turned the information over to
the Attorney General. Um, I'm
thinking that certainly we
should at least bring this to
the attention of the state
auditor, Mr. Chair, unless you
have another suggestion, Roberts
of the entire legislature of the
state of New.
Mexico last at the end of the
session last year asked the
Attorney General to investigate
the waiver. Two-thirds of the
standing legislature.
And they were going to talk to.
Representative Thompson.
Well, Mr. Chairman, I, I think
really the auditor could provide
the Attorney General with what's
needed. I, I, I, I, I think I
hear from everybody they're
understaffed. I mean, but I, I
don't know. I.
I think I know that.
The AG is still hiring and um,
so they probably don't have the
investigatory capacity at this
point to do it, but I, I.
I really think we need to have a
meeting with the auditor,
perhaps the um
I, I don't know if you want to
do that.
Um
So that this committee, I think,
takes it very seriously, so that
your, um,
Your frustration and anger don't
mean you're an outlier, but that
We know this is
um, serious, and we've got to
have the state look at this.
I mean, unless there's an
inspector general somewhere
who's going to look at it, but
I, I actually think the auditor
would be a good place to begin.
That's definitely something we
can consider a representative, I
mean, Senator Servio Lopez,
thank you, Representative Chasey
actually made my point. I think
that we need to have a
professional investigation by
the auditor, or I was going to
say the attorney General's
office, um, and I know we, I
know we tried to do that. It's
very disappointing to me to see
that nothing happened after that
referral to the Attorney
General's office, but maybe the
auditor can
Spare some of the investigation,
but we need to have, we can't.
I've listened to Robert in the
hallways since I started. And
It's just, it's so frustrating
to hear this and to know that
there seems to be no oversight.
Um, yes, part of the reason is
we don't have staff, um, as a
committee, so that's a piece of
the reading, but the other, the
other piece is that we don't
have anybody at the AG's office
or the Attorney General's office
following up on this. And I
think we should, um, at least,
You know, just request, you come
to come to us and tell us what
you found after an
investigation.
So this is, I guess, a
suggestion for another strongly
worded letter to the auditor or
the or a meeting, I think a
meeting would probably be
better.
Representative Chasing Mr.
Chairman Rubien just mentioned
to me that the healthcare
authority does have an inspector
general now.
That with the reorganization, so
there's that perhaps we should
include that person along with
the auditors say who's who's um
wheelhouse is this?
But this committee expects it to
be addressed.
I, I guess I, I just had never
thought of the state auditor as
somebody that would get involved
in stuff like this. I always
thought they only dealt with
fiscal matters, budgetary
matters, and
well, but I mean, but, but.
The budget, I mean, the fiscal
Scope of the program may be
perfectly adequate from a, from
an accountant's point of view,
but the quality of the care is
what is what, you know, we're,
we're so concerned about, so,
but I mean it's certainly worth
seeing and if, if, if Tim Keller
when he was state auditor,
broadened the the scope of the
office and maybe that's
something we could follow up on.
Representative Jones.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Robert.
So you've been doing this
research for 12 years?
And this the description of the
care that was received or not
received for all, all of these
people who died.
is just horrifying to me. It,
it's, I'm sick to my stomach
right now.
Makes me want to cry. I mean, I
feel really helpless as a
legislator here, especially a
nurse, thinking of just the lack
of basic care that caused
people's death.
This is so much more serious
than writing a letter or having
a meeting or having an auditor
investigate.
I just don't, I mean, I don't
even know what
where to go next, but it's
criminal what's happening. So
It's the criminal residential
abuse and neglect. It is
criminal, isn't it more
important than having a meeting?
Isn't there something more that
we could do to have a meeting?
He's, here's the thing, excuse
me, if you have staff that are
grossly understaffed which are
in all of our group homes.
Because the, the way they pay
them for staff is you have to
have 3.5 residents for a
Category 4 group home.
Now over here and it, you know,
in, in.
David Abbey's daughter's world,
they have plenty of staff.
you're in the waive or they
don't.
And there is no overtime. They
don't pay them for overtime.
So somebody doesn't show up. The
reason I had to drive from Santa
Fe to Almagora this weekend and
so I staffed my kid's house.
So, so what you're saying is
that a change in how we pay
people would make the
difference, or at least some of
the difference. Well, the first
thing to look at is our own
state program and see what we're
doing there.
And compare their rate of abuse
and neglect to the community
and, and, and.
Rat up the numbers. But to
pretend like we don't have them
and tell the feds we don't, that
doesn't work.
You know, where we've got a
sacred cow program, yeah.
And frankly, my kid gets all
kinds of exceptions because he's
blind, he's a quadriplegic. They
starved him to death during
COVID, almost killed him, had to
have a feeding tube put in. He's
normally intelligent, right?
But he's wild child spastic. You
can't put him in a hoy lift. So,
and, you know, Scott Dolan the
department have really tried to
do a good job because I'm
outspoken and won't take
anything, and I actually uh and
the other thing is I have a a
ellate court order that they
provide him service. So I don't
have to go through the BS.
So you're, you are an advocate
for these people. Do we not have
another advocate? I know that,
you know, when, when I've worked
in nursing homes, for instance,
for short periods, they had an
ombudsman you could report a
lack of care and proper care to
someone who said, yes, this is
happening, um, is that that may
be what what Rubien just pointed
out to Representative Chasey
that now HCA does seem to have
an inspector general that
You could at least take some of
these concerns too, but this
goes beyond, I mean, if, if
crimes are, are being
investigated and is
substantiated, but nothing is
done about it.
There's something we need to do,
and if we're paying our programs
so poorly that they can't staff
safety and the security of the
of the patients, there's
something we should do about it
and if we're paying our state
program people more than we're
willing to pay the community
program people.
We should be doing something
about that too. That's at least
3 things that I think this
committee ought to pick up and,
and deal with. I'm gonna have to
cut this short now because we
are about to eat lunch and if we
don't eat lunch now, we'll never
eat lunch. Mr. Chair, just
quickly, I don't know if we all
recall the extensive, um, aging,
um,
Investigations that went into
the long-term care of our aging
pop uh facilities. I don't
remember how many years back it
was, but it was an extensive
even investigation
because of similar
circumstances. People were
dying, um, negligently in the
homes and there was an extensive
investigation that was an
auditor involved, the Attorney
general office of the Inspector
general involved in a highly
Uh, publicized and consequently,
um, there was a, a number of, of
homes, um, investigated and
closed, and I think that's one
of the times that governor, she
wasn't governor then, she, I
believe she was congressman,
Congresswoman Michelle, no, who
was it? She was Secretary of,
yes, yes, went in, um, how do
you call it when you're not?
You're not undercover, whatever,
and um, and, and.
So I think that kind of a blow
up, uh, with, with the potential
of criminal investigation is
something that we need to demand
in the and it's gotten to the
point, Robert's been, since I
got elected and since I was the
first term, Robert's been.
Dealing with this on a personal
level as well as legislatively.
We need to just now put a stop
to it. And, um, and end it. My
mother-in-law was in one of
those homes, and unfortunately,
she was negligently, uh, treated
and died as a result, and we
went before that committee and
testified, um, so it is, it is
terrible for this to happen, but
consequently things where we um.
We regrouped higher pay, all
kinds of things changed. Homes
facilities were closed, uh,
language barriers were, were,
um, improved and all kinds of
changes occurred. There's still
problems in those homes, but now
they're closely watched. So I
think the same type of thing we
need to undertake. Sorry for.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So I got
in, my son got on the DDA for 25
years ago and I started my
advocacy at that time on this
issue. So there are champions,
but there's like a handful of
us and we can't seem to get the
groundswell. I mean, and, and I
know that almost everyone in the
legislature. I was so excited
when everyone in the legislature
seemed like they knew what the
DD waiver was because for the
longest time they had no idea.
So we've come that far, but we
need, we just need to do
something, um, my son, as I've
said, is 6'7, stronger than a
horse, and can get violent. Who
wants to work with him for $15
an hour when you can flip
burgers at McDonald's for 19. He
may hurt you. He wipes feces on
the ceiling. He breaks
furniture. He pulls toilets out
of the floor. He breaks
windshields and his agency gets
no money for any of that damage
that he does.
They have to come up with it
from their budget that they're
supposed to be paying people so
needless to say that doesn't
work real well. So we are
looking at putting him in an ICF
just to save the agency money
and have him in a safer place
and then turnover is ridiculous
and with Eric, if you get to
know Eric, you know his
triggers, you know what to do,
but when you have new staff
every week they're gonna do
something that's gonna upset him
or they're not going to read his
cue and then
Something is going to happen and
it's, it, it's just totally
ridiculous and then um we do
rate studies, uh, to find out
what we should pay these people.
It's like the minimum that we
can pay them we and then they do
a rate study and they don't put
it into effect for 4 or 5 years.
So by the time they do the rate
steady increase, it's way behind
inflation already, so we, we
have set this system up to be a
total disaster, and we've gotten
what we set up. Thank you, Mr.
Mr. Chair.
Well, thank you, Robert. Uh, one
quick thing on your, your a
couple of points we need to go
forward is right now in the ICFs
we are, we don't have the uh a
waiting list for them to report
to for openings so nobody can
get in line for them, and
they're an entitlement. You can
move if you don't want to be in
the way where you can go to an
ICF. If you're on the waiting
list, once you qualify for the
waiting list, you're qualifying
for an ICF.
Is there space in the ICF for
you? Yeah, a lot of people are
moving to the waivers. But the
problem is their rates are so
low they can only take low needs
people. Now, when we re-based
the entire complete Medicaid
system.
Every service, every hospital,
every inpatient, everything,
every tooth pulling, every
nitpicking, everything you could
possibly do. The one thing
Mercer left out was intermediate
care facilities and it's in the
report. They said, well, we
couldn't find their, the
comparing states online, so we
just didn't.
NHSD said, oh, OK.
That's fine. We haven't re-based
them in years.
And they can't take high needs
people. In fact, they're
discharging people when their
needs get too high. They say,
well, we don't have the staff to
do it and it endangers our other
clients.
And that's happening at El
Mirador right now.
OK, so.
We've had lots of ideas here we
have on Wednesday at 10:30.
A report from the healthcare
authority's Developmental
Disability waiver, an update
from them.
It will give us a chance to
pursue this even further and,
and this is certainly something
that we would want to put on our
list of things that we want to
propose some kind of legislative
action on. So thank you, Robert,
for bringing this. Members take
those reports with you and, and
read through them far more
detail than Robert could cover
here in the time we've given
him, but thanks, Robert for all
the work you do on this.
Thank you. And, and members of
lunch today is being sponsored
by the dynamic duo of Jason
Weeks and Al Park, uh, they,
they are paying for the lunch.
It's actually being provided by
the university, but, but, uh,
uh, Jason and Al are the ones
that are paying for it today. So
with that we'll break for lunch
and we'll return at one o'clock
or maybe a few minutes after. I
think it's available right here
to help yourselves.
