Um
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Representative Montoya, uh, from
San Juan County represent uh
Farmington, Aztec Relata.
I'm glad to be here today.
Excuse me. Good morning, Madam
Chair, uh, Representative Andrea
Romero from um Northern Santa Fe
County, representing four
sovereign pueblos, um, the city
of Santa Fe all the way through
this, uh, city of Espanola.
Thank you.
Good morning. I'm Renatapansy. I
represent House District 47 in
Santa Fe County.
Good morning. I'm Gail Chasey.
My district is in Albuquerque
and the university and Not Hill
and um that area of town.
Glad to be here.
Thank you, Senator Woods, take
it off from that side, my left
side.
Well, thank you for allowing me
to speak, Madam Chair. Uh, my
name is uh Senator Pat Woods
from Curryquay and Union
Counties and
Uh, will you allow my, my
counterpart that covers part of
Curry or our car Quay County to
speak also.
In her compost and you can sit
up at the table, thank you very
much, Madam Co-Chair, and it's
great to go ahead and be here
with the committee this morning.
State Senator Pete Campos
representing all the parts of 7
counties in northeastern New
Mexico, always with my
counterpart, Senator Pat Woods.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I'm
Senator Craig Brandt, uh, I
represent uh the town of Rear
Rancho in Sandoval County.
Used to leave the town a little
bit and go to the town of
Bernalillo, but not anymore, so
I'm just in Rear Rancho and.
I, to my right is my neighbor.
Uh, good morning, Madam
President, Mr. Speaker, Senator
Michael Patius and served as the
Senate majority whip, uh, the
southern portion of Bernalillo
County.
Thank you downtown Albuquerque.
Good Morning again, everyone.
I'm state Senator Mimi Stewart,
District 17 and the East Gateway
area and International District
of Albuquerque. So we do have a
quorum.
And uh
If you see your yellow sheet,
this is the agenda. Um, I will
accept the motion to approve our
agenda.
So
OK, in the opposition to that,
seeing none, we have approved
the.
Agenda, let's also do a motion
to approve the minutes of our
last meeting, which were emailed
to all of us,
Agenda, let's also do a motion
to approve the minutes of our
last meeting, which were emailed
to all of them
moved
to approve any opposition for
approval of the men, seeing
none, we have done that. So, uh,
We have some per diem approvals.
Um, I'll just go ahead and uh
Do these because Sean is about
to be able to have to talk for a
long time.
So we're going to have new
member orientation on that first
week of December, uh, December
2nd, 3rd and 4th.
Uh, I'm gonna tell you all of
these and just ask for emotion
for all of them. Uh, this would
be an approval for new members
to receive per diem at the
public rate for their
attendance. That's our first
one. secondly, we're gonna have
a few members assisting with
that orientation.
Uh, so the per diem approval
would also would be for just a
handful of those, and finally we
had a uh committee uh that never
got a quorum and they traveled
to the southern part of the
state. This is the tobacco
settlement revenue Oversight
Committee, so there's 2 people
that showed up, this would be uh
proving their per diem for that
meeting.
So any questions about those,
any comments, um, I'll accept a
motion to approve Senator Brown.
And President, I would move that
those uh per diems be accepted.
All right, we're on a motion to
approve those. Any comments or
questions? Any opposition to
those. All right, seeing none,
we've approved those.
Yes.
Representative Chase, uh, thank
you,
Madam Chairman,
I have one that I just realized
last night, so I hadn't had an
opportunity to let you know. But
the Council of State governments
has been working with a number
of states on youth justice and
adolescent services, and they
have included New Mexico and
they have connected with the
governor's office, CYFD
leadership, the administrative
office of the courts, um, and
then through me and Alisa Lara,
my chief of staff with
Legislative
Health and Human Services and
CCJ.
They're gonna be here on um
November 9th.
And 20th and 21st, but the
excuse me, 19th, 192021.
On the 19th, they're going to do
a presentation at lunchtime with
policymakers, um,
Uh, and the governor's office,
CYFD leadership, AOC, and I'm
wondering if, if members because
there's gonna be a lot of
emphasis on juvenile justice,
wanted to attend that if they
could um get pretty in that day.
LHHS will be here, so that
wouldn't be necessary. It would
just be right by request to the
individual members of perhaps of
CCJ or other interested parties.
Well, so uh this is in line with
the policy we've already
adopted, which is members.
And choose up to 3 events a year
that are in state.
Uh to attempt this sounds to me
like it would be one of those.
And so it be the same process,
uh, members would, uh, uh, ask
the speaker from the house or me
from the senate, uh, and then
that approval comes because if
they haven't gone to 3 of them.
Uh, so I don't, so I don't think
we need to add that. OK, thank
you very much.
Uh, any other questions or
comments before we get started?
So, uh
So our, our subcommittee of our
six chiefs of staff.
from the
House minority and majority
Senate minority and majority and
our chief clerks and Shawna, um,
are the, our subcommittee. Did I
get that all right, Shawna? Uh,
that's working on our
policylicies for our new staff.
So they've met again. They have
brought us a some changes and I
like to ask Shawna to go through
those at this time.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the council.
Uh, so first, the policy
proposal revisions are in your
folder. There is a red line
version. There is also a clean
copy. The clean copy is also
posted to the web page, uh, for
members of the public to follow
along.
Um, as Madam Chair, uh,
mentioned this council uh
directed the chief clerks of the
House and Senate, 6 chief clerks
of the staff representing the
four caucuses and the LCS
director to form a working group
to establish policies and
guidelines for district offices
and staff and to bring those
recommendations to the council
for your consideration and
potential approval. That policy,
policy number 27, was developed
and adopted by the council as
June 24th meeting.
The proposed policy proposal
revisions that I am presenting
to you today, um, represent a, a
general consensus um of this
working group on changes that
are recommended to the policy to
address questions and concerns
that have arisen in the process
of legislators hiring district
legislative aides and
establishing district offices,
uh, beginning September 1, those
legislators who are incumbent
and did not have or do not have
general election opposition.
We're allowed to begin hiring
district legislative aides and
the date 23 district legislative
aides have been hired.
Uh, before I present these
policy proposals to you all. I
would like to note that the
district office working group
doesn't tend to continue to
meet, uh, to discuss the issues
that are arising and to ensure
that everyone who is involved in
this process in the hiring, uh,
in the establishment of offices
is carrying out and messaging
the policies that were adopted
by this council. Um, so unless
an urgent issue arises or the
council directs us to bring
policy revisions back to you.
Um, I do not
not intend to propose further
policy revisions to the council
until sometime after session.
So, um, I will go ahead and
proceed with reviewing the
specifics, and we are looking at
the district office policies,
uh, which is 27, not to be
confused with the code of
conduct.
So the first one in subsection
A.
Uh, this, uh, proposed revision
that the title of the district
staff position shall be district
legislative aid, and no other
title shall be used.
Um, this has been, uh,
Proposed because it's come to
the working group's attention
that some individuals working in
the DLA position and um I will
use the acronym DLA throughout
this presentation. So that means
district uh legislative aid, um,
but it's our understanding that
some people in that role are
using the title of Chief of
Staff or chief analyst, or other
such titles. Um, the official
title of the position is
district legislative aid, that
imports with a specific, uh, job
duty descriptions, uh,
restrictions, limitations, etc.
and also comports.
with a specific uh P band within
the class and compensation plan.
So it's really we've the group
feels that it's important, uh,
to be clear that the position is
a district legislative aid
position and not in the other
position, which would be uh
related to different class and
comp and different duties. So
that is the first uh proposed
policy revision.
The second one in new subsection
B asserts that DLAs are not to
work as session staff.
Session staff are hired by the
chief clerks to perform
session-related duties and the
DLA's responsibilities are to
the legislators and constituents
in the district.
One person cannot perform both
the duties of session staff and
district legislative aid. The
DLA working session staff leaves
a gap in services to
constituents in the district,
and there is a great
administrative burden on hiring
and rehiring the same person for
district roles.
Um, however, recognizing that
there could be a circumstance in
which someone hired as a DLA
decides that they would prefer
to work session, the policy
proposal allows for that.
However, there's a cooling off
period to discourage that person
from then being rehired as a DLA
after session.
So sub B uh states district
legislate shall not work as a
session staff. But if that
person does work as session
staff, there is a 90 day cooling
off period after the termination
date, uh, of that person's
employment as session staff
before they could be hired as a
DLA.
The 3rd policy proposal is in
new subsection C, and this is
very similar to the previous
point, but is in regards to
district office liaisons, um,
each of the leadership offices
per council policy has been
authorized to hire a district um
office liaison to be in a
coordination position between
the district legislative aid,
legislators, other legislative
staff.
Um, there's a concern that if
these individuals are also
working as session staff, that
they will not be able to uh
engage in their duties as
district office liaisons, and
that work is going to continue
throughout session. So the
policy proposal here is to state
that a district office liaison
shall not work as session staff.
And again, the same
consideration also comes into
play in that session staff
hiring is the purview of the
chief clerks and um the the same
person working in similar
roles is incompatible.
So the next policy proposal
revision is down in subsection
G, uh, formerly subsection F.
And this is with regards to um
establishing district offices.
Uh, the language here really is
just clarifying language that
the legislator may propose the
location, uh, the final approval
is subject to a collaborative
process between the district
office liaison and the
legislative council service, and
then further states or clarifies
that the director of the council
service, uh, is the one who
executes all leases and
memorandums of understanding for
district offices on behalf of
the Legislative council.
Uh, moving on to new subsection
H, formerly G, um,
So the, the working group
has some strong concerns about
budget considerations for
district offices. Uh, to date,
there have been a handful of
leases or memorandums of
understanding that have been
brought to, well, to me
personally or to the district
office liaisons for review. Um,
a lot of spaces that are in
public spaces, public buildings,
universities with counties,
cities, etc. um, are generally
free of cost, uh, or very
nominal cost.
Often in those uh arrangements,
the public entity is taking
responsibility for instance for
repairs, for utilities, for
signage, for parking. Um, it's
kind of a, a full service
agreement, um, if you will.
Um, some of the, the market rate
or private sector leases we've
seen, uh, are more expensive as
they are market rate and that
can vary greatly throughout the
state. Um, there are also often
additional clauses that, um, I
believe the working group needs
to think through and work
through how we're going to
address, um, some of these
clauses refer to maintenance,
let's say, and placing
maintenance, um, responsibility
on the tenants, uh, in which
case that would be the council
service. Uh, we're not currently
set up to provide
maintenance on office space
throughout the state. Um, so
that's something we need to
consider how we would handle
that in a market rate lease.
There are also um other
provisions um such as there may
be culinary maintenance fees, CA
fees, um, oftentimes those
spaces also, uh, may not have
signage or other amenities that
may be provided free of charge
by a public entity. So there
really are additional budget
considerations um with entering
market rate leases at this time.
And as I know you're aware, uh,
last
Legislative session, uh, the
legislature, uh, appropriated $6
million to the council service
to start this program and to
start the rollout of district
legislative aids and
establishment of district
offices, um, pursuant to the,
uh, studies that were undertaken
by the focus group last year.
There is an estimated cost that
the full rollout, so for 112
legislators who all have um
staff and to also establish
district offices is probably
more in the range of $14 million
and the appropriate
from last year was, uh, last
session was $6 million. So we
currently don't have a full
budget situation that we are
working with.
Um, the working group proposes
that um market rate leases not
be entered into until July 1st,
because at that time, um, it is,
uh, assumed that there will
maybe be a uh a larger budget
appropriation from the
legislature to carry out this
program, and we'll have a better
idea, um, as to what those
outlays might be for district
offices. So the policy proposal
revision in new age, uh, former
G is to provide
that, uh, you know, spaces that
are market rate, uh, would not
be able to enter into until July
1st. And again, that is largely
based on budget considerations,
um, with market rate leases.
OK, so moving on, uh, to
New sub I.
Many questions have arisen from
legislators as to if or how they
can purchase additional
additional supplies uh for
district offices. Um, and I do
have a list of all of the
supplies that are already being
provided when those offices are
being set up. So all of the
district offices, uh, or
district legislative aides are
being provided with basic office
supplies to get started. You
know, this includes things like
a stapler, tape, tape dispenser,
pens, pencils, post-its, paper
clips, legal pads, eyelighters,
scissors.
mouse, correction tape, uh, in
addition to computers and uh
keyboards and mice, um,
printers, toner, paper for the
printer. So it's kind of this uh
this basic uh set of office,
office supplies, though, uh, we
have gotten requests from some
legislators that they would like
to purchase additional office
supplies. Um, as these are state
agency, uh, offices, um, you
know, the leases are entered
into by the council service, a
uh branch or an agency
of the legislative branch, uh,
we need to be very careful about
one budget considerations.
Again, uh, we don't really have
enough full information at the
moment to ensure that if a
legislator wants to purchase
some additional item, that
there's enough budget for other
legislators to also purchase
that additional item. We also
have procurement code, uh,
considerations, and as a state
agency, uh, we must be following
the procurement code in the
purchase of any additional
supplies for these offices. So
new eye.
Uh, just puts forth that a
legislator shall obtain office
supplies, etc. Um, through the
request to the district office,
uh, liaison and or the
Legislative council Service,
council service is working very
closely with the district office
liaisons and other leadership
staff on, um,
On these, these procedures, um,
but this is really to ensure
that there's budget available
for the purchase of these items
and also that procurement code
uh processes are being followed.
Um, similarly with leases, any
unreasonable extraordinary costs
for additional supplies, uh,
would be brought to the council
for your review and
consideration.
There is additionally a clause
here that the council service
shall not reimburse legislators
or expenses that are paid from
personal or campaign funds. Um,
there has been some, uh,
suggestion or request at this,
at this moment that a legislator
could go out and purchase
supplies and get reimbursed, um,
I, I feel that that or the
working group feels that's a
disfavorable position, again for
budget and procurement code
issues. So that is new sub I.
Going down to new sub L,
formerly J. uh, this is really
just clarification.
Uh, the district legislative
aides do work at the pleasure of
the legislator who hired the
individual, um, but for
administrative logistics, leave
requests, so all district
legislative aides as employees
of the state are accruing leave,
annual leave, sick leave, etc.
um, and for administrative
purposes, those need to flow
through the district office
liaisons. Uh, so this, uh,
revision clarifies that process.
Moving on to new subsection P.
This is, uh, in regards to
travel for district legislative
aids.
Uh, the working group recognizes
that DLAs will likely need to
undertake some work travel as
requested by the hiring
legislator.
However, a one size fits all
approach to travel is going to
be inadequate because of the
geographic differences between
all of the districts. Some
districts are geographically
quite large. Others are rather
small.
And uh the working group
proposes that a travel budget be
developed for each of the
districts based on a formula,
uh, that takes into account the
size of the district and also
adequately allows for all of the
DLAs to do a reasonable amount
of travel throughout the year.
Uh, the working group would
intend to bring this formula
back to this council.
To, uh, to review and approve,
um,
Well before July 1st, 2025.
Um, and July 1st, of course, was
chosen because that is the
beginning of the new fiscal
year, and when a new uh budget
appropriation will likely be
available.
Uh, this policy proposal also is
specific to in-state travel. So
out of state travel, currently
the policy is silent on out of
state travel, uh, which
translates to out of state
travel not currently being
authorized. I believe that is a,
um, discussion that the working
group will continue to have and
to bring back to uh this council
later in the springtime, um, a,
a proposal for your review.
And lastly, on these policy
proposal revisions. I'd just
like to point out that towards
the very end of the policy, uh,
there is a strikeout regarding a
district legislative age shall
not engage in electioneering.
Uh, this is not intended to mean
that a district legislative aid
can engage in electioneering,
rather the working group, uh,
after much discussion, has
decided or uh proposes to uh to
put this information into the
legislative code of conduct.
Uh, which is, uh, applies to all
of the legislative employees,
uh, so it's not specific, uh,
within the policy regarding
DLAs, um, and that code of
conduct and those policy
proposal revisions, um, is the
council's next order of
business. So I just wanted to
let you know that that is being
moved, not that it's being
proposed to be eliminated from
the policy.
Um, and with that, Madam Chair,
I, uh, do stand for questions.
Right. Thank you so much. Uh,
first on my list is Senator
Brown.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, uh, director for bringing
this uh policy change, and I
want to thank the working group
for for their thoughtfulness on
this. Um, I, I do have a couple
of areas that I have concern on.
Um, and there's even been some,
some question as to, uh, and
this is really dealing with the
district office.
Situations
Um, I think G and and H.
That were passed before, uh,
Gave us
The ability to go out and find
office space.
Um, which I did.
Um, I
Checked with the public
entities. I live in a very
strange community, uh, for New
Mexico. We're actually growing.
Uh, Last year, Riar Rancho grew
by 17% of the population. Um,
there is no other city in New
Mexico that has even come close
to growing.
4%.
Um, there's nothing available in
The rear rancho area.
All the public buildings um are
full.
Uh, there was one space that I
had thought about at City Hall.
Um, that we used to use for the
VA, they're now using it for
something else.
Um, and there's just, there's
just nothing available in rear
end. So after doing that, uh,
began to look at the market, um,
the, the market in Rear Rancho
goes anywhere from currently
because it's all increased in
the last year and the study was
done a couple of years ago from
about $23 a square foot for a
very small cubicle, uh, in
another inside of another
building that's hidden.
Um, to 30 $35 a square foot for
one that's in a visible place
for people to know where your
office is.
I was able to find a place that
had been sitting empty for a
while.
Um
Because I was concerned about
everything being snapped up. I
actually rented it out of my
campaign funds and you and I'm
using it as a campaign office.
Uh, and did this with Raul
knowing about it. Raw and I had
been working on this for quite
some time, um.
He looked at everything and
said, yeah, I don't think it's
unreasonable, uh, to, uh, bring
that and we had uh
I rented it through the month of
November.
So that we could start on
December 1st, just like the
policy said.
Um, so I have concerns with now
in the middle of this policy. I
don't know if there's any other
legislators that have done that.
Alan Martinez and I are doing
this together in, in that space,
and we plan to actually add a
third person if that person wins
the race, which they're doing
right now.
Um, and so.
We would split that cost 3 ways.
It's actually even reasonable if
it was just one.
Uh, but
It sets up other things that
make it more beneficial by
having more than one person, and
I would highly recommend if
you're able to double up.
For your staff's safety.
That that's really a good idea
because then you don't have a
staff person sitting in an
office by themselves.
Um, for people to come in. And
so that was the first thing Alan
and I talked about is we need to
at least double up so that we
can have
Two people in that office all
the time.
It's just for safety matters.
Um, so we found this space, we
rented it, and you actually, I
met with you and Raoul before
Raul left, and then we have met
again, um, and we're currently
in the middle of negotiating a
contract that this policy would
now not allow us to do.
My big concern with waiting till
July is not just the fact that
I'll have to take all that
furniture that's been donated,
we didn't charge.
Or have any cost to the state
for the furniture for the
office.
Um
I'll have to find a place to
store it.
Rent a place to store it.
Keep it in storage, it's heavy.
So now I'm gonna have to hire
someone to help move it because
my back does not allow me to
move that kind of stuff.
And um so there's there's a lot
of other expenses that go into
not keeping that place.
Um, as well as there will be no
place available because there's
someone else already trying to
rent that space out from under
me.
And so that's the situation in
Rear Rancho, and it's, it's,
it's unique. This is probably
not a situation that you're
gonna see anywhere else, you
won't see it in Santa Fe, you
won't see it in, in Albuquerque.
And, and so I'm not really sure
what I'm supposed to do.
Um, and so I don't think that
that policy actually is, is a
good change. I think everyone
What are you gonna do with your
District legislative aid, if
they don't have a place.
Work.
They're gonna work out of their
home or they're gonna work, you
know, they have kids, so they're
gonna, you know, how are they
gonna do their job?
How's the constituents because
the main job.
Of this is for constituents to
be able to come in and get
constituent services.
Where the constituents gonna
meet with your staff person.
At their home
Oh.
Alan, I guess we can meet with
them at the Starbucks like we do
now.
For the legislative aid.
Well
You know, as we see in another
policy,
That we're gonna talk about is
the confidentiality issue.
When you're meeting with a
constituent, there's a lot of
times there's a lot of
confidential information to
share.
I don't want to have that shared
in a Starbucks.
Or in any other public building.
I want it to be where
It can be in private.
And so that person can have that
ability to share their situation
and what they need help with.
They're not coming to us
because, you know, they had to
wait 10 minutes at DMV.
That's not the reason they're
coming down.
They come to us for for real
situations that usually have us
needing to get their social
security number or their family
social security number or
dealing with a CYFD issue
that's, that's very private.
I don't think we want to do that
at Starbucks. That's, that's why
we're doing this in the first
place, and I think we need to
think about the constituents
that we're doing this for.
And so that's what I did with
the location that we, we found,
um, as well as with the staff
that I'm looking at hiring on
December 1st, and I just don't
think that this policy of
waiting until July is a good
one.
Don't mind the other parts, you
know, we're going from the
legislator may select. That was
what I looked at under when I
selected the location for my
office.
proposing
It's a big difference in that
one word.
Um, I think that's fine. I like
adding the word adequate.
Right? So if we're looking at a
public space, let's say there
was a public space at UNL.
Where you and M is in Rear
Rancho?
is not an adequate place to have
a constituent service office.
It, it's just not, rear ranch is
weird.
And I say that as someone who
who loves the city, but
You know
There is no housing around the
city center of Rear Ancho.
It's very strange. It's just
they kind of took the building
and
put the city center in the
middle of
Of the town without thinking
about infrastructure or anything
else.
So those are the situations I'm
having to deal with.
As far as getting a space and
getting office and, and this
policy change would make it go
till July. By July, there will
be no, there'll be no space in
Rancho. I, I won't be able to
rent a broom closet.
By July.
Because the city is maintaining
that 17% growth every year.
We don't have commercial
properties being sprung up or
office buildings being sprung
up. Maybe they will eventually.
Maybe by the end of my next
4-year term.
This 4-year term coming up.
They will.
They don't know.
So I don't know how we address
that, so I just wanted to bring
that. Thank you, Senator and
Shana, assuming you have a
response.
Or not?
Madam Chair, members of the
council, um, what I am
presenting today is the best
thinking of the working group on
these issues and, and general
consensus uh decision. I
absolutely um hear the concerns
that Senator Brandt raises. Um,
however, it is, uh, this
council's uh determination as to
what the policy will be going
forward. Um, I do think the
budget considerations are
significant and challenging. We
are in a, in a
But with that being said, some
of those considerations will
still exist in July in terms of
how do we budget for each of
these districts. Uh, we are
looking at essentially 112
budgets, um, because there's
just such wide variability um
between the needs of every
district. So that is a challenge
that the working group and our
accounting staff and myself need
to grapple with, um, but it is
concerning, um, not now knowing
what that full budget allocation
will be, um, and entering into
leases.
that maybe um
Market range, but certainly more
expensive than some of the
public spaces. So, um, that was
definitely the impetus for the,
the working group to put forward
this proposal was those budget
considerations and ensuring that
there's going to be adequate
funding for all districts to
establish DLAs and district
offices.
Yeah, I'm sure I, I, I hear that
concern, but, you know, there
are ways that we, first of all,
6 million and, and we're halfway
through the year.
So where we're thinking it'll be
14, I think it's gonna be more
like 15 or 16, just to be
honest.
Um, because there is a lot of
things we really didn't.
Look at to begin with that we're
now seeing, right? Um.
Equipment, everything else, um.
But
We can, we can
Do it in the feed bill.
First of the session, we can put
extra money in there to cover
that cost.
We can do it in the supplemental
budget, which we do for all
kinds of agencies. I'm not sure
how.
Because I've never been on
finance, but I'm not sure how
you overspend what you're
budgeted as an agency, but they
seem to do it all the time.
Um, and we're saying we can't.
So I, I think there are ways to
deal with that, that we can deal
with as a legislature, the
amount of money that we're
talking about when you're
talking about the uh size of our
budget.
You know
We pay a lot of money for the
executive.
And yet we get, we're gonna be
paying 16 million for us to have
staff to be able to take care of
our constituents better.
So I, I do think that it's
something that would be
reasonable for us to deal with
either in the feed bill or in
the, in the supplemental budget.
Thank you, Senator Brown. Uh,
next, we'll hear from Senator
Wood.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
gonna
Please don't take the fence. I
don't mean to poke the bear
here.
Not calling you a bear, madam
chair.
What I, what I'm getting at.
His own
Subsection C, or on section C.
But we start talking about
If there is a over a
2/3 majority to one side.
Of the
Uh, number of people in the
legislature to one party or the
other.
I get to thinking about that and
we're, we're going so much on
this as being a non-political,
nonpartisan consumer.
Help consumer constituent help.
System
Is that I don't really
understand why we need to say,
well, we're gonna put an extra
person in there if all of a
sudden we elect 2 more to one
side than the other side.
And so
I, I don't believe we need to
just to grow government more by
by putting this in our policy.
Especially if we don't know how
much use there's going to be of
this person to start with.
We are talking about providing
logistical and coordination
support.
And
Do we need to reinvent the wheel
of what's going on today.
Today, the, the, the pro side
of, of this argument would be,
well, we can do more constituent
service.
Right now, each agency has a
constituent service person right
now, we use legislative counsel
for constituent service right
now, we use our chief clerk for
constituent service right now,
we also use the
Uh caucus office for constituent
service.
And
This makes it sound as though.
We can free up someone in that
process.
But really the constituent
services trying to get to an
agency.
For constituent.
So I have a hard time saying,
well,
When, when we're going to be
nonpartisan in this.
But just in case we get too many
on one side.
We need an extra one in that
caucus office.
I think you probably need an
extra one.
In, in the clerk's office to
take care of something.
Or something like that instead
of saying no, we needed another
one in the caucus office. And I
know that this is, is makes it
sound like that.
anti, anti something here, and I
don't mean that, but if we have
a natural disaster occurring one
of our districts when our
constituent needs help.
If we're on one side of the
aisle.
We still need the same amount of
help.
As the other side of the.
And there should be a middle of
the road person in this, not
just saying,
All of a sudden, we elected one
more person in this, this side
of the aisle. Therefore, we need
to employ one more person
because it should be all
nonpartisan, and it should be,
we should that management
position.
And I'm beating this horse.
Sorry, Madam Chair.
That management person we should
hire the staff that can manage
people well enough to direct
this.
In my opinion.
Thank you for the opportunity,
Madam Chair.
Uh, thank you, Senator Woods.
I'll just remind all of us that
um
We are only looking at the red
lines today. The rest of the
policy we've already adopted.
Uh, this legislative district
offices is a policy we've
already adopted.
So today we are looking at
change.
Uh, next, we'll hear from
Representative Romero.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um,
thank you, Shawna, um, for the
proposed, um, recommendations.
I, I just wanted to uh go to
page 2, or maybe is it page 3,
the red line just cause it's
easier for me to read through,
um.
On the new item I, the
legislator, a legislator may
obtain, I, I, I, I'm, that's my
edit. Legislator shall obtain
office supplies, furniture,
equipment, etc. Um,
I, it, I'm concerned about the
language being shall, that all
of those that the office
supplies have to be purchased. I
don't know if my legislative
assistant needs tape or workers
sometimes I don't know. Um, so I
think part of that like needing
to do that is, you know,
especially in the world of the
digital sort of
Hands off. I don't even know if
they need an actual office,
right? Working from home is an
option that I would hope to
provide as well for an aid. So
I'm concerned that it forces us
to have that space, um, or it
could change mobile offices are
also really exciting for my
district to think that maybe
they're in Espanola one day and
Santa Fe the next, and he walk
it and other days, so, um,
That would be more interesting
to me to think through what that
lease would look like, etc.
rather than a fixed location, so
I wonder if it's possible that
we change that language, um, and
I don't know what the process
would be for that.
This moment
Uh, you know, this refers to the
purchase of these equipment.
So it's just when you're
purchasing equipment. This is a
process that you
Oh
Oh,
But it's, um, Madam Chair, um,
it does say that we shall do
that rather than if you're
purchasing equipment, correct.
That's my concern.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Romero. um, so
district offices that are
established are state agency
offices. Um all state agencies
must purchase their supplies in
accordance with the procurement
code. So that's what the
intention of sub I is to say, is
that, um, additional supplies or
equipment that may be needed for
an office if established, must
go through the proper
procedures, which is to
coordinate through the district
office liaison or through the
council service. Um, so that's
the intention of I.
Um, however, the policy does not
require a district office to be
established, um, and an
individual may have a hybrid
schedule, they could a district
legislative aide could work from
home or, you know, in a hybrid
district office um situation,
um, or they could be fully
working from home. So that is an
option, um, at your discretion.
Um, but in the instance where
additional supplies, say, um,
I'm not, I can't think of
anything offhand, sorry, like
chairs or uh you don't want, you
want a particular monitor or
certain kind of mouse or
something of that nature, uh,
those would need to be procured
through the council service, uh,
because it is a state agency
office that has to follow
procurement procedures.
So, Madam Chair, Sean, where
does
Where does that reference the
procedures that preface, um,
Having the office.
So I'm, so I'm reading.
Linarly
Um, Madam Chair, representative,
so if you look at new sub N,
formerly Em.
It says the um the legislative
aid may work in a district
office or on a hybrid schedule
to include working from home or
in the district office, provided
that if the aid works solely
from home, no district office
shall be provided.
OK. Um,
And then logistically, if this
is in the case that we go
through a procurement process.
Everything must be
pre-approved um before a
purchase can be made, including
signing a lease, including
purchasing any equipment,
including locating a, an office
that would be paid for by the
state. Is that correct?
Madam Chair Representative, that
is correct. Uh, the Legislative
council service is performing
the administrative, uh,
functions for coordinating
closely with the district office
liaisons and leadership staff,
uh, to ensure that the same
processes and procedures are
being followed, uh, in
accordance with the, the law
that um state agencies or
legislative agencies must
follow.
So reading further, Madam Chair,
um, the Legislative council
service shall not reimburse
legislators for district office
expenses that are paid for from
personal or campaign funds. Um,
When I read that, I was like,
well, where would the money come
from? What I'm understanding now
is you're saying that
We would have to be pre-approved
on pretty much everything in
order for any money to be spent.
You could not do that in real
time, unless it was not expected
to be reimbursed or so there is
no reimbursement per se. It's
all pre-approved and spent,
there is no reimbursement,
essentially, uh, Madam Chair,
representative, that is correct.
Um, and this concern is, is
twofold. Well, one,
Um, legislative employees do not
get reimbursed for monies they
may have spent out of their
pocket for supplies, they, they
would like to have for their
office. If their supplies they'd
like for their office, there's a
process to go through. Uh, we
need to ensure that there is
budget uh to buy the supplies,
and then again, that, you know,
proper procurement procedures
are followed.
OK, Madam Chair, I haven't hired
an aide yet because I'm trying
to understand the logistics, so,
um, I appreciate the, the, the
changes, especially if right now
there is no
Processed for approval or if
this chunk of text with the how
to pay for these things, I have
to get further clarification
about current situation, but um,
I, I guess I'm trying to
understand and how that works.
So thank you, Madam Chair.
Yeah
Thank you, Representative Next,
we'll hear from Representative
Alan Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I'd
like to go back to the red line.
On the new section 8.
Um, I kind of want to echo what
Senator Brent brought up.
We are directed to hire in my
case, in December.
Um
When I, when I had a business or
when I ran a state agency,
I always made sure that there
was a place for that employee,
so
We're being directed to hire
somebody and then
7 months later,
We're allowed to find a place
for them.
It just, it, it just doesn't
make sense to me.
I deal with a lot of veterans
issues.
And those cannot be handled
where I usually meet.
Um, because there's very
sensitive.
And very uh confidential
information.
Right now,
A lot of that stuff I'm having
to do by phone, but then I have
to find a place to meet that
veteran to sign the papers.
The whole idea, the only reason
that I supported this.
It was because I would have a
central location.
Or that veteran or family member
could go to.
We could build the relationship
face to face.
Trust could be established.
And then the claim would be
worked on.
But you're telling me.
I can hire somebody.
But not have a place for them
for 7 months.
But it's, it, it's just not
logical for me, and I think
This being
A red line proposal, we need to
relook at that date.
I understand the the
Budget concerns?
I lived when I had a state
agency.
There were very few times that I
ever asked for a supplemental.
But I always made sure that I
had a desk in an office for my
employee before I hired them.
So
To me this is putting the cart 7
months before the horse.
It just, it just doesn't make
sense to me.
I'm hoping that
This being a proposal can be
Delayed or, or the
They changed.
Because this is not
It just doesn't work. It's not
logical. It doesn't make any
sense to me.
Um
So those
Those are my comments to the,
the council.
And I'm not sure if you
prepared to respond to that?
It just, it, it's not making any
sense to me. Hire somebody.
Wait 7 months to
Be able to use them.
Um
Which doesn't make sense to me.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Next,
we'll hear from Senator Wirth.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. So I
just wanna
Again, follow up on this
question and, and again it's
Let me start by just thanking
the staff because I think the
beauty of this is that
The staff have all been working
together and have come up with
this, and I think the budget.
Concern is legitimate given the
budget we have now. I do hear
what Senator Brandt is saying we
can certainly put money into the
feed bill or do a supplemental,
uh, to help with that.
Um, I also think that, you know,
the policy we passed clearly
said the preference was to use
public spaces and that's what
the public listening in needs to
hear. That's what we're trying
to do here is this is really a
situation where there's not a
public space, then how do we
deal with it? Um,
Moving from there. I guess my
first question Sha Sha.
As
Your office, as I understand it
has approved.
At least one.
Lease for a nonpublic space. Is
that correct? And can you just
tell us what that is.
But my understanding that there
was a space that up in the
northwest corner and, and maybe
represent Montoya.
It was a low dollar.
Space that was a public, so
that's, that's what I'm getting
to. So just, uh, have we done
some is my first question.
Madam Chair, members of the
council, Senator Wirth, uh, yes,
to my recollection in this
moment, there are two office
space arrangements that have
been finalized. One was no cost.
The other is what I was
considering uh nominal cost, uh,
it, um,
Calculates out to, I believe,
$150 per month for the member,
um, and there are no, uh,
additional costs that need to be
paid for by the Legislative
council service.
So, and I appreciate that, um.
Madam Chair, and I think that's
consistent with the language
that here, that's here in the
new
In the new age, it basically
says provided for the director
shall not enter into or execute
a lease that that includes
market rate payments.
I guess
You know, as I read that
language and listen to what
Representative Martinez and
Senator Brand are saying it
sounds like their situation.
is not a market rate situation
because they figured out if they
don't get, I mean, I think
there's room there to, to allow
them to potentially proceed,
especially when you're in a
situation where there's multiple
legislators going into one
building.
I mean, to me, that's, that's
what we also should be
encouraging.
It makes a ton of sense to have
one space with multiple
legislators versus
I mean, it sounds like in Rio
Rancho, if they don't go
together, you're gonna have 4
different
Different offices that's gonna
cost 4 times as much.
And so, I mean, again, I just
think there's an argument that
If we pass this with this
language.
Then it's your, your discretion
to determine is this below
market rate and just from what
I'm hearing, it feels to me like
this is a situation where
We could pass this language and
you could approve what they're
doing because you got multiple
legislators in there. You've got
a situation where there's
Assuming it's correct, and I,
and I think
Our study showed a number of
different spaces in Rio Rancho,
but that's
I think that's incumbent upon
The liaisons to work through
that in your office to work
through that, but just on based
on what you're saying, it feels
to me like that is a below
market rate situation, just like
The one that was done for a
nominal. Obviously the nominal
is easier.
But again, I just want to throw
that out cause I sat there and I
looked at the language. I, I
mean, I do have concern with
just eliminating the language
altogether, because then I think
we really are gonna be, I mean,
the whole point of staggering
this and taking it slowly was to
figure it out.
And so I just think take it case
by case, but
I certainly think an argument
can be made that we can pass
this.
But if you get a group of
legislators coming with a, with
a below market rate. I think it
was intended to allow that.
And I think that's, that's the
discretion. So I just wanted to
throw that out there.
As may be a way that allows us
to
Hold this in place, but deal
with these case by case, which
is what you've been doing.
So that, that's what I have. I
deal to.
Er.
Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Um, I do agree with, with
Leorth as well. And, and look,
uh, you know, we, we have not
had staff in forever.
Right? And we went through this
arduous, very painful process.
Um, including $6 million in the
feed bill that like folks like
crazy against.
And yet here we are.
I get it. I have a lot of
meetings at Starbucks, coffee. I
have too many meetings at
Starbucks.
Spend way too much money.
Um, not campaign money using my
own money to meet with
constituents and sometimes it's
CYFD stuff.
Sometimes it's sexual assault.
And I mean it was somebody over.
I've been doing it for 10 years.
Now, had we been able to put 20
million in the feed bill last
year to pay for all this?
Different story.
But we have $6 million.
And I don't know how much of
that is already expended or will
be expended once we hire people.
Um, so I think if more
legislators.
want to go in together.
And read something below market
rate. Now, let me be clear,
below market rate hopefully is
really below market rate and not
$5 below, right?
Um
And hopefully, we're looking
first and foremost.
That space that can be used.
For free.
Um
My office, I don't have an
office in Albuquerque. The
speaker's office is in Santa Fe.
I live in Albuquerque. Most of
my staff lives in Albuquerque.
I'm not gonna force everyone
myself included, to commute here
every day.
So we executed an agreement with
UNM and we're using some of
their space, um.
Free of cost. Now granted, if
they ever lease it out because
they have somebody who's willing
to pay, they're gonna kick us
out.
That's just the reality. That's
how that works.
Um, but
You know, we are 3 months away
or 2 months away from a
legislative session.
We're gonna have an opportunity
and I hope everybody here
supports fully funding this
program next year.
That way we can ensure that our
constituents are
Getting the services that they
deserve, including space that is
adequate.
Who have sensitive conversations
with
us on in.
Um
But with regard to right now, I
agree with leader Worth. I think
this is very much doable.
Um, if you all have 4 people
that are willing to go in and it
truly is below market rate and
we've got the budget to, to, to
do it, then it's gonna get done.
Right, but if
I would, I would really, really
encourage all of us.
Look for that.
Zero cost space.
Um, and look, you know, when I
look at somebody like
Representative Armstrong who
represents the largest district
in the country, it might be a
little harder for her.
You get free space.
Right? Might be harder.
But for me in an urban center,
It would be a shame if I can't
find something.
That is very low to zero cost.
And that's the commitment we've
made to our office.
And once we get budget to have a
district office as well. We're
going to keep on that
commitment.
Because there are plenty of
spaces.
Um, they might not be the
prettiest. I'll tell you what, I
don't have an office with a
window.
Uh, overseeing the Sandia
Mountains.
I've got sort of a
Conference room.
And we call
Bears in the space.
I don't have big bulky furniture
to like show off my speakership.
I just sit on a table with a
chair along with my staff.
That's what we got.
And afford everything else in
that.
OK. So, thank you. I agree with
you. I don't think we need
changes. I think this as is
allows you guys to do what you
need to do.
And we're good. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Duhek.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
So subsection B.
Uh, which this issue of
Staff, uh, DLA's being session
staff.
And I, I understand why this is,
is a difficult
Issue and not wanting to have
the administrative burdens of
folks quitting being
Uh, district folks to come work
at session and then being
rehired as, as a DLA.
That said, I think,
I think there are our members or
I'll speak for myself.
I would want, I want continuity.
Uh, of the folks who I'm working
with throughout the year, also
be there with me during session.
So,
What I'd like to propose is
What if
What if in order for a DLA to
Work as session staff, they are
required to go on unpaid leave
for the duration of the session.
So, they are not actually
quitting as DLAs, but they're on
unpaid leave as DLAs during
session. Then they can be hired
by the, the clerk's office. Um,
as session staff.
During the session, and then
once that job is over, their
unpaid leave as a DLA would end,
and they could return to that
position. You wouldn't be able
to hire a new.
Uh, DLA during session, uh,
because you'd still have that
position be filled, they would
just be on unpaid leave.
So that I think could reduce
some of the
The administrative burden of
folks and going back and forth
between these positions, uh,
while still allowing for the
kind of continuity.
That, and I think at least some
members, uh,
I would like to have.
So, I I'm sure, I, I don't know.
Uh, Ms. Casebeer wants to
respond to that or not, but I, I
would like to propose that an
amendment.
Go ahead, John.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Senator
Duhague, uh, so absolutely there
is an administrative burden in
individuals switching between
roles in, in quick succession.
um, but I believe that the, the,
the working groups, um,
recommendation here is less, uh,
based on that, then the fact
that session staff hiring is the
purview of the chief clerks.
Also, the rules and, and duties
of the DLA's versus session
staff are different. So if the
same person is working uh a DLA.
takes leave of absence and work
session, then that there's
nobody in the DLA role and
there's nobody serving
constituents in the district.
Uh, the duties are distinct, uh,
the spheres of responsibility
are distinct and uh that drives
uh this policy proposal as much
as some of the administrative
burden considerations.
And Madam Chair,
we can't bring 112 people to
this building. We don't have
space. We don't have space for
our current staff.
We don't have space for the new
staff we need in legislative
council to help run this
program, which we are trying to
do the right way through our
procurement code, etc. So it's a
question of logistics, uh, I, I
really want to appreciate our
subcommittee who has just been
slogging through this for
months. I think what they have
come up with is something we can
start with.
Let us start with this, so that
we're not overwhelmed by, by
things like what you're
proposing. We could not handle
uh that many people coming up
here, uh, and being extra people
in the filth.
And so, Madam, Madam Chair, this
would not be an extra 112
people. You would not get an
extra staff person during
session.
Just because they are your DLA.
This would be that if one of the
existing staff positions that
you have during session.
You wanted to fill that existing
position with your DLA, then
yes, you would have to make the
choice. You'd have to, the
sacrifice would be, you don't
get a DLA in your district
during that time, but it would
not be any extra people. It
would be the same number of
people just saying if the, if
it's important to you to have
them up with you during session,
then you wouldn't get to have,
have anyone there during.
during, uh, uh, in your district
during session because Ms.
Kingswe is absolutely right,
Mountain Chair. They are, they
are different roles, different
responsibilities. Um, we're not
looking to
To duplicate though a DLA role.
In the roundhouse during
session. It would be an either
or.
Mr. Speaker, thank you, Madam
Chair, I appreciate the point,
Senator, uh, the same doesn't
apply to the house because we
share an alley.
And so if we each wanted to
bring our DLA up.
And we do run into space issues.
I just wanna make sure. And, and
Madam Chair, I, I, I senator
share LAs too. Um, so yeah, so
not every single DLA would be
able to, to come up. That would
be something that would have to
be worked out among members.
But it would be nice to at least
have that option, uh, because
otherwise, for folks for whom
that continuity is important,
then for 90 days at a time,
they're not having anyone in
their district who can serve as,
as a DLA.
So we certainly put in the
provision that if you want your
DLA to come up here, they would
have to quit, and you would hire
them for session and then there
would be a 90 day waiting period
before you could hire them
again, uh, so that we discourage
this practice, um, because the
jobs are very different and that
Just the design of what we're
trying to do does not.
Uh, we don't believe allow for
that many more people, maybe not
112, um, but it certainly would
be a lot, so, any other comments
about this?
And ma'am, I, I'd like to, I
know, I know your pro how you're
probably gonna vote on it, but
I, I would like to propose that,
that amendment.
Well, I don't know what the
amendment says. So it would be
sub B, striking the language
that's there, and instead
putting in, in order to work his
session staff, a district
legislative aide shall take
unpaid leave for the duration of
the session.
shall take unpaid leave as, as a
district legislative aide, yes.
For the duration of the session.
Or Paia
on the amendment. Thank you,
Madam Chair, on the um on the
amendments, so with the
provision of the 90 days still
apply?
With that amendment, um, Madam
Chair, no, it would not because
we would be taking that language
out. So all of the language
that's being added for me would
be struck, we'd just keep that
edition of B and it would be in
order to work as session staff,
a district legislative aide,
shall take unpaid leave as a
district legislative aide for
the duration of the session.
Understood.
Uh, Madam Chair, um, some I'm
advised that a state employee
cannot hold two state employment
positions at the same time. So a
leave of absence would not um
be uh available.
Well, Madam Chair, uh, that's a
very good point. Uh, I don't
have a better idea sitting here,
so I'll withdraw the, the
proposed amendment.
All right. Thank you.
Uh, any other comments?
And I would make a motion to
approve, um,
The new legislative district
office policy with the changes
that are highlighted in red,
understanding.
And with the understanding that
you're gonna work.
And we deal with that issue on
offices.
Under the existing language.
Um
Give you the flexibility that
we're able to proceed forward
but still have the date in
there.
Market
True market situation. So that
would be my motion.
And any other comments?
Uh
Thank you and I, I just wanna,
you know, I, I, I think if, as
long as we're going to leave the
flexibility with Let's counsel,
be able to look at the case by
case basis, and I understand the
point that you're making, uh,
Senator Wirth on that and, and I
think that works, um.
As long as we all understand
that up here and we're all good
with that. I think the legs
council feels comfortable about
that, um, but I think we need to
make sure they feel comfortable
about that before we
Do you feel comfortable with
that language giving you the
flexibility to continue on, on
any contracts that are underway.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator Brandt,
uh, if that's the will of the
council, I will, I will
certainly follow your directive,
um, in, in all of these
situations, we are reviewing uh
the details amongst many people
getting input, um, to ensure
that uh we're comfortable with
the reasonableness um of the
outlay. So, uh, I guess my
answer is yes. Thank you. Thank
you.
Thank you.
Uh synthia. Thank you, Madam
President, and on the budgeting
component or the dollars and
cents on this, I mean, I haven't
even begun to look for a place
or identified somebody or
whatever, so I, I can't imagine
that we're not going to have
some extra dollars kind of, you
know, there for situations that
might be special in in nature
until we figure it out. And then
we're gonna come to the session
and we can right size this
budget, and I do encourage
everybody in this body to help
us right size the budget. The
numbers that we heard earlier
were that we appropriated, was
it $6 million but we really
it's gonna be somewhere
Hate to say that, but, you know,
14 to $16 million. So I, I just
hope that we all support
right-sizing it in this very
session so we can move on and
deal with all the other issues.
Thank you.
Thank you. Any other comment,
uh, Representative Martinez.
Madam Chair, I, I appreciate
Senator Wirth's input.
Uh, on the flexibility, but it
It's still clearly states shall
not enter.
And that doesn't seem to allow
for much flexibility, so that's
I have a concern with that.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Anyone else? uh,
Senator Woods, you had a comment
just one more comment if, if I
could have
Shana,
explain a little bit more about
the geographical.
deal on the travel.
My district is not the biggest
district in the state.
But it's a long ways between.
Major cities.
And
The question I have, I've had
the offer.
Of an office or a free charge in
Clovis.
And took care.
And
Play.
But you know,
If I remember right.
If your office is somewhere.
You don't get paid to go to your
office.
So do I want to try to get an
office somewhere and expect
My guy from travel from Clovis.
Clayton.
Without being reimbursed.
My dilemma is
I've got a place, I know that I
can have an office.
I envision, my deal, as when
there's a city commission
meeting to have
Office space or a county
commission meeting to have
office time in that office, so
my constituents will know.
There's a major meeting going
on.
My, my staff will be in that
town that day.
But if he doesn't get paid to do
that on his travel, he can't, he
can't travel on my dime or his
dime.
So
Further clarification, if you
would, as to
How that will work.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Senator
Woods, if you'll look on the
last page.
It's next to the last page is
he.
So if you see in one, the IUD is
to look at a travel budget
allocation for districts.
It's gonna be different.
With you, uh, so we want to do
that. Uh, we want that to do
that purposely. Look at this to
have a budget travel budgets,
depending upon your district and
your needs at your district.
We're just not ready yet to do
that. We need more time. We need
money in the budget, but we're
definitely looking at that and
it's in the policy. And I
appreciate that, but then again,
I have an opportunity.
You have a low-cost office.
But I need to make sure
My guy gets covered for his
travel.
Uh, to those. And just bringing
that up.
Understood what you're saying
here. I, I see the be here
myself, but I just wanted to
bring that up because
Everything costs money.
And feels not free. Thank you.
Thank you.
Any other comments?
Uh, so we have a motion for
approval before us. Uh, is there
opposition to the motion for
approval.
Uh, seeing no.
Uh
Uh show representative Alan
Martinez voting no.
Uh, seeing all other voting
members voting in the
affirmative.
Uh
Great discussion gonna be
talking about this forever.
Uh, so let us, um, we, so we
have did pass our policy. Thank
you all. Let's move to our New
Mexico Legislative Staff Code of
Conduct Shana.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the council. So the code of
conduct, uh, proposal revisions,
those are also red lined in a
clean copy in your folders. The
clean copy is also available
online for members or
individuals watching from home.
Uh, first thing that I would
like to point out is that, um,
the first two sections, one
confidentiality, 2, use of state
resources. This is current
language in the code of conduct.
There are no substantive changes
to this language. The reason
that it is redlined is because
it got moved up in the document,
and so that's why it looks like
it's a new language. Uh, it is
not the, uh, again, no
substantive changes there.
So if you move on to um on on my
page, it's, it's page 2, the
bottom of page 2, new paragraph
C.
Um, the next, uh, following
items, um, are one to address
the prohibition on
electioneering by district
legislative aides, but more
broadly to flesh it out for all
legislative employees. The
legislative code of conduct, it
does apply to all legislative
employees. So that would be, uh,
the council service, the
legislative Finance Committee,
Legislative Education Study
Committee, the chambers, etc.
and I have run uh these policy
proposals by both the director
of the LFC and the acting.
of the LESC and they had no
objections, so I'd like to let
you all know that.
Um, a lot of these
Revisions too are not
necessarily departures from
current policy, uh, but put
forth more specific examples to
uh inform employees um conduct
and behavior.
Um, new sub C, uh, discusses the
types of political office that
can and cannot be held, um, as
our positions are largely
nonpartisan. Uh, this means that
legit employees cannot hold a
political office, um, or be an
officer of a political
organization, and officer of a
political organization, uh, that
is from kind of, um, the, the
highest levels to, to lower
levels. So for instance, a ward
chair is an officer in a
political organization.
Um, a Democratic Party chair,
Republican Party chair, those
would be officers and political
organizations. So it's any, um
any individual who holds a um a
position of trust and
responsibility within a
political party, uh, that would
be prohibited activity for all
legislative employees.
Uh, moving on to new D, uh, this
just makes clear that a
legislative employee becomes a
candidate for public office, uh,
is to take a leave of absence,
uh,
After filing or accepting
nomination or during the
campaign. This again is also
current practice, but we are
just making it clear in this
policy.
Uh, new, uh, addresses the
prohibition on electioneering
while on duty. Uh, so this, uh,
replaces the electioneering
prohibition that was in the uh
district legislative office
policy and applies it equally to
all legislative employees. Uh,
so it goes on to say that uh
let's employee and this is while
on duty shall not engage in
activity directed toward a
desired electoral outcome for a
particular candidate, party, or
ballot issue and then goes on to
enumerate um some of what those
specific prohibitions are.
New sub F, uh, this provision
would apply to legislative
employees, but excluding
leadership office staff and
district legislative aides who
serve at the pleasure of an
individual legislator. Uh, the
working group took a look at the
Hatch Act, which is the federal
government's uh prohibitions on
political activity, and they're
essentially kind of two tiers of
restriction, um, in recognition
that uh leadership staff um
often does play a role, um, in
the, the political sphere. Um,
we
have made essentially two tiers
of restrictions. So, so, while
it does not apply to leadership
office staff and district
legislative aides, it would
apply to all other uh
legislative employees, and
again, really not a departure
from a current policy, but more
so to uh enumerate and provide
some detail on the contours of
the activities that would be
prohibited.
And then finally, under
subsection 4 consultations, so
this is at the um end of 3, it
just directs the legislative
employee who's unsure about a
particular activity to uh
consult with the employee's
agency director or chief of
clerk to get more clarity. Um,
so that, uh, is the policy
proposal on the code of conduct,
um, I will note that under the
governmental, did I already say
this? I'm sorry if I did under
the governmental Conduct Act,
this council does have the
responsibility and
to enact a code of conduct for
all legislative employees. And
with that, I stand for
questions.
Thank you so much, Shawna. Uh,
questions, uh, Senator Duhey.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
thank you, Ms. Casebeer. I'm
just, I'm looking at the new
subE and I'm, I'm looking at the
redlined one, so it's on page 3.
Starts while on duty.
But then sub 2 under that says
using the legislative employee's
official authority or influence,
so they shall not use their
official authority or influence
to interfere with or affect the
result in an election, I would,
I would think we would want that
to be true, whether they are on
duty or not.
And same for
The, the last part of sub 3
there, allowing the legislative
employees official title to be
used in connection with
fundraising activities or
hosting a fundraising event.
Right now as this is, as this is
drafted, those things are
limited to while that person is
on duty and, and it seems to me
that we would want those to be
true.
Just generally.
Madam Chair, Senator, I think
that's an excellent point, and
it does create a little bit of
a, a confusing situation there.
Um, I, I might suggest that it
could be uh reworked so that the
while on on duty, uh, pertains
in, in specific to engaging in
the political activity, um,
because I do, I do see the point
that the others, um, certainly,
uh, an employee should not off
duty be using their official
title to influence, uh,
elections. So,
I, I may suggest, uh, with the
council's, uh,
Approval that perhaps the while
on duty it's moved down to
engaging in political activity.
I believe that would resolve the
confusion.
Madam Chair, and Madam Chair, I
think, I think that almost, so
if you move that while on duty
to the first part of that sub
one there.
And then sub 3 move while on
duty before soliciting.
And then, instead of where
there's a semicolon and or turn
that into a sub 4.
And have allowing their title to
be used in connection with
fundraising activities without
the while on duty, uh,
qualifier.
I know that was probably about
as clear as mud, but so, uh, we
have people want to talk about
this. Can you just reiterate for
us what the amendment is that
you think you, you and the
Senator Dohek are coming up with
on a place.
Sure, uh, thank you, Madam
Chair. Uh council members. So I
believe the proposal is to, so
we're looking at E, the new, uh,
East paragraph and to remove, so
strike while on duty from that.
So it would start with a
legislative employee shall not
engage in an activity directed
towards a desire well.
No, I'm sorry. Now that I'm
rereading it, it does need to
qualify while on duty, uh, from
that, um.
It may take a moment for us to,
to, uh, reconfigure the drafting
on this because, um,
Randall, do you have a
suggestion. We need to have
while on duty before the first
clause, um, engaging in
political activity is also a
prohibition while on duty, uh,
using the official authority or
influence, uh, that could also
be on duty, but I believe that
also would be perhaps off duty.
Um, you don't want to be, uh,
have an employee using their,
their title to, you know, off
the clock, um, influence
election results by their
official title.
So a couple of them could be
qualified.
uh, Madam Chair and Miss Cape
just on this point, I just
wonder if you moved to
P2 and
Allowing the legislative
employee's official title to a
new
S
And just have that stand alone
cause I think you do need the
qualifier while on duty for
He won and much of E3.
Suggestion.
And we start.
Uh, rips of Armstrong, uh, Madam
Chair, some of the people in the
audience are having a hard time
hearing if people could speak
more directly into the
microphone. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Uh, so, uh, when is our next
meeting, on uh, wondering if we
can move this to the next
meeting.
Madam Chair, that would be
December 4th, December 4th.
Perhaps we should, uh, have this
go back to the group and uh look
at that language and wait till
December 4th. Is that all right
with you? It's not a little
better. I really hate to do this
on the fly when you now have 3
or 4 suggestions on how to do
it. I don't really know where
we're at with whatever amendment
we're looking at. So is that all
right with everyone?
Absolutely, uh, Madam Chair,
thank you. I would like to, um,
propose, however, the policy,
the district legislative aid
policy that was uh revised and
adopted by the council moments
ago, did strike the
electioneering provisions from
that. Uh, so I'd like staff to,
uh, everyone to be clear that
electioneering while on duty,
uh, is, is prohibited, uh, even
though that language was
stricken from that policy.
Well, you, you know, we could
also adopt what you have now and
that you go back and make these
changes and bring just this
small section changes back in
December.
So if, if we can
That's what I'm suggesting. I
just do the motion myself but I
move adoption of this with the
idea that these small little
changes, you can come back.
And
I see people nodding their
heads. It's in opposition to
that motion, saying no, so we've
adopted this one also, and if
you wanna mess around with those
and bring that back December 4.
OK, so I think we're at the
point of staff reports, and I've
been told
I apologize, I apologize.
So, uh,
I'll just call on people if you
wanna undo what I've just done,
that's fine.
Uh, Representative Chase.
chair,
um, I
What I appreciate is the um
The, the attitude that we really
are gonna have to be flexible
and view this with fresh eyes,
because we're gonna learn as we
go. And you know, the, the
gentleman in Rio Rancho.
Have a problem and gotta figure
that out.
I, I feel the same is true of
this uh staff conduct section as
well. I can appreciate
Wanting to apply the Hatch Act.
And yeah, this is much stricter
than the hatch Act.
Because congressional staff are
not subject to the Hatch Act.
Except in
Specific circumstances. So I, I
really think you need to look at
that. I mean, I won't be the one
dealing with this, but um,
You don't want to discourage
people from running for office.
You don't want to discourage a
member from having the full
support.
And um availability of his
legislative, whatever we call
them that only we district.
Yeah, and um,
So
I, I think too.
Consider that what's been,
what's written right now is
stricter than our state
Personnel Act.
On political activity, it's
stricter than the judiciary
code, um.
Code of conduct.
For employees. So I don't know
that we really want to make it
stricter than all of those. And
um so if you kind of look at
that, I think it would be
helpful.
Um
The US house, there's a US House
Committee on Ethics and um you
can look at that too, where if
you're worried about um your
staff members running for
office. The individual member of
the US House of Representatives
has to consent to the candidacy
of his or her staff. So I mean
you can look at some of those
kinds of things if you wanted
to, but I, I think right now
this is written.
Very prohibitively. So I, I, I,
um
I'm glad we're looking to be
flexible as it evolves.
Thank you.
OK. Anyone else that I did not
call uh representative Romero
first and then representative
Shipansky.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
thank you for the proposed, um,
changes. I just had a question
on, um,
Just oversight of the
responsibilities for clarity for
this body on this roll of um for
the code of conduct when we're
in session versus out of
session.
Is it rules and order of
business that any complaint on
the code of conduct would come
toward, uh, I'm thinking from
the house perspective, um, and
perhaps Senate, and then also
when we're in the interim, if
there was a violation, where
does that go?
Madam Chair, Representative
Romero, if I understanding
correctly, you're speaking of a,
a session employee versus a a
full-time year round employee
and where they're complaints or
a conduct violations may be
addressed for the DLA
specifically, Madam Chair, what,
what, how does the
responsibility, um,
get um
Where does the responsibility go
to hold them accountable?
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair,
Representative. So the DLAs are
employees of the chamber for
which the legislature is a
member, um, there is close
coordination with LCS's Human
Resources department, uh, but
frankly, the mechanism of how
say progressive discipline or
coaching, um, or even, you know,
a termination may need to be
effectuated. Uh, the details of
that have not been fleshed out
as the uh DLAs do serve at the
pleasure of their legislation.
Tour. Um, so the working group
will be considering these
issues. Uh, they have been
discussed, uh, uh, minimally at
this point, um, but, uh, I
believe some pro uh procedures
do need to be put in place, at
least for legislators to kind of
understand what steps they need
to take, what resources they
have, uh, to get input on that
employment situation, uh, but
the DLAs do serve at the
pleasure of the legislator. So
the legislator is hiring and
firing authority in those cases.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'd love
a little bit of clarity on that
if, if we can in December, just
as we're going into session,
what the responsibility might be
just so that we're clear about
um if there was a complaint or
concern how to be able to manage
that. Thank you, madam.
Uh, Representative Syansky.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, and
for the working group, which
said two things, um,
The item, it is C3.
I did not understand what
soliciting, accepting, or
receiving.
Uncompensated volunteer services
from an individual who is a
subordinate, was trying to refer
to, um, and, and we don't need
to get into the explanation
here. The thing that I would
hope that we're not trying to
prevent is I know a number of
the members have volunteers that
help them with specific policy
issues or they may convene a
constituent group for them, um.
And I would hope that
I think it's written a little
broadly to where that
Uh, could be prevented or a DLA
reading this, I think, OK, I
can't be involved with this
water expert or this, this other
person that's helping with
legislation. So I think
As you, as you are
Putting those
Proces in it, it's not really a
while on duty issue, but it's a
making that clear that that
specifically about
electioneering volunteers, I
think it's important.
Um
If you, if, if you'd like to
comment.
Miss Case we are pleased to
Madam Chair Representative
Suppansy, uh, so this language
is um intended to recognize that
there are power dynamics between
an individual who may have a
subordinate, um, and so it is to
prevent, uh, say if I myself, I
have, you know, individuals who
are direct reports, um, that if
I were to ask an a subordinate
to do a volunteer activity, they
would feel pressured to do so
because I'm their boss, and
there could be employment.
ramifications for it. So this is
to uh address kind of that undue
influence between the power
dynamics of a boss in a
subordinate uh in requesting uh
political volunteer type
services. Um, but the working
group can certainly take a look
at that language and make sure
that it is clear and, and really
uh effectuates its intent. Oh, I
see. I thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, this case here, I think.
Uh, maybe instead of an
individual, then you wanna put
And in a legislative employee.
Um, to be specific about that.
And then, um, secondly, Madam
Chair,
I'm not sure C and D.
Uh, under item 3 really read
together?
Um, because if you
you have an
3C, the term political office.
And item 3D you have public
office. I think the language
around
Um, upon a filing or accepting
the nomination and during the
campaign.
is a little bit vague and I
don't know how an employer would
arbitrate that. For example, if
someone
a primary election, they were
successful in the primary. They
were unopposed in the general.
Or maybe they don't really have
a campaign anymore or do they
still have to continue on
political leave.
Um, or it,
Leave of absence. So I would
Really encourage like some very
tight language around that cause
otherwise, I think it's, it's
pretty confusing.
And also it's unclear since,
since you were
In this policy, Madam Chair,
permitting legislative employees
to hold
Some political offices.
If you sought one of those
political offices while you were
a legislative employee, does
that leave of absence still
Apply.
So
Just for discussion, we don't
have to discuss it here but
thank, thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, so I think these have been
good discussions. Um, I, I'm
just gonna ask the counsel if
you're OK with having us move
forward with this because we
definitely need it. Um, but
we've gotten all kinds of issues
have some Casey's issues, uh,
uh, representanski's issues, um,
so, a working group can work on
this and come back December 4th.
On changes.
Everyone all right with that?
OK.
All right, so thank you. And
thanks for the conversation. I
apologize again for uh just
cutting everybody off and moving
forward.
All right. Now, staff reports.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the council. I, I try to be
brief, uh, but first staff
report, I'd like to introduce to
the council a new staff attorney
with Legislative counsel
Service. This is Mr. Ian Keller.
Um, so you'll certainly be
working with him, this
legislative session, so very
happy to have you on board.
Uh, now I'd like to bring your
attention to some, uh, project
updates. The capital, uh,
heating, uh, ventilation and air
conditioning, uh, system has
been upgraded and modernized,
um, and this is scheduled for
completion and training in mid
November. This project installed
electronic thermostats and
heating and cooling units
throughout the building, uh,
formerly the, the system was
based on a pressurized system.
So this is a a needed upgrade,
um, and it should make the.
heating and cooling in the
building easier to control on
the computer in the central main
plant, and also just uh easier
and more efficient to maintain.
Um, LBS, uh, legislative
Building Services and uh
legislative information services
staff have been working to
ensure that the audio and visual
equipment in all the committee
rooms is properly tuned in
preparation of session. Uh,
cameras have been moved to get a
better view of the committee
rooms and staff, continues to
work with the vendor who
installed the original
equipment, uh, to fine tune the
entire system and provide staff
with greater ability to control
and address the sound levels.
And I just briefly like to
address
That currently, uh, we do not
have the equipment or technology
to allow those cameras in the
committee rooms to focus on the
presenters, uh, that would
necessitate additional cameras
and equipment to be purchased
and it's something we could
certainly look into for um the
interim period, um, as an
additional project.
The Suite 411 remodel of the
Bill Clark proofreading and word
processing area is on schedule
to finish by the end of
December. The walls are framed
and sheetrock is complete, so
that is a, a good progress is
being made.
I'd also like to let you know
that staff is looking to update
the information kiosks
throughout the building. So on,
um, each of the floors, uh, the,
the 1st, 3rd, and 4th, there are
uh kiosks that have names of
legislators, room numbers,
locations, etc. on those.
Um, how they're currently set
up, they're very expensive and
difficult to maintain. Uh, it
seems like a very low tech, uh,
situation, but each name or room
listing is currently on a very
flimsy and very expensive piece
of plastic that breaks very
easily uh when the names are
changed out. And so we are
looking to um to fix that
situation so that it's easier
for staff to maintain. It could
be updated more readily and it's
less costly to um to have in
place. Uh, so we're looking
to develop an aesthetically
appropriate custom frame to
modernize those kiosks that are
near the elevator locations. We
are hoping to be able to have
those installed prior to
session, in particular with new
members coming on board, we
definitely want to make sure
that those are accurate and
updated and the public is able
to find each of your offices
and, and other important
locations.
We would also look, uh, like to
look into replacing, modernizing
the ground floor lobby kiosks.
So on the east and west side, on
the 2nd floor, there's big
towers, uh, frankly, the
software on those, uh, kiosks
very outdated. It's completely
antiquated equipment. I think
those television screens are
from the, you know, 1980s, um,
it's just really not providing
the service to the public, uh,
that we need to be providing. So
we're looking to modernize
those, um, also to make it
easier to change, it'll likely
be more of a um a computerized
system so that staff could input
the information on the
computerized system. It could
more easily change the
information for the season, you
know, or interim committees
meeting or standing committees
or other events happening in the
Capitol and also would be um
able to be more effectively
used uh as a roundhouse
information resource for people
visiting the Capitol. Um,
however, that project, uh, is
going to take a bit of
development and time and
will not be able to be
accomplished before session, but
the elevator kiosks, we sure do
hope to get um something more
update and modern in before
session.
Uh, finally, just to note that
the next council meeting is
scheduled for the morning of
December 4th. Uh, we'll make
sure to have the items discussed
that you've requested to be on
the agenda. On that agenda, and
uh those are my staff updates
and I stand for any questions.
All right. Thank you, Shawna.
Any questions?
Uh, let me just say that uh
there are some copies of this.
This is the art study of spaces.
pile of them right over there if
you want to pick one up before
you go home, um, it's just
really enabled me to look at
some of the areas where the
spaces are. We got it
electronically, but not.
A on a little old school. I had
a few copies made for people.
All right, if there's no other,
uh, comments, uh, we will
adjourn until December 4th. Uh,
thanks so much to the
subcommittee for working so hard
on this and uh we will see you
next month. We are adjourned.
