County, San Juan County and
Sandoval County.
Thank you. Good morning, Mr.
Chairman, Gail Armstrong, state
representative for District 49,
uh, really happy to be here. I'm
from Magdalena, New Mexico
represents Captain Sierra,
Socorro, and Valencia.
Good morning everybody.
Representative Jack Chatfield,
District 67, I represent Colfax
Curry Harding Qua, San Miguel
and Union County.
Uh, good morning, Mr. Chairman.
Uh,
Good to see all these smiley
faces here today. Everybody
seems so happy to be here today.
Uh, my name is Harry Garcia. I
represent House District 69,
which covers parts on one
McKinleyurburn new programs.
Have a good day.
Then her guy goes, you want to
start from that side.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, today
is my first day, um, state
Senator David Gallegos. I was in
the house for 8 years. This is
my 4th year in the Senate, uh,
Representative Eddie and Lee
County District 41.
And excited to learn,
everybody can hand Sen guy goes
to their yellow sheets.
Freshmen have to pay the full
tab. That's how I do it. That's
how we do it here. Do you take
credit card? No, no, I don't
take credit.
uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, folks
out there in the audience and
listening on state Senator Benny
Shindo from uh Haus Pueblo. I
represent Senate District 22.
Uh, good morning, uh, Mr. Chair
and Mr. Vice Chair and Mr.
Selli. I'm a Senator Michael
Padilla. I represent the uh
Senate District 14, which is
essentially the southern part of
Bernalillo County, finishing my
12th year in the Senate, I also
served as the Senate Majority
Whip. Thank you. Good morning,
Mr. Chair, Senator Pat Woods,
Greu Union Counties. I asked for
a
Appoint a, a personal privilege
this morning, uh, I asked for us
to stand and, and have a moment
of silence for the people in the
Dexter Rosville area, they've
had a
A terrible flood in that area
and they need our prayers for
them.
For their future.
The Lord may blessings flow upon
those people. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Chaplain, Mr. Chair.
I'm Bill Sherrer. I'm from
Farmington.
Good morning, uh, Mr. Chairman,
Vice Chair, uh state senator
Roberto Bobby J. Gonzalez,
District 6, encompasses part of
uh Los Alamos, Ririba Santa Fe
and Taos. Thank you.
Good morning to everyone. My
name is Nancy, Senator Nancy
Rodriguez. Oops, we should have
gone there first. I'm already
here, so, uh, and I'm happy to
be here. Good morning to
everyone. Thank you.
Representative, you want to
start dela Cruz. Good morning,
Mr. Chairman, Vice Chairman, and
everyone in attendance, and
those on.
On the uh television.
Appreciate being here with
everyone. It's always a joy to
be here. Also with Joy Garrett.
I represent District 12. My name
is Art De la Cruz. I represent
the heart of the South Valley.
Thank you so much, John.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, uh, Mr.
Vice Chair, ladies and
gentlemen, Harlan Vincent, uh,
District 56, Lincoln and Otero
Counties.
And thank you for that, Senator
Woods. Appreciate it.
Good morning, uh, Representative
Tarahan. I represent House
District 48 and excited to get
to work here today. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, State Rep
Joe Garrett, Northwest
Albuquerque, uh, home of all the
volcanoes on the west side.
Thank you.
Uh
thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
My name is Nathan Small. I'm
privileged to represent House
District 36 down in Donana
County, uh, really excited to be
here with everybody. Appreciate
the work that's gone into making
this week possible, also the
subcommittee yesterday, uh, on,
uh, fire flood and our
responses. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. uh, I'm George
Minosa. I representbola McKinley
in San Juan Countyy, Senate
District 4, and the chair. It
was a real, I listened to the
meeting yesterday because I got
tied up in an inspection.
And, and it was very interesting
to see the the comments and
where we're kind of headed in in
building that, so.
Um, our, our thoughts and
prayers also go out for the
people of Rosal and.
When you're in that kind of
disaster and you really don't
realize that we all got in our
cars today and got up and
Came up here and other people
don't have that.
You have their homes. They don't
have a place to shower. They
don't have their vehicles.
There's a lot of trials that are
gonna happen, so.
With that, we'll get started.
Izzy, you're gonna start this
morning? I noticed you're combed
your hair.
That was for you all, Mr. Chair.
Um, good morning, everyone.
We're actually gonna get started
with uh Mr. Golding's
presentation on Zoom. Mr.
Golding, go ahead and take it
away.
We can hear you fine.
We do have your screen. I don't
know if we can, we can't, I
don't think we can do a split
screen where I can see you in
the presentation.
