Just, just who you are and where
your district is.
Madamian members of the
committee. I'm Senator Shannon
Pinto. I represent District 3 in
the northwest corner of the
state. It's great to be here.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee,
members of the audience and
those viewing. My name is
Patricia Royal Caballero and I
represent House District 13, far
southwest quadrant of
Albuquerque.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Senator
Harold Pope Junior. District 23,
Northwest Albuquerque,
Bernalillo County, and I just
came up today to proved
everybody I own a pair of jeans.
Thank you. Stand up.
Good morning everybody. Eleanor
Chavez, I represent House
District 26, which sits on the
west side of Albuquerque and
also includes the pajeo Mesa in
uh the South Valley.
Good morning, Madam Chair. It's
a pleasure to be here. I'm Liz
Stefani, Senate District 39,
representing parts of four
counties, San Miguel, Santa Fe,
Torrance, and Valencia, and I'm
an advisory member of this
committee. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair.
Representative Tara Luhan, I
represent House District 48 here
in in Santa Fe and very happy to
get to work.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee,
audience, and those online. I am
Representative Pamela Herndon, I
represent the energetic, ever
thriving House District 28, and
we're inviting you to make sure
that you come to the annual 3rd
annual Heights Night on
Saturday, July 26th. Put that on
your calendar and thank you. I
think you're hired as the PR
person.
No, no pay as usual, but you're
high, we'll, we'll start with
the senator.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
State Senator David Gallegos,
uh, living in Eddie and Lee
County, the heart of the Permian
Basin, we bring you your
funding. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair, uh
John Blockhouse District 51 in
beautiful Otero County, I
represent Almogordo.
Uh, good morning, madam Chair.
Senator Larry Scott.
Uh, my first
Legislative health experience
looking forward to.
To the education and I represent
the Senate District 42, Lee Eddy
and Chavis Counties.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Uh,
my name is Anita Gonzalez. I
represent House District 70, um,
in northeastern New Mexico, San
Miguel in Torrance Counties. Um,
I'm happy to be here at my first
interim committee meeting ever.
So happy to be here.
Uh, good morning, everyone. I'm
Representative Kathleen Cates
from House District 44, that's
all of Corrales, parts of Rear
Rancho, east of the river down
to I-25, which is northern
Albuquerque and the
unincorporated area of Alameda,
and we're hap you're here as
well, Representative.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
committee members, um, and
audience, I'm Joanne Ferrari,
state rep for uh Donana County's
uh northeast part of Las Cruces,
and it seems like we just left
here, and yet it seems like so
long ago, 2 months, right? So
thank you. Good morning, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
audience members. Uh, my name is
Mariana Anaya. I am
representative for House
District 18, that is the Knob
Hill UNM CNM area.
And uh Representative Garcia,
can you please introduce
yourself?
Diaz des
Miguel Garcia from Marisco.
House District 14, I represent
some of the more historical, um,
Hispanic uh traditional
communities and uh
Berno County and the city of
Albuquerque.
And we will have folks come in
and as, as we have breaks in
what we're doing, we'll let them
introduce themselves. So, uh
I will tell you I am working on
2 hours' sleep cause I laid
awake all night. What do I have
to do tomorrow? What do I have?
So I have texts to myself at
2:14 a.m. and 3:45 a.m. and I
intended to organize them. I
didn't, so I'm just gonna read
from my text to myself to kind
of get kind of uh get a lay of
the land, so first off, oh, I
forgot. Let's have the staff
introduce themselves. So,
Xander, do you want to introduce
them or do you wanna have people
come up to a mic and introduce
themselves it's OK.
So we'll start with Xander and
if you all could come up and use
Senator Lopez's mic for now or
whatever mic is.
Handy.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, my
name is Andrew Dawson. Uh, I'm
the lead staff for this
committee, and uh I'm here from
the LCS.
Hi, I'm Grace Balderramos from
the LCS.
Hi, my name is Andrea Lazaro,
and I am a field drafter. I
worked with Sanders. This is my
7th interim.
Working with this committee.
Uh, hello. I'm Doctor Allegra
Hernandez and I um in one of the
Health and Human Services
analysts at LFC.
You want to introduce your
colleagues in the. Yes, uh, so
back there we have Doctor Rachel
Marcer Garcia, who is the um
analyst for the CYFD block, Eric
Chenier, who's the healthcare
authority analyst and Kelly
Plut, who is the ECECD analyst.
And Ruby and Escobel is another
Health and Human Service analyst
who is not here today.
Good morning everybody. My name
is Doctor Harry Rommel. I am a
health and human services
analyst for the Legislative
Finance Committee. So we have a
great staff, not enough, but um,
but they're great and they, we
work them really hard. So, so
I'll start with respecting
colleagues, staff, and the
public. I mean, that's kind of a
given, but just a good reminder,
um, that, that's what we're here
for. And
People, particularly freshmen
are concerned that they're
non-voting members.
Essentially, it doesn't mean
anything. The only time we vote
is when we're going to send one
of our
Famous, strongly worded letters
to someone who isn't doing what
they, we think they should, and
then when we endorse bills at
the um at the end at our
November meeting, so you will
have the same opportunities for
questions, etc. etc. You're,
we're all equal here. Um, and
those of you who serve on the
health committees in either
chamber know the depth and
breadth of what we cover. I
mean, we cover everything from
AAS anesthesiology, um.
Assistance to, to whatever Z is
and everything in between. I
mean, we, we do.
CYFD and all the medical stuff
and all in all in all, so we
never have enough time to cover
um
What we need to cover, so in
saying that, basically what I'm
saying is,
The time for folks to present
their bill ideas is very
limited. Um, we may have in some
meetings, we may set aside um
half an hour for 6 people to
take 5 minutes and talk about
something, 6 members, or we may
not, depending on how full the
agenda is and just looking at
what LFC wants to provide to us
at every meeting, um, we're
gonna be really pressed for
time. Um
I'm asking folks to be on time,
just so because we have so much,
so much going on, um, and later
on today, we will, whatever time
we have, we will take
suggestions for topics that
you'd like to cover and, and
what I'm looking for are more
broad things as opposed to like,
um, you know, I, I did a bill on
340B pharmacy pricing, not that,
not, not such small little
You know, bills, but bigger
things, workforce, all those
kinds of things. Um,
And, and also uh we will
discuss, although I'm not sure
if we will be able to nail it
down where we would like to meet
this year and, and we, for those
of you who haven't served, we
are, um, we go throughout the
state, um, and we try to roughly
hit every quadrant, um, and, and
not go to the same place 2 years
in a row, but, but that's, it's,
if nothing else, I'm um flexible
uh and I was gonna say loosey
goosey, but I'll say.
Flexible. Um, we will be
covering medical malpractice in
one of our later meetings as we
get things together, but we will
give that probably at least a
day. Um, and then, um, the, oh.
The letters that were passed
out, we will vote on them later
if you didn't get one, raise
your hand. There's two of them.
There's one in the
The reconciliation in the
federal government, uh, in the
Congress.
It has a provision that keeps
states from enforcing or
enacting legislation on AI for
10 years. Um,
That's uh in, in tech time 10
years is more than a lifetime
and so uh this came to me at an
NTSL meeting and they're asking
states to please reach out to
their congressional districts to
say we need to have some control
over this. I mean, then the
other letter is um regarding the
races for the DD waiver uh
providers, um, as, as I said
before, we do strict sternly
worded letters, uh.
And we usually don't get a lot
of
A bang for a buck, but with
that, we do what we can do. Uh,
we have, we essentially have no
oversight power. We can't
subpoena, we can't, we can't do
any of those kind of things, so
we do what we can, although
hopefully that will change at
some point. Um,
And we move, we move really
fast. I mean, it feels like
You know, we have an hour and a
half hour presentation and that
feels like it should be enough,
but there's all the, my point in
saying this is you're never
gonna get all your questions
answered in this meeting. I,
I'm, those of you who have
served before, know I was a
timekeeper. I will be a
timekeeper again when if you
know if we have 2 hours for a
presentation and the presenter
takes an hour and a half, we
have 30 minutes, and if there's
10 of us, you get 3 minutes,
ballparky, and I, I stick to
that.
And I want to remind folks that
when you ask a question for 2
minutes and 48 seconds, that
gives the person 12 seconds to
answer your question. So, so
think about what you're gonna
say and and but I'm, I am gonna
be tough and I am sorry for
that, but
A couple of years we um we
frequently met till 10:30 or 11
at night in this committee. And
um you know, those of you who
know that we frequently are
asked to go to visit clinics or
go to visit um schools or
something and that that that
that year we missed several
dinners that were planned for
us. It's like, OK, no, we're not
done at 6. No, we're not done at
7 and at 8 we'd say cancel the
dinner. We're, we're not gonna
make it, so I don't wanna go
down that road these.
These hearings are very
emotional. I mean, we hear child
abuse, we hear prison rape, we
hear whatever and so to expect
people to keep their brains
functioning for
12 hours straight is, is more
than I think is fair. Um,
And, and we use a lot of
acronyms, and if you don't know
what uh I'm encouraging people
for a while to not use acronyms,
but we all will. And if you
don't understand an acronym,
it's OK to, you know, say, madam
chair, what does that mean? or
whatever. Um, but don't get
intimidated or frustrated
because it, it is, it's a huge
learning curve, um, silence your
phones and be courteous, um, be
on time for we used to go out to
lunch in a one hour lunch always
turned into a
2 hour lunch and then we were
behind schedule, so now, in
general, we have lunches
provided either by the place
that we are at or lobbyists, um,
provide us with the lunch and,
and usually there's some,
something to eat in the morning
and we should always have
coffee. Just and I was thinking
about buying uh one of those big
industrial coffee pots, but for
hot water. How many people would
prefer hot. I mean, we'll still
have coffee, but how many tea
drinkers are there?
OK, so that may be, that may be
something. Um.
And then, as I said, frequently,
there are evening events that
are obviously optional, but if
you, you know, think about the,
the federally qualified health
center or the, the dental clinic
and, you know, that this is
their one chance to show off to
legislators, so I encourage
people to attend those things,
um, and we will have public
comment and they also have will
have um strict time limits, and
we are going to do public
comment today and for those of
you who would like.
To do public comment. We have 3
minutes. Um, and today, uh,
several of us have tobacco
committee at one o'clock, so we
can't go too long today. Um, and
I think that's all I have for
right now.
Yeah, so all that's the Senate,
the vice chair introduced
herself and then I'll go to
Xander.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
good morning committee members.
My apologies first for being
late.
Uh, driving er to school this
morning, just a whole bunch of
other things going on. School's
almost over, yay.
Uh
I apologize again for being
late, but um
Madam Chair and I have met and
discussed the process and such
for us here this coming interim.
Um, I look forward to working
with each of you. There's always
so much to learn.
And I know that we have a lot on
our, on our plate, and I look
forward again to
Um
Having a fruitful discussion on
each of the topics and other
topics that may be discussed
today and added to our agenda,
but this is
Um, we have a lot, and I know
we're going to do some good
work. Thank you. Representative
Chavez, did you introduce
yourself? Oh, no, that's OK.
Just, just checking my memory,
which obviously is faulty, um,
so, oh, my apologies. Linda
Lopez, state senator, District
11, the Southwest quadrant of
Bernalillo County. Thank you.
Uh, go ahead, Sandra.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So I'm
gonna pass this down. I'm gonna
start with uh Representative
Royal Caballero. So this, uh,
basically is a way for us to
keep track of whether or not you
want us to loop your DLA into
all uh communications throughout
the interim. So it's just a
check yes or no and then a
signature.
It's gonna be a good day. I've
already lost my agenda.
Oh, there it is, looking for the
wrong color. OK, um, so I guess
we will jump into um,
LHHS work plan and meeting
schedule. So in your folder is
a, is it kind of orange color
that's the
No, it's the green one that has
the inter-meeting dates.
And for, for those of you who
don't know this, and
You could imagine legislative
council trying to put together a
schedule. We have, I don't know
how many meeting days to do in
way fewer days than that and
they've got to make, they try to
make sure that
If you're a voting member on two
committees that they don't
conflict, but I think it's
impossible for them to do that.
So
There's no way to change these,
essentially.
Um, cause then it would mess up
every other committee in the
building, so.
So those are the dates, um, and
Xander, did you, do you want to
talk a little bit about, well,
in the past we've taken 3.
Major topics, um, and, but I'm
not sure that that worked out so
well. So we all, every year we
had um workforce and CYFD
and and yeah, so, so we will
still be doing those, but we
won't necessarily have targeted
meetings. I mean, we, we will
try and bunch subjects together,
um, but we're not gonna do that
3 and all that, but we, we are
looking for um
Suggestions for topics.
And we will just, um, we'll
start in the front and then go
this way and um just a minute or
two and then we'll, we'll keep
going back. And if someone has
mentioned something, no need to
mention it again. How about we
say one idea per pass. Um, and
then there, this will not be the
be all and end all that will be
an opportunity, um, oh, I
haven't announced my, my, um,
district legislative assist I
almost called her attorney,
district legit, so
Britney Barretas, she's a former
rep, and as it happens, today is
her birthday.
So, Marianna, can you please
sing? We'll, we'll sing with
Be working together to come to,
to gather all the topics
together, and what I'd like her
to do and because I'm not tech
savvy at all, and if you've been
in any conferences, you see
those bubble things where the
bigger bubble has more more
people who voted for that
essentially, which is the most
popular. I'm sorry
I, there you go. I knew there
was a word for it, but I'm old,
um, so idea clouds just so we
can get a picture of, so, and
there will be a uh like a
monkey or we don't know what it
will look like because that that
occurred to me at about 5:15
this morning and I thought I can
call IT and see if they can set
it up starting at 8 or 9
o'clock, and I said,
That's stupid.
So, so we're gonna do that, but
I, I, I came up with the idea
too late to make it reality
today. So we will start with um
Senator Pinto and then um
Representative Garcia and then
to around this way.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. So one
of the things um
After going to a couple of
facilities with IHS
is the um ADA compliance,
especially with our um health
facilities. I'm not sure how to
address it, but uh we're, we're
not uh meeting some of those
expectations too, especially
when you talk about the D&D
waiver, and even the um
If we have people at home that
are being taken care of, uh.
Making sure that they're able to
access and get around if they're
home alone or have some sort of
the, uh, even with a walker or
something. I thank you,
Representative Garcia.
Madam Chair, we limit it to just
11 item or one item and if per
round we'll get as many rounds
in as we can. OK, Madam Chair,
um, I'd like to propose, uh,
that, uh, a panelist on the
malpractice panel.
Be uh Doctor Michael Montoya, I
mean Doctor Michael Lopez.
Uh, from the Las Vegas he's.
Uh, has a 44 year.
Uh, practice there in Las Vegas.
He's a native Chicano from uh
the Las Vegas area.
And I highly recommend them.
Uh, as a panelist on the
malpractice issue, OK, so we're
looking for ideas for topics. So
there's any, I mean, and at any
time if you don't get it in
today or with the survey, you
can send an email to Brittany
and Xander and I and and request
it and and there's no guarantee,
but let's try to stick to topics
as opposed to specific panels
or, um, especially people. So go
ahead, senator.
think I'm in a chair, and I
appreciate uh you bringing up
CYFD, uh, one of the things that
I'd like to continue dialogue
with CYFD. I've worked with the
Secretary of CYT and the
governor on Safe Haven baby box
legislation on some
clarification and educational,
and I would hope that we'd
continue that in the realm of
CYFD to be able to get some um
dialogue going on that.
Thank you.
OK, sorry,
madam Chair.
Thank you. Appreciate it. So,
uh, I think maybe a larger
conversation about nutrition and
additives in our food, things
like food colorings, things
like, uh, seed oils, etc. and
just uh emerging research
regarding those and then how the
state can adapt to federal
trends and federal mandates that
we may be having to implement on
that.
Thank you, Madam Chair. 2
elephants in the room, medical
malpractice reform.
And secondly, what will we do?
In the event
That Medicaid comes down to the
states.
In a different form.
And perhaps block grants.
I don't think
Any of those changes should try
to take us by surprise. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
one hope is for dental Medicaid
reimbursement rates, um,
specifically how that's
impacting um
Dentists in rural areas.
And we will just count that now
as Medicaid reimbursement rates
and we'll look at who needs
what. I mean, everybody can use
more, but um, so you no need to
mention that again.
Medicaid rates. Yeah, just a
broad umbrella and then we can
work on the finer who needs who
we need to concentrate on, so
thank you.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
uh, and, uh, my suggestion would
be instead of a a week or a day
of uh talking about medical
malpractice. I'd like to see a
week of talking about recruit
and retainment of our workforce
the medical workforce, which
medical malpractice would be
part of that conversation, um,
but there would be a wide
variety of other topics within
that conversation. Thank you and
that makes sense to put those
together. Thank you.
Um
Thank you, madam chair, um, I
think we should have um.
Kind of a broad, um,
Discussion about drug misuse and
prevention regarding alcohol,
vaping, and fentanyl, and um
also.
Uh, focusing on youth as well as
adults.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
would really like updates on
licensing and credentialing, um,
specifically the legislation
that was passed for the 30-day
process and whether or not it's
working.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'd like
us to look at uh the bigger
topic of aging and wellness,
particularly as we look at the
onset of Alzheimer's disease
affecting a larger portion of
our community and what's
available through aging and
long-term services to help
families to get through these
processes.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'd like
to have um
The broad topic of behavioral
health with regards to SB 3 that
we passed this session and
including the DD I think it's
where GD waiver for behavioral
health expansion, which is in
the budget as well, and
Thank you.
Um
Me, I would like to have us
receive updates on the federal
uh work group.
That's happening because of many
of us, of course, are very
concerned about it, and it's not
just Medicaid that we need to be
concerned about. Thank you.
Um, Madam Chair, I, I'd like for
us to have a follow-up
discussion, um, I can't right
now remember the the the number
of the bill that was passed, but
we had a presentation in Taos,
about the money that we gave to
hospitals who were supposed to
be in a financial distress, um,
and I don't know if folks
remember, but the hospitals came
and basically said they really
weren't. So I'd like to have a
um uh.
Presentation on that to see, you
know, where we're at, has any
money been uh given to any of
the hospitals and sort of what
are their financial condition.
Madam Chair, um, I'd like us to
discuss a little bit about how
we can leverage.
Uh, the VA when it comes to
health care, behavioral health,
uh, folks who in house we have a
huge.
Large veterans population will
be dealing with that in the end
that committee as well, but I
think tying it to this
committee, I think would be
helpful.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I would
like to um see if we can have a
broad discussion around the
overall health impacts, uh,
created by the uh fire and
floods, uh, air pollutants
combined with all the dust
storms, however, and the
increased um rates, high rates
of health issues that are
related, uh, because of this
amongst our elderly and our
youth, I think there's
a lot to be discussed also
around increased fracking
extraction around schools and
communities and what that
impact. So just the overall
health impact around um these uh
pollutants.
Thank you. OK, Senators, um,
Pinto.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
think there was some mention
about this already about the
compacts because I'm
understanding that there's a
little bit.
Um, an issue with the details,
so I think we do need to dig a
little bit deeper in that if
we're going to continue. Thank
you, madam chair.
Representative Garcia.
Madam chair, um,
We need a real thorough
presentation on the expenditure.
Of the opioid settlement fund.
In terms of um
Where we're appropriating our
monies regarding that fund.
Um
And also understanding in terms
of where we are appropriating
the funds.
What is working and what is not
working.
And also, um, if we're
appropriating our opioid
settlement funds.
Uh, to areas in need, instead of
being egalitarian and um
appropriating funds on an equal
equal basis.
I'm sure, thank you for a
certain time, uh, a couple of
years ago we had a really good
conversation on drug costs and
options for New Mexico
constituents. I think I'd like
to see that again, see if
anything's changed where we're
at, what the costs are, what our
options are for, for New Mexico.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I would
love a discussion on the
memorial that we passed this
last session, HM 29, regarding
diabetics and the MVD and
roadblocks that people who have
diabetes have with getting their
licenses renewed as well as just
getting new licenses. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Um, I'm sure the last several
sessions.
We've had legislation presented.
To
Limit
The proximity of petroleum
industry.
Operations to population
centers.
With the representation.
That that's been detrimental.
To
Our constituents' health.
I've seen no.
Science.
To support these
representations.
And I would like to see some if
there is in fact been any
studies done. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Um, Madam chair, um, maybe you
would like to revisit. I know
some of the conversation has
been around the federal funding
specifically how that trickle
down will affect some of our
small or smaller or rural
hospitals, um, possibly the tie
in or updates on
passed legislation that has gone
through our state in supporting
our rural hospitals and how that
ties in.
Just to make sure again that
we're prepared for possibly
what's to come.
I thank you, ma'am just to
remind you, keep your
conversations cause everybody's
trying to listen. So if you have
to speak to each other, whisper,
please.
Uh thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
would like to have a
presentation where we uh review
the different business models
for healthcare that is provided
in the state of New Mexico. So
uh private equity owned
hospitals, uh, privately owned
local clinics, uh, single
practices and what are the
different processes and access.
Do they have, um, for, for
funding and what are their, what
are their
Challenges and how can they, how
can we help uh with legislative
and funding support for all
three of those different
business models. Thank you.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
I'm interested in um.
Behavioral health, especially
for youth and those who um might
be incarcerated. How do we, um,
Provide behavioral health and to
make it so that they're not um
Uh, become
Uh, lifelong criminal. How do we
make it so that they get the
behavioral health um support
that they need and um be
rehabilitated.
Sort of along the line of the
Missouri.
Model. Thank you, Madam Chair. I
would like to see us really dive
into sexual assaults, how it's
happening in our state, but
specifically in our public
schools.
And just as an aside, the rig
kit backlog is building back up.
Which we thought we took care of
and I mean, they found people in
that that had been sitting there
since the 80s that had gone on
to commit multiple more crimes,
and so that's uh something that
I had hoped we had fixed, but
obviously not.
Madam Chair, as we continue to
look at behavioral health, I'd
like to take a look at the
effect that mental health rooms
have had within our schools and
the effect on our students. We
remember there was a large rate
of uh of uh
Of, of the students who were
committing suicide and also
remembering what happened with
Benny Hargrove. We now have that
in place and let's look at the
effect of how that's improved
mental health for our students.
Again, as an aside, I'm hoping
that we can get updates frequent
up, you know, not necessarily in
person, sometimes on paper or a
lot because let's face it, we
pass a law and we don't know
what happens. We don't know if
it ever gets implemented, so the
preview preview. I'm gonna talk
to the speaker about having, I
learned about this at a NCSL
meeting last week, um, about
having like a legislative
oversight committee and their
job is
To oversight the, the department
oversee the departments and
somebody to keep track of the
laws that we passed to make sure
that they're being implemented
as opposed to just ignore.
But that's, that's just my
dream. It probably will take 30
years.
We
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Um
I'd be happy to be on the
oversight committee to see how
they're doing that, um.
So I would say, uh, one of the
four topics I would like to look
at, um, and work with, with CCJ
and with all the, on that point
of implementation when we have
passed, you know, big competency
package and with our family
courts, um, it's in the
legislation that Representative
Herndon and I worked on together
and and diving back into that uh
topic of what would it be to uh
for paid representation for
family courts and other other.
um, other things along that
line, but really looking at the,
having a, a topic or a day uh
looking at or working with our,
um our CCJ committee, Madam
Chair.
Mountain here, I believe we
should have the health care
authority in the Department of
Health come and present about
not only the reorganization, but
uh how the services to the
people of the state of New
Mexico is really occurring.
Thank you.
Uh, madam chair, so one of the
things that I think that we
should um dive into is housing,
looking at um whether or not the
money that we or how the money
that we allocated um this past
session is being used.
To, um,
Um,
deal with in-housed populations,
but also housing it with regard
to behavioral health. I think
that we really need to um think
about uh supportive housing as a
part of that.
Um, as a part of the model that
we set up here in New Mexico.
And I, I will jump in here
again. The one of the great
things about having LH, I mean
LFC staff with us is that they
can, you know, particularly if
they're doing a, a deep dive or
whatever they can present to us
on that, but also maybe even
monthly depending on how things
are happening, just an update on
the money state of healthcare
authority or whatever, so we're
not, so we
Hopefully have some idea of how
things are going. I'm trying to
make this, this, uh, senator and
I are trying to make this
committee very informative in
the limited amount of time we
have. So some things are gonna
have to be
In print as opposed to in
person.
Madam chair was touched a little
bit, um, on the environment and
so wanna talk if we can talk
about environmental impacts, but
probably more specifically, uh,
climate change impacts to um
People in our state and how it
impacts.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for bringing up about
the oversight, because part of
what I presented number one,
about the health care impacts, I
mean the health impacts caused
by polluted industries is
related to how we oversight uh
these these industries and
departments, so my next one
would be just general topics and
also thank you for bringing up
LFC because I'd like to look at
what our options as a state are
to make sure that we can gap
fill any shortfalls, um,
will come out of this federal
administration, how much of our
budget will we need and how long
will that last and what are our
options to replenish these funds
in general, um, some sort of a
An or presentation on those
general topics. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee like to see how
the legislation, um, endorsed by
this committee moved through the
session and um kind of early on
in this committee to like to see
what potentially some possible
builds that would be would need
your strong support. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
And um.
I think we should look at um.
Where there are especially our
rural schools.
Um, can I have an eye for our
rural schools.
Uh, in terms of whether they're
Uh, adequately being served.
By uh school nurses.
School counselors.
School social workers and school
librarians.
And if we see in that
presentation that there is some
discrepancy in terms of
shortages.
That we look then at the
possibility of creating a
differential pay.
Uh, for these, um,
Um, positions.
And representative, I will tell
you probably most of the people
on this will tell you there are
shortages in all of those areas
in APS as well as rural.
And sure, thank you, uh, I was
wanting to go into Senate bill
297, the Senator Lopez was part
of, uh, to seek for there's a
chance we can get into the
market assessment, determine the
regional commercial insurance
reimbursement rates.
For all health care services,
they're covered by Medicaid.
To see when Dave dive deep into
that, figure out how that works
for us for the state.
Thank you man.
Madame Chera passed for the
interest of time.
Madam Chair, this is my last one
we've passed a number of
Pieces of compact.
Legislation in the last session
and, and every one of those, the
standard contract language was
modified.
I would like to know whether or
not those modifications impacted
the ultimate adoption.
With those other.
Studied entities.
I don't believe any compacts
passed, not, not, I mean pass
through all of them passed
through the house, um, but
So, and there are people who are
looking at this and working, but
that that is definitely an issue
that, you know, we, we want
certain people in the
legislature want to make changes
to those and have concerns and
the compact folks are saying if
you do that, you're not part of
the compact, so there's a
variety of people thinking about
and looking at things like that,
but no none did pass this year.
Um, Madam Chair, as in
He was an add-on to the
recruitment retention piece, um,
a specific look at residency
programs, um, specifically
increasing community residency
programs and supporting.
I think you madam chair, um, to
also expand on Senator Pinto's
uh accessibility. I, I feel like
um I would like to have a
presentation like some time
several presentations, maybe a
half day's worth about
accessibility. Uh, we had
several bills that did not go
through the Office of
Accessibility Adult changing
tables, there's a program with
the division of tourism
currently now, uh, the senator
mentioned tribal territories
that are having challenges right
now.
I would like to look at the
different programs technically
and physically for accessibility
issues and uh not just the
compliance driver, but an
economic development driver as
well. Um, so that uh we can see
where we can invest in that.
Madam Chair, I'd like to add
that um we look at in uh as part
of our environmental issues, the
um polyfloral alkalol or Phos,
the um Forever chemicals, how
they are impacting the health of
our um communities and also some
of the new technologies and the
incremental um application uh
from uh NMED.
Madam Chair, I would like for us
to look at data privacy and
artificial intelligence as it
relates to healthcare.
And Madam Chair, I would like
for us to look at CTE and the
schools we've talked about the
retention and, and maintaining
of healthcare professionals, but
how is that, uh, CTE progressing
within our schools to make sure
that we are retaining, uh, that
we are getting the healthcare
professionals that we are
looking to train.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I'm
gonna bring in uh back into um
The SB 3, the behavioral health
um, topic, um, making sure, of
course, AOC will be here, but
also our health councils
included in in the conversation
and how um
We are, how they're, they could
be integrated into what's the,
they're trying to form. Thank
you.
Um, man, I know many people
brought up behavioral health,
but there's a lot of confusion
at the local level, not just
health councils, but from
counties and cities and other
entities about what is regional,
how do they become involved, um,
do they have to wait for an
invitation to come to the table.
So I think if we could tease
out,
How this is going to be
organized and set up to include
everybody. Thank you.
Madam Chair, one of the things
that I think that we don't have
enough conversation about is is
um.
Prevention with regard to, um,
you know, the kinds of programs
that we might be able to
establish or even looking at a
survey of those kinds of
programs, uh, for especially
at-risk kids.
Um, and families that are
struggling.
Um, you know, we talk a lot
about CYFD and kids that come
into that system, but what are
we doing to prevent?
That from happening.
I'll pass, madam.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I think,
um.
This may be well, I, I don't
know if it's my final, but I
think it will be. Um, I wanna
see how we can, uh, what, what
is the plan to address rural,
excuse me, rural healthcare
provider shortages. What is that
plan? Um, what is specifically
on our tribal lands as well, and
then what is the continued
impact of having that shortfall
in the rural communities and on
tribal lands because at some
point someone's gonna
have to fill um these continued
gaps, um, when, when we continue
to deal with uh rural healthcare
provider shortages. Thank you,
ma'am.
Madam Chair, I know I passed,
but
I want that one.
I apologies.
Man, could we look at um
Gun violence from a public
health standpoint. I think
that's good. I think we need to
have that discussion.
OK, well, so we'll do one more
round for and you don't need to
if you want to, and then we're
gonna switch over to um
locations for meetings and maybe
that'll give you some time to
kind of clear your brain from
what you've heard and what
you've thought and we'll come
back for another round. So, so,
um,
So Representative, um, Garcia.
Manure um
Look at the possibility of
creating more caseworkers.
For the uh unhoused.
Uh, not only, um,
On houses that are living on the
streets, but also in shelter.
Literature maybe not an add-on,
but just clarification. So after
talking about the compacts in
the works can be done elsewhere.
Will they circle back and give
us the results of what the
compacts are looking for towards
the next session or 60 days.
That's the hope and, and there
are, um, and I don't wanna let
the cat out of the bag cause
people have talked to me about
what their ideas are and I, you
know, I'm don't have their
permission to discuss.
Some, but some ideas maybe as
workarounds or um to do a trial
balloon with one compact, making
that change and seeing if it
will pass muster. So it's just a
bunch of ideas, but hopefully
they will be working with this
committee, um, and if, if they
are not able to present at least
providing us with some data and
or not maybe data, but ideas and
and frameworks of what they're
looking at.
Thank you for that. I think it's
valuable for this, we, we, we,
we need to be involved for sure.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Something that just crossed my
mind when we're talking about
the DD waiver. I know we're
going to have a conversation
about that during the interim. I
believe we had a conversation
about the data regarding
violence and
Reported abuse, and I would just
like to look at that data and
also see maybe some preventative
measures, oversight wise that we
could implement maybe in
legislation, maybe in policy to
ensure that there's no more uh
Cases of deaths as we had a
couple of years ago that really
struck this state really hard,
Madam Chair, and just kind of
again, um,
In that system of which my son
is a so.
A&E is abuse, neglect, and
exploitation. So I get a report
of um neglect if he misses a
med, so it goes from a
nonworking smoke detector, miss,
you know, one pill falling on
the floor all the way to
physical or sexual abuse, so the
number of those incidents is not
necessarily, they're not all
serious and criminal. Exactly,
and I, I think that's just
something that we need to look
into.
So we're not having someone sent
out every time the fire alarm
goes off or something. Well, but
that, that's, that's required,
but I, I just think maybe those
very strong cases, yeah.
Um, Madam Chair, um, maybe a
combination along with
Representative Garcia's idea,
but just uh uh a focus or look
at school-based health centers,
the ones that are in existence,
how they're performing and, um,
looking at them.
You know, terminology maybe or
or community-based health
centers like those wraparound
services, um, that have worked
well in some communities and.
Uh thank you the representative
took my uh uh suggestion, so I
want to make sure that we've
added that to the vote. I knew
that we've had every year uh
representations for school based
clinics, but yet there are still
public school systems out there
who are not allowing them, um,
and there are not enough of
them, and so having some real
data that we can be able to
reflect back out into those
communities.
Madam Chair, I'd like to add
about um a discussion about
domestic violence and how some
of the different prevention and
um
Things we can do, um,
To mitigate it, um.
You know, including alcohol
misuse and um that goes along
with gun violence also with the
alcohol misuse, um, being a
major part of that, but
domestic.
Violence in general, I think we
should, you know,
Keep talking about what we can
do. Thank you.
Uh, I didn't know the rep was
going to say that, but as a
subsection to that, um, how the
ice raids are affecting
immigrant communities and
immigrant populations and
immigrant health. Um, so,
subsection to the domestic
violence piece, but um I wanted
to add healthcare affordability
models, specifically those like
Medicaid forward.
And
Madam Chair, I'd like to bring
that in New Mexico, we still did
not have a mobile medical unit.
They come in from Arizona, so
women who are in the, in the uh
rural areas often don't have
access to some tomosynthesis
mammograms and also we need to
make sure that we're looking at
fertility preservation and
making sure that insurance
companies are covering that.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I I just
would, would like to add to um.
The and we always do, but having
um the discussion with the
disabilities communities and the
ADA updates and legislation that
was um vetoed and where, where
the
Where we are with our state
governments with the GSD and how
they're implementing their
model. Thank you.
So, Madam Chair, during this
session, and I'm sorry if I'm
repeating myself from somebody,
um, the occupational therapist
came forward and indicated they
were not receiving the
appropriate rates that had been
done from the um DD study. So
I'd like to have a report on
that. Thank you.
So, um,
I'm going to add to what was
said about Madam Chair, about
food, and I don't remember the
exact words that were used, I
think representative block
raised the raised the issue
about um additives in food and
really healthy food. Last year,
we also had a presentation, um,
I think we were in Silver City
about um
Healthcare that was provided in
to to jail uh to inmates and
part of that, part of what came
out of that was the impact of
the kind of food that they were
being fed and the impact on
their health.
So it's when we have the
conversation about food, I would
like to also include the the
food that that inmates are
receiving.
As well. Um, and I think we
should have probably also
include um food that our kids
are receiving in schools, um,
definitely all of that has an
impact on health.
OK. So I did think, Madam Chair,
something, um.
In line with your um
introduction about broader
topics, I think that there were
several uh measures introduced,
excuse me, that didn't, um, move
completely forward in um they
did in one house and not in the
other house, such as paid family
medical leave, minimum wage,
guaranteed basic income baby
bonds. These were all um
measures that were attempts to
break
the cycle of poverty because as
we all know, poverty is directly
linked to health and wellness.
And so how is it that we improve
what we introduce.
In order to be able to get them
through.
And the general arena of
Economic impact.
To reduce poverty, but also to
reduce uh or to improve health
and wellness of our families
because it has a direct impact.
We're seeing higher rates of
stress-related, um, mental
health issues in general and
other uh health related issues
that are directly correlated
with poverty, living in
conditions of poverty. Thank
you, madam.
OK, so thank you all for that
and keep your thinking caps on.
So just a couple of things, the
family infant toddler program,
the program through
ECECD, um, back when I worked on
it was much more robust and more
um
More leaving it up to the
professionals to decide what a
child at risk or child.
With disabilities would need and
with all the money going into
ECECD, that program is
shrinking, and it's, it's a
great way to um keep kids out of
special ed to catch them early
and catch him up and, and so
that that's something that I
want us to talk about is
How important it is and to put
some pressure on um
The executive to, uh, for
instance, when I was when I was
a developmental specialist many
years ago, if we saw a kid that,
you know, there was alcoholism
in the house or there were, you
know, there was domestic
violence, we and we saw, you
know, maybe the kid had shut
down and didn't have language
where we could as professionals,
we could decide what that kid
wanted. 2 agencies had to agree,
so it could have been the early
intervention agency and the CYFD
agency or whatever, and now that
has been
cut down to, I'm not sure. I
think it may be an hour a month
total services. So that would
include service coordination,
therapy, um, you know, whatever,
so I think we're kind of killing
that goose that could help us
lay the golden egg, and then
just one final point, those of
you who've been on this
committee before, and I won't
name names, but there are
certain secretaries who come and
present in front of us. They
don't have any slides, they
don't have any handouts. They
don't have.
any information. And so I have
requested of Andrea and um
Xander that that all all
official folks who are
presenting in front of us have
some sort of a handout and some
sort of a presentation that we
can take with us. Um, so that we
don't get any more of that. Oh,
I don't have that information or
oh I, you know, I didn't look
that up for today. We're, we're
asking them to come prepared
and, and we're not gonna take a,
I'll get around.
do it anymore.
So with that, we will um
So Xander, do you have on, on
hand uh or anybody, a list of
where we went last year.
In.
Just so
I hope my movie, we may go back
to the same places, but just so
we know where we've been.
So Madam, madam chair.
May I make a quick suggestion
regardless of the um places that
we went last year, I say we
because I was following very
closely. Um, is there, is there
a possibility to think of the
weather as well, so going. Yes,
cool places when it's warm and
warm places when it's cold. Las
Cruces, Las Cruces in August is
not our best bet.
Thank you.
Just a, a point of clarification
on I'm looking at the um interim
calendar that we were giving,
and I'm seeing, and we have LFC
staff here. It's, it's
indicating in June we'll be in
Taos, but also in July, is there
a need to, can I get some
clarification on that? I'm sure.
I'm not sure what you, I mean
LFC I know
it
before, I mean, they, they kind
of get to put their calendar
together before the rest of us
as we're looking like in, in
working with calendars, but
they're in Taos for 2 months. Is
that correct or incorrect?
Oh, so go ahead, you can just
say it and I'll, yeah.
Yeah, thank you man. I just
bring it up so that as we're,
yeah, yeah, and, and for those
of you who are freshmen, there's
not a whole lot of you, but um
if you're, if you have two
conflicting committees, if
you're voting member, that
should be your priority cause
that's what helps the committee
get the quorum. If you're an
advisory member, then you choose
which is more um interesting,
appropriate, exciting, whatever
the word would be, um, but, but,
and
Well, let's say council tries
really hard to not have, if
you're voting on two committees,
tries really hard not to have
those committees meet on the
same day, but sometimes that
happens and sometimes in this
committee, we have a hard time
getting a quorum of, so we, what
we do is call the speaker or the
pro tem and have that person um
appoint someone for that meeting
so that we can make, again, for
those of you who don't know if,
if a committee doesn't make
quorum, you can get per diem.
But that's never a problem with
this cause we have enough
people, it may be on non-voting
members made voting.
But so, OK, so we were in Santa
Fe, um, Albuquerque, Taos,
Portalis, coral, Silver City,
and Rio Rancho. So trying to
stay away from those places,
just uh raise your hand if you
have a suggestion and we'll
write it down and I'm not sure
how we'll get to consensus or
even if we will, but at least
we'll have a list of
possibilities and then it always
comes down to if we can get a
place at the place and what
their hotel situation is like
and what the
restaurant situation is in
Portalis, there weren't a lot of
places that were open on the
days that we were there, so just
think so, raise your hand, I'll
rip a senator Gallegos.
I'm here and I'll tell you a
Representative Senator Cortez is
watching. She sent a request for
Hobbs. Uh, we've talked about
that earlier, uh, uh, Lee
County, um,
Economic Development Corporation
would help facilitate all that.
I would re.
Recommend September, October,
November.
Just because of the heat that we
get down there in July, you're
welcome there.
But, uh, just thinking through
that, we just, we just want to
highlight that because she made
a point to send me a text for
you and, and, um, legislative
council requires us to meet back
here in October, yeah, the
November 1 will have to be
November must Santa Fe. October
we'll have to get permission,
but we normally meet somewhere
else,
just, just so that folks know
what kind of what the rules are,
so we, we have to come to Santa
Fe for
November meeting, uh, and we
have to request permission to
meet outside of Santa Fe for our
October meeting, not that it
can't be done, but just, just
there's a lot of qualifiers we
have to think about.
Representative Ferrari, I was
going to suggest Las Cruces, and
we could go to either NMSU or
Burrell College.
Representative Gonzalez.
Madam Chair would love to offer
Las Vegas. I know we have a lot
of things happening there
between BHI, our new um rehab
center. We have new ownership of
our hospital. I'm doing a lot of
great things there. We also have
two school-based health centers,
so kind of can tie in a lot.
Madam Chair, I know that we
suggested this last year and
because probably because the
real dose of fires, the schedule
got if we book it early, I would
like to see if we could have
maybe in July, uh, Presbyterian
Rest Medical and Albury is the
same time as the LFC is in
Albuquerque as well. It helped
our members be able to make
both.
Um, and it's a, a west side
hospital.
Madam Chair, uh, you know,
Albuquerque is one of the
largest cities in our entire
state. So I'm thinking that we
will be going back to
Albuquerque, and one of the
places that I would recommend if
we have a several meetings in
Albuquerque would be at La
Vitalena. They've been highly
engaged and involved in the
legislature, and they do have
the space for such a meeting.
In, in terms of that, we've been
offered all kinds of places in
Albuquerque, UNM, Presbyterian,
um, and, and that's another,
that's another consideration is
this, you know, who will host us
and how will they host this? We
have, I won't name the city, but
one time we tried to meet at the
Branch College and they wanted
to charge us for water and uh
and wanted us to only eat their
catered food that we had to pay
for and, and we don't have the
budget for that, plus I
personally don't think that's
very um welcoming or um
Cool. Yeah, there you go. That's
not cool.
Hospitable that it anybody else
have other representative Reel
Caballero. Yes, I'd like to go
ahead and suggest, um, so that
the gallop and it's kind of a a
hub that we can uh perhaps um.
Uh, invite our tribal, uh,
communities.
And arrange it around some of
those general topics that
perhaps um we raised that have
direct impact on tribes, a
nation, so Gallup would be my
suggestion.
And
And person, I mean, I hope that
the committee is OK to kind of
um let, let the vice chair and I
and staff kind of figured this
out based on who's offered what
and when they're available and
uh.
And obviously we're not gonna
get to all the places that have
been suggested, but um,
And there's nothing personal if
we don't choose your, your place
it for whatever reason, um, uh,
Representative Garcia.
Madam Chair, we should uh meet
in uh Logan, New Mexico at the
road to ruin Bar.
Hm
We're already too far on the
road to ruin. I don't know if we
need to to go any further. I'm
trying to put the brakes on
representative.
Representative Wuhan.
Thank you, man. Um, as I'm
listening to the list of
recommendations and, you know,
the coordination of dates and
also the the good advice from
representative Anaya on
regarding the heat. Um,
And as closely as we are now
working with um LFC in, in
being, um,
I would say, um, in coordinating
with them because their staff is
is limited as well that maybe if
we take a closer look at the
June, July and August, um, dates
the LFC is meeting because we
are overlapping with those
dates. And um the, they will be
in the same places. The only one
I have is Las Cruces in the
middle of August, so I'm sorry,
but same same recommendations
that I'm hearing and maybe
there's some better coordination
there so that we can have staff.
Um, LFC present at vote because
they're required.
Um, and needed at both
committees, Madam Chair, thank
you. So let me check in with the
LFC folks. Are, are you required
to attend all LFC meetings.
Um, or a certain, I mean, I know
you're not all gonna be at each
of our meetings, but can we
assume that there will be, you
know, a couple of the folks that
are assigned to us who would be
available. OK. Thank you. Just
checking the logistics, uh,
signature, the list caucus
here, um, the list caucus. Uh, I
would ask Sander to work with
Sarah Woodmere upstairs, um,
water and natural resources has
48 members.
After the legislature.
And we go up against HHS on
several times, so we need to
make sure we're not picking up
the same large spaces um
throughout the entire time.
Thank you.
Some places we might go, there's
one spot and if uh if water is
looking at that too. And, and
none of this will be finalized
until the next legislative
council meeting, so we will come
up with the tentative and they
may come back and say, oh no,
you can't do that cause water is
meeting in that same town, the
same, and there's one hotel with
40 rooms, it's like that's not
gonna work, so, so we will try
and keep, and as I said before,
this is, you know, if you think
of somewhere, if
If you figure out a way we can
get paid to have a meeting in
Tahiti, I'll be all for it. So,
um,
And in CSL and Tahiti.
A representative Anaya and then
Representative Gonzalez. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Um, I'm
thinking of social work, uh,
which makes me think of uh
Silver City.
Thank you.
Madam chair. I just wanted to
make a note, um, and thank you
Representative Block for
pointing out there is
Just looking at our calendar
versus what's already planned.
Still a press for Las Vegas, but
there is an LESC meeting for the
July time frame. It's not
overlapping, but again, I don't
know if the preference is to be
like back to back in the same
city or um we we can it'll be
different places, facilities, so
I think it's still manageable
but just aware that there is an
LESC meeting that same week in
Las Vegas also.
And I'm just curious, does any,
do any of the staff know how
many meeting days we have to fit
in how many calendar days. It's
something ridiculous one. I
don't know, but I think it was
like 250 and 180 days last year.
So, so thank you, Madam Chair.
So just, just a point of
consideration and just, um,
again, as a consideration, if
you were going to choose to come
to Las Vegas, um, the June
meeting dates our preparation
right before our big fiesta, so
those may not be ideal for
lodging and things of one big
hopefully we have water,
hopefully all good. But so the
June dates may not be ideal for
Las Vegas.
But the rest is good.
And, and those are, you know, if
you know that you've requested a
something in the city that you
are living or as part of your
district or you're just familiar
with and there are some, you
know, they do a giant 4th of
July thing that sells out the
hotel rooms a week in advance
and a week after, um, please
share those details with the
vice chair and I and Xander, um,
so, and
My point is that none of this is
written in stone.
Ever. I mean, it's really not
written in stone until uh even
in, it's not written in ink.
It's written in sand right now
and the waves are coming in, so
anything can change, but once,
once the legislative council
gets it.
Um, sometimes things have to be
changed depending on what
happens. So, um, but please
provide us information and, and
if I could request that when you
um send something to me, you
also send it to my district
legislative assistant or my
brain as she's known, um.
So, just, and if you, you know,
if you don't, that it's, it's
fine, but it's Britney B R I T T
N E Y dot Barrera at NM legis.
Um
So, anything else on loca as
vice chair Lopez.
I appreciate the suggestions,
Madam Chair, and you may have
mentioned this before I arrived,
but we're looking to see if we
can have a um a hearing with
course corrections and justice,
um, at some point coordinated
when we talk about the issues
around uh juvenile justice.
Um, a lot of the bills that were
introduced the session, um, it's
not just an issue dealing with
courts and corrections, it also
has to have the heart side, um,
so it's mental health and all
the others. So, um, I know that
there are some dates, Madam
Chair, that we can look at as we
look at this as to where maybe
there's a date that overlaps
with CCJ court corrections in
November and they will be we
will both be in Santa Fe, so
that might be it's kind of late
in the
But that that's a date that
we're in the same place at the
same time, so we can request.
Yeah, cause I mean, there's some
other overlap, and my concern
would be, Madam chairs, if we
wait so late in November,
there's a lot of other.
Things that have already been
put together before we have a
chance to really dive into some
of those discussions. So I just
wanted just to highlight what do
we overlap? There's August.
I feel like in August, Madam
chair, um, and CCJ is to meet um
Somewhere in there and I'm just
thinking if it depending where
they have, they're not, they're
not the same as us in August.
No, but maybe we could choose a
date and just because it's hard
for us to find that what I, what
I think we might have to do in
that case if we can't do when
we're in the same place at the
same time is ask them if we can
do a joint meeting where we
would attend one of their
meetings as, as one of our guest
days or um two of our guest
days.
Because trying to reschedule
things and get us in the same
place at the same time is.
Gonna be difficult. So like I
said, nothing is written in
stone. These are just ideas. If
you have other ideas, please
share them. Um, and if you don't
get a chance today.
Email, text, whatever.
I just want to put that on the
table for the committee to keep
in mind because it's important
for us to talk, just, just not
on that, um, on the
incarceration side or, but also
the other side, which is our
committee. So thank you.
Anyone else on this topic?
OK.
Any, OK, so we'll go back to um
Topics.
Does anyone have
Other
Send that, Senator Scott.
Thank you, Madam Chair. It was
brought to my attention.
If we don't have
A good comparison of the
reimbursement rates.
That are available with
commercial insurance.
Versus the reimbursement rates
that are available through
Medicaid.
And to be competitive.
We should
No whether we're competitive or
not.
I'd like to add that, that,
that's a great idea, getting
rates. I had a bill for hospital
transparency where they would
publish 500, the prices of 500
different.
Procedures and uh that
essentially went nowhere. So,
A lot of data like that is
considered proprietary.
Um, like,
Um, in, in determining rates for
auto insurance they use
algorithms, and I had a a bill
around auto insurance and not uh
and not using a credit score to
determine rates, and I asked a
couple of the insurers.
Or what, what their algorithm
looks like and they flat out
said can't tell you it's, it's
proprietary, so it, it, it would
be great if we can get the data,
that data has been um really
hard to get, we, we
I hear the all payer's claims
data, which we've been trying to
get for years and
is finally becoming a little bit
of a something, um, but getting
that kind of data is very
frustrating and next to
impossible to do, but um we'll
keep working on it. It's not
that we're giving up, it's just
that it's, it's not as simple
as, as requesting.
And, and for those of you who
weren't on this committee last
year, we got a report um from
LFC that when we did the big
bill, not this session, but the
past session on funding rural
hospitals, um, LFC had to IPRA,
the healthcare authority to get
those numbers.
Um, and then, and then the
hospitals came and said those
numbers are wrong. Well, that's
all we had. They, they refused
to provide their own numbers, so
we run into, uh, um, Kelly, if
you could come up to a mic.
Thank you, Madam Chair's
Committee Kelly Legislative
Finance Committee. Um, it is
true that we have not been able
to get access to the all payers
claims database, um, we have
already proposed to look at some
of that statute change, um, with
some of your staff and we'll be
meeting very soon to bring you
interim to be able to uh that
will be helpful.
But as those most people here
know, our pace is glacial, you
know, we're not.
Yeah
Senator Scott.
And Madam Chair.
Perhaps an investigation.
Into transparency.
Legislation with regard.
To what our medical providers
are charging would be
appropriate also.
Senator, I, I believe it would
be appropriate. Again, I, people
they're very hesitant to provide
it, um, very hesitant. I mean
they came out in droves against
my hospital transparency bill.
And and the the purpose of that
bill was if you need a total
knee replacement, you could go
online and see what it costs at
Russ, what it costs at um
Loveless, what it, but like I
said, that bill went nowhere, so
we've been trying to pull those
teeth for I started on this
committee, um, in 2013, since at
least then, so, um.
And Hope springs eternal, but
don't be disappointed, don't be
disappointed if we don't get
done what we want to get done,
but we keep on plugging on and
we do the best we can.
Represented block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I don't
know if this is a big broad
discussion, but I know that
there were many health care
bills that we passed. Most of
them pretty unanimously through
both chambers in the last
session. I do know in the next
session, we have an opportunity
to override those, so I was just
wondering, one of our very
strongly worded letters. Maybe
they could go to the leadership
to urge.
Overriding of a veto in the next
session, if possible.
Ah
I'm not, I'm, I'm not sure about
the technicalities of that. Do
one of you legislative council,
can we override, I think we
would just start over as opposed
to overriding a veto, start a
new bill if it's a new session,
yeah, yeah. I guess we'll just
have to call for an
extraordinary then, madam.
Oh well.
What can you do?
uh senator.
Um, Madam Chair, just uh, and,
and I appreciate the input that
everybody
has suggested for us for our,
our long list of hearings for
this interim.
I just wanted to add one more
couple of items for topics that
have already been introduced um
for us for our consideration.
But under the domestic violence
issue to make sure that we
include a discussion on
bullying.
Um, bullying, I mean, domestic
violence covers a wide range of
things, yes, but I want to make
sure that we talk about
bullying, especially within our
schools.
It's, it's very much alive and
well.
Um, and we have a discussion,
um, of course, with CCJ, but
making sure that we also have a
presentation and discussion on
juvenile justice issues.
his behavioral health related,
but also with CYFD when they're
in front of us to talk about
what's happening with regards to
um
The children that are within the
detention centers and exactly
what services are we providing
those children because I'm
curious and I have concerns.
Um, because, Madam Chair,
there's been a lot in the news
recently, um, about many
different issues, you know, one
of them with those two, they're
not even juveniles, they're
children, children, um, and I
think that goes back to the
issue of gun violence, um, an
issue in bullying, domestic
violence. It's, it's all
together, Madam Chair, and I
want to make sure that we, we
have part of that discussion,
um, because it's important for
us to look at, and Madam Chariot
also, I'm gonna bring the same
subject up at the LESC meeting
because it's
to our schools, it's a systems
issue.
Um, so I wanted just to to
highlight that for our committee
for consideration for things
that we've already um have
already been mentioned.
Um, and then on Senate Bill 3,
that's a whole another thing for
us to look at.
Um, but making sure that we
senator can just a quick
reminder of what Senate Bill 3
is for, yeah. Senate Bill 3 was
um setting up the uh behavioral
health system in the state of
New Mexico, and where we have
charged um the administrative
office of the courts to develop
regional planning, and they just
hired their new person um last
week, so she's just coming on
board. She's a state employee
formerly, but so she's not new
to the system.
But I think um
As they are putting together
their executive committee and
moving forward.
That we make sure that um as
they come to present in front of
us.
is to make sure that Bernalo
County, um, the behavioral
health system that both the city
of Albuquerque and Bernalo
County are putting together with
that huge chunk of change, um,
that is part of our discussion
also when it's they come in
front of our committee manager.
Cause that's, that's a big
chunk, um, we need to see what
they're doing.
And how it compliments or not.
So, thank you. Those are my,
just listening to everybody and
Representative Anaya, um, Madam
Chair, uh, during the last
session, uh, Representative
Robert Caballero introduced a
bill to do away with um
To do away with, uh, um,
slavery within our state, but
what, looking at the 13th
Amendment, but what she was
focusing on was looking at how
inmates are may now be used to
do jobs that would have been
done by immigrants. And so if
that's going to happen, they
should be paid their wages so
that the money that they earn
can go to their families if
healthcare is going to be cut
and also to make sure that any
individuals who were harmed by
them also receiving some part of
those wages. So it would be
really good to take a look.
at that in the broader general
sense of how that would work.
Madam chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
speaking of healthcare cuts, um,
uh, I know as we're
contemplating overlapping with
uh different committees. I would
like to suggest, um, an
overlapping session with LFC as
it regards in regards to the,
not just the Medicaid cuts, but
all of the cuts to healthcare
that are coming down, cause I
feel like um if we can talk
about this early on, it might
help set up our presentations
later to think about the ways in
which, like when we're talking
about funding, when we're
talking about affordability.
Knowing that we're gonna have to
plug holes like what
realistically does the picture
look like for us? And I think um
I don't know if if LFC regularly
does joint meetings with I know
they've done some with CCJ and
uh, so that may be again where
we can have an afternoon,
perhaps, um, somewhere.
Close to where we are or, you
know, in Albuquerque or Santa Fe
and see if we, that their time
is also very precious and um for
them to
Let me just say this, we haven't
been successful going down that
road in the past. I'm suggesting
if Madam Chair, because we are
such a substantial part of the
budget. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Well, you're preaching to the
choir here.
Representative Luann and then um
EM.
Thank you. Um, I'm going to, um.
Can add to what um Senator Lopez
just said and also
representative.
Um, and I, I think that.
If we are to ask for an
overlapping or even a
coordination with LFC on a
particular budget item. I would,
I would hope it would be in
regards to SB 3.
And SB1 that we passed SB one
was the behavioral health fund,
SB 3 was implementation with a
huge amount of money, a large
amount of money that we put
together um in
In coordination, obviously, um,
to reform what is going on with
the behavioral health system,
which we know is the underlying
um issue that has led us to a
lot of these um
These other um issues we have
regarding our wellness for our
state. So I think that would be
appropriate. I think that that
is a a true focus of what um we
need to do with regards to the
budget and what we just did in
this last session. Um, I'd also
add to that the
During that conversation that we
are looking at Bernco as senator
mentioned, but also all the
other uh coordination that's
going on with our local
governments in regards to the
opioid settlement funding that
they've received because they've
created their own behavioral
health collaboratives, um, in
respect to that funding and also
with the regionalization and the
development of
How the AOC is now looking at
hiring um.
Outside consultants, where we do
have expertise with our health
councils and other programs from
DOH, so I think there needs to
be a better coordination in
regards to that legislation,
Madam Chair. Thank you.
Of
um
Thank you, Madam Chair. So a
couple of things, um,
In terms of, you know, joint
sessions with, with um LFC. I
think that would be great. We
also passed um a lot of money
for uh Medicaid, right? And so
we should probably look at, you
know, what's happening with that
money, but also, I think that we
need to think about whether or
not the system as it's set up
right now is really working. Are
we getting what we need, uh,
from, for example, the MCOs, um,
our health outcomes what they
should be, um, I mean, that's a
a really huge, um, topic, and I
think we need to look at that.
We need to look at what's
driving the high cost of
healthcare.
Um, with regard to corrections,
um, juvenile corrections and
adult corrections. Um, I know
that for youth, they are not
getting medically assisted um
treatment. And that's a big
issue for kids who are going
into the system who are
addicted, um, and then we should
probably also look at reviewing,
you know, what, um adult
corrections has done with regard
to Matt as well, because there
was a lot of resistance, uh from
them for.
implement that program, and I
think we need to know whether or
not they've done it and how
they're doing with it, and how,
you know, how it's progressing.
Sorry, we're trying to, trying
to figure, so representative
cakes and representative rebel
Cabao and Garcia.
I think you mean.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and,
and I do appreciate that uh this
committee has not gone short on
ideas for this interim session,
but um I would be remiss if we
don't have this discussion, so
for.
As many years as you've been a
part of this committee, there
has been discussions about
Issues
Whether they're perceived or
factual by the MCOs.
And I would like to have a
presentation where um instead of
just
having that same discussion, we
go back to because we're
approaching the time where we're
gonna be sending the state is
going to be sending out RFPs in
the next year or two.
So what is that process? What
are the questions that we are
asking to be answered by the the
the RFPs, we want to see what
that looks like, because as a
legislator, that's the report I
want when they come back, is
that it reflects back to the
application that they um were
selected for, and we are not
getting that data, we're getting
completely different other data
that has nothing to do with the
actual contract for the.
Selection. So I would like to
have a presentation of what the
process is, who's reviewing
RFPs, how, um, what are the,
what is the criteria of
selection, and I think we need
to start there before we we keep
always asking for data and
information once they're
implemented, but I'd like to
start at the very beginning to
see how the legislature can be
able to create a
report a quality report on on
the data, uh.
At the very beginning. Thank
you. Thank you, Madam.
Representative Robo Caballero.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
going back to what you um
mentioned earlier about
oversight and the reports and
all of the reports that we get,
I think should incorporate
everything we've just been
saying in terms of associating,
for example, the funding.
And the in addressing the
problems that have been a
prioritized in the request for
funding, um, and what have been
The impacts of the funding on
those outcomes. That's really,
really important when we're
reviewing, um, and beginning to
associate the best use of our
funds and whether they actually
are addressing um remediating
the problems that have been
identified in the funding
request and the agencies have
not, you're correct, that they
come before us and
we have no way of holding them
accountable because we don't
have a way of measuring, um,
what we are requesting. So not
only in the policy arena, but in
the funding arena, what, how
they have associated that in
terms of the outcome. What
effect have they had? We're
still in a state of poverty, for
example. Thank you.
And, and on that point, um,
It's gone now. So we'll go to
Representative Garcia and I'll,
I'll come back to it, hopefully.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, I know that we, uh, touched
on, um,
The uh medical practitioner.
Shortages, but we definitely
need uh
A updated and and detailed.
Report by the School of
Medicine, UNM School of
Medicine.
On our BA to MD program.
And make sure that they're still
on track.
Um, because this committee
basically helped start that
program.
Uh, in 2009.
And make sure that the, the
school of medicine is still on
track.
And complying in terms of the
student population.
That uh it reflect the face of
New Mexico.
Uh, which is 50% Hispanic, 100%
Native American.
And 65% rural.
So we want, that was the
Basically, the
The goal that this committee set
forth.
In terms of that program meeting
those targets. Also man, um,
Um,
It's important that we look at
the
The uh stabilizing.
Uh, the victim advocates in our
law enforcement agencies.
Uh, victims of homicide and
violent crime.
And what we've done, uh, 3 of
the past 5 years.
Is that in 2000 and 2000.
24, we did a general fund
non-recurring.
Um
Appropriation of $4 million for
these victim advocates and law
enforcement agencies.
And the prior year we did
500,000 in the prior to that, we
did 120,000. The pro me chair
that law enforcement agencies
have.
With non-recurring monies is
that they really can't plan
ahead.
And uh so I think it'd be
imperative that
That if we're going to do any
funding to victim advocates and
law enforcement agencies that we
really look at creating.
Um, a recurring.
Um
Fund for for these uh much
needed individuals.
Thank you.
And my, uh, I'll go on and it
will be um
Ferrari, Gonzalez and then
Stephanics, but what I was
thinking of when I said, well,
um, when the MCOs, uh, if you've
looked at the um LFC.
Book that that grades things,
and if you look in there on some
of the MCO grades, um, you know,
it's acceptable to be at 70%.
and, and things like that, and I
always thought we are the you
are contractors, why are we
accepting 70%. And what I
learned from the department is
that they negotiate with the
MCOs about how good they're
gonna be and
I personally think we don't, you
don't negotiate with your
employee to say how many, how
much of your job are you going
I personally think we don't, you
don't negotiate with your
employee to say how many, how
much of your job are you gonna
actually do? And so I think we
need to look at that and figure
out, and in terms of the dollar
things we can get reports from
LFC, um, not that we can't do
deep dives, but again, just what
we've talked about today, we
could take, uh, you know, 50
days, which we don't have and
not get through all of that. So
some things are gonna have to
be.
This written reports, um, and
then the LFC folks are always
available to meet with you
individually to explain things
to answer your questions,
whatever, um, so it, it's, we're
gonna have to pare down, these
are a lot of good, good ideas,
but some things are out of our
reach and some things we're just
gonna have to depend on written
reports as opposed to having
presentations on everything
cause hours are limited, so I
will go to um
and Ferrari. Thank you, ma'am
Chair. I'm not sure if I missed
someone mentioning um uh
report or information on sexual
assault.
You did. OK, thanks.
Representative Gonzalez. That,
that was my same do, Madam
Chair. So just, uh, well, just
the end of a presentation scene
of the funding just well, I, I
know you, you a representative
and I was gonna say wet noodles
for you too for not paying
attention.
Well, um, yeah, just got a, yes,
thank you.
And, and we do laugh a lot in
this committee, because if we
don't, we cry.
Um.
So um senator Stephanics, uh,
thank you, Madam Chair. Many of
the things we talked about today
relate to poverty. So I hope
that we will continue to
verbalize how our initiatives
And state agencies are
alleviating poverty in the
state. Thank you.
Good point. Thank you. Um,
Representative Kate.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I
understand that our time is
drawing close to the end of this
meeting, um, were you, uh, I,
and I appreciate you providing
these letters on our desk, are
you scheduled for anything for
today to discuss the issues that
these letters are addressing.
Are we gonna discuss this in a
meeting or no? Um, we can
briefly, uh, is there anybody
who has anything really pressing
and again this the door isn't
shut.
This is just what we discussed
today. As soon as you think of
things, although not by text at
4 a.m. um, but when you think of
things,
Add them to our list, we will
add them to our list if you, if
you, um, share them with us.
Representative Lujan, thank you.
I'm just going to, um, uh,
support what uh Senator Stefanis
uh just said along with a
representative Roma Caballero
and the poverty and how we are
looking to uh.
To work to, to solve that issue.
I do, I've been working on, um,
some legislation too, so I'd
like to be a part of that with
the baby bonds and all, and
really um looking at the wealth
and and um.
Growth there um in in regards to
our poverty, I'm sure. Thank
you.
OK, thank you.
OK, so let's go, let's go back
to the letters, um, and I will
need a motion and
Do voting members know who they
are? Do you know if you're a
voting member or not?
Uh, Xander, do you have that
handy? Yeah.
OK, so voting members are, um,
of course, me and the vice
chair, Senator Block, who's not
here, Representative Chavez,
Representative Herndon, Senator
Hickey, who's not here, and
Representative Jennifer Jones,
so we don't actually.
We don't have a Senator,
Senator, OK, OK, we do have a
quorum. So those will be the
people that vote, um, but we
will just, let's start with the
um
The AI one.
Um, so are there questions on
that, as I said, this, this was
brought to my attention at a an
NCSL meeting last Friday,
actually, um, and so they
requested that we, we write a
letter to our federal
delegation, so are there
questions? Are there concerns,
if not, can I have a motion from
a voting member.
OK.
I'm sure.
In the AI community.
Today
It's where the internet was.
20 years ago.
Largely
Or of good portion.
of its early history.
Unregulated
So
The question that I would have.
Supporting this letter.
would be
I guess twofold. First,
Is there any?
Expertise.
Within our state government or
within any of the legislative
body.
To put forth
Reasonable and appropriate
regulation.
And secondly,
Would
What
This stances negatively impact.
Some $500 billion.
Of AI activity.
That is projected to occur
throughout the country.
In the, in the coming years.
So, so, um, what, what was
brought forth by the NCSL staff
is that it's unconstitutional
for the federal government to
tell us we can't pass laws. Um,
the concern is, you know, every
state is different.
And what, what, what's in the
bill that is in front of
Congress right now, basically
says states you can't do
anything on your own. Um, and we
see that as an issue, um,
because one size doesn't fit all
and there's sovereignty, its
sovereignty of the states and
there is expertise actually. I
wouldn't say I'm an expert, but
I am on the NCSL task force on
AI and healthcare. So I'm
learning a lot, um,
representative Anaya. There were
several bills regarding.
AI and healthcare this year, um,
and, um, you, how do I say this?
You don't necessarily need to be
an expert on something to bring
a bill forth. I mean, it could
be uh an agency bill that could
be a um
Uh
Group bill, a labor bill or
whatever, um, we do have the
expertise. We have the science
and technology, and let's face
it, AI is changing by the minute
and um so no one is gonna be an
expert on all areas, and we can
also call in folks from NCSL or
CSG or other
Either to advise us or to
present to us, and I don't see
that that us writing a letter to
our federal delegation will slow
progress on AI. I think that AI
horse is out of the barn,
there's no slowing it down. It's
just a matter of trying to
protect New Mexicans from things
that um as I said before, like
using the algorithms in AI to
determine rates for, for auto
insurance, uh if those pro those
are proprietary.
We, we can't regulate it. We
can't, so I think it's very
necessary, but I don't, did that
answer your question?
OK. Thank you. Representative um
Luhan and then Rebel Caballero.
Ma'am, I just, I just say yes,
we did have um legislation uh in
regards to AI and I think did we
not, and I just clarifications
are we going to have a task
force, uh, legislative task
force on that or a task force.
I have
To be to address all the AI um
legislation and information and
things like that during this
inter would expect that that
would be science and tech would
be doing that. Yeah, I just, I
see Xander shaking his head, and
so I just want to make sure that
uh uh Senator Scott knows about
that as well, that there is a
task force and they're gonna be
looking at all these aspects as
well. Thank you. Repa Caviero.
Um, Madam Chair, just a
question, uh, in relation to
Senator.
comments. What is the State
Department that is charged with
executing AI.
Do it.
Do it. Oh, Department of
Information Tech, so they, they,
it's under their arm, but we
have the oversight, obviously,
and science and technology would
be we have the oversight over
making laws to provide
oversight. Well, for the laws
and then they administer, so I
just I would say different
departments will be
administering different things.
I mean, if it's a, if it's an
insurance thing, the Department
of Health in the superintendent
of insurance will be overseeing
that. So it's not, it's, it's
AI is in everything, so we
can't, you know, just expect it
to be part of
Science and technology it's
gonna be part of healthcare,
it's gonna be part of CCJ, it's
gonna be part of business, it's
gonna be part of everything,
but, but so in different
departments in the state will be
overseeing the AI part, you
know, the healthcare authority
is going to be seeing some
oversight of some um AI as well,
Department of Health, as will
transportation as well. Um,
Everybody, yeah, yeah,
everybody.
So, Madam Chair, just to add,
ask one more. In relation to
what you just said. I, I
understand that everybody is.
Overlapping or integrating,
actually integrating is the
better word for it, uh, AI and
all of our systems in all of our
transactions. It's going to be,
it is already a major component
is so that one department, are
they charged with ensuring that
it's AI is not only integrated
but executed appropriately
according to our state laws and
then uh compliance, so that
would be the next.
The follow up, and that's it. My
guess, I mean, and anything
could, is that in the
legislation, it will spell out
who was going to be responsible,
um, you know, the, this office
of the Superintendent of
Insurance is responsible for
making sure that the algorithms
for um breast cancer don't, um,
OK, so,
Oh, here, this is, I am from
Linnea. Thank you, Linnea. Um, I
believe that LESC will have a
work group on AI in education
this interim.
through the passage of House
Memorial to. So yeah, it's, it's
gonna be very diffuse and, and
as with most of our bills, we
write into it who's gonna be
responsible for, and not that it
always gets done to our
satisfaction, but that's, that's
how I view that things would be
um
would be worked on. Let's see I
had someone else, but I was it
you represent block. I thought I
wrote someone down, but I don't
see anybody. I think so, madam.
So I just had some, some
questions about this. So I
haven't been able to read the
big beautiful bill that they're
passing in Congress right now.
So I don't know what provision,
I don't know if everyone on this
committee who's voting on this
has read what the provisions
are, but I do think it's
something very interesting to
consider regarding our state and
regarding what other states have
done, because
I'm just wondering, would this
nullify other states' laws that
they've passed regarding AI and
then also have we spoken to the
AI community on what their
thoughts are on that legislation
federally, and then also how
does this deal with interstate
commerce and New Mexico
regarding investment that's
currently in the state that
could have been jeopardized by
potential legislation and how
are we going to reconcile that
with this stance because it's so
broad and it's so vague.
In my opinion, it's not, it's
not even very strongly worded in
my opinion. So I just think
I mean, it's a nice letter. I
mean, good job, but I'm just
wondering what, what outcome
we're looking for on this.
With what we're looking for is
the ability for New Mexico as a
state to have some input on how
AI is used and sold and
everything else in our state. If
you look at the second
paragraph, uh, the second line
of that, and this is directly
from the bill any law or
regulation.
regulating artificial
intelligence and
Cannot be passed or enforced in
states for the next 10 years.
And that's a big part of the
issue is taking away our rights
as a state and saying for 10
years, I mean, uh, you don't say
anything for 10 years is not
gonna be touchable by the
states, but especially something
that's so that's, I mean, I
imagine the the knowledge in
this area is doubling probably
every hour or whatever, we, what
we're saying is we want to be
able to
Oversee AI in our state in
whatever way, in whatever, you
know, form it looks like.
Thank you, Madam Chair. No, I
totally get that. I, I just
don't understand. I, I need to
read it because it says it's a
sentence fragment of the bill.
So I need to read what the bill
says. And also I just
I just have some concerns about
who so the members of Congress
who are listed here.
It says, we asked them.
To do everything in their power
to stop this part from being put
in the budget. So, I'm just, I
just want to know what their
stances are currently and yeah,
I mean,
It's a nicely worded letter, but
I just don't necessarily like if
we're gonna write strongly
worded letters in this, in this
committee.
My opinion is
I want people to actually read
them, and I want them to have an
outcome. So I just hope we don't
get too inclined to send them
like every single, every single
time we meet, because it will
dilute their message. So, I
mean, also another thing.
I believe you said it was
unconstitutional already to put
this in law. So won't it already
be stricken down even if it does
pass the budget and what
recourse would we even have at
that point? I just, there's a
lot of what ifs, and I there are
a lot of what ifs, and it's very
broad in the legislation, it's,
it has no detail whatsoever, and
I, I can, in a minute I can
probably find the exact
language, but what it says is no
state shall enact or um enforce
in the
legislation regarding
AI for the next 10 years.
Um, so there's not a lot of
detail that this came directly
from NCSL requesting that we
write this letter and we write
letters to our federal
delegation regardless of where
they stand on. I mean, I would
bet that all of our delegation
is not in favor of this measure,
um, but, so we don't really need
to know,
um, OK. Here, here's the full no
quote no state or political
subdivision thereof.
may enforce any law or
regulation regulating artificial
intelligence models, artificial
intelligence systems or
automated decision systems
during the 10-year period.
Beginning on the date of the
enactment of this act.
So I guess we could pass laws,
but we couldn't enforce them.
So, um, so, and, and
I, I, I, I trust NCSL. They have
a lot of experts. This is was
their recommendation in order to
maintain our authority as a
state.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Appreciate that. OK, so
Representative Anaya and then
Representative Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I'll
take this moment to give a
shameless plug for a full-time
legislature. We are the, we
shouldn't be part of the
overseeing body, not just with
our um
Uh, state institutions, but also
being up to date on what's
happening at the federal level,
um, for now, I suggest folks use
Google alerts. They're great,
they get sent to your inbox. Um,
but the other piece of this,
Madam Chair, is I would like to
urge the voting members to vote
in support of this one, because
of constitutionality.2, it's a
matter of states' rights. So if
you are a proponent of having
rights here in our state than
you should before this. It's
also an issue of a balance of
power. Um, so if you are a
pro-democracy, pro-constitution,
pro.
States, right, you should
probably vote in favor of this.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
And we have a vie for the 2nd
cheerleader position.
I love it. I love it. So
Representative Chavez, uh, yeah,
Madam Chair, I'd like to make a
motion that we uh send a letter
to our congressional delegation.
OK,
so go ahead and call the roaner.
Um, so, uh.
Don't have a roll
pencil it in pencil it in, so,
um.
All right. Um,
Let's see, we'll go in
alphabetical order, um, Senator
Block's not here, uh,
Representative Chavez. Yes.
Representative Herndon, yes,
Senator Hickey's not here, uh,
neither is Representative Jones,
Senator Scott.
And then, um, Senator Vice Chair
Linda Lopez. Yes. And then Madam
Chair, Thompson. Yes. All right,
uh, with the vote of 4 to 1, uh,
this passes, and so we'll send
it. OK, thank you. OK, and now
we will move on to the um
The purple one and just a, a
quick explanation of this. We,
we thought that we passed a bill
or part of the budget to provide
raises to direct support of
professionals, um, and what we
are hearing from the department
is they are taking that as that
was for last year. That was for
the rates that were already in
place and the, the people who
were behind this bill and many
of us were under the
Standing in the, the desire that
this would be for rate increases
because we have not increased
rates, um, in several years.
You've probably all heard from
your constituents about how
they're how people's loved ones
are are not getting the services
they need, they, they're as
representative Block talked
about earlier, the abuse cases,
um, if, if group homes in
particular are short-staffed or
have to hire people who no one
else will hire.
Because we don't pay enough to
get it, I mean, I, you all have
heard, most of you have heard
this kind of thing, but my son
is 6'7 and breaks glass and
breaks windshields and um
sometimes hurts people and
sometimes wipes specs on the
ceiling, and you could do that
job, or you could flip burgers
at McDonald's for more money.
It, it's kind of a no-brainer. I
mean, so, so our intent was that
racist bring the the direct
service providers up to a level
where we can compete with
The, the lowest paid jobs that
there are essentially.
So are there questions or
concerns?
Go ahead, ma'am, I just have a
question. So basically in the
letter it says that they didn't
um try to receive matching
funds.
Um, yeah, and, and, yeah, so
they, they are not.
They would have to uh submit a
plan to um CMS Center for
Medicare and Medicaid Services,
um, in order to be able to do
this, and they are saying
they're not gonna make that
request.
Ma, they give their reason why,
because they think it's for
races that have already gone
into effect.
And and I I don't know if any of
you know about the candle, Bruce
Weatherby, if you, if you Google
the candle, he's been writing
articles about it, which has
much more detail, I mean not
saying everything is 100%
correct. I'm not endorsing it,
but you can get more information
there.
OK. Thank you.
OK, uh, any emotion?
So move manager. OK, so uh
motion from Vice Chair Lopez in
a second from Representative
Chavez, is there any opposition?
OK, seeing none, we will send
that letter.
OK, so what time is it? Oh, we
are doing well. So I think um
We have public comment at 12:15.
I can't believe we're, we have
an hour, um.
And, and so I, I'm not, if you
are on Zoom and you would
Like to give public comment,
please raise your hand, and is
there anyone in the room that
would like to give, OK, and, and
I will limit you to 3 minutes.
Um, so if you wanna come on up,
um, in whatever order and if
everybody who wants to speak
come forward and sit in these
forward seats, so we don't have
to wait and just come on up and
uh
Introduce yourselves, and you
have 3 minutes. Yeah, you start,
and I think you have to push the
button on the mic. Go ahead and
sit down and push the button on
the mic and go ahead. Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
I, I think there's a list as
well too, and I was the last one
there, so I don't want to skip.
No, it's we're gonna get to
everybody, so don't worry about
it.
Um, Madam Chair, members with
me, um, my name is Eric
Martinez. I'm a lobbyist here in
New Mexico and I was just uh
speaking on behalf of
suggestions for the committee to
where we can uh address some
gaps in, in recovery and the
gaps in between recovery and
getting into IOP programs and
expansion of recovery
infrastructure, this legislative
session with appropriations tied
to that expansion, whether it be
appropriations that go down to
counties or the possibility of
P3 legislation as well.
to just to identify some options
and I would probably have some
um
Clients of mine come and speak
about the need for just the
stability of, of recovery in in
their phases cause some people
who are incarcerated who come
out and try to find a recovery
center, they sometimes can't
find any in the state sometimes,
and then even when they finish
the recovery program, they take
takes a little bit of time to
get into an intense outpatient
treatment program as well. And
sometimes that lets them fall
back into a cycle of back into
going back to jail cause there's
nowhere else to go.
go and really nothing else to
do, so I think to observe and
identify uh services and, and,
and critical infrastructure for
recovery centers and in the
interim, I think would be
extremely helpful and um I just
on another note as well too,
I've, I've talked to uh some um
of my other clients from the
village of Angel Fire, and they
said they'd be willing to host
any of your uh, any of your
hearings in.
The summertime, so you guys can
get a little bit of cooler
weather as well too, so that's
all I got members, Madam Chair,
thank you.
Thank you. Um, so,
Robert Cagle and give me one
second, Robert, um.
Stop this. And also um Xander's
handing out a handout from
Robert and um this is, this is
Robert's opinions, Robert, so in
no way are we saying that this
is the full and complete
picture.
Um, just kind of from a legal
standpoint, we have to say this
is not, this is just one
person's um
Work. So whenever you're ready,
Robert.
Yeah, my name is Robert Cagle,
and for the past well over a
decade, I've done substantial
research in the
Waiver programs, I have a 40
year old son. I helped start the
waiver over 40 years ago.
Um, it's, it's been a real
treacherous journey.
Uh, federal law requires that if
you have a Medicaid program, you
have to provide adequate rates
to have providers across the
area you serve. New Mexico does
not have a geographical
exception for rural areas and to
serve the whole state.
You also have to provide choice
of providers, that's federal law
42 US Code Section, I think it's
1903 or 1302 something.
Um, in October of 22, Jason
Cornwell, the director of DDSD,
came before this committee, and
he had the handout on is the
second page when he gave this
committee.
Illustrated the fact that they
were uh DTSD and Department of
Health were in violation of that
federal law.
He told the committee that they
were doing a rate study and a
provider capacity study to set
base rates. Unfortunately, they
did them backwards. They did the
rate study before they did the
provider capacity studies, so
the rate study didn't know that
they were short and not paying
enough.
The previous rate study was done
in 219, and they decided to
follow the plan of some
providers basically in Las
Cruces who were using illegal
subcontractors as workers.
Um
In 23,
They told the legislature that
they were going to backfill the
ARPA money. They did not.
Uh, on the back page, you'll see
that we're being paid less. This
is supported living category 4.
is still being paid quite a bit
less than it was in 22.
Um,
When they did the rate study,
they followed that formula of
45% of the providers being able
to use subcontractors, one of
the providers quality of life
was taken to court. They
basically had to come up with
$1.5 million.
Subsequently, Sandra Alber with
the US Department of Labor has
been doing investigations down
there and as they're
investigating and forcing
several agencies to pay back
wages.
This is still the rate that
we're relying on today is a rate
that is illegal to use.
The, um
The
Provider who was sued their
attorney came to this committee
and said this is a problem and
it's illegal. Everybody knows
that.
Um, in 24, the legislature
provided $20 million for
provider rate increases. The
department could not get it
together to have that rate
increase done by July 1st, the
beginning of the year, and they
delayed and delayed and delayed,
and finally, at the end of the
year, they did a retroactive pay
increase. That was based on an
inflation index on the previous
rate study.
OK, Robert, that's 3 minutes.
Wrap it up. OK.
The current this past session,
there was another $20 million
increase, which was to go to the
3.7% inflation, which is still
in the operative rate study, OK?
We don't have that.
In 24 uh
I did, I went back and looked at
the number of providers and on
this back page, you'll find.
We're supposed to be providing
this supported living on a
statewide basis.
16 counties and 24 did not have
supported living providers.
Thank you, Robert. Thank you.
Well, I just asked you to look
at it, yeah, and, and, um, if
you don't know how to get a hold
of, if you have questions, um,
and you don't know how to get a
hold of Robert with his
permission. I will share your
contact information, so if you
want to talk to him, let me know
or send me a text and I will
share his contact information,
if that's OK with you, Robert.
My final point is that we're
grossly out of compliance with
federal law, and we're denying
these people service.
Thank you it's not OK.
Thank you. Next we have Nat Dean
and Nat may be using a um an
alternative communication
device. I'm not sure. She's had
some respiratory issues, so it's
not AI generated that happened
in the, some people got up in
arms when Nat did that, um.
And, um, she's not using AI
generated she's.
She's putting it into a talking
machine for old fashioned words
that I'm using.
Mhm
that their labor intensive.
Madam Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
committee members, staff and
advocates. My name is Natine and
I am a disability and healthcare
advocate. I will speak through
some bullet points. One, the
revolving door of incarceration,
probation or parole, violation
and reincarceration can be
changed if there are enhanced
recognition of the risk factors
in using models similar to drug
court programs. The labor
intensive, but often render
improved outcomes. 2, the
was absolutely correct that laws
are passed, but the key to the
larger kingdom of success is
that the laws are actually
enforced. A perfect example is
the service Animal Act passed in
2013, which came about from
Handlers such as myself, but I
still struggle with others who
violate the law and the
enforcement is almost nil. It's
a daily challenge for me as a
service animal handler for 40
years now, 3, case management is
often lacking for folks who are
the most in need of achieving
continuity and achieving health
improvements.
received so many referrals to
clean up train wrecks that could
be avoided.
I love the work I do, have no
charge to those referred to me,
but it frequently reveals what's
not working instead of what's
working.
Then we will outs and
renovations of affordable
housing or even housing overall
needs to recognize how important
it is to use universal design
concepts that incorporate
accessibility in the ADA 5. It's
very exciting to see the
revamping a new programs with
aging and long-term services.
These are exciting times.
Thank you for your time and
consideration today. I'm
impressed with the long and
comprehensive list of subject
matter you have discussed today.
I look forward to collaborating
and hope I can be of support in
your work going forward.
Thank you, Nat.
OK. Next, we have um Tom
Hernandez.
Did he step out?
OK. Um, if it comes back in,
somebody.
So do a spit wad at me or
something. Um, so next we have
um Ellen Pines with the question
mark, OK, she's a no. And then
Linda Siegel, and I don't see
Linda either.
Is there anyone on Zoom?
OK, so we will go ahead and go
to Zoom.
And
Oh
Oh
time.
Oh, OK.
OK. So first, we will go to Jim
Copeland.
Whenever you're ready, Jim, and
just a reminder, it's 3 minutes
and please introduce yourselves
and tell us who you're with if
you are with, you know,
organization or a department. So
go ahead, Jim.
the tech poltergeist's gonna be
here for interim like they are
in session. Yes.
So Jim, are you there?
Nope.
No.
I guess that wasn't Jim.
Jean, hello?
Jim Copeland.
Nope. Oh, OK. Who are you? We'll
go ahead with you. This is Roger
Valdez. How are you, uh, Madam
Chair? Go, go ahead.
Uh,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, this is Roger Valdez
with the Center for Housing
Economics. Um, I hope you
received our
A letter with our rather
expansive um agenda for 2025,
2026, we, we, um, there's a lot
of housing issues that the state
is facing and there was some
concern last year that there
were, I think, 53 plus bills
that were
In the legislature and only one
of them was um signed into law
and we're hoping that we can
work with the committee and
stakeholders and others to
winnow some of this down.
To a little bit of a consensus
agenda, um, especially focusing
on on incentives, um, to
encourage more private
development of housing, um,
looking at things like deposit
assistance and other support for
tenant um side issues that arise
in housing, and then also
looking at data and better
measures of poverty and better
measures of affordability, uh,
for New Mexico, especially in
light of changes at the federal
level, and then finally looking
at at financing, particularly
A very good build house built
426 that looked at support for
um resident acquisition, a
mobile home parks and, and
trying to find a way to more
effectively and and efficiently.
Uh, finance those acquisitions.
So we have a lot of ideas, not
all of them obviously can be
turned into legislation, but we
hope we can work with you in the
interim, um, and possibly
present on some housing issues
to uh to your committee among
all the many other important
things that you're working on.
Thank you.
Thank you. So, um.
Linda Siegel is back in the
room. We'll come, Linda will
come back to you after Zoom, uh,
but I have on the Zoom list Jim
Copeland, Rick Madden, Bruce
Weatherby, and Tommy Hernandez.
So can we get whoever we can get
next we'll take.
OK, Madam Chair. Thank you so
much. I just got the option to
unmute myself,
uh, Madam Chair, thank you,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. I'm Jim Copeland,
executive director of the
Association of Developmental
Disabilities Community
Providers, and I just want a
second what Nat Dean had to say,
you guys have a lot of work
lined out for you, but I
appreciate the discussion this
morning around the FIT program,
uh, 14 of our providers also
provide family infant doctor
services. I appreciate the
discussion about the
developmental disability.
issue
Um
And we're just here to, to help
and assist the committee, uh,
just to let you know that we're
interested in the work that
you're going to be doing and
there is certainly a lot of work
that can be done around the
developmental disability
services that we provide to our
citizens and, and their
families, and that's all I have
to say. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Jim.
So next would be Rick Madden.
Fingers crossed.
Yes, thank you, Representative
Chair and members of the
committee. I'm Rick Madden. I'm
a family physician and I
represent the primary care in
two guys as one.
I tear the primary care
committee at the Medical
Society, and I also chair
government affairs at the
Academy of Family Physicians for
New Mexico.
So I just want to make a couple
of brief uh comments of support
for all the
Things that were discussed this
morning of ideas for future
discussion by the committee. uh,
we strongly agree with the focus
on healthcare workforce
shortages in the crying need
that all of our patients and
communities feel, uh, and, and
experience all the time trying
to get into care and uh second
strong support for the coming
potential extreme effects on our
communities and our patients.
of federal Medicaid changes,
including funding reductions and
work requirements. So thank you
for your work and uh we'll be
trying to collaborate with many
of you and uh be attending
committee meetings uh in the
future. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Doctor Madden. Next
we have Bruce Weatherby.
Hello, can you hear me, Madam
Sharon? Chairwoman.
Thank you, thank you very much.
Uh, I'll be really brief, two
things, um, we do a lot of
reporting on the DD waiver and
other health issues. One of the
things that I'm Bruce, could you
introduce yourself and who
you're with. Yes, I'm sorry, uh,
Bruce Weatherby, I'm the editor
of publication called The
Candle. We do advocacy
journalism and a lot of research
on matters dealing with health
and the health workforce and um
the workforce in general. One of
the things that I, I know you
all
have
A great deal on your plate, but
one of the things I think you
ought to think of doing is
request that the economic
development department, uh come
before you at some point and
discuss the health workforce,
uh,
Healthcare workforce and also
the um Department of Workforce
Solutions. We've read through
all of their reports. There's a
lot of money being invested for
good reasons in many instances,
but in the private sector for
so-called uh jobs of the future,
but there are enormous needs out
there for jobs for healthcare
workers, direct service
providers and the like that are
woefully underpaid and
and
The jobs they have are
bountiful, um, and not filled
because there's not enough
people working in them. So
there's gotta be some
synchronization of a state
policy that actually supports
that workforce. Most of those
folks make anywhere from $5 to
$6 an hour less than a
supporting living wage in New
Mexico, um, check the MIT, uh,
uh, living wage calculator and
you can see how poorly these
folks are paid. The issues that
Mr. Cagle referenced relative to
the illegal and
misclassification of employees
as independent contractors
further compounds the problems
and not just the waiver, but in
other areas of employment as
well. So I, I hope you get a
chance to look at it. I know you
have a lot on your plate, but
we'll continue reporting on it
as well. Thank you.
Thank you, Bruce, and finally we
have Tommy Hernandez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Tommy
Hernandez here for the
Alzheimer's Association public
policy director and registered
lobbyist.
Uh, I believe most of the, most
of this committee is familiar
with the work of the Alzheimer's
Association, but simply put, the
Alzheimer's Association exists
as the world's leading
organization, helping families,
states.
And other community partners
tackle the growing burden of
Alzheimer's disease, not only at
a state level but also at a
congressional level.
We're very pleased to see that
this legislature and
legislatures past have worked
with our organization to help
advance tackling the burden of
Alzheimer's disease for the
nearly 50,000 people who are
living with this disease in our
state, namely we're very pleased
for some work that was passed in
the last legislative session.
I'd like to express our sincere
gratitude to state
Representative Pamela Herndon,
who is a voting member of this
committee for her work to pass
House Memorial 53, would also
like to thank a few other
members directly.
who are also on this committee,
Madam Chair, Representative
Elena Santa Cortez for her work
with Representative Joseph
Sanchez to expand the silver
alert policy program as well as
working with Senator Gallegos to
help pass that in his chamber as
well.
Lastly, Madam Chair, in advance,
we'd like to express our sincere
appreciation for all the hard
work that this committee will
put over their many topic areas
that will be covered, uh, and
most importantly, we're very,
very excited to hear that
Alzheimer's disease and and
dementia was mentioned as a
topic offered up, and we hope
that that becomes a reality.
I'll go and close there. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
members of the committee.
Thank you. No one else on Zoom?
OK. Linda Seal.
She bolts out of her chair.
I'll do play by play.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Linda Seal
representing many healthcare
providers, including nurses and
I just wanna put a plug in. I
know you all have been talking
about putting workforce
healthcare workforce on the
agenda for the interim, and
this, I wanna especially
encourage the nursing issue.
Again, in the last month, we had
7700 advertised jobs just for
registered nurses in the state
of New Mexico and
200 advertised jobs for various
kinds of physicians. So the
crisis is, is continuing. Our
schools of nursing graduated
less students in 2024 than in
2023. Probably they say because
of COVID, but we've really got
to entice people into the
profession of nursing. It's a
great profession, great pay.
Sometimes good working
conditions, um, but I would
really encourage that and of
course, uh representative
Ferrari mentioned domestic
violence. We, the domestic
violence providers as well as
the sexual assault providers
each got 2 million non-recurring
money and each in the last
session and um unfortunately,
the number of domestic violence
um occurrences has not declined
and
Providers are having a difficult
time, so if we could address
that.
Thank you.
Thank you, Linda. Anybody else,
uh, in the audience or on Zoom
who.
a brilliant idea or a
Whatever
OK, not seeing anybody. Um let
me look at Ar agenda just to
make sure we've
covered what we need to cover.
And uh if we do get out early, I
wanna say don't get used to it
because it, it's a rare
occurrence. Um, so Xander, do we
have anything else?
I think that's
OK, yeah, the handouts from the
Alzheimer's.
Oh, I'm sorry, Representative
Kates, I wrote it down and then
I shuffled the paper away. Go
ahead. No, thank you very much,
Madam Chair. Thank you for your
indulgence. Um, uh, two things I
would be remiss. One is, but I
would like one to be put in to
record a possible visit of of a
of an issue that we talk about.
I've had several of my
constituents who have been um
victims of enormous amounts of
fraud to their vulnerability
because
of their age or uh um a medical
condition, and I have worked
with the guardianship program,
which is um
Challenged and um and a lack of
medical
A lack of medical exam that
should be required is what I'm
hearing, but is not, um, and
there is just an enormous amount
of uh fraud out there and and be
victim through through
technology and preying upon our
most vulnerable. So I would like
to make sure that that is on the
list as well. And then I would
remain a remiss that I am
disappointed in today's meeting.
That, um
I appreciate that we have closed
caption right now, but closed
caption was not available in our
public.
Comment and understand that that
is required by law of April in
2026, but I would like New
Mexico to be a leadership of
accessibility, and I hope that
we can work out those technology
kinks. Thank you.
Uh, and Xander has pointed out
it was available on that screen.
So, but
Point taken, point taken. And,
and I'm gonna request that um
and I know it's extra work for
the LFC folks, but if
If and when, not if, when LFC.
Is having presentations
regarding the things that we
work with, just a, a, an email
for Xander to send out, you
know, on, you know, Tuesday,
August 13th, LFC is gonna be
discussing the DD waiver or
something, so that cause it.
I don't know about everybody
else. I don't spend all my days
looking at the agendas of every
other committee. I can barely
keep up with the agenda of this
committee. So if you could do
that, that would be very
helpful, I think, to the
members. And just a reminder
that we have 5.
Guest days that we can and you
have, you have to get permission
in advance.
Or theoretically, um, you can
always beg forgiveness. That's,
that's my mode, MO, but so if,
if we get something from LFC
that says they're covering an
issue that you are really
passionate about. You can always
zoom, but you can also use 1 or
2 or 3 or all 5 of your guest
days to go to wherever LSC is
and and I doubt they will let
you ask questions, but, um, you
can text members to ask
questions for you, so.
So, um
Representative Rebel Caballero.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative Cates for
bringing that up, but I also
would like to um mention that
the closed captioning is not
just for the hearing impaired.
Um, and the hearing impaired,
oftentimes have visual
impairment. So in my case, for
example, if I were to be relying
on the screens because of my
hearing impairment. I'm also
visually impaired. There's no
way that I could be able to read
that. So I understood from IT
our services, uh several years
ago, um, that there is a uh
system or, or I don't know what
you call it.
an app or whatever that allows
me to be attached to the closed
captioning and thereby I can
follow the closed captioning on
my phone. So if, but, but the
other thing that I learned in
due to being able to be assisted
in my legislative work through
the rehabilitation services of
the state is that there is a
component.
Of close captioning that can be
added.
To the bottom of the screen that
allows for bigger print. I don't
know what that's called, but our
IT services are aware because
they've attempted to equip me in
the past. So I bring that up
because there also it's
difficult. I can't sit here and
be reading this. I did look over
here and saw that it was being
offered, but
In Spanish, we say menos was
able to, uh, I be able to do
that. So those are things for
consideration cause I'm
understanding that I'm now not
the only one that has these um
Um
Whatever you wanna call it
whatever and maybe I'm having a
stroke again, but during the,
during the session.
Isn't the close captioning
bigger?
than it is here, or am I?
Ellen.
Yeah, I, it seems like it was
larger, but um is green on or
Green is on, and when you're
done, you can turn it off for
us. Thank you. OK, I will. Oh,
thank you, Ellen Pine for
representing the disability
coalition. Um, I believe the
cognitive dissonance here is
that the house had much bigger
captions in the Senate, and you
are in a Senate meeting room,
um, and I also cannot read that
from back there, um, so I really
appreciated the house making
them bigger and I strongly
recommend.
To the Senate, Madam Vice Chair,
um, that you make yours bigger
too.
Thank you, Ellen. I, I knew I
wasn't wrong, but
Yeah.
Um
Is there
Oh, the mic. Oh.
The birthday, the birthday girl
will turn it off.
Now you all owe her a piece of
cake or something. Um, so is
there anything else pressing?
And please know that um that
Xander and, and, um, the LFC
folks and the.
Um, Andrea and Grace are
available for, you know, if you
have questions, if you have
suggestions, suggestions, I
would say go to Xander and um
the vice chair and I along with
my DLA and perhaps the um the
senators too that can be her
call. Um, but, uh, that's
OK, I think,
um yes, madam chair, if I could
just mention one other item, one
of the big issues that the New
Mexico Supreme Court is looking
at this year that will align
with the things that we're
talking about is making sure
that no person who is a survivor
of domestic violence, ever goes
to court without an attorney. So
that's really important for the
mental health and wellness of
individuals in those situations.
So hopefully they will be able
to come back and be a presenter
of what they found out and how
they
will be implementing that in the
future. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Anyone else? And like I said,
the door is never closed, um,
you know, we, sometimes we can
slip things in even though the
agenda is set or if somebody
cancels, so, um, don't despair
and welcome to the committee. I
hope, I know we will get a lot
of work, good work done, and I
know we will have some fun if,
if you will allow yourself, um,
and, and this is a serious
committee, but we also have a
good time and we have good
relationships.
so welcome. I want to welcome
all of you, Senator. Do you have
any, um, just want to say ditto,
and I look forward to uh a
thorough discussion as we go
through the interim. So thank
you and it's also good to see
some of my committee members on
On board with us this too.
Thanks.
One last reminder for members,
uh, don't forget to turn in your
reimbursement, reimbursement
forms. And I think with that, we
will be adjourned until our next
meeting, which is uh June June
25th through 27th. So thank you
all for being here and the
meeting is adjourned.
