which is the far southwest
quadrant of Albuquerque, and I'm
happy to be here again. Seems
like Las Vegas is on our map
this year. This is the 3rd 3rd
time.
I can't remember how many times
we've been here, but it's
wonderful, beautiful. Thank you
for your hospitality.
So, good morning. I'm
Representative Pamela Herndon, I
represent House District 28 in
the Northeast Heights. I want
every one of you to pull out
your calendars and mark
Saturday, July 26th from 5 until
8 p.m. and you're gonna come to
Lynnwood Park to the 3rd annual
Heights Night event where we're
celebrating the Northeast
heights and all the great things
that we're doing out there. So
do I see a yes? Of course I do,
thank you. There we go, Madam
Chair.
Representative Herndon, I, I, I
call you a walking commercial.
Thank you, Madam Chair. That's a
hard act to follow, but I'm
state Representative John
Blockhouse District 51, my
beautiful district is in Otero
County in Alamogordo, and it's
great to be here. I drove up a
couple days ago, uh, 3.5 hours
to Santa Fe and then over this
morning. So it's so beautiful
and I'd love to see some places
I used to actually go and visit
as a kid, every summer we used
to go to Villanueva and go
camping, so I just love the area
and it's great to be back. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I am
John Bloch's younger brother,
Jay.
Uh, from, uh, I represent Senate
District 12 in southern Rio
Rancho, northwest Albuquerque,
and I just want to thank Dan and
the entire staff here at
Highlands, uh, for hosting us.
What a beautiful facility. So
thank you so much.
And we'll go down this way to
Representative Garcia.
Um
Thank you Madam Chair. Bueno Dia
de laos.
Representante Miguel Garcia
Listrito Case.
I represent some of the more
historical areas uh within the.
Syria and the unincorporated
area of Berlingo County.
All therico established uh.
1640s by my great grandpa to the
9th power.
Uh, established as a land grant
1692 by my great grandpa to the
8th power. I represent, um.
South Broadway Community, which
is a tricultural community first
Afro-Americans in the metro area
were established in the South
Broadway area. I have Barrelas.
Which established as a villa in
1850.
And then we have all the trees
go across the river.
Uh, and uh some blue collar
Chicano neighborhoods on the
West Central, the Alamosa
neighborhood, Stinson Tower
neighborhood, and the Skyview
West, uh, neighborhood, Skyview
West or the
Hunting grounds of the Yunzer
family, the famous racing
family.
They established their first
garage right there in the corner
of Unser.
And course
And uh these these are my
ancestral land holdings here and
San Miguel County.
Uh, my great grandpa.
Great great grandpa Juan deos
Maesa.
Was Alcalde Mayor.
Which is a combination of mayor
and magistrate in 1846 when
General Kearney walked into
town.
With the conquering army.
And uh here in the plaza on top
of the house uh my great great
grandpa, General Kearney now.
Order that New Mexico was not
part of the US territory and
right there and then there, he
took out a Bible and he wore in
my great great grandpa as the
first.
Official of the new territory.
But that story was short-lived
in terms of uh uh kind of uh the
uh, uh, uh, the collaboration
shortly after that, there was a
lot of resistance in this area
to the newcomers to the
railroad, and um my great great
grandpa was part of that
resistance, so, um, I'm always
proud to be here in this area. I
have a lot of families still
here and it's always an honor to
be here with this committee.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, my
name is Anita Gonzalez and I am
state representative for House
District 70, so I'm also here
from Lovely Las Vegas, so
welcome to the Meadow City and
you are correct representative
uh Real Caballero and that this
is the 4th of 5 legislative
committees. We are hosting this
month, so, um, very honored and
proud to be showcasing all that
Las Vegas and that this region
has to offer, uh, my district
does extend to majority of Semii
County as well as parts of
Torrance County, um, so just
happy to be here.
and happy to have you all here.
Thank you.
Thank you Madam Chair. Good
morning, everyone. I'm, uh,
Representative Mariana Anaya for
House District 18. That is what
we call the vibe of, uh, the
state that is UNM Knob Hill, um,
CNM area in Albuquerque. Thank
you.
Madam Vice Chair.
Good morning, Madam Chair. It's
always good to be back in Vegas,
um, Linda Lopez, state senator,
District 11, which is the
Southwest quadrant of Bernalillo
County and it's also part of
Representative Miguel Garcia's
district. We kind of share some
of the same precincts, but a
mode of history is my mother
grew up here.
And with Representative
Anita as I call her, um, we're
pretty much.
So, uh, immaculate Conception,
uh, church, the school is where
my mom went to, so I have
history here too.
Thank you.
Good morning. I'm Representative
Liz Thompson, House District 24,
which is the Northeast heights
of Albuquerque. The shopping
heart of New Mexico. Uh, we get
a little, uh,
Competitive when rock and Uptown
or in my district, and I want to
remind the members and the
audience to please silence your
phones, and if you have
conversations, um, whisper, um,
because we, we take in a lot of
information and I will let, uh,
Xander introduce the staff.
I think I might need to borrow
your mic.
Yeah
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
Xander Dawson, um, lead staff of
this committee for the
Legislative counsel Service. Uh,
let's see, we have Andrea Lazaro
over there, another bill drafter
with the council service. We got
Grace Balderramo. She's a
proofreader with the council
service. And right now from, uh,
LFC we got Harry Rommel joining
us, and then, uh, our esteemed
colleague over here making sure
that this is all shown on the
webcast is Roberto Sanchez.
OK, so if, if the Highlands
folks can go ahead and come up
and I do want to say thank you
for hosting us. We come here.
Fairly frequently, probably
every other year, and we get
treated so well and um we love
coming here and this is a
beautiful spot, so thank you and
go ahead and come forward and
um.
Whenever you're ready, you can
introduce yourselves and get
started.
And as members trickle in,
we'll, when we have a break in
the action, we'll have them
introduce themselves.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, we're
really honored to be here today.
It's so nice to see so many
familiar faces.
Wonderful. Thank you.
And just a reminder, only one
mic on at a time, or else we
get.
his son.
We're all off. Oops.
OK.
Red is on.
It doesn't make sense, but we do
things differently in the
legislature.
OK, if I talk normally, can you
hear me OK?
So my name is Anna Nelson and
I've had, I proudly served the
helping professions for over 31
years. I'm also a proud alumna
of the New Mexico Highlands
foruldo Valdez School of Social
Work class of 2003. Many of us
are alumni here since 2009, I've
dedicated myself to social work
education and in June 2025, I
began an exciting new chapter as
the dean of the Foundo Valdez
School of Social Work at New
Mexico Highlands University.
I'm grateful to have had the
assistance of two phenomenal
leaders who exemplify the heart
and soul of community rooted
social work in preparing today's
dialogue.
I will turn it over to Valerie
Valez Pedrosa, who um is the
interim, uh, director for the
Center for Excellence in Social
Work and she'll start us off.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Valerie.
Oh, there we go. Got to hit the
red button. There we go. My name
is Valerie Vale Pedrosa. I'm a
proud Nuevo Mexicana alama de
faundo Valdesco of social work,
former faculty member, and
currently serve as the interim
director of the Center for
Excellence and Social Work in
New Mexico.
I've had the honor of serving
the communities in New Mexico
and the social services sector
for the last 20 plus years and
as a social worker since 2008.
I've been able to see firsthand
the power of the therapeutic
relationship and the impact that
advocates and communities can
have in shaping policy that
reflects the needs of our
communities. I look forward to
sharing more with you today
about the Center for Excellence
in Social Work and our impacted
in the last fiscal year later in
today's presentation. Thank you.
So now I will turn it over to
Doctor Rochelle Tenorio, who is
joining us, uh, remotely as the
interim director for the Native
American Social Work Studies
Institute, which is housed
within the Fukundo Valdez School
of Social Work.
Doctor Sennorio.
Hi, good morning, everybody. I
am honored to be here with you
today. My name is Doctor
Rochelle Tenorio.
And Mico Pueblo. I am
unfortunately not able to join
you in person, but was glad to
be able to join you online.
I am currently the acting
director for the Native American
Social Work Studies Institute
and an assistant professor in
social work at New Mexico
Highlands University.
Thank you, Doctor Tenorio.
Would you like to share our land
acknowledgement as a form of
welcoming the committee.
Yes, I can share that now. All
right, so for the land
acknowledgement statement on
behalf of the Fund de Valdez
School of Social Work, we would
like to welcome you into this
space by honoring the indigenous
people of the 23 tribes and
pueblos as natural traditional
stewards of these unseeded
ancestral lands upon which our
work occurs.
Um
We believe in the power of
collaboration and actively seek
partnerships with indigenous
communities, organizations and
allies to co-create solutions
that respect and honor
indigenous sovereignty
traditions and knowledge.
Thank you, Doctor Tenorio. So we
are really honored to be with
you all today just having
concluded the Fecundo Valdez
School of Social Work's 50th
anniversary, so we're honored to
be the first, uh, accredited
univers or accredited school of
social work within New Mexico
and possibly the rumor is the US
Southwest, so we're grateful to
share that legacy with you all
and welcome. So moving on to the
snapshot, uh, slide. I would
like to just share that the
Fukundo Valdez School of Social
Work holds the
distinction again of being the
oldest accredited school of
social work in New Mexico
accredited since 1974.
Our legacy is deeply rooted in
the communities who we serve.
Our mission is centered in
preparing social work students
to practice with cultural
competence and integrity,
particularly with with the rich
diverse populations of New
Mexico and the US Southwest.
We place special emphasis on
serving Hispanic Latino
students, Native American
students and learners from rural
communities, as well as tribal
communities. We are very proud
to share that in 20 2023 among
the New Mexico schools of social
work with master's degree
programs. We had the highest
first time pass rate for the
ASWB Master's licenser
examination.
Our faculty lead research
nationally in our and in our
state in critical areas of
well-being for New Mexicans,
including substance use
prevention, child well-being,
and the behavioral health
impacts of environmental
disasters in New Mexico which so
many of us have been affected.
Currently we serve 522 students
across all of our programs, 120
BSW students, 164 site-based
master of Social work students
and 238, uh, students who are
enrolled on our MSW online
program.
Notably, 92% of our student
body, our New Mexico residents
underscoring our strong
commitment to growing New
Mexico's statewide workforce.
Looking ahead, we are actively
expanding access. I am honored
to share that we will be
preparing to launch the online
BSW program as well as we are on
track to establishing the New
Mexico's first Doctor of Social
Work Practice program hopefully
by fall of 2027.
A historic step toward building
leadership capacity across the
profession.
I'll transition now to the ethos
of our school. We have 4 guiding
commitments to the students and
communities who we serve.
First, we show dedication and
funding our mission by providing
in-person education and
enhancing and enhanced
advisement in 5 key locations.
We have locations in Farmington,
Las Vegas, Albuquerque, Rio
Rancho, and Santa Fe.
Second, we emphasize the
importance of uplifting New
Mexico's community cultural
wealth and funds of knowledge
our students possess through
dedicating our programs to
students from our state.
Third, we offer relational
recruitment, meaningful student
engagement and enhanced
advisement that centers the
student and their learning, both
in the classroom and in
community.
Finally, we meet workforce needs
through 3 concentrations. Our
clinical concentration, but also
our bilingual bicultural
concentration and our leadership
and administration
concentrations. Those are the
only of their kind in the state.
I'll introduce uh one of our
three special projects and then
I'll turn it back over to Doctor
Rochelle Toorio or actually let
me go ahead and and Doctor
Tenorio, are you prepared to
speak on the Native American
Social Work Studies Institute.
Yes, I can start now.
All right. So the Native
American social work studies
Institute is a powerful and
innovative statewide and
national resource positioned
within the Funda Valdez School
of Social Work. It was
established to address a
long-standing and critical gap
in social work education and
practice. Specifically, the need
for social work education that
centers on tribal sovereignty,
indigenous knowledge,
and culturally grounded
approaches.
With the support of tribal
leaders and the New Mexico State
legislature. This institute
became the first of its kind in
the country.
It's founding reflects a
powerful commitment to
developing social work practices
that are culturally responsive.
NASWSI is guided by formal
tribal resolutions from the
Pueblo council of the Governors
and the Navajo Nation, and its
efforts have already made an
impact.
In fiscal year 2025, the
Institute developed an
introduction to social work
practice with tribal communities
course outline and deliver it
In fiscal year 2025, the
Institute developed an
introduction to social work
practice with tribal communities
course outline and delivered for
high impact trainings on Native
American child well-being,
reaching 71 participants and
providing 270 hours of cultural
continuing education.
Units.
Looking ahead to fiscal year
2026. We are establishing new
tribally serving practicum
sites, developing a full course
map for the Native American MSW
concentration and expanding
training opportunities for
social workers and community
partners working in tribal
context.
NESWSI represents a profound
opportunity, one that we
collectively approach with deep
humility and gratitude.
We are honored to steward this
resource built through the
vision and leadership of tribes
and pueblos.
NASWSI uplifts native students
affirms indigenous knowledge and
ensures that social workers
across New Mexico are better
prepared to serve tribal
communities with cultural
integrity, historical awareness
and relational accountability.
We remain committed to working
alongside tribal partners in the
spirit of respect, reciprocity,
and shared purpose.
Thank you.
Thank you so much, Doctor
Tenorio. We'll now move on to
the reissa slides and before I
turn it over to, before I turned
it over to my colleague Valerie
Valez Pedrosa.
I want to briefly uplift another
of our school's visionary
initiatives, the, the sweet
proesis, meaning roots, reflects
our commitment to growing our
own social work workforce right
here in New Mexico.
At its core, this program
supports enrollment retention
and graduation of all students
at the Fukuno Valdez School of
Social Work, particularly those
who are Hispanic Latino and from
uh grant language underserved
communities.
We do this by fostering
meaningful relationships among
students, faculty, and the
communities who we serve.
In fiscal year 2025, reis
reached over 1,001,100
prospective students through
culturally grounded platicas uh
allaticas are our
community-based social work
career talks that deeply
resonate across New Mexico
across the life of this grant,
more than 500 students
participated in our
multi-dimensional advisement
model and the School of Social
Work student success series,
helping them stay on track
toward graduation.
We are also very proud and
grateful for the sweet pri Kip
Coggins Memorial scholarship,
which now holds an endowment of
$538,000 with more than $20,000
prepared to be disseminated in
scholarships and fall of 2025.
Our most exciting recent success
with Suriises was the 2025
Behavioral Health Summer bridge
program co-sponsored by a
community partner, Future
Focused Education held at both
our Albuquerque and Las Vegas
sites. This program engaged 20
high school students from 7
schools in in 4 days of career
exploration, college readiness,
and community advocacy. 81% of
students reported a clearer
sense of their post high school
graduate.
goals and the reflections speak
volumes where one participant
said it showed me how I can be a
point of healing in in a
community lacking behavioral
health professionals.
This is what growing our own
looks like and now it is my
great pleasure to turn it over
to Valerie Baez Pedrosa, who
leads the Center for Excellence
in Social Work.
Thank you Dean Nelson.
We'll move on to the slide
titled Center Story Mission,
Vision and Core Priorities.
The Center for Excellence in
Social Work was established in
2022 as one of six centers of
excellence in the state, in the
state of New Mexico by Governor
Michelle Lujan Grisham, with the
aim of enhancing our state's
capacity to train and prepare
social workers for competent
practice with the multicultural
populations and our
multicultural populations and
communities.
The way we go about doing this
work is by two primary charges.
One, by providing high-quality
research, and 2 by providing
high quality professional
development for the social work
workforce throughout New Mexico.
The center, as we often call it,
is situated within New Mexico
Highlands University's Facundo
Valdez School of Social Work,
but we have a statewide charge
to serve social workers and
communities across New Mexico
including all schools of social
work. Dean Nelson, former
director of the center, came on
board in July 2023. And
alongside leadership and with
the charge from the state,
established the mission vision
and priorities of the center
that are before you today.
Our mission at the Center for
Excellence in Social Work is to
grow the workforce while driving
innovation in social work
education, practice, policy, and
research. We do this by
centering relationships and is
serving as a convener and
collaborator and leading with
innovative research and practice
policy recommendations grounded
in the needs of New Mexico an
actual examples of which I'll
demonstrate in the slides to
come.
Our vision is a robust,
resourced, and culturally
responsive workforce that's
mobilized to respond to the
needs of New Mexico, but what
does it mean to be robust,
resourced, and culturally
responsive. It means to be
supported, to be balanced, and
to have learning opportunities
that go beyond simply
acknowledging the role of
culture, but requires actively
incorporating cultural
knowledge, perspectives, and
theirs and and people's
strengths into assessment,
interventions, policy and
advocacy and overall service
delivery.
Providers.
Our core priorities are grounded
in 4 areas child and adolescent
well-being, interdisciplinary
and public public safety, public
health, social work, and
environmental disasters and
justice. The center utilizes the
evidence-based spectrum of
prevention model, which is a
framework that guides the
development of comprehensive and
multifaceted prevention
strategies, addressing public
health and our community's
challenges from a micro to macro
perspective.
Over the next two slides you'll
see information about the impact
that the centers had over the
last fiscal year. I actually
want a slight start uh begin by
looking at there's a, a, a
rectangle, kind of a red rust
colored rectangle that I really
think sums up the impact of the
center over the last fiscal
year.
Through our professional
development offerings. Remember,
that's one of the primary
charges of the, of the Center
for Excellence and Social Work.
We engaged with 1270 community
members and issued 2,904
continuing education credits, of
which 1,289 were cultural
continuing ed units, which is a
requirement for social workers
in the state of New Mexico.
In addition, or sort of under
the umbrella of our professional
development, uh, charge. We also
hosted our 2nd annual social
work education summit in March
of this year. This helps us to
fulfill our charge in providing
high quality professional
development opportunities and to
grow innovation in social work
education.
As the first of its kind in the
state to bring social work
educators and practitioners
together, it's focus is to
improve the quality of social
work education and to more fully
understand the needs of our
communities and how to prepare
our students to serve those very
communities.
We were, we were in Albuquerque
this year. Each year we moved to
different parts of the state, so
different practitioners can
participate in person. We had 85
attendees from communities
across New Mexico and we're
proud to say that all schools of
social work were represented.
And in the end, 306 continuing
education units were distributed
through that effort.
Another effort that I'd like to
mention, and there's actually,
if you'd like to reference,
there's a kind of hot off the
press report or CYFD Inspire
report, uh, CYFD Inspire is
another exciting endeavor that
the center took on this fiscal
year with funding from the US
Department of Labor.
Inspire augments CYFD's core
training for protective service
workers and provides
participants with
interdisciplinary professional
preparation with culturally
relevant intermediate social
work skills training to create
and deliver culturally grounded
trauma informed services.
Over the course of 6 months, the
Center for Excellence in Social
Work, trained 5 cohorts
enrolling 134 CYFD workers,
awarding 45 certificates and
distributed 720 continuing
education hours through this
effort.
88% of participants felt that
they learned new skills or tools
that they can apply in their
practice with one participant
noting, I have learned different
skills in this course. I find it
vital that everyone at some
point take this course to brush
up on new skills and older ones
that we need to have updated
information on.
92% of Inspire participants felt
that this, that the training met
their expectations. One
participant shared, I've learned
that I have a lot of learning to
do. I'm interested in pursuing a
degree in social work. I was not
sure before, but since taking
this training, I got a bit of
insight that helped me to choose
to move forward. So supporting
CYFD workers in their work with
children and families and also
paralleling that idea of growing
our own in New Mexico.
So I invite you to look at the
the more comprehensive report
with more information that's in
your folder.
Continuing to look at our
impact, um, I also want to
mention our student advocacy and
Action Day. When this is a way
in which we engage students and
and schools of social work
statewide in February 20 in
February of this year. SANA was
in part created to give students
the opportunity to translate
classroom knowledge in policy,
advocacy, and macrosocial work
and to be able to see it in
action at the new New Mexico
state at the New Mexico
Legislative session alongside
many of you in this room.
In addition to SAA, the center,
as I noted, hosts various
professional development
offerings and serves as a
community partner in the
distribution of continuing
education credits for our
partners statewide. That all
helps in in us reaching reaching
that goal and, and those markers
that I mentioned in that, in
that slide it on the top of the,
the slide.
The center is committed to
continuing to provide accessible
and affordable ongoing learning
opportunities for students,
faculty, community, and practice
prac practicing social workers
statewide.
Next, I'd like to move to the
slide that's titled The Center
Plaza.
With the many professional
development opportunities that
I've noted. The center is
developed and offer that we have
developed and offered over the
last two years, we found it
imperative that we be able to
house this knowledge in a
platform that was accessible,
resourceful, and sustainable for
social workers and allied
professionals as such, the
Center Plaza was formed. The
center plaza is a thriving
community hub where New Mexico
social work students educators,
practitioners, and
interdisciplinary partners come
together foster to foster
dialogue, inspire.
learning and champion
professional growth via an
online platform.
The Center Plaza will house
various learning opportunities,
including those that are part of
that circle that you see on your
slides. Uh, and I wanna make
note of some early outcomes of
some offerings that are
available via the center.
One that we are excited about to
to excited, excited to offer
free of charge to students and
practitioners across the state
is the ASWB licensure prep
course, of which you have an
additional handout in your
folder.
This licensure prep course was
created to promote equity and
licensure pass rates in New
Mexico, which has been a
challenge historically. This
free course is it was funded by
the Department of Labor grant
and is focused on serving
diverse students and communities
across New Mexico.
Launched in April, in April
2025, we currently have 259
people enrolled in the course.
24 have completed the practice
test with an average press score
of 90%.
Last, I'd like to make note of
our social justice teachings.
This, this is a live, uh, Zoom
event that's held typically on
Wednesdays throughout the
semester and provides a space
for discussing critical social
justice issues and were designed
to facilitate collective
learning, collaboration, and
mobilization.
In the last fiscal year by
through, through hosting 6
teach-ins, uh, we
We engaged with 577
participants, of which 640
cultural CEUs were distributed.
The social justice teachings
remain available to
practitioners and folks in the
profession statewide via the
canvas platform where they can
still achieve that 1.5 uh free
CEUs.
One participant who participated
in the social justice teachings
noted, the community is speaking
and our professionals are taking
notice. I feel very seen right
now. This was just so deeply
human and respectful.
Last and before we transition,
I'd like to speak to our
research charge, which is to
generate high quality impactful
research for the social work
workforce sector. In your
folders and in your, your
digital slides, you'll see a
flyer that that it's a front and
back that speaks to the center
plaza, which I just noted, and
on the opposite side, it
announces the launch of our
policy and practice briefs that
are available now from fiscal
year 25.
Policy and practice briefs
inform and provide
recommendations to community and
stakeholders on best practice
and practices and issues
relevant to our profession.
Our charge from the state of New
Mexico is to create two policy
and two practice briefs per
year, of which we surpassed in
fiscal year 26 by excuse me,
fiscal year 25 by completing 6
briefs. We are on target for
fiscal year 26 to complete an
additional 2 practice briefs and
2 policy briefs for this fiscal
year.
In terms of our annual statewide
research, our 2025 social work
students of New Mexico survey is
currently being developed with
the target for completion in
fall 2025. This research seeks
to understand the factors that
influence social work students'
well-being and persistence
toward degrees. This report will
be distributed in the 2026
interim committees.
For fiscal year 26, looking
ahead, we will complete the 2026
Social Workers of New Mexico
survey that will explore social
work, social workers'
professional well-being and
longevity, barriers to their
well-being and successful
practice and professional
development needs. This study
will be replicated from our 2024
study that's available on our
website and we'll be analyzed
for trends over time.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you for your
time and for the opportunity to
present on the work of the
Center for Excellence of Social
Work. Dean Nelson.
Thank you very much, Valerie,
and on behalf of the Fecundo
Valdez School of Social Work.
Again, thank you so much for
your time. I would like to turn
now turn the floor over to my
esteemed colleague, Doctor Jerry
Glover. Our interim dean for the
for the school of education, a
licensed professional clinical
counselor and leader at New
Mexico Highlands University and
the counseling department since
2009. Doctor Glover is here to
share about uh Animatehu's
counseling and psychology.
Programs. We will be available
after Doctor Glover speaks to
answer any questions. Thank you.
Madam Chair and committee
members, I'd I'd like to.
Madam Chair, no.
Here comes tech.
And while we have this quick
break.
Um
It was brought to my attention
that we have, uh, Dan Brown in
the audience who will have to
leave. He's the provost and VP
for academic affairs for
Highlands and thank you.
So go ahead.
Try this again, no?
How about now?
Thank goodness, um, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, uh,
thank you very much for having
me. I, I must thank uh Doctor
Nelson for mentioning, uh, that.
It would be nice to invite our
other behavioral health
training, uh, folks from
Highlands University to also
share. So I'm just going to give
you some background, um, I will
not be as eloquent as my
colleagues because I did not
write my speech out. This is my
first rodeo even though I have
been with Highlands for many
years. I've been teaching full
time, um, for, uh, over 20
years, 17 at Highlands and I've
been a clinician for over 30
years, um, working primary.
ly my, my population is, uh,
children, so I'm a play
therapist and do that. I'm also
a non-enrolled member of the
Salish Flathead tribe from
Montana, uh, so diversity and
working with native peoples is a
very important aspect of what I
do, um, the counseling program
and the psychology program at
Highlands, um, I'm here to also
represent the College of
Education or college, college
the school of education and the
College of Arts and Sciences,
um, because
We have a small clinical
psychology program who also
trains and puts behavioral
health workers into the field.
Oh, and I'm not going to be able
to do my, oh, there we go. Um,
both of our programs, the MA and
counseling and the MS and
clinical psychology with a
counseling track, are nationally
accredited, um, our counseling
program was accredited by KCEP
in 2021, but counseling has been
on the Las Vegas campus for a
very long time. We started
educating and training school
counselors in 1968.
Um, our clinical professional
counselors, um,
Program came in in 1984. Uh, we
even had a rehabilitation
counseling program, although
that one we have retired in
favor of our clinical
rehabilitation counseling
program, which we started in
2013.
Um, I'm actually not sure how
long the clinical psychology
program has been training
clinical counselors, um, but
they are credited by the masters
in psychology and counseling
accreditation council. Um, in
the state of New Mexico,
clinical counselors at the
master's level can get licensed
by the counseling and therapy
Practice Board.
So
Our students are served by the
Las Vegas campus and 3 of our
centers, um, over the academic
year 24, 25, and we are a
year-round program. Um, there
were 11 clinical psychology
students and 250 counseling
students in these two programs.
Um, our programs are, uh, are,
are clinical psychology
programs, it's an on-campus
program here in Las Vegas, they
had 19 students over the last
year in their program, um, and
then.
Our,
our counseling program or 11,
our counseling program, we had
19 students, but we also have
distant students, students who
are too far away from our
centers to get to classes, um,
at a center. So they're either
an hour and a half away or they
might even be out of state. We
do have a grand total of 6 out
of state students in our
program. Everyone else is in New
Mexico resident, uh, beyond the
campus, actually, most of our
students are at our other 3
centers. Uh, we have a center
that we work out.
in Rio Rancho, we have the um
Farmington Center and the Santa
Fe Center. By far, the most of
our students are, uh, out of the
Rio Rancho Center.
As far as where our students
come from for our program, uh,
62% of our students are from our
large cities, which would
include Albuquerque, Rio Rancho,
Santa Fe, and Farmington. We
consider Farmington a large
city. Um, we have 18% who come
from our smaller cities, uh,
Raton, Peco, well not even ecos,
uh, red tone or uh Bernna Leo
and then 20% of our students
come from rural areas, um, the
smaller towns and uh we have
many students who come, they
don't.
Come, but they participate in
our program, um, uh, that are
from the reservations.
We depend significantly onto our
center support. uh, we have the
Las Vegas campus, but
Considering the size of our
program, only 7% of our students
are actually served by our Las
Vegas campus.
49% are served by our Rio Rancho
campus. Uh, that is, like I
said, where the bulk of our
students are, 22% are served by
our Santa Fe Center and
Farmington Center serves 14%.
Um, and we do have 8% who are
distance. I did mention our 6
students who are from out of
state, but most of our distant
students are just from places
that are too far to get into any
of our centers.
Demographics over 2024, 25 in
the clinical psychology program
out of the College of Arts and
Sciences.
This profession is
overwhelmingly female, almost
90% of that group of 11 were
female, 11% are male. In the
counseling program, it's similar
numbers, um, 82% female and
almost 17% male, uh, 0.4%
identify as non-binary. We also
in the counseling program do
keep track of our, um, ethnic
groups, um, 45% identify as
white, 37% Hispanic, 11%
Native American, and then we
have the rest that are a
combination of African American,
Asian, or choose not to share.
Our numbers of uh white and
Hispanic students kind of bounce
back and forth around.
One side or the other of 40%.
We really have um
On campus, two very distinct
programs, the psychology program
is serves traditional students.
These students are in their
early twenties, uh, they attend
classes in Las Vegas. They live
near or on campus, and most of
them do though remain in New
Mexico post graduation to serve
behavioral health needs in New
Mexico, not always in Las Vegas,
but they do stay in New Mexico.
Uh, those traditional students
are usually heading into their
very first career.
The bulk of our students in the
counseling program are
non-traditional students.
They're between in their mid-20s
to their 60s. Our average age is
34, and this year our age range
is from 21 to 82.
We have people coming in, yes,
they come into the profession
after they've done many other
things and decide, you know,
I've always wanted to be a
counselor, and we welcome that.
Our non-traditional students are
typically established in their
New Mexico communities. They
have families and they have
jobs. They are working adults.
Our non-traditional students are
heading into their 2nd, their
3rd, or their 4th career.
Counseling was my 3rd career.
So, I'm also a teacher and I did
investment banking for a minute.
Um, we have, um, looking at our
counseling students in
particular, 93% of our students
are degrees seeking, um, about
half of our students are
full-time and 50% of our
students are part-time. We run a
very flexible program because of
our non-traditional adult
learners, uh, they can shift
from full time to part time
anytime they want to, just
depending on what they decide to
enroll in, they can take summer
classes, skip some summer
classes. We have a roadmap that
we want them to follow and they
Just stay on the road, we'll get
them there eventually.
75% this year are clinical
counseling students working in
agencies, uh, and eventually
moving off into private
practice, um, 4% are clinical
rehabilitation counselors are
pursuing that clinical
rehabilitation includes not only
drug and alcohol, um, but also
working with adults with
developmental disabilities with
uh students who are
transitioning, who have special
needs from high school to the
workforce, um, they also work
with the chronically mentally
ill and
Veterans and uh division of
vocational rehabilitation. We
have 13% in school counseling,
which is a low number for us. We
usually have more, um, and then
we have a, a small number of
students who are pursuing both.
They stay long enough to do both
of those, both the school and
the clinical counseling so they
can be licensed in both areas.
We also provide um certificates
for our students. These are, we
have 7% of our students are
doing completing certificates,
certificates are for people who
already have a master
' s degree in counseling or a
very closely related field, they
will come in and they want to
say they came in and they got
their master's degree with a
concentration in school
counseling, but now they're
ready to retire and they only
want a part part time, so they
want to get their license as a
clinical counselor, they can
come in and take some additional
coursework and do another
internship, and, um, then have a
certificate which they can take
to the state and get that second
license so that they're dual
licensed. Uh, our certificates
include
counseling, rehabilitation
counseling, school counseling,
and we just, uh, established,
um, a new
Certificate in addictions
counseling.
Which we hope will.
Served well.
Uh, just some statistics about
our department. We graduate
typically somewhere between 35
and 50, uh, professionals each
year. Um, our completion rate
within 7 years is 70%. The
reason it's not 100%, which we
would like it to be is because
it's a difficult program. It's
60 credits, it takes them 3
years to get done. Uh, there's
an internship at the end, they
might start the program and in
the first semester decide, uh,
maybe this is not what I was
expecting.
Um, our overall pass rate for
licenser and certification is
85%. Um, we don't keep up with
them after they haven't passed.
People keep working at it until
they finally pass. So most
everybody who does get into
passes there, um, gets their
degree, continue to work to pass
that uh those licensure
requirements and 90% of our
students are employed within a
year of graduation.
We have a big need for
behavioral health in New Mexico.
Uh
We just recently started keeping
track of how much time this
would be true for uh social work
as well. Our students do
internships and practicum
experience in the field. These
are not paid, typically, uh.
Experiences.
Internships are 20 hours a week.
So if you have working adults
with families, working around
and, you know, it's not working
or working part time during
those last 3 semesters of their
time is a huge burden for our
students. So you can see the
different tracks that we have,
the concentrations and how much
hours, but in total, our
students have put in 25,000
hours in two semesters of work
at institutions at agencies, at
schools and
under supervision of
independently licensed
counselors and have provided
over 10,000 hours of service to
directly to clients and students
in the field.
And in closing, I really, I
wanted to mention uh some
financial support that our
students have received from the
state and to actually thank you
for that. Uh, the expanding
opportunities project was a
project to get more school
counselors into our rural
schools. More than 25 of our
students benefited from this
grant. They received uh tuition
assistance, stipends during
their field placement and a
salary incentive if they would
stay at that rural school. The
NMELP
opened up to our um
Big 3, urban schools districts
in the last year, uh, but this
grant has also run its course
and so we no longer have it and
very sad about losing that.
Recently, the Grow fund for
non-credit workforce training,
um, was started and this is to,
uh, you know, get people out
into the field, because our
internships are non-paid. We,
our students qualify this for
this, and in the fall of 24 and
spring of 25.
31 of our students benefited
from a 1500 to $1650 stipend
while they were doing their
practicum time on uh at their
sites, uh, in their first field
experience in 66 of our students
benefited from a $333,350 4500
dollars stipend during their
internships. And the first time
they got it, they didn't want to
even tell us they got it because
they were afraid it was a
mistake.
On their um from that business
office and so they didn't tell
anybody and we so we, it's just
like, OK guys, yes, this is your
money, you get to spend it. Yes,
you've been starving yourself.
It's OK now to have that. So I
must say we, we, it was a, it
was a surprise for us when we
received the grant. It was a
surprise for our students, and
it was really, really, uh,
appreciated. I'm sure that you
all know that graduate students
in New Mexico.
Do not receive Pell grants.
They do not qualify for the
lottery scholarship. They do not
qualify for the opportunity
scholarship. Graduate students
go to school.
Through loans.
And they, uh, so they pay, pay
their way, so.
Um
Thank you.
And I would uh like to hand this
back to Doctor Nelson, and I
guess we are all the questions,
right?
Thank you and we're ready for
any questions you may have.
Thank you so much. So,
questions?
Uh, do most people have
questions? OK, so I'm gonna go
back and let a senator
Stephanic, uh, I was gonna say
Representative Lujan, um, and,
and Representative Torres
Velasquez, introduce yourselves
and then we'll go to questions.
Good morning, Madam Chair, uh,
Madam Vice Chair. It's a
pleasure to be here, Liz
Stephanics, Senate District 39,
parts of Ford counties, Santa
Fe, San Miguel, Torrance, and
Valencia. Thank you very much.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
Elizabeth Diane Torres
Velazquez. I go by Diane, and I
am House District 30 in the
Albuquerque Northeast Heights.
OK, so let's see the time. Um,
we have 30 minutes and about 10
of us, so 3 minutes each, so
we'll start with Representative
Benaya, work that way and then
come around this way. So
Representative Anaya, thank you,
Madam Chair. I will try to go
quickly through this. Um, first
and foremost, thank you. Yeah,
first and foremost, thank you.
Um,
Your school is just gonna do so
much in terms of healing
generational trauma in this
state. So I just wanted to put
that out there and give you all
of my gratitude, um, a couple of
questions. Uh, the first one
that I have is about the
licensure exam. My understanding
is that um many students of
color have a really difficult
time passing this examination.
Congratulations on being our,
our, uh, top folks in terms of,
uh, folks being able to pass the
examination, but can you talk?
a little bit about the
challenges and also what your
opinion would be in terms of um
getting rid of the examination
as many other states have
started to do. And I believe you
and I have talked about this in
years previous and I know the
cultural competency part of your
program was also um something
that we wanted to be sure to
save. And so could you talk
about the intersection between
those two.
Absolutely, Madam Chair and
Representative Anaya, there,
there is um research to
demonstrate that there are both
uh racially, uh, um,
disproportional and by gender
and age dis disproportionately
poor outcomes for the
association of Social Work
boards, uh, national license or
examination, so in delving more
deeply into the several that's
multifactorial, um, one of the
factors is that
Uh, many of our black indigenous
and students of color, um, the,
the method for uh norming those
questions do not account for the
lived expertise and funds of
knowledge, these students have,
uh, so there has been a, a, a
significant and robust dialogue
statewide about what might it
look like, so the licenser
examination is just one factor
in several factors that lead us
to become qualified as a
licensed social worker.
So we, we do upwards of 900
hours of practicum service we
pass from um from accredited um
universities. We, you know, do,
uh, 2 years of supervision
leading us to our independent
licener which I hold, um, so
there are several steps along
the way to ensure that our
practitioners are high quality
and are practicing with
confidence. Uh, so the license
examination, uh.
tends to test how well you test,
then more so than testing around
competence, so there's several
things like research and and
other pieces that most social
workers don't use in practice.
So, uh, I appreciate and honor
the question. I think it's a
lively debate and not all social
workers are in consensus. So
recently, uh, the Center for
Excellence in Social Work did uh
perform listening sessions
statewide. We had an even mix of
uh practitioners who
participated.
said, we do and we do not want
to eliminate the license or
examination, um, the same, uh,
sort of, uh, ratio was true for
the interstate licenser compact.
So I hope that answers your
question and thank you.
Uh, it does, and I will also
follow up because I'm interested
to know why and why not, um,
folks would be supportive or not
supportive. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Representative Gonzalez.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. um,
no real questions. I'm actually
fairly familiar with all these
programs and um just wanting to
say, you know, thank you, um,
being here locally, being an an
alumni of Highlands University,
um, just really proud of what
you all offer and what we're
able to provide, um,
specifically with regards to
social work, behavioral health,
and to filling this very much
needed workforce gap in our
state and so just thank you all
for your presentation and for
all your work.
Thank you, Representative
Garcia. Thank you Madam Chair.
Thank you, panel, for your
presentations. I have two
questions, uh, if time allows.
Uh, the first, uh, has to do
with your social justice
teachings.
That sounds really interesting,
really exciting, uh, my question
is, what does it consist of, uh,
who does the teaching? Is there
a curriculum? How are the
subjects, uh, identified, etc.
etc.
Madam Chair, Representative
Garcia, thank you for that.
Excellent question. So, social
justice teachings look at uh
issues of equity and access for
our communities across New
Mexico, uh, these teachings are
driven by results from the 2024
social workers of New Mexico
survey which help us to
understand what uh workforce uh
needs for additional training,
um, our, so that does drive who
is the.
invited and we typically have
both state and national experts
come and join us. So we've had
anything from, um, we, we hosted
a, a robust session on um the
internment camp that that
existed within Santa Fe. uh, we
hosted a um beautiful session on
Fecundo Valdez and his legacy
and what it means for Northern
New Mexico. So those are just
two of the uh of the um the,
there is no curricula.
more experts and uh people with
lived expertise coming to share
their experience and being there
in support of people, I think
one of the, the greatest things
that these social justice
teachings offer is that they are
for free and they offer cultural
continuing education units,
which are a requirement for all
social workers within New Mexico
to have.
Thank you.
OK, thank you for that, uh,
lastly, uh, Madam Chair, uh what
are some of the financial
supports?
Uh, in terms of, um,
Retaining recruiting.
Social workers. I know Madam
Chair, 2024.
After an 11 year battle.
We passed uh additions to the
rural healthcare practitioner
Tax Credit Act.
I carried that legislation. It
was a bipartisan.
And we included social workers.
In that list of 6 new
professions, um,
We also included pharmacists,
behavioral health counselor,
therapist, registered nurses,
and certified midwives, um, but
what else is there?
In terms of
Of retaining, recruiting.
Uh, social workers specifically
for rural.
Rural New Mexico.
Madam Chair Representative
Garcia, excellent and um I think
very inspiring questions. So,
uh, several opportunities exist
and we are so grateful to the
New Mexico legislature for
providing these, so we received
as a school of social work 3 a
succession of 3 endowments, one
of which is focused at least for
our school of social work in um
the recruitment and retention of
students we find pay equity a
challenge for our students or
economic equity, so, uh, another
of those
3 endowments was dedicated to um
to issuing immediately
scholarships and paid practica
for our students. We are also
honored to share that we
received another $1.6 million
that are that will be
disseminated this academic year
to students to fund practicum
placements as well as direct,
uh, scholarships again, Doctor
Glover mentioned our graduate
students are not funded, so, um,
these are just some of the few
things that we have
access. We tailor our curricula
to retain our students. We are
there with relational
recruitment from the beginning
all the way through enhanced
advisement so that our students
who may struggle with the
curricula, have those additional
supports to really thrive and
succeed toward graduation. Thank
you so much. Thank you, ma'am.
Thank you, Representative, um,
Torres Velasquez.
Thank you all for your wonderful
presentation. Uh, this is so
very important in New Mexico,
behavioral health is a huge
passion of mine and I'm really,
really glad to hear there's a
new program in addiction as
well. Um, so I might, if I have
time, come back to that point.
If not, I'll talk with you all
about it later, but what I was
curious about where your
platicas. I heard that in one of
the presentations and one of the
programs and I was getting lost
in the slides, couldn't find it.
Can you tell me more about that,
where I might find that in the
slides.
Thank you, madam. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, Representative
Torres Val Velasquez, I'd be
honored to talk a little bit
more about our social work
career Platica model, um, I'll
find where they're at in the
slides in just a moment. Um,
this model was developed by a
department of a developing
Hispanic serving institutions
grant, the one we referenced
that we call wires. Uh, I serve
as the former director of
Suraise and, and the current
principal investigator. Uh, this
effort was really about how do
we recruit, retain, and graduate
social workers from rural
communities.
And uh from Hispanic Latino
communities statewide and so we
started with really looking at
um if we're taking a statewide
approach, but we're in one
particular location in New
Mexico, how do we utilize an or
an organizing model and work
with community to really get out
into community to inspire young
people and those looking for
perhaps those 2nd, 3rd careers,
uh, to be inspired to become
social workers, so this social
work career platica model is
like a flip. I'd like to explain
it as, as really inspiring and
sharing story, one of those
cultural assets that we have
here in New Mexico and that's
certainly my family uh shared
around any table we sat at or
any space we sat at, and it's
about sharing our own stories.
So this model partners, uh, SD
Nelson noted, we have locations
across the state of New Mexico.
This model works alongside a
faculty member and a current
student from that local
community in organizing at the
local level. So instead of kind
of sitting and waiting for folks
to come to us, we go out into
community to really inspire
folks.
Uh, to consider the, the field
of social work. It's a
three-tiered latia approach,
meaning we outreach to youth, so
a lot of engagement in high
schools across New Mexico that
summer bridge program was an
example of a summer project that
we host through Res. Uh, we also
have a, a partnerships with our
community colleges and other
universities statewide and so a
lot of partnerships and what we
call a 2 + 2, many of all of our
transfer students come from
two-year institutions and then
transfer into our programs. So
it's really about how we
build strong relationships with
their two-year institutions to
facilitate that transfer pathway
for students so we go into these
classrooms, uh, this was at the
height of COVID when we received
this particular grant, so
everything was done online, so
we have an online practica and
an in-person practica, uh,
again, where we, we hit the
ground with that faculty and
current student to share our
stories around what brought us
to the field 10 number of years
ago and what this program is
like now and how it might be of
interest to students.
So beyond that, our third tier
for that particular approach is
working with a community-based
organizations we do practicas in
various organizations across the
state as well.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Lujan,
and if you could introduce
yourself. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Representative Tara Luan,
I represent House District 48 in
Santa Fe, um.
Can you hear me? Thank you. Um,
very happy to be here. Um, a
couple of questions that I have,
Madam Chair, are, uh, relative
to the, the stipend program that
we're looking at that we've been
able to provide.
And you said that the students
were even afraid to, to let you
know that they got the stipend,
so I don't know if there's a
follow-up survey or information
that you're getting to see how
effective these stipends are,
and if they are covering the,
the basic needs that they're
supposed to because clarify for
me, did you say that they have
to participate in 20 hours a
week for how long, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Lujan, um,
Traditional internships are 16
weeks, so it's 20 hours a week
for 16 weeks, although our
students also do internships in
the summer, which then are 10
weeks. So that's the time frame
as far as covering what they
need for survival.
I doubt it. I'm sorry, uh, this,
but anything is of assistance.
And so, uh, anything that helps
them to pay their rent and, and
buy groceries, um, is, is
helpful and essential. I don't
know how the amount was
calculated or where it came
from, but we have just been
doing it these last two
semesters, and we will be doing
follow-up surveys to find out,
um, how it's been useful for the
students and um it, it only goes
to particular qualified
students.
I do believe there is some um
income-based um.
Requirement for it as well.
Thank you. I would, Madam Chair,
I'd be interested in, in, in, in
those follow-up um information
pieces and how this is working,
um, I think it's a great
program. I just, I think we were
looking for more feedback and
what, how this could be maybe
even better developed by those
needs and where those students
are and if they are if it
entices them to, you know, um.
To stabilize their income, if
you will, in a way so that they
stay in um in the program or if
they're leaving the program or
what's going on there.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, may I also add
quickly a comment, um, I wanted
to share with some of Luhan is
that for social work students,
it's 16 to 20 hours for two full
academic years. Uh, so our, our
practicum requirements are
rigorous and high. Um, we
typically disseminate about
$6000 per student, um, per
academic year or to support
based on our legislative funding
and we're very grateful for
that, um, that
is a fraction, however, because
it is an additional part-time
job. Uh, so we are looking at
models for more robust funding.
I will just say that in the 2024
uh social work students of New
Mexico survey, I should say
2025, uh, we will be asking
questions specific to the
efficacy of paid practica. So
thank you so much. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and really quickly,
are you just getting state
funding or is that, uh, federal
funding as well, state only and
uh uh just to uh.
quickly say, um, the other
rural, uh, the rural funding,
uh, our our social work students
are being rejected to receive
those funds because they're not
seen as a healthcare provider,
so we're working through that.
It's just a follow up, you said
they have to do that certain
number of hours.
her academic year, so does that
mean like if they work in
schools, they can load up in the
summer, or does it have to be
that many hours per week.
Madam Chair, excellent question.
So, um, we, we do have block
summer practica again, uh, some
practica are paid. We do have
Title IVE and other stipended
opportunities as well. Most
practicum experiences are not
paid. Uh, we are very grateful
that the council and social work
education just recently allowed
for um placement at place of
employment, so this didn't exist
up until 2 years ago and, and
that's really an opportunity for
students.
Thank you. uh Senator
Stephanics.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for your presentation,
all of you. Uh, I'd like to
follow up on a couple of people
have brought up the internships
and the placements. Could you
identify some local entities,
local institutions or nonprofits
that uh your interns and
practices are being
followed in.
So let's expand it to San Miguel
County.
Let's talk. What are you doing
in San Miguel County?
Madam Chair, Senator, I'd just
like to share that, uh, in San
Miguel County, so I mean we have
over 500 sites across New
Mexico, um, in San Miguel
County, what comes to mind for
me are both um schools as well
as PMS, uh, seem to be coming to
mind immediately for our
students.
So madam chair, is there
anything in the hospital?
Madam Chair and uh Senator
Stefanos, we, um, we have
students placed at the state
hospital. We don't have as many
students on this campus and so
it's harder to pull from our um
interns and our practicum
students because there are so
few, um, when I said people were
able to commute from Santa Fe,
we might be able to have more
people here, uh, El Centro is
another place that we have
placed, um, counseling interns,
and then West and City School.
schools, our school counseling
interns.
So you mentioned, Madam Chair,
uh, state hospitals. What about
Alta Vista?
The private hospital.
Madam Chair, we can look into
that for you, Senator, uh, to
ensure that you have the
information you need specific to
your county, we are able for for
anyone interested to provide you
with our partnerships, our
affiliated partnerships within
each of your districts.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Senator.
Representative Roel Caballero.
Thank you Madam Chair and thank
you all. This is close to my
heart. I'm a, my undergraduate
degree is in social work and I,
my first career was as a
certified clinical social
worker, so I truly appreciate
all of the hard work that you do
and we very often highlight
highlands University as being a
model so thank you very much. I
have a couple of questions, um,
On the ethos page, you have a
bilingual bicultural under the
meeting, the workforce needs. So
can you tell me what languages
are spoken or offered in the
course curriculum.
Madam Chair Representative
Caballero, uh, the languages
that are, uh, the language that
is of focus is Spanish, uh, both
heritage language and um and
what we call uh medical or
professional Spanish as well.
Thank you and, and I ask this
because it's so very important.
I, I have sat on several
hospital boards, um, as their
community advocacy, uh, group,
and the difficulty in being able
to um seek counseling is impeded
by language, and so I would
encourage you to expand as
quickly as possible, but
especially since you have a
focus on Native American
students.
and there are multiple languages
associated there and we really
need them on at the first
contact from primary care to
referral to them so therapy to
whatever they're being referred
to, they have to have, uh, my
second question is, what steps
are being taken to get paid
internships in order to
incentivize the career paths
that we have.
Madam Chair Representative,
excellent question as well. I
think right now we're assessing
uh both need and impact of the
legislative endowed funds as
well as other opportunities for
paid practica within the state,
uh, I do believe that that would
be uh a charge that the Center
for Excellence and Social Work
would be willing to undergo is
to better understand those
points of impact, um, we and all
students within the Fukuno
Valdez School of Social Work
are.
are very grateful for any funds
they receive to be supported,
uh, we do know that sort of a,
um, a multi-pronged approach is
necessary to really achieve that
pay equity and that that
financial stability for our
students. It is the, you know,
the single driving factor, I
would say currently, uh, in
students not wanting to pursue
their degrees is worrying about
debt and worrying about the
financial strain on their
families. Madam Chair, thank
you. Thank you and that you.
stated it at the end. It's
incredibly important, um, in
order to also retain so final
question is what impact
OK, we'll pick that up, um, next
go around, thank you.
Pardon me? Oh, OK, just I'm sure
you've given thought to the
federal cuts in the US
Department of Education. How is
that gonna impact your funding?
Have you made plans for it, um,
and what does that entail? Thank
you.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
definitely we are aware of and
attempting to be strategic about
how we might respond uh to
really support the students who
we have and to sustain across
time the services we provide.
Um, I think it's ongoing and,
and ongoing daily conversation
with university leadership as
well as deans and directors, so
I do appreciate the question.
Thank you, Representative
Herndon.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and my
question focuses on where the
placement of the of the
internships occur in 2021 we
established 14 schools that had
mental health rooms, an
additional 10 schools are being
established now. I'd like to
know if any of the internships
are being placed in any of these
schools where there are mental
health rooms.
Madam Chair, Representative
Herndon, that we're so thrilled
to celebrate that our students
are, uh, in fact, uh, one of the
students who I worked directly
with is placed at um the
leadership tech and, and ACE as
well as um several leadership
academies within Bernalillo
County. We are honored to to be
in spaces to meet students, uh,
high school and middle school
student behavioral health needs.
Uh, this is something we, we
prioritize highly and are
grateful for the.
support to have mental health
spaces within school context.
Thank you. I'll look for more
continued placements there and
then my next question goes to to
Doctor Tenorio. I hope she can
hear me. So with respect to a, a
group of uh educators who met
yesterday. There was a great
deal of concern regarding Yasi
Martinez and the lack of support
for Native American students.
I'd like to know if you are, if
your placement of social work
students, I only see 11% are in
uh schools that are.
And how are they helping address
the issues that were raised in
Yazi Martinez to help the
students with their social uh
emotional growth.
Right, well, I'll come back to
her on that question, maybe
we'll find her.
Can you hear me?
Yes, we can hear you now.
OK.
All right, so, um, I believe
your question was addressing um
practicum placement for Native
American students. Is that
correct?
Yes, and the support that uh
they are indicating that
educators are indicating it's
lacking for the students that
are supposed to be receiving
this support under the Ozzy
Martinez case.
Um, so I am not familiar. Um, I
think I will refer that question
to Dean Nelson for this part.
Well, that's OK. I'll make one
other quick comment because I
only have 3 minutes. I'll talk
to Dean Nelson later. That's an
important issue. But with
respect to everybody's been
focusing on this efficacy of
payment for internships, so I'm
looking at the fact that 89% of
these graduates are women and so
my question to you in this lack
of payment anyway, is that a
policy? Was that a reason for
not for not having that payment
in the place. Where did that
come from?
Madam Chair, Representative
Hernon, uh, that's a very deep,
uh, uh, sociological question
you're asking, uh, so I'll just,
I'll keep it short. Um,
essentially, uh, the, the, uh,
concept of being paid for your,
um, learning what is is
relatively new. OK, so, um, so
typically historically and
traditionally, it has been that
this is free, uh, labor within
an environment um
the education of the student, so
to um it it's a paradigm shift
that we are making currently to
really uplift and uphold that
these students do contribute,
um, to, you know, meeting the
unmet behavioral health needs
statewide and, um, and are
deserving of of compensation
during for the work that they do
do.
Thank you, Madam Chair, just to
point out that it's a win-win
situation for both, both the
interns and the people who are
receiving their internships, and
thank you very much.
And just to follow up, uh,
Representative Herndon, um,
unpaid internships have been the
norm for
Decades, so it's not that it's,
it, this is a new thing or this
is because it's majority women,
most internships through the, I
mean, my internships were
decades ago and they were free
labor. So we will go to uh
representative block.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you guys. I know that you
were raising your hand if you
wanted to respond to that after
I asked my question real quick,
Madam Chair, I was wondering,
uh, how many of your graduates
who have passed their
certifications, stay in the
state of New Mexico.
Madam Chair Representative
Bloch, this is a really
excellent question. Um, are, uh,
our board of Social Work
examiners does struggle to, uh,
track uh whether our students
stay within New Mexico. This is
something that we're hoping to
build capacity. This
historically in higher education
has been really challenging to
track our alumni and um and so
without their engagement with
us, it's difficult to track them
whether they stay in New Mexico
or not. I will tell you that in
the 2024 social work.
workers of New Mexico survey,
there was some, some very
powerful data of more than 750
social work responses about
plans to leave the profession
within 5 years, um, active
intent to leave the profession,
and though I don't recall those
numbers off the top of my head.
I can provide them to you, um,
and, and we do, you know, really
strive to make sure that we know
whether our students are staying
here and serving in New Mexico.
Thank you for that excellent
question.
Madam Chair, thank you,
Representative Block. Um, social
work and counseling are two
different programs, um, and we
have two different licensing
boards. We have different
accreditation boards, etc.
Counseling has long allowed our
students to have paid
internships, um, if they can
find one, traditionally it was
our, our, um, rehabilitation
counseling students were able to
and then in school counseling,
um, they
can get a school counseling
internship and depending on if
the if the school district will,
they can be a student success
worker and then have a paid
position during their internship
time. Um, I don't know if
you're, I assume you're familiar
with bills for nails.
The billing for
non-independently licensed
counselors. This has been both
good and bad for our interns who
are in the field. Um, what
happens is that an agency.
Who, um,
Brings in interns, we'll build
those interns to Medicaid, and
while the interns are doing
their work and they might give
the intern a stipend while doing
that, uh, bills for nails is,
um, supposed to be only hiring
employees. They're supposed to
hire them and not be paying.
Stipends and small amounts and
so it's a little tricky and some
of our sites we've had to stop
using them simply because, um,
the
Administrators of the site are
taking advantage of having
students come in, paying them a
small amount of money, um, to,
uh, to work at their site. So,
um, the paid internships can
have as many problems sometimes
as an, as an unpaid internship.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I was gonna give my time
to the next person, but I ran
out, so thank you. Good job. No,
good job. Thank you.
Representative Block, you know,
we can't give time away.
And we can't buy it and we can't
save it and uh Senator Block.
That makes it even more illegal.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, very
quick questions if you just give
me quick answers because I, I, I
want to get through as much as
possible here. Uh, the
demographics, it shows clinical
psychology, 89% female, 11%
male, um, what's the percentage,
um, maybe
Nationwide of males seeking
treatment, versus females.
Madam Chair, Senator Block, I do
not know, um.
That one's a hard one because
they uh seek treatment for
different things. I understand
my point is that
I guarantee more than 11% of the
males are out there needing
clinical psychology treatment,
and yet males, we don't want to
talk to women. A lot of us,
we're more comfortable talking
to men, so I, I'm just curious
what we're doing to get more men
into the career field, uh, very
quickly.
One reminder if you're not
speaking, turn your mic off.
We're getting feedback. OK.
Um, one thing that I would say
and actually related to the
stipends and things that were
awarded through the state is
knowing about those things ahead
of time and using that as a
recruitment, um.
Uh, tool would actually be
helpful. It was wonderful to be
surprised with these funds, but
we certainly weren't able to
tell students who are interested
in becoming counselors or social
workers, we have funding for you
when you get to your internship,
which will be, you know, in year
3 of your program, um, I think
that Doctor Nelson did mention
that cost is, uh,
Is a difficult thing to
overcome, both for our male
counselors to be and our uh our
uh female counselors as a
helping profession and
traditionally behavioral health
has been low paid, that seems to
be changing. I'm quite
surprised.
Thank you, Madam Chair. What,
what is the average salary
coming out for a bachelor's or
master's in social worker uh
counseling.
Madame Cha Senator Black, uh,
excellent question. I will just
say quickly about the question
of recruiting more male
representatives in each of the
helping professions, um, we have
about 25% in social work who are
um male social workers. I will
just say that having male
faculty and doing relational
recruitment where male faculty
are present, helps to establish
that trust and show the space
for all genders within this
within this profession, so I
will say that um.
So, uh, with real quick, I'm
almost out of time because I
have one more question on the
average salary. Yes, so the
average salary is about $56,000
to $60,000 at starting for uh a
licensed social worker,
so
Masters, I apologize, Masters.
OK, lastly, um, two-part
question because I want to get
this in. Um, how are you guys,
uh, Madam Chair, um, integrating
with SB 3, and one of your 5
centers is in Rio Rancho.
RMC has a huge behavioral health
program. How are you involved in
SRMC in the 14 tribes of pueblos
in Sandoval County, the most of
any county in New Mexico, 2 in
the United States.
Madam Chair, Senator Block,
briefly, I will just say that we
are, we have established and
continue to grow partnerships,
uh, with tribes and Pueblos
across the state, including at
the public of Aamma where we
hope to provide on-site social
work education, um, I will also
state that um with, with regard
to SB 3, we are actively engaged
in dialogue, uh, to assure that
social works um needs are being
well reflected and represented,
um, so, and, and I can provide
more information.
specifically about where we are
represented within the tribes of
pueblos of your, of your
constituency. Thank you so much.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'd like
just to follow up with you after
the break. Thanks.
Vice Chair Lopez.
Uh thank you, Madam Chair. The,
uh,
I appreciate the questions that
our colleagues have asked
because that took care of quite
a few of mine, so thank you. But
I do have a question and it's
always everything goes back to
money,
uh, funding drives money drives
so much.
Practically everything, madam
chair, as we well know, um.
When, uh, in looking at the uh
Doesn't have a page number where
you were talking about the
social work educational
enhancement project raises and,
you know, some of the others I I
wrote down the money sign and
the question mark.
Because it says you're funded by
the US Department of Education.
So
What funding is still existing
for this type of program.
Madam Chair, Senator Lopez, the
developing Hispanic serving
institutions grant that you're
referencing is set to sunset in
on September 30th of this year.
We're currently in the process
of requesting a no-cost
extension because of low
spending in years 1 and 2 as a
result of COVID because we
couldn't do on the ground
activities. So we're seeking
that, uh, Dean Nelson and I are
actively working on a
sustainability and
institutionalization plan for
the work of races so that we can
continue to recruit, retain and
graduate social workers across
New Mexico.
But constantly, I think we're on
a weekly basis actively looking
for other opportunities, grant
opportunities, uh, to sustain
our work.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
the reason why I ask is because
I know that the grants have been
suspended from the US Department
of Education.
And you know, it's just a
concern, but, um, Madam Chair,
as, as we continue to move
forward and looking at what the
state of New Mexico needs to do.
to stabilize some of these
funding grants that are
disappearing, um, from.
Support through the federal
government, um.
I, I would
asked that you maybe send some
information financially.
As to what the amount of monies
are.
Because in these days and times
in reality, we don't and cannot
expect money supports from the
DC at this point in time.
So even to continue and say that
we're applying, I don't think is
I apologize, Madam Chair, but
it's, it's not the reality that
we are dealing with, so, Madam
Chair, if you could, you know,
bring forward to us and this
covers the different programs
that um is working within the
school of social work.
Any of the monies that you have
been, uh, utilizing for grants
from the federal government, if
you could please send us that
information because, um, Madam
Chair, there's a and as we all
know, there's a a federal
funding stabilization
subcommittee that's meeting at
this point in time and what we
are looking at is to see how the
state can help to stabilize,
especially in FY 26, which is
when we know most of those, um,
Medicaid and other cuts are
coming.
After the, you know, the.
The elections,
but we know that in
anticipating, so what is it that
the state of New Mexico needs to
look at.
To sustain some of these very
important programs, Madam Chair,
especially since we're looking
at social work, training, um,
such a very necessity as my
colleague Senator Block refers
to as Senate Bill 3.
And that we're trying to rebuild
our behavioral healthcare system
in the state of New Mexico that
was decimated a few years back.
Um
And we just need to make sure
that you're on the radar, so I
would ask that, Madam Chair.
And then last question is just
asking about, um, we need to
grow our own for our young
people and, and I appreciate
what you, what you shared with
us on your summer bridge
program.
But how do you grow it?
Because a small group of
students is great, but there are
so many others, I think that
have potential if they're
looking at, you know, they're
exploring.
So what are the plans? Who are
your partners? and if you can't
answer now too, but who are the
partners that you're working
with?
So that it's not just, you know,
a small group, but how to
expand.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, Senator Lopez,
thank you for that question. Uh,
this was the first of our, uh,
uh, a pilot project for and a
partnership with Future Focused
Education, which is one of our
community partners, uh, we
leverage the connections that
they have made with youth across
the state of New Mexico to offer
this opportunity and so this is
something that we're hoping to
replicate. It was a huge
success. It was wonderful. It
was a 4-day event and from the
pre to the post is really showed
significant outcomes and
interest in youth pursuing
degrees in behavioral health
field. Uh.
Our hope is to replicate this in
years to come. Uh, as I noted
via our, our practica outreach
model we partner with schools
across the state of New Mexico,
so we piloted there in the
Albuquerque campus and commuted
here to Vegas so that they could
have a day on campus, um, but
my, our hope is to really
replicate this across the state.
And Madam Chair, I, I bring this
up too, um, again with Senate
Bill 3 which we're, we're
putting so much on the shoulders
of Senate Bill 3 at this point,
but it's our hope for the state
and as, um, my colleague over
here, Senator Block asked, I
hope that you are participating,
um, within the AOC's plan that
they're putting together
currently, but making sure that
Um
You know, maybe at some point
there's some opportunity for
funding.
Through
Uh, the entity itself, whatever
it turns out to be after this
first year of organizing because
we also need to find a way to
sustain training programs,
right, for those who are going
to be providing the services
that they are currently
organizing for it kind of didn't
state that correctly, but just
an FYI. Thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, and I'm gonna maybe
take the point of personal
privilege, um, at the last
meeting, there was a complaint
about the chair made that, um.
Debate was cut off, etc. um.
We all know that we do not have
unlimited time. We have many,
many subjects to cover, so a
reminder to the presenters, to
the members, and to the public.
You can talk to these people at
any point, if they do not have
contact information on on their
handouts, Xander or Andrea or
Grace know how to get in touch
with them.
Um, I wish we could devote as
much time as we want to every
issue, but
Reality doesn't allow us to do
that, so my apologies to people
who are upset that we don't get
deep enough and if you saw the
breadth of
Topics that we need to cover,
um, you, if you were like me,
you would put your head under
the cover and put your fingers
in your ears and pretend like
it's not real, but it is so um
with that I will bring up the
next presenters, um, it's never
too early to start preparing for
healthcare careers, and I will
allow the presenters, thank you
so much, ladies, um.
And the next presentation
whenever you're ready, you can
start. Thank you.
And I figured you could
introduce yourselves better than
I could, so, and then I don't
have to struggle with
pronouncing some names.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, welcome to San Miguel
County. I'm Matt Probst. I'm the
director of rural engagement for
the people of New Mexico through
the University of New Mexico
office for Community Health.
And I'm Kristen Esa was a little
bit.
And I'm Kristen Arraskovich. I'm
the clinical operations manager
for the New Mexico Department of
Health school-based Health
Center program.
Good morning and welcome to
Northern New Mexico. I'm Tim
Dodge. I work for Sunrise
Clinics and Santa Rosa
Consolidated Schools. I'm the
community schools uh coordinator
and um school-based health
center coordinator for Sunrise
clinics in Santa Rosa
Consolidated Schools.
So a perfect segue, I hope
members of the committee, Madam
Chair, you will identify uh
throughout the presentations
over the next 3 days that so
many of these presentations are
interwoven.
And so for me, this is many,
many years of presenting on
this, this topic to this
community, the first to this to
the to your community of
legislative health and human
services. The first time was
2009.
Who was on this committee in
2009, members of the committee.
Yes, Representative Garcia,
Senator Lopez, uh, so it was
myself and uh
And the amazing doctoral Vallege
Romero presenting about pipeline
initiatives that year.
And uh we've come a long way in
collaboration.
Uh, I just want to mention, uh,
my better half, senora probes
who is in the school of social
work here at New Mexico
Highlands University will be
returning today after 2.5 weeks
in Mexico.
Completing our uh representative
Garcia, you'll appreciate this.
Our Kala grant Spanish Heritage
Toolkit.
Which is was built on our own
Norteno Spanish that will now be
available for the entire world.
Um, and so watch out for her in
2009, I, I didn't ask for any
funding for SIMIAs. I just said
watch out for this program.
You'll keep hearing about it and
it's going to continue to grow
and, and I think here in 2025,
I'll say watch out for enerra
probes as she now goes to the
front and her health career
coming off of uh a previous
career of education and really
helps to take our uh our kids
and our recia to the next level.
Therefore, the title Simias de
salud grow our own health
professionals.
Seeds of health.
And so, as I mentioned in 2009,
we presented the program which
at at the University of New
Mexico Health Sciences Center,
Doctor Val Leger Romero's
program has grown so much.
Uh, at the time we had Dream
makers.
And uh now here in this
community, not only our high
school dream makers Health
Career clubs, we have our 6th
year, they just completed a
summer health career academy and
also at New Mexico Highlands
University, our Clined program
for undergraduates, um, the
growth has been amazing.
That being said, it is
phenomenal to me, the amount of
growth that has happened despite
the hardships.
What this program could be if it
was just going in one direction.
The realities are that, uh, as
Senator Lopez mentioned, the
current threats in the current
climate to funding sources, uh,
from the federal level, a
pandemic, floods and fire and so
much else that seems sometimes
uh destined to keep us
struggling and not thriving.
Nonetheless, there's been
tremendous growth. So in our
garden, Simias de salud which
was first.
explain the senator being a man
as a component which made part
of uh recommendations for the
Affordable Care Act before it
was law.
And growing our own health
professionals from our own
communities.
This, these plants are hard to
kill.
Their roots go deep.
Uh,
if you, what happens when you uh
when you uh
Cut off a branch to grow back.
So pruning is welcome. uh I
would say that uh sometimes
supported but oftentimes
trampled underfoot is the
realities that we face a diverse
adversity in our communities
that seem to try and keep us
down, uh, for those adversities,
I would just say be careful
where you step. There are many
goat heads here and rattlesnakes
and other things for your own uh
protection.
Um, that being said, uh, the
growth has been tremendous here
in San Miguel County.
We
Our oil is healthcare
professionals. We grow more
healthcare professionals,
students than any other county
per capita. That is evidence.
The only one that comes second
is Los Alamos County.
And if you look at our social
vulnerability index and look at
the number of PhDs per per
capita and every other
statistics, you say how, how
could that be?
It is because of a collaborative
effort, uh, when we first
started in this presentation in
2009 with Doctor Vallege Romero,
we had one.
Dream Maker's program.
And that was uh at Las Vegas
City Schools at Robertson High
School. Now we have 2. We have 1
at West Las Vegas as well. And
so every high school student in
Las Vegas, New Mexico has the
opportunity to be a dream maker
and participate in the program.
Beyond participating in the
program, the program has grown
under the local leadership of
people like Ms. Donna Ortiz, uh,
a huge champion for growing
health professionals who was
gonna be pre-med but decided to
teach high school science
instead and has probably made a
greater impact, uh, in her
career than I have in terms of
impacting health here. Our
students are now not just
mentored and learning about
health professions.
They are health professionals.
They start as peer health
educators.
Uh, in schools, force
multiplying my effort. I, uh, me
and my colleagues as far as
health professionals can only
stretch so far with the uh
number of patients before us on
the schedule every day and
waiting lists, trying to get in
the clinic, how do we get out
and do prevention efforts while
we use our youth. Our youth are
mentored and then they become
mentors and we've created a
pyramid scheme that I learned
putting myself through PA
school, except I did that
selling prepaid legal insurance
under.
I can appreciate that, um.
But we don't uh take people's
money, we spread health, right?
So I can only I can only mentor
uh and precept so many students,
but as those students are here
on clinical rotation. They are
charged to mentor, mentor our
high school students as our
UNMBAMD summer core just did
those high school students
become peer health educators and
many topics, uh, from substance
misuse to
Suicide prevention on and on
many, many topics and then they
mentor and educate their peers
and then link them to our
school-based health centers for
care. Uh, we'll get into that as
I pass it to Christian here
shortly, but not only does every
student in Las Vegas, New
Mexico, have access to a health
career club, every student in
San Miguel County has access to
a school-based health center.
Uh, my colleague Tim, Tim Dodge
will be speaking to that as I
pass off to him later, so that
linkage to care, then they don't
just uh uh give presentations at
the high school, they mentor the
middle school students and those
middle school students give
presentations to their peers and
to the elementary students and
those elementary students even
kindergartners for a topic like
heart health, we'll do things
not only like uh a dissecting uh
uh uh
Uh,
ran rancho style, um, uh, uh, a
heart of a pig, but they will
also do things like make
Valentine's Day cards to be
given at our local um senior
centers and uh long term care
agencies so everyone serves is
the idea. And that funnel, if
you will, not a pipeline but a
funnel has created more
healthcare professionals per
county than any place else.
in New Mexico.
Same de Salud has changed a lot.
There are 3 key prongs to it,
you see that on the one pager
that I gave you.
Yes, health career clubs have
been important, but the change
is now health career classrooms,
CTE programs, right? Like all
other CT programs. So now as we
launch the next next initiative
at Santa Rosa High School and
here at West Las Vegas as well.
we have, they leave school.
Graduated sometimes with dual
enrollment, associate's degrees,
but also with certificates as
community health workers, as
EMTs, as phlebotomists, as CNAs.
You'll hear from Doctor Tim
Shields at the presentation that
follows us that we need, he
needs those at NMBHI so that we
can fill our beds. Um, so all
those entry level health careers
so that when they finish high
school and now they go off, they
may be pursuing a higher
education in a health
profession.
They don't have to just work any
uh job to help put them through.
They don't have to sell prepaid
legal insurance like me, they
could be riding an ambulance.
They could be working as a
community health worker. They
could be doing those careers as
they pursue uh their next level
education, such as uh social
work or nurse practitioner here
now at Highlands University.
So that has is is the big change
now as we create these health
career classrooms, uh, in our
schools.
The rate limiter that I spoke to
you guys about in during the
session and continues to be as
we ask our, our state programs,
academic programs to, to grow,
uh, the number of, of uh slots
in in every school from social
work to to residencies is
clinical rotations.
Thank you, Representative
Gonzalez for supporting our
legislation to try and expand
the number of preceptors by
offering a preceptor tax credit.
Uh, we had a wonderful
behavioral health summit here on
Friday, uh, with 180 behavioral
health folks here, many of them
providers, uh, uh, VHSD director
Nick Bokass, you know, ask the
audience, raise your hand if
you've been doing this for
longer, for less than 5 years of
the 180 maybe 10 hands went up.
The majority of us have been
doing it for a long time and
then he had an ask.
Mentor.
Mentor, right? Pay it forward
and mentor and and take
students.
Just understand that in that
audience, many of us who do
that, it is.
Hard to do both, as I said, our
schedules are completely full.
We're trying to get through
waiting lists. We're trying to
provide access to healthcare
today while mentoring a future
generation of health
professionals, we need your help
and support.
We have a very thank you with
that help and support, Christian
Orskovich will be speaking about
our innovation as we've grown
the number of school-based
health centers in New Mexico,
everywhere from here to now APS
as the New Mexico hub and spoke
model that we created expands,
uh, to the metro. It's not just
for rural, uh, with more
school-based health centers, is
that more access points for more
internships and clinical
rotation spikes site, so
Christian will be speaking to
that.
And then the third part, which I
heard you all say so well, I
think every one of you brought
it up in one way or another,
which is addressing the social
drivers for learners.
Mr. Ray Sanchez, our area health
education director sitting here
to my left and would have been
up here today, but you'll hear
more about what he does to
support food and housing and
transportation for our students
that are trying to get through
their programs, um, in a
presentation sitting at the
table with his colleagues from
Luna Community College later in
the agenda.
It is not just the students in
the school-based health centers
that need these social services
to be able to show up to school,
much less get through a day of
school and much less graduate.
It is also our health
professional students and our
interns that need paid
internships and social support
to get through their programs.
Uh, so the more we can do to
move the dial, uh, for them and
support them, not just into
getting into
programs, but finishing their
programs, the better.
That being said, I am going to
hand the mic over to my dear
colleague who was one of 3 of us
who
Invented the New Mexico hub and
spoke model here in New Mexico
myself, Kristin Orrskovich, and
Doctor Masaro. Christian.
Thank you, Matt, um, and thank
you for having us.
closer
About my
Thank you. Thank you for, can
you hear me better?
All right, thank you for having
us today. I appreciate your
time, um, as Matt said, I'm
Kristen Oreskovich. I'm the
clinical operations manager for
the school-based health center
program with New Mexico
Department of Health, um, I'm
gonna be fairly brief here
today, just talking about uh
this project that we're working
on, um, with our school-based
health center program.
Um, when I presented to this
committee a few weeks ago in
Santa Fe. We mentioned that the
one of the biggest challenges we
have in school-based health
centers and expanding access to
care is having enough workforce,
um, every county in the state
exception, except, uh, Los
Alamos has health care
professional shortages, primary
care, behavioral health, dental
health. This is not new news to
any of you here.
Um,
And a report from the
Conal uh foundation from 2023,
um, estimates that we are short
about, uh, 800, uh, primary care
providers, so that's MDs, PAs,
uh, and MPs, um, about 250
behavioral health.
Providers and over 1000 nurses.
So without some sort of
Creative interventions like, you
know, Matt was just talking
about, um, this problem is
expected to get worse, as those
of us who are in the health
field and have been for, I don't
know, 2025 years-ish, um, are
gonna retire, uh, at some point
and would like to retire at some
point, maybe not Matt, um, but,
you know, there are, we need
people to replace us and we're
already so far behind, so.
When we think about how New
Mexico, a lot of
Our traditions are around
partnerships, um, and
partnerships have always been a
key piece of us um in New Mexico
and, and communities, um, being
able to meet needs of their, of
their folks. COVID is a perfect
example of that, a recent
example of that, how we all came
together to be one of the most
innovative and successful states
in the country and um in our
COVID initiative.
lives.
Similarly, success in
school-based health centers in
New Mexico depends on
partnerships, partnerships
between us at DOH and local
medical entities, um,
partnerships between the schools
and school districts and
healthcare systems, partnerships
between our medical providers
and our behavioral health
providers because we know that,
um, health is health and primary
care and behavioral health are
inextricably linked.
Um, and
So in our state of
Pretty significant, uh,
shortages in every county. We're
looking at partnerships again,
um, with school-based health
centers, partnerships with our
universities to be able to
provide clinical rotations for,
um, nursing nurse practitioners,
um, counselors and social work
students, um, we're also doing
some work with CHW's.
And bringing them on, um, and I
hope one day that we'll be able
to do the same with uh dental
assistants and, and hygiene
students as well.
So what is this, um,
Workforce initiative look like
from the DOH perspective. We're
working and partnering with
Highland and UNM to match
learners with clinical rotations
and school-based health centers.
So providing that those spots
for students, um, who need that
clinical time to be able to
fulfill the requirements for
graduation for their um for
their
Licensure and for their degrees.
We also are gonna be able to
have some funds to pay students
stipends, the um, the group from
Highlands who were talking
before us, um, mentioned that
that's an important thing, so
it's not, you know, it's not a
ton of money, but, and, and.
Yeah, and, and they mentioned
too that, you know, in previous
times, it wasn't.
Accustomed to uh pay interns,
but it is now. And so for
students who want to do
school-based health center
internships in school-based
health centers, there will be a
best.
Small stipend that they can get,
um, to provide that.
Let's see.
Um, we also want to be able to
reward our school based laws and
our operators, the FQHCs and
hospital systems that we work
with, um, to be able to pay to
recruit folks into the program
to come work in school-based
health centers, um, and so if
they choose school-based health
centers as uh as a career maybe
they'll get a little
Pot of money to be able to help
pay loans or sustain, um, some
of the
Put towards some of the
education that they've had to
pay for. I don't know the exact
numbers of what we have for this
yet. I know that, um, so we're
gonna be working through that in
the next 6 months or so, so that
we can figure out what that
looks like for both the students
and the um
And the school Baseball Center
operators.
Let's see.
And I think that's really, I
mean, that's really what we're
gonna do in a nutshell. We're
pretty our presentation is
fairly simple. Um, Matt and his
team are working to help us
operationalize this, um, with
the work that he does with
Samius de Salud and um
And with the other SBHC partners
across the state.
So
We'll look forward to talking
about this with you again next
year, um, hopefully, when we can
have some results for you and
tell you about how, how things
are going and, and hopefully the
successes we've had, um, with
this initiative.
I will.
Good morning again, uh, senators
representatives.
And you know, I, I really want
to talk more from a, you know,
the clinical standpoint and from
community schools, you know,
I've been fortunate to actually
benefit and, and work in both
areas, um, and uh earlier I
heard a representative talking
about, you know, the Yazi
Martinez, um, case and and
whatnot and, you know, the
community schools, um,
framework, I've been able to
take that and blend it in with a
school-based clinics and it's
really working very well, uh,
working together because it
gives.
a set framework to go in and,
and help identify, you know,
grass from a grassroots effort,
the needs that the communities
have and particularly there in
Santa Rosa, we've been able to
take this, this framework and
put it together and blend and
braid the funding that goes into
both those programs.
So at, at Santa Rosa High
School, uh, we do have a
school-based, um, health center
and it's run by Sunrise Clinics
and Sunrise Clinics is part of
the expansion that happened with
school-based clinics where, um,
originally, I believe we had 4
sites. Now we have 24 sites in
the last 2 years, um, we've,
we've uh grown from, we had uh
12,000 visits to, uh, this past
year we did over um 17,000
visits for the state of New
Mexico.
With that 2000 of those that
increased last year were
behavioral health visits and the
rest were primary health care
visits.
In the model, the spoken up
model that, that Matt and
Kristen and other gentlemen
created. I got to implement.
And implementing that, I think
that I've had a tremendous
impact on the population that
we're serving. Any time that you
walk into a school that we
serve.
If you're a student, if you're a
faculty member, you could be
seen.
And it doesn't matter the time
of day because the spoken help
model the way that we're working
it. We have community health
workers that work in every
single school. If a primary
care, um,
Uh, like Matt is, is working in
one of our hubs and Waggy
Mountain has a student come in
that, that has a acute illness.
Um, we have a telehealth
equipment that we connect them
to and they could be seen, uh,
via telehealth, but we also have
an otoscope, dermascope,
stethoscope, and if the parent
wants to zoom in, say they're um
working here in Las Vegas, they
can zoom in and, and participate
in the visit.
So the program has been very
impactful. We've been able to
demonstrate that.
But one of the things that we've
also been able to demonstrate is
working with the school
districts and blending and
bringing these programs, we've
also served as advisory
committee to the CTE program in
Santa Rosa, we had 62 students
out of 200 that participated
with the CTE program.
And you know, juniors and
seniors, and as, as they have
worked into it, they get uh
placed several of them who got
placed at the local hospital,
have worked in the clinic there
in, in Santa Rosa and also in
the school-based clinic.
This past year we had a student.
That had actually came from a
broken family. She dropped out
of school.
I'm gonna get a little
sentimental here.
But we got to come back to
school.
She participated in the
school-based health center.
And she ended up getting a C
certification.
We had a vacancy at the high
school. She applied for the
position and out of everybody
that interviewed, she came out
on top.
You know, that, that's a
testament to all these programs
are working together.
Sorry, I got a little bit
emotional. I apologize for that,
but these programs are being
impactful.
And I just want to thank you for
your investment.
In the community and the people
that we serve, thank you.
So are you ready for questions?
OK, we will start um I'm
assuming that everybody has
questions, so we will start with
Senator Block and go the
opposite way again, 3 minutes.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you for the presentation.
A lot of good info.
I just
Got a couple of quick ones here.
One thing that this session
looked at pretty hard and
Senator Lopez and I were there
in the health committee was
compacts.
Uh, do you guys favor compacts
to kind of help bridge that gap
between the need that we have
here in New Mexico.
You know, I don't have uh
Senator and members of the
committee, I, I don't have a lot
of context to be able to answer
that question. I'm sorry, but we
can
Madam Chair, Senator Block.
Uh, anything that drives access,
I'm in favor of. So how do we do
that and how do we work, you
know, uh, for example, uh, there
are so many initiatives that try
and divide us by county. And
we've got, you know, for
example, local collaboratives
were Mora San Miguel Guadalupe
County. Now we have rollout of
SB 3 that's going to be by
judicial districts. There are
state lines. I've never seen the
line when I cross over into
Texas or Colorado, but they tell
me there's one there, back to
our northern New Mexico,
Spanish, that's southern
Colorad.
ro San Luis Valley Spanish as
well. So it's the same people
we're the same people and so
anything that we can do in
compacts to be able to expand
that care. That being said, when
we launched Hub and spoke, uh,
then Secretary Becerra, who sent
funding to New Mexico to help
get it off the ground and thank
you also for the rural
healthcare delivery fund.
The idea was I, I was told,
well, if this organization
doesn't want to do it, don't
worry, Matt. Somebody else will,
right? So that being said, I
would much prefer local agencies
with local providers as uh as uh
Doctor Sanchez, a border region
here at New Mexico Highlands
University taught me 20 years
ago. Every doctor we, we inject
into the community of Las Vegas
means they have to live here,
professors too, Islands
University.
They inject a million dollars
into our economy, that being
said, that was 20 years ago. I
bet you it's $5 million now. So
that being said, if no one else
can do it, and we're talking
about uh doing telehealth from
Texas or anything else like
that, I am all for it, but uh we
should start by trying locally.
Thank you, Madam Chair. A
completely. The compacts are
very important. um, especially
if, um, we can get them written
where they're accepted, uh, into
the compact.
Um, the health, um, this piece
of paper here, the one thing
that jumped out at me just from
my military career as a previous
commander talked about HIPAA
information.
When I see that local, uh,
middle school, high school
undergrad students have more
opportunities, um, and they can
serve as these youth peer health
educators. What type of legal
liabilities are there for HIPAA
violations or what type of
training are they getting
because that's some pretty
complicated stuff for middle
schoolers and high schoolers to
really fully understand that.
Madam Chair, Senator Block,
absolutely. So, and, and to
complicate things even further,
we're not just talking about
HIPAA law, uh, which is not
really enforceable until you're
18. Uh, but fur law, right, in
schools and and confidentiality
on that. What they do is not
direct healthcare, so they can't
do that till they get licensed
someday. What they do is health
career presentations. Now that
being said, there may be a
student, and, uh, for example,
Ray Sanchez teaches QPR.
for kids. Question per se, refer
suicide prevention for youth.
These are evidence-driven,
evidence-based programs designed
specifically intended for youth.
What do they do, right? There
may be a student after
presentation appear, it might be
at a high school football game.
It might be at a party that
comes to them and says,
I'm thinking of hurting myself,
right? So they are taught
evidence-based programming on
how to now navigate that and
connect them to licensed
resources, um, and not overstep
their bounds.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, sir. Appreciate all the
information. Thank you,
Representative Herndon.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
just wanted to comment briefly
over at Eldorado High School.
They have the these classes
where students are, are able to
talk about how they're feeling
and about their healthcare.
There was the student who was
addicted to some opioids. I just
want you to know that that class
helped her so that she was able
to overcome that problem she was
having in graduate. So I just
share that with you and no HIPAA
violations occurred there. So I
with another item you brought up
a rep I mean um
Doctor Valerie Romero Leget's uh
program, Communities to Careers,
so, uh, my understanding and I'd
like you to clarify is that we
can only get that program moving
if the RS I think it's the RPSP
through the university is
funding it, so is that correct
or do we as a legislators need
to do something more to fund
that program.
Madam Chair Representative
Herndon, first of all, thank you
so much for being a champion for
our youth and for these
programs. Uh, so this fund, this
program communities to careers
and dream makers was once funded
by her uh before the current
federal funding cuts. It was
already, it, it wasn't funded in
the next 5-year renewal cycle.
So we had already lost funding
for this vital program. And so
yeah, now back to Senator Lopez
asking us, please tally, I'm
sure Doctor
they get Romero has that
information handy, but what do
you, what are these impacts
gonna be and how can the state
of New Mexico shore up hits, you
know, when we're talking about,
um, these early pathways in
these communities to careers,
these early entry level
positions. It really is an
upstream approach. You know, it
is vital that the more people
you introduce to health careers.
On one side of the funnel, it's
not a pipeline because doing
this for 25 years now, thinking
that if you take this many
students.
And you introduce them to health
careers, a pipeline says, well,
just physics, right, or
plumbing. This much will come
out the other side. That doesn't
happen. You have to drop many,
many youth exposed, give the
opportunity to many, many youth
to produce that yield, planting
many seeds produces the harvest,
right? You don't get a one on 1
to 1 ratio on that. And so, uh,
I don't know the detail, uh, uh,
representative Her Herndon,
Madam Chair, uh, for what Dr.
Vallega Romero needs.
to continue to sustain community
career two careers and expand it
so that every child across New
Mexico, not just every child in
Las Vegas, New Mexico can have
an opportunity to experience the
programs, but I'm sure she has
that information for you. Thank
you and just for one clarifying
question, those students who are
working in the community-based
health center, uh, school-based
health centers. Do you keep
those health centers open during
the summer? Are you closing
them?
Adam Chair Representative
Herndon, that's a 3:30
presentation about our youth
centers, which you, uh, last
time I gave this presentation to
you all, Representative Garcia
and others were there for our
ribbon cutting and the ground.
mural, uh, that is the intent of
the youth centers if it is done
properly with the community
schools model that uh uh
community schools like program.
Programming that uh Mr. Dodge
explained the whole intent is to
have the same axis, access to
services, school-based
healthcare, youth mentoring, um,
food, uh, transportation, uh,
all of it, uh, summer's evenings
and weekends. So yes, our
school-based health center here
at West Las Vegas, Monday
through Friday, all summer long,
including the summer
programming, and you all will
get an invitation tonight to uh
the presentation of our
Youth music camp there'll be
offering a concert in the
community tonight.
Thank you,
madam,
as well, you know, in addition
to that, we've actually hosted
some uh student interns
throughout the summer to work on
additional hero programs with
the University of New Mexico as
well, so getting out and working
with financial literacy and,
and, um, you know, really
focusing on the low income tax
credits as well, so.
Representative Roy Royal
Caviero.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I have
several questions. Thank you
very much for your presentation,
um,
OK.
Gosh, I used to have a very loud
voice if you all recall, for
some reason I'm drowning out
anyway, um, how many students
are currently enrolled in the um
school-based health centers
across the state.
Uh,
representative Caballero, uh,
Madam Chair members of the
committee, uh, so school-based
health centers have to have
consent, um, uh, from the
families for students to be seen
there, um, just like any other
medical clinic around the state.
Uh, we are at.
About 56,000 visits for last
year, um, for over
Around 20,000 students.
So that was for last year and
then, you know, we're hoping as,
you know, these expansions
occur, those numbers will
incrementally, um, we, we're not
hoping, we know that as, as our
expansion, um, takes place will
continue to grow.
Thank you. My second question
has to do with the page, um.
In the handout titled University
Pilots and it speaks to
financial incentives available
for paid internships. Can you
tell me where those funds are
coming from, number one, and the
second part of that are Medicaid
funds involved at all in any of
the disbursements or in the
budgeted funds that you are in
the final bullet referencing.
Representative Caballero, Madam
Chair members of the committee,
uh, Medicaid funds are involved,
um, all of our school-based
health centers bill Medicaid, so
they are an important part of
the reimbursement in the
sustainability for for
school-based health centers, you
know, for them to get paid for
their work, um, because, like I
said, they are true medical
clinics, um, otherwise,
Yeah, uh, sorry, what was the
other part of your question?
The second part is in your last
bullet, you said we have also
budgeted funds. Oh, that's gonna
be, we have state fund dollars
that we can attribute to those
efforts, um, hopefully, right
now we're still, um, getting
some federal match from Medicaid
for our general fund dollars and
so we are hoping that we'll be
able to continue to do that, um,
to be able to offer to receive
that so that we can continue to
offer maybe even more stipends
because that would, if we get
cuts in that federally.
Um, that would limit the number
of, of stipends that we'd be
able to provide, but it's still
an initiative that we're
committed to regardless of the
federal funds, Madam Chair, so
I, I imagine that you're making
plans, alternative plans, should
the Medicaid funds not be part
of the budget so that you can
leverage existing, uh, and use
other sources. Am I correct?
Yes, ma'am. Thank you. And the
final question I have is that
you mentioned several times.
That you were working on,
working on and working on
various projects. What um actual
projects are in place or any of
what you said that you're
working on are those projects
currently in place.
Representative and uh Madam
Chair members of the committee.
Yeah, they are, there are some
things that are in place, some
things that we have gotten, you
know, we've, uh, we're in
process of developing CHW
curriculum for, um, school-based
health centers and behavioral
health services, uh, some of the
efforts that Matt and Tim have
been involved in are part of
that expansion. Other clinics
down south are in the process of
Expanding and getting services,
um, going in, in their
communities. So it just takes,
it takes a little bit of time to
be able to
Get all of the clinics up and
running.
Thank you, Madam Chair. If I
could please, uh, make reference
to my name is.
Royal Caballero. It's a double
last name, so I appreciate it.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you Madam Chair
Representative, may I speak on
that?
Very briefly, her time was up,
but very briefly. I just want to
state that, you know, working
with, with Christian, there are
uh many partnerships that have
been established in my
communities that I work in and
it's been very impactful to, to
what we're doing, you know, not
just, um, the, the direct
service but the internship
programs as well.
Senator Stephanics.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
just first want to mention that
several legislators try to put
extra funds into the
school-based health clinics, so
it's not just Medicaid, and I
think many people are committed
to this. Secondly, Madam Chair,
this youth resiliency report.
This is not online, and I think
it's good reading. I think we
should have staff put this
online, um, it relates to
education as well as to our
health committee and Senator,
can I interrupt you?
Um, Andrea, uh, pointed out to
me that we will also be using
this for a presentation later
today, so don't lose it.
Is it on for the later
presentation online?
I'll look, but anyway I'm
hearing no. I think it's very
beneficial reading. OK. So my
question, Madam Chair, is, um,
If you all could comment and
maybe this would be for San
Miguel specifically in the
school-based health clinics and
maybe you all have other
comments after the fires here,
the fires, the flooding, etc.
Did you see
an uptick in physical and mental
effects.
So let's first before Matt
talks, let's have Tim, Tim talk.
They do
Uh, Madam Chair, um, Senator,
yes, we did see an uptick. If
you look at the, at the numbers
of bulk behavioral health and
primary health care visits that
we've seen the increase, um, in
the last two years, there's well
over 2000, um, additional visits
that we've seen, um, you know,
in addition to, I believe COVID
had an impact on that as well.
And, you know, other factors,
but um I, I do believe that
there has been an impact direct.
From the fires.
So the reason I asked Madam
Chair is, you know, I, we've
been in interested in um
Climate and public health. Uh,
we're interested in asthma.
We're interested in heat
effects. We're interested in
heart attacks. We read about
adult strokes recently, but I'm
thinking about PTSD. I'm
thinking about a whole variety
of things that could come not
just in this county, but in
every county that's going
through this, and I'm just
wondering if our school-based
health clinics, which I really
like and want, whether they're
Um
Prepared to handle these
traumas.
Madam Chair, Senator Stefaniks,
uh, I think what is the the data
most shows, the behavioral
health impact, the devastation,
what I call the aftermath of
COVID and then on top of that
here for our county, uh, fire
and flood. And so there is, it
is undeniable. I do want to
point out as you asked in the
earlier presentation, uh,
Senator, uh, so, so what's
happening here?
You know, and to Highlands
University. How many of our
interns are placed here in this
community, for example, at Alta
Vista Regional Hospital.
I, I, I just want to make sure
that data is, is clear and what
hub and Spoke has done.
56,000 visits.
20,000 because of hub and spoke,
20,000 of the school-based
health center visits as Tim
notes, because we went from 4
clinics to 24 clinics.
came here in this region of
those 24 new access points.
Imagine what that would be if we
spread that access across the
state of the three BAMD students
that were here for their summer,
uh, cohort for their community
learning project. One was from
Riodoso. She had no idea, well,
she, she said Riodoso because
nobody knew where Kaitan was
except me because I hunt there.
Uh, but she had no idea what a
school-based health center was
before doing her project in
school-based health centers
because there's no school-based
health center.
over there. So as Rio doo and
faces the impacts there now in
terms of the flooding. I don't
know that they have the capacity
that we do every single school
in San Miguel County has a
school-based health center our,
our community school at Rio
Cainas United World College, New
Mexico Highlands University,
Luna Community College has
access at Highlands University,
all the ear the early childhood
center, all the, every single
elementary school has a kiosk in
it, right? The access.
is the answer.
Thank you, Madam Chair. If I may
really quick, uh, senators,
Madam Chair, very quickly where
no one is paying attention to my
clock.
I'm sorry, I just wanted to say
the school-based sals in Riodo,
so, um, has hired, they, they
have 4 full-time behavioral
health providers now because of
in response to all of the
tragedies that have happened in
Riodoso. So for the last year
and a half, they've had 4
behavioral health providers
working full time and booked
full time.
Thank you. And just a reminder
to the members, if you would, I
would like you to stay in the
room as much as possible. If
you're out of the room for a
presentation or for questions, I
may skip over you because it's
not fair to folks who are here
and those questions may have
already been asked. So
Representative Lujan, if you
have questions, but just a
reminder, if you want to ask
questions, stick around and hear
what's already been said.
Sure. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, thank you, panelists, uh,
this, this is really, you know,
important work that we're doing
and um I appreciate Senator
Stefanik's question, um, so that
scratch that question my list,
um, what I, what I'm gonna stick
to you is, you know, um, really
addressing our adolescent
suicide rates are up in New
Mexico, um, according to the
last, um, information uh review
that we've received, Madam
Chair, so I'm very helpful and
hopeful of what all the
programming you're doing.
Here. I like to see that
replicated in order to replicate
that, we're gonna need funding.
And the funding and all the
other things that we're talking
about the workforce, all those
sorts of things, but it does
come down to money. So,
We have some opportunities with
stable money and that is through
our opioid settlement funds from
state government into local
government. So can you, um, kind
of tell us if what the
interaction is and what the
funding source and how that is
and if at all, it can be
increased. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Representative Luan members of
the committee, um.
Yeah, we have, we fund
school-based health centers, uh,
you know, they submit RFPs to us
and tell us the work that
they're going to do and then
once those RFPs are reviewed, we
are able to fund based on the
number of hours that they can
provide, um, and the size of
their schools. So, you know, a
community like Des Moines that
has 100 kids pre-K through 12 is
not the same as providing
services at Albuquerque High,
which has, you know, 2000 kids.
Um, and so we fund based on the
funding formula we have, we, we
do not have the funds to be able
to.
fulfill everybody's budget, um,
you know, their operational
budget, but that's where billing
Medicaid and insurances and the
ability to do that comes into
place, so I
I don't know, I can't.
I can't tell you, I haven't been
asked about that. I have not
been asked. I used to be able
to, I used to be get asked
frequently like I'm just gonna,
I'm gonna cut you off there. You
don't have that answer. If you
could get that to us to see how
those supplemental fundings are
coming in. The other question I
want to ask briefly, um, it's
not a brief answer, but we can
talk later to prep you is
working with the AOC right now.
What we have given our
behavioral health um directive
to them and what they're doing
here particularly here in um.
San Miguel in Las Vegas if you
can comment on that in your
working relationship in our
community and outreach. Thank
you.
Tell, tell me about the AOC is.
I'm sorry.
Thank you. The Office of the
courts and the new directive
that legislation that went into
effect on July 1, Madam Chair,
and how they are interacting
with the with your part of the
community in the world here in
Las Vegas, Adam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative Lu
Han. So there will be a
presentation at 3:30 that it
speaks more to that and
leveraging not just opioid
settlement funds, but you know,
in uh that component of its
specific and youth centers and
community schools and
school-based health centers and
all those initiatives come
together, um, specifically for,
uh, when we're talking about SB3
and, you know, now breaking up
into judicial districts, as I
mentioned earlier, I think again
there that the key is we're
still very early on.
But I do hope that, you know,
through collaborative effort,
we're going to have to cross
county lines, etc. uh, through
collaborative effort, we are
gonna be able to shore up.
If not expand. I, I brought this
up as I think many of you know I
wear a very big Doctor Seuss
hat, not a lot of different
hats, cause I'm always wearing
it, um, but I serve on the New
Mexico Primary Care council, SB
3 was presented to us last
Thursday, um, uh, by the way,
the New Mexico primary care
council, the workforce work
group, uh, uh, decided on
Thursday to support Simias de
salud as a, as a workforce
initiative as an upstream
initiative.
But with the presentation on SB
3, I think the reality that, um,
When it was designed as when the
rural healthcare delivery fund
was designed. The idea was we
were going to be expanding
services and growing on a
foundation that was strong, but
now we're in a flood. I'm gonna
use that Riodoso analogy. We're
in a flood and so these long
time agencies that have been
here for half a century for
decades, providing behavioral
health services, right? They're,
their foundation is risky. I, I.
We all saw that visual icon of
race back to PTSD of the house
going down the road that was a
road and now it's a river in
Riodoso. How do we build a third
story on and expand services
when our foundation is at risk
with federal funds. So it's
gonna be a fine balance and I
hope with with judicial
districts, we're able to find
solutions that we say, let's
make sure not.
Repeat as Senator Lopez is in
here right now, but the, the
traumas of the past in
behavioral health where the
whole, you know, this is
supposed to fix that and so can
we equitably make sure that
we're shoring up existing
services because of current
risks and funding cuts while we
are trying to expand. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative Torres
Velasquez.
I'll try to keep this short. It
may be too related to some of
the past questions, but I'm
curious, um, it seems like y'all
have a very robust program with
the uh BAMD program, uh, with,
uh, Doctor Romero Leggett, um,
if we were to what I think what
she'd like to do is double the
program and if we were to double
the program, um, can you see
that there would be
opportunities for more students,
or do you think you saturated
the interest in your population
and
Have you thought about what you
might add to it, um, if you have
the students and the funds.
Madam Chair, thank you.
Madam Cha Representative Torres
Velasquez.
Uh, I
In double if we talk about the
number of students in the
program, there's absolutely
still more need, but we have to
free up that it's the best of
the best of the best cream with
a crop.
You know, with honors, you know,
that's the point, right? Now,
that being said, simultaneously,
you know, our most recent crop,
those were the COVID kids. They
were on online school. We had
the greatest attrition rate in
the BAMD program that we'd ever
had. Why? Because they were
taking biochem and those other
things online, you know, it was
not fair. So we've got to find
out ways on, you know, health
and education come together to
back to the CT type programs to
shore up, you know, those basic
science.
feels that they need all the way
the original Simi is the salute
model with Senator Binghaman
was, was, you know, it was
greenhouses, right? We're going
to teach basic, you know,
science to elementary students
and teach their taste buds to
like real tomatoes, not the uh
Walmart. Excuse me, poor
Walmart, uh, cardboard tasting
tomatoes, real ones, right?
Chain their taste buds, uh,
early, but yeah, so, so how we
utilize that and and
strategically, there is
absolutely more.
people than the 18 per capita,
we have more here, uh, what did
they say there was 14 in, in,
out, out of Rio Rancho and
Sandoval County, BAMD students,
I think was the number and 18
here. I think we're a lot
smaller of a county.
That being said, there would be
more, uh, but the, the
letting them into that pathway
and supporting them along the
curriculum so that they can
actually finish to that ultimate
goal of getting into a
residency, uh, and, uh, and
coming back and working.
Madam Chair, great answer. Thank
you.
Perhaps Representative Garcia.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, panel, uh, for your
presentations. They were
outstanding.
Uh, thank you, Matt, uh, for
still hanging in there.
Uh, we surely miss, uh, Doctor
Zadonas.
Uh
But uh you know it's, it's
really an accomplishment in
terms of San Miguel County in
terms of per capita producing
uh.
Um,
Uh, kind of health
professionals, uh, on career
paths.
And in the, in the professions
given what you've experienced
here.
2003, um, Las Vegas had 26
physicians.
Three of those were OBGYNs you
had a surgeon.
Today 2 physicians.
Uh, Doctor Michael Montoya, I
mean Doctor Michael, uh.
Um, Lopez is one of those two,
and I have a lot of respect for
Doctor Lopez.
Uh, during COVID, uh, he was
working 18 hours in his clinic
of which he's put 40 years into.
So what you have in Las Vegas is
you have a core group of
dedicated.
Health, visionaries, you Matt
being primary.
What Santa Rosa has is similar
with.
Christina Campos.
You know, so there's this huge
wealth of knowledge.
Uh, institutional knowledge that
we have disposal of in our
communities that we're feeding
off of and we're seeing results
because of that.
And um
You know, we were here what, 7
years ago?
Uh, you lost your only OBGYN?
And what happened 3 months after
that?
A young Chica from here was
going to Santa Fe to deliver her
baby.
And she died in a car accident.
Two lives lost because of that
loss.
So we know the effects of
shortages and how it impacts our
communities and uh I just wanna
kind of applaud you for that.
Uh, but also the way that our
Chicano community has made
growth in terms of how
professionals.
is that we've been able to also
Break into
The selection committees like at
UNM.
Uh, in terms of having
conscientious people.
In those selection committees
that get to choose what students
are going to participate in
these programs and we know that
you and them at one time had
selection committees that
favored.
Eastern white students.
Over native New Mexican
students.
You know, and that's no longer
the case, but we've had to
penetrate these institutions in
order to make them relevant.
And so we're seeing these
changes and uh but we're still
seeing some dropback.
Uh, school on wheels, a
non-traditional high school in
my community lost their only.
Uh, behavioral health,
school-based contact.
And that was terrible in terms
of the students and how it was
impacted them in negative ways
to where this this stabilize
their learning so that
school-based health clinic that
provided behavioral health
services to those students,
eliminated overnight and it was.
Catastrophic to those students
that depended on that individual
coming into the school 2 days
out of the week and we still
haven't rebuilt that program.
So, uh, I applaud you, but we
still have a lot to go and we
need visionaries like you like
you 3 on this panel to continue
moving the needle to where we
were almost empty to where we're
going to be full.
In the matter of time thank you.
Representative Gonzalez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um,
thank you presenters, um, when
we look at our health care
shortage, I think we, in my
brain, I compartmentalize it by
saying there's like recruitment
retention and policy issues that
we can all have our own opinions
about to recruiting, um, and in
my career, and I've had the
opportunity to work with you all
on a very in-depth basis
pre-legislator work, um, and
that this is just something that
I've done for my career is
building up STEM students,
building up STEM careers,
building up health careers, and
as much as, as far as we've
come.
Um, besides, you mentioned
DreamMakers, there's also other
out of school time programs that
focus on health careers. Now
with the inclusion of CTE
pathways, I just looked briefly
health science, health
informatics, therapeutic
services, community health, um,
trying to buff up these
healthcare professionals here at
Highlands, we just started our,
uh, master's program, nursing
with the family nurse
practitioner concentration. I
think there's a lot of work in
trying to beef up interest and
gaining them, and I guess my
question, and I know we've gone
rounds, um, a big focus on my
legislation in this session was
on some of these things.
Supporting that hub and spoke
model, um, preceptor credit, um,
CTE addressing faculty
shortages, um, where do we go
from here that we are still
experiencing a bottleneck, um,
you know, we're pumping in all
these kids, getting them
interested, and then there's
something that just still
results in them not returning
back to our communities and not
translating into uh working
professionals and so is it maybe
some of this legislation
passing, hopefully, you know,
getting through, um, where would
you see
Where would you see that
happening? Again, faculty
teaching, higher education
coursework, preceptors, um, all
of those things. What is the
stop, that is, once you get them
interested, we have a ton of
kids interested. How do we get
them through to actually
becoming health practitioners in
our communities. Thanks.
Madam Chair Representative
Gonzalez, uh, very good
question. There's not one single
answer to um.
You know, with recent federal
legislation, I, I felt so
defeated being the only provider
in my organization where I get
to see patients, I get to be the
circuit writer for the hub and
spoke system for sunrise, uh,
when I am wearing my provider
hat, um, that knows what
healthcare look like in this
service area before the
Affordable Care Act in a, in a
federally qualified health
center.
Which meant that a third of our
patients, a third of my patients
used to have no insurance before
Medicaid expansion.
And then after it's 5% now,
roughly, and uh we're going back
there.
So at the root of the question,
I wonder about the historic.
This is maybe, you know, people,
my dad, the civil rights
activist coming out in me, but
the system set up to keep.
That boot on our neck.
Yeah, are we destined to
struggle?
Miguel said, we'll get there,
you know, full to full 25 years
in for me.
Yeah, yeah, we're going
backwards again.
So I don't think there's one
single answer. I think it's
multi-pronged, all the
legislation you you supported
absolutely, um, we have to have
stronger schools, so it's not
just about health, right? I
mean, I'm talking about early
childhood, right? All of it,
right, uh, prenatal services, we
heard that, you know, we got to
start, you know, in the womb,
prenatal even. So I think there
are many, many different uh
components to it, but, uh, but I
do wonder about some of the
underlying things that keep
Our rural, uh, especially our
rural people of color down.
Madam Chair, you know, um.
If I understood your question,
uh, Representative, you know,
you're, you're really talking
about, you know, what's keeping,
um, students from going into
those pathways, I think that
there's a lot of students that
do go into those pathways, but
we end up, um, experiencing in
some of these small communities
brain drained, where, where
they're leaving and they're not
coming back and so, you know, I
think we need to, to not only,
you know, focus on, on, on.
Um, the development of the
healthcare, but the economics of
the, of the whole communities
that we're serving and look at
it, and that's why I like the
community schools model, and
when you start to look at the
work that our community health
workers are doing, they're not
just focused on primary or
behavioral healthcare, they're
looking at the other social
determinants as well, whether
it's for healthcare or
education, they're all the same.
So poverty, um, you know,
transportation, a lot of the
other factors that affect
people's lives, I think are
barriers to people moving into
whatever career pathway that
they want to go into.
If I may, Madam Chair, just
quickly, the third prong of
Simias, as I'm hoping a big part
of that as, as Tim mentioned and
is leading that part of the
presentation, but those social
to make sure not just, you know,
we recruit them into healthcare
career, but they can finish it.
You know, and not have to drop
off because the transmission
blew on the truck and they can't
get to class, um, and then that
we can retain them. So I think
that, you know, those social
drives, drivers of health for
learners. Uh, there's a lot of
hope in that in programs like
Mr. Dodge is speaking to.
Thank you, Representative Anaya.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you presenters, um, there are a
couple of things that I feel
like we all know to be true. One
is, of course, the federal cuts
are really going to damage
everything that we have going
for healthcare here. And the
second piece is that we're short
on healthcare providers. And so,
given that I've been trying to
figure out like how do we think
creatively about the things we
were doing, how are we going to
do them into the future,
especially as it relates to the
economic pieces.
And so one of my thoughts has
been, it's really gonna take all
of us to pitch in, including the
private sector and including
employers and so one of the
things that I think of is
knowing that we're short on
healthcare providers.
Has there been any conversation
when we're talking about
internships, when we're talking
about preceptors to take the
vacancy savings from all of
those, um, vacant positions and
make sure that they're going to
these internship type programs,
both for the interns themselves
and also for the preceptors.
Representative members of the
committee, not that I'm aware
of.
Madam Chair Representative
Anaya, so the original budget
for Simia de Salud in 2008 was
$30,000. It's stretched uh over
a decade. And because I said
it's a pay it forward program.
And so, but my selling pitch to
the organization that I was
working with in the for the time
was just what you just said
that, yeah, we know, you know,
this is funding that's sitting
on a salary light item that
we're not utilizing, let's
invest it into this. And
it paid off to the point where
we didn't have that vac vacancy
rate anymore and every time we
have a, a vacant position, now
it wasn't sitting there for a
year waiting for somebody to
apply 8 or 9 people applied and
it became an oasis in healthcare
where people that rotated fell
in love with our rural
communities and they wanted a
job when they came back. And
then if I couldn't place him as
a medical director of one
organization, I would callOA
Clinic or PEOs or or the other
agencies and say, hey, I've got
some dynamite people. I couldn't
hire them, you need them? And so
yeah.
Yeah, that's the idea of what it
can look like thinking about
that, uh, that being said, the,
the, the hard sell to the CFOs
and CEOs of the business side of
this. It's a no brainer.
Uh, to me from a medical
clinical site, uh, is the
revenue loss because there's
those vacancies.
Right, now pair that right now
the revenue loss because in the
federally qualified health
centers, you'll be collecting
$20 on a sliding ski fee scale
instead of, you know, whatever
your rate is PPS rate of 140 per
visit, right? So it's going to
be a hard sell, I think asking
those agencies right now in this
climate, but it worked before.
I'm willing to try it again.
I will be asking. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Vice Chair Lopez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
again, thank you to our
colleagues you all have asked a
lot of good questions, so I had
a scratch off some of mine.
Um
One of the, I was reading
through one of the handouts, and
this is youth voices real
priorities.
And, um, looking at our uh DOH
Department of Health Office of
School and Adolescent Health.
Uh, Madam Chair, I believe this
is.
A gem that we need to really
work with and support.
Um, as we move forward, and
it's, it's been around for a
long time. Funding has been an
issue over the years, Madam
Chair, and I've been honored to
be able to put some monies in
over the years, but it's needs
to be sustained and grown
because of what I believe the
potential is of the Office of
School and Adolescent Health and
DOH.
The course works with our
tobacco.
Um, you know, cessation
programs, etc. but there's so
much more, I think that this
particular entity does and
should be doing with support.
Um, I know looking, reading
through this, um,
I call it a report as to, you
know, for our youth, the
questions that were asked
through a focus group.
These are, this is information
that needs to be shared widely
with us, Madam Chair, as
policymakers, because this, I
think, is much more clear than
us as adults because we don't
live in their world. We think we
do, but we don't. We don't
understand what's going on in
the brains. We were 16, we were
14 at one time, but that was
like a long time ago as I am
reminded by somebody else in the
room who's here with me today.
Um
But Madam Chair, this is, this
focus groups give us, I think,
an insight and just for what
I've read here is.
I think really should be helping
to drive what we are doing in
the legislature and what we can
do to help our young people.
It's what we talk about, but I
think there's some good
information in here and others,
other focus groups that have
happened over the years,
Generation Justice did one a few
years back. I mean, there's
other organizations, but this is
the real stuff that I think we
need to to pay attention to and
have those with lived experience
who are here in front of us.
And um, Madam Chair, just one
question is in lase.
Still within the community of
Las Vegas in our in our school
system.
Madam Chair, uh, Senator Lopez.
I'm, I would have to double
check. Um, we've lost a lot of
programs as far as I know and,
and, uh, Representative Gonzalez
knows a lot of these, uh,
components from her other hat,
uh, about a lot of these
programs, um, what I would say,
uh, whether we're talking about,
you know, not MESA because
mesa's solid.
Uh, but Josa or other programs
that have come and gone is that
they do this. And so again, the
idea of Siya de salud is not to,
uh, um, uh, take over
everything. It's to say that
when there is a dip or when, you
know, I told you in Las Vegas,
there's tworeakers programs, one
on each side of the of town, but
there are many, many towns that
don't have not even one, right?
So to be able to shore that up,
the idea, as you see in in
number 1 on the three-pronged
approach
is where, where they do exist,
we will collaborate with them.
We offer programming, we, you
know, do all kinds of things we
can to shore them up. And then
when they don't exist, then we,
we build something grassroots,
so, uh, but I, I do not think
so, Senator Lopez.
And Madam Chair, I just ask
because in lastly of course is
was funded by Kellogg years and
years ago, um, and I know has,
has still has some what I call
tentacles in certain communities
and I think they were here
before. Yes, Madam Chair,
Senator Lopez, year before last
they were and uh uh that was an
effort here with, with in
collaboration with Highlands
University. We had a special
project, that special project
was funded for, uh, two sides of
the mountain.
The schools at at uh in
Espanola, um, uh, uh, the high
school Espanola Valley High
School and McCurdy, and then
east and west. So those four
schools were put together. We
had our big event here. They
were both given projects which
was economic innovation back to
uh uh Doctor Sanchez, and, and
injecting resources into a
community is the way they looked
at it through the lens of
healthcare. Interestingly
enough, both, both sides of the
mountain said.
The same thing in the end. They
said they needed a youth center
and they needed a residential
treatment center. And so, uh,
they both came up with the same
solutions as you see there in,
in, in the Youth Voices, uh, uh,
publication that you're
mentioning that's hot off the
press is why didn't make it into
your packet. I found it in my
emails this weekend. Uh, so, uh,
is there strategic
recommendation number one, we
need safe places like youth
centers.
No, and thank you, Madam Chair.
So I would just encourage my
colleagues.
Uh, for us to review this, I
just, it's, it's a gem.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, and I have a few
questions. So, um, we all know
that the what's happening
federally could have devastating
effects on everything that we
try to do. So I'm just curious,
do any school-based health
centers partner with.
Money
with, you know, let's say a
Walmart or a, a family
foundation that's strong in that
part of the state.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, not that I'm aware
of, like a, an external sponsor
sort of thing, not that I'm
aware of. It's a great idea.
Thank you. And, and I mean, I
hate to say this, but I, I've
been, I've worked with a lot of
nonprofits struggled with a lot
of nonprofits, you know, I hate
to think we have to go to bake
sales and car washes, but
That may be where we have to go.
I was with the New Mexico Autism
Society for a lot of years and
we did everything from schwan's
sales to to rummage sales, to
any, any way we could figure out
to get more money, so that's a
sad way to be um Madam Chair,
if I may answer that as well,
you know, uh, we do partner with
a couple of not for profits
within our area, one which
Christina Campos was part of,
which is New Mexico, uh, which
also operates our local
hospital.
In addition to that, the
Singleton Foundation has been
very generous in our area and
helping with our school-based
clinics as well.
That that's great to hear. And I
mean, and I know that
school-based health centers
partner with a lot of folks, but
I'm looking at folks with money
because usually the people we
partner with are struggling as
much as we are.
So, um, Thompson, one other
piece just leaning in. I don't
want to steal the thunder, but
you'll see a presentation coming
later from Anorum and who have
funded our hero hubs and our
partner heroes that the interns
and the worker community health
workers that you're hearing, uh,
Mr. Dodge mentioned uh earlier
in his presentation.
So there is that piece, but I
think you're on to something
that when we lose federal funds,
can we look to philanthropic
dollars.
Exactly, you put it just and I
may take away the commercial
person of the year from
Representative Herndon and give
it to you because you've done
coming soon, um coming
attractions several times, so,
so she may lose her crown. I
don't know. We'll, we'll have to
decide at the end of this
meeting. Um, and then who, who
put this together? Who, who is
responsible for this.
Uh, we contracted with uh um
Sorry.
With an evaluation team, um, at
Apex evaluation to
Hold together focus groups
across the state and
Find out what what folks needed.
So, uh, my suggestion would be
that that be front and center,
who, I mean, you know, if the
school-based health centers, um,
funded it, whatever, so it will
give it more weight, more
validation than just here, you
know, we don't know where this
came from and a place for people
to go to to find out more
information. Just, this is a
great, but I was looking like
who did this? Who do I, who do I
contact? So front and center,
take credit, um, and then, um,
in terms, I, and I know I asked.
every time, I think, and Project
Echo, how, how are you working
or are you? And, and is there
more that we can.
Project Echo I know is pretty,
Doctor Aurora is ready to jump
into anything we ask him to, so
just, just a little bit about,
about how you work with them and
things that maybe we could
encourage.
Madam Chair Representative
Thompson, I'm, I'm not sure, uh,
Sanjeev's role right now with
Project Equi, I would just say
that, but, but I, um, but that
being said,
That being said, Project Echo is
still a valuable partner, and if
you look at number one here, we
have a new option again, how do
we get where every student in
New Mexico has access to this,
um, if you look at, for example,
Roy schools, if you've got K
through 1228 students, can you
set up a health career classroom
and have all this robust
programming that we have at West
Las Vegas. Can you have a
DreamMaker's health career club
in this little tiny school.
Well, back to, can we have a
virtual option and so we're
designing right now and this is
a partnership.
With uh Doctor Vallega Romero's
team and Project Echo through at
UNM, uh, multiple agencies in
the Health Science Center are
designing this virtual learner's
experience option. And so, uh,
yes, at one time there was
Siya's echo, you know, that,
that set up but fizzled quickly
and with one agency. The idea
now that Samis has a home at the
University of New Mexico Health
Sciences Center, a home base, is
we can really leverage all the
strengths of the university.
to really get it so that it's
available to every child in in
Project Tech Echo was at that
table. Thank you so much for
that. And then just for, for
members, particularly new
members, there was a question
about why we have such a
bottleneck of, of producing
healthcare providers and through
the years we've learned a lot of
things that getting
Healthcare educators,
particularly nurse educators is
really challenging because you
can work as a
Hospital nurse and make twice as
much money as you can as an
educator, so and that's the case
in many professions that we
just, we don't have the
professors, the teachers to
teach the folks and then in
terms of physicians some years
ago, the American Medical
Association decades ago decided
that there was going to be a
glut of physicians, so they
choked up on the residencies, so
we graduate more people than we
have residency slots. So we as a
State have been discussing doing
some of our residencies, they're
really expensive, but it's a
multifaceted and just a piece
of, of um history and I will say
to the committee, I was feeling
bad only giving people 3
minutes.
And we, I'm finishing up, we
have 3 minutes to spare, so, so,
um, if, if we all stuck with our
3 minutes, I could give you
more, but we don't, so, so I'm
still gonna be the, uh,
Well, the vicious chair, as I
was described last, last
meeting. Um, and with that, we
thank you so much and we will go
to public comment. We do have a
sign up sheet. It was kind of
moving around, so if you want to
give public comment, could you
please raise your hand?
OK. OK, seeing no one in the
room, do we have anyone on Zoom,
if you are on Zoom and would
like to give public comment. Is
there somebody with their hand
raised? OK, so if you were on
Zoom and would like to give
public comment, please raise
your hand, and we will, we will
come to you.
Nobody. OK, OK, so with that we
will actually maybe get a little
bit of a break, um, so we will
be back. I mean, please don't
leave, lunch is here. I've
learned as a chair, don't let
people leave because once they
leave, it's a 23 hour lunch. So
in lunch today is provided by
Alta Vista Hospital and Roger
Gonzalez.
So please, members of the
committee, um, fix your plates.
Hopefully we'll have some
leftover for the public, but
please let the committee, um,
eater or, you know, get their
food first and then we will be
back at 12:30. So don't go far
if you go somewhere. Thank you
all.
