do some of this ourselves, and
she said, well, Wyoming may be
willing to share with us. That's
her words and uh maybe putting
her on the spot, but those are
things that we got to think of,
right? We have the.
So let's set it up because we
look, and I don't know if
everybody's looked, if you look
at the next page in our next
presentation on page 2, you'll
see the wildfire map in the
state of New Mexico and and it's
covered largely in red, uh, a
few spots or not, but largely in
red and so how do we prepare
ourselves for the future of this
and and how do we do it
correctly and how do we do best
practices and not everybody
going for that.
The blood in the water and
everybody running in one
direction and, and then
everybody's just fighting
everybody off and things aren't
happening and when you're
fighting everybody off in that
direction. Um, it's all you.
The federal government has
always been slow to respond.
We've seen that in the north,
right? We see how that reacts. I
mean, they wouldn't have ads for
attorneys in the North if the
federal government was giving
the money out, uh, correctly and
getting out on time.
So I, I.
I don't know how we manage that,
but we're gonna have to figure
it out. So we'll probably put a
subcommittee task force together
to start drafting bills will
includes you guys, we'll get the
agency so we can get that cross.
Everybody's shaking their heads.
We'll do that, so we'll get that
cross and, and how do we set
aside money, right? And, and put
it in a place where you guys can
access it when it's whether it's
a little fire in the bossy or a
big fire like down here and how
do we manage that, how do we,
how do we really get
Head of the federal government
and put them, put the rope
around their neck and say we're
in control and here's what
you're gonna do because we've
learned how to handle these
things, um.
You know, I appreciate Roswell,
the mayor Roswell really trying
to help out and just.
Helping everybody down here, but
I think as we move forward, we
have to have a master plan, not
just a disaster plan, but a
master plan, right? We know that
the disaster plan is over here,
and that's a quick response.
What's the master plan that we
need to lay into place, uh, uh,
across New Mexico.
And, and that goes for DOT, I
mean, uh, Francisco, are you,
how much are your, how much your
maintenance budget are you
spending in in there?
Uh, Mr. Chair, um, currently,
uh, we, we spent 500,000 on our
responses to this point.
OK. And, and how much overtime
is included in that?
Uh, a significant, uh, I
shouldn't say significant, but
there is a part of that, you
know, we track labor material
and equipment costs and the
500,000 encompasses all of that
and a portion of that cost is,
is over time and labor.
OK, yeah, cause that DOTs
overtime is risen 67% in the
last two years, and it's not
just because of fire, so we're
going to figure out where that
is and and if we got to put a
bucket of money for you in the
conversation in DOT in the
conversation for whatever
district the fires in or
emergency response to flooding,
right? Flooding happened in
Grants, it's happened in a
couple places around the state.
And so how we manage that. So
don't just think fires, think
the flooding that comes to it
and how we handle that emergency
response. So we'll, we'll get
with you and Charles will, will
appoint somebody maybe.
Thursday or something before we
leave here. So we'll know who
that committee is and start
getting some meeting times and
and everything set up and and
maybe we can figure out if they
need to come down here or if
they need to go to the north and
look in the process and after
the process of what needs to be
done and what's not happening.
And then go to Senator Wood's
comments about writing a letter,
I mean, you can write letters to
federal delegation and they just
get shuffled to the next one
right into FEMA and say here's
our letters, but how do we
really put some teeth in it,
right?
As a state
What constitutionally do we have
control over what can we take
away right from the feds and
then and make it their
responsibility, but you have two
different responsibilities of
fire because the one up north
was 100% by the federal
government, right? This one was
natural disasters and.
And man-made.
And so how do we handle that in
different situations because
it's 75% reimbursement by FEMA.
On this fire, right, versus 100%
in the north is completely
different. And the reason we
structured that bill that way is
because we know that the only
one allowed to give forgiveness
is, is the board of finance.
And so when he structured that
money, we planned on.
Uh, there being some forgiveness
on the 25% side from the state.
But now it's my understanding
that in Male mean how they did
this. How is DFA managing the
money and how they're gonna
manage the forgiveness of that
money.
So, Mr. Chair, I, I do want to
address one thing real quick and
then I will answer your
question. So this disaster is a
70 typically a 75, 25% cost
share. Um, the federal
government has allocated 100%
casher for the 1st 30 days, um,
the state due to ongoing impacts
has formally requested that that
100% cost share be extended even
further. We are awaiting um the
results back from, from uh the
president on whether that
determination has been made or
not. As far as your second
question, we're
Working through um that legality
and what that looks like. Um,
we're, we're crossing our
fingers though that we'll have
um maybe that 100% coming
through that will help with that
conversation a lot more.
Good.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, uh, thank you
for letting me demonstrate that
I'm an expert at passing the
microphone back and forth, but
the um the uh uh to your point
about a master plan, and that's
kind of what I was alluding to
when I said we needed to do a
lot of cross-cutting work and,
and uh I was at the US
Department of Energy when we did
a quadrennial energy review,
President Obama instructed us to
do that. It was 22
of the federal government. And,
and, uh, and my office managed
the analysis, etc. etc. but 36%
of the recommendations from a
democratic administration were
enacted into law by a Republican
Congress. So when you do
something like that, it's very,
very compelling, and I love your
idea of, of the task force. So I
think it's very important to the
idea of the task force is
results though.
It's not just talk about it,
right? Let's, let's get it
there.
I know it's short, right? And I
know you guys are overloaded
right now, but it's gonna be a
priority as we move into that.
That deal. Ellie, there's no way
to just say a general blanket
for 100% for 30 days and say,
this is a $2.5 billion dollar
file fire.
And,
and include that in the FEMA
deal for the 1st 30 days. Why
can't we bulk that number in the
1st 30 days to the federal
government and not say, oh well,
this, we're going to pay this
later. This is our additional
cost later on. Why can't we not
bulk that or blanket the entire
cost at one time to get the 100%
reimbursement in the 30 day time
frame.
Mr. Cheryl, I'll be perfectly
honest with you, I think a lot
of it has to do with we don't,
we don't know those costs yet.
Um, every time, especially
during that 1st 30 days, every
time that we would go out and do
damage assessments by 3 o'clock
rolled around, the rain started
again and the, the area that we
had already assessed now has
more damages and so it was just
a continuous revolving door and,
and I would tell you, I really
don't want to put a dollar
amount on it just yet until we
we get the final amount because
I think it's a lot, a lot higher
than what we all expect it to
be.
And but there's got to be some
type of, of satellite mapping
that we can do and run
estimates, right? And, and get
an estimated bulk number, you
don't want to be low, but you
can always be high. What's the
worst you're gonna have to do is
you're gonna have to give back
to the federal government, so we
overestimated the number, right?
Um,
I, I, I mean, if they want to
play the 30 day game, then let's
play the 30 day game and, and
we'll shoot high and, and see
what happens in order to not
have that extension because we
don't know what's gonna happen,
right? Hopefully the president
probably will extend it.
But we're riding the rope. How
many days in are we now from the
30 day timeline?
Uh, we are at 60, almost 70, I
think.
Pretty close. Yeah, pretty close
to 70. And, and what's the
timeline for the 100%
reimbursement. The 1st 30 days,
so from the start of the
incident period in 30 days out
and then we formally requested
for us to continue on.
So what is your question in the
1st 30 days, do we know that
number? No, sir, we don't, cause
it also includes not just damage
impacts, it also includes like
all of the response efforts so
everyone's over time, you know,
how much it costs to keep the
lights on in the building, all
of those items as well. We're
working very closely, so I will
tell you that um currently right
now, DHSEM has a staff of 5
that's assigned specifically to
the village and to the county.
They're down here 24/7. Um,
they, they were handpicked to
come in and then we've hired two
additional.
Staffers that are gonna be
sitting at Mescalero tribe, um,
and they, they stay all the time
helping them pull that
documentation together so that
way that burden is not on um the
applicants.
The municipalities. I'd like to
see a number. I don't know if
you're gonna be around the next
couple of days, but I'd like to
see a rough number of of
estimated costs within that time
frame, I mean, um.
We'll start working on it.
Yeah, if we need to pull some
LFC resources to help you.
Uh, we can do that.
Or DA secretary will be here
today and if we need to ask him
to pull some other resources to
help you estimate that number,
whatever we need to do, but I
mean if we can, we can bulk that
in the 1st 30 days, it's, it's
not against the law.
Yeah. We're just
Gonna be high.
OK, thank you guys for your
time. Thank you for the
presentation.
Thank you.
We'll move on to uh.
Our superintendent insurance.
So we're behind tab B.
Colin, you're gonna start us
off, or who's gonna start us
off?
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee calling by deputy
superintendent. I'll get it
started and then uh pass it off
to my colleagues, um.
First of all, um, do you want to
say that the superintendent is
sorry she wasn't able to attend
today. She has been deeply
engaged in working on the
presentation for you all today
and is committed to supporting
the efforts to develop a
comprehensive risk mitigation
program that protects people's
lives and property and
strengthens the ability to offer
insurance in the state, um,
before we do dive into the
presentation today, I do want to
take a moment to note that other
efforts
are underway to address some of
the immediate insurance access
issues that New Mexicans are
facing. Um, the members of this
committee might know that the
New Mexico far plan plays a
critical role in providing
coverage to New Mexicans who
can't find a policy in the open
market, and it has played a very
important role in providing
coverage and covering losses as
a result of the South Fork and
salt fires. Of course, the
optimal situation here is that
we have a
Competitive insurance market
where insurers can take on the
risk of covering properties and
our hope is that a robust risk
mitigation program can get us
there. But we do recognize that
there are gaps that need to be
addressed in the current market
and OSI is exploring some
potential options to strengthen
the fare plan. Um, OSI did
recently increase the coverage
limits for the fair plan and our
new actuary is is working on a
study right now and working with
National experts on modeling
some additional changes that
could provide better coverage
for those who can't find
coverage in the open market. Um,
so we recognize this is of
course a multifaceted problem.
It's gonna require multifaceted
solutions, and I want to be sure
that this presentation has
received um with that context in
mind.
So, uh, Mr. Chair, um,
I have with me today, um, Steve
Hawks, who is a uh an expert in
wildfire mitigation, and I'll
allow him to introduce himself
when we get to to his slides,
and then, uh, Laura McCarthy and
uh the secretary for uh Ener.
Um, but I'll, I'll kick us off
by um just acknowledging here
wild flat fires are a growing
threat in Western states and
it's creating insurance access
problems. The superintendent is
in constant.
Communication with commissioners
in other states in the West that
are addressing these issues and
not just on wildfire, but hail
damage, wind damage, um, these
weather related events that are
um causing it to be more
difficult to predict risk, uh,
in addition to the overall
context of other costs growing,
the cost of building and
maintaining homes uh increasing
all of these factors come
together.
To create challenges for the
insurance market. Um, we do know
that wildfire threats have
increased the number of burned
acres per fire, the duration
that wildfires last, and the
frequency uh that wildfires
occur and then as we've seen
sadly here that uh post fire
burn scar that increases the
risk of damages due to flooding
uh after fires have um have been
in an area.
And then on top of that growth
patterns in populations moving
to rural areas and the creation
of more wildland interface
increase those risks as well. We
have provided on slide 3 a
wildfire risk map um that was
developed by the Forestry
division along with local
governments to create the
wildfire protection plans. Um,
you can see as the chair noted
earlier that
Large portion of the state is at
heightened risk of wildfires and
as we continue to see those
risks grow, um, this map needs
to be continuously updated and
improved to be able to really
get down to the local levels and
see where the risk exists and
where we need to really target
our efforts.
So wildfire risk is impacting
insurance access in high risk
areas. We have seen at OSI an
uptick in non-renewals and
cancellations in those higher
risk areas and we recognize
losing that financial protection
as a homeowner or as a business
owner, uh, is a huge issue for
that, that individual and it
needs to be addressed on that
basis, but it also has the
potential for huge ripple
effects on our state's efforts
to do economic.
Development, um, lenders require
a creditable coverage to uh to
provide a mortgage and if
somebody doesn't have access to
that, it makes it a lot harder
to build homes. Most people
aren't able to, you know, front
the full cost of building
something, uh, you know,
building new homes or or
businesses. So that link to
insurance is critical, and
that's why it's been so
important for the panel up here,
but also all of the stakeholders
who are engaged.
And this including um the
Builders Association, the
insurance industry, consumers to
be engaged in this effort as
insurance regulators are tools
to address the changing external
conditions are limited and so
that's why we're turning to risk
mitigation efforts as a way to
try to maintain maintain
insurance access by focusing on
those external factors and how
we can lower the risks in a way,
um, that in the insurance
industry
Recognizes. So that's where
science-based risk mitigation
comes in, and IBHS is a leading
organization researching
science-based measures that are
most effective to reduce risk.
So with that, I will turn it
over to Chief Hawks and uh ask
him to speak to the great work
that is being done by ABHS. Good
morning, uh, Chair Munoz and
honorable committee members. I'm
Steve Hawks, senior director for
wildfire at the Insurance
Institute for Business.
And home safety or IBHS. I
believe you might have a
separate slide deck in your
packet of materials that's
identified as IBHS uh LFC, OK.
So I'll be presenting from that,
uh, the first slide is entitled
The Science of Wildfire Risk
mitigation.
So IBHS is a nonprofit
organization that's funded by
the insurance industry. We
conduct research on how 4
different perils with wildfire
being one of them, impact the
built environment.
So we determine the
vulnerabilities through our
research from wildfire from
embers, direct flame contact,
and radiant heat and identify
appropriate mitigation actions
that can be implemented to
reduce these vulnerabilities to
the structures.
We also feel validate these
mitigation actions as effective
through our post-fire analysis
on some of the nation's most
destructive wildfires onto the
next slide.
When a wildfire enters a
community, the fuel, weather,
and topographic features when
they align, allow a wildfire to
become a very high intensity
wildfire and the potential for a
conflagration to develop.
Conflagration occurs when a
wildfire burns uncontrollably uh
through a community with
structure to structure fire
spread being a significant
contributing factor in the
development of that
conflagration. At IBHS we focus
on narrowing the path to.
And lessening the impacts from
these conflagration fires.
A number of factors have come
together to bring us to the
current state of our firestorms
that we've been experiencing
across the country.
To narrow it down though,
conflagrations follow humans,
drought, and wind.
Humans account for over 80% of
wildfire ignitions.
And an increasing population
means more humans or people,
more structures and more densely
spaced structures in wildfire
prone areas.
Drought, drought at any scale.
Means that the fuels that the
wildfire will burn in are more
receptive to wildfire and more
receptive to a large wildfire
development.
And this can occur throughout
the year whenever these uh
drought conditions exist.
Wind is the single biggest
factor that drives extreme fire
behavior and the development of
conflagration.
Onto the next slide.
To build community resilience
against conflagration.
We need to look to the existing
factors that exist within the
community. The environment that
the fire will burn in the fuels
that surround the community are
within the community that
provides pathways for the fire
to burn through the community
and the structures themselves,
how densely spaced are they and
what materials are they made out
of?
Once we understand these
existing factors, then we can
develop and implementable plan.
To address these fuel
characteristics.
Whether it's vegetation, urban
or structural fuels. They all
contribute to the development of
the fire.
We can also put measures in
place like codes and ordinances,
uh, and grant funding programs,
um, to ensure that the plan is
implementable at scale and
sustainable over time.
So the plan for community
resilience needs to address the
main factors of the fuel
component.
That influence how easy it is
for a wildfire to burn into and
through a community and travel
from structure to structure.
And whether that fire will
result in a conflagration or
not.
These factors include structure
density, which is homes,
accessory dwelling units and
outbuildings, how closely spaced
are are they on the parcel and
across parcel lines.
Also, the connectivity of fuels
within and around the community.
So how easy is it for the fire
to burn into the community and
travel through the community.
And then parcel level mitigation
and looking at the home and it's
immediate surroundings.
And the home materials that the
home is made out of.
So IBHS is in the process of
developing a community level
risk reduction program called
Wildfire Prepared Neighborhood
and that identifies the scale at
which this program will be
implemented.
It is important to note that
this program is not a one size
fits all program. We know that
every community is unique for
many reasons, and those reasons
need to be evaluated
individually.
Although the program is still in
the developmental phase, we know
it will include a measure of
fuel reduction that surrounds
the community to prevent a high
intensity fire from burning
directly into the community. Yet
we understand that embers travel
very long distances and can
ignite fires on and within the
community, uh, and on
structures.
Uh, so the program will include
parcel level risk reduction, so,
uh, home hardening and
defensible space as well as fuel
reduction within the community
to reduce the ability of the
fire to travel easily within the
community along pathways.
Next slide.
In this photograph taken of the
South Fork fire, you can see a
very high intensity crown fire.
Um, but as the fire approached
the community, fuel reduction
projects were able to moderate
the fire behavior.
And this is what we want to see
as the as the fire approaches
the community that fire behavior
becomes moderated and then
through additional measures of
structural hardening, defensible
space, and additional fuel
reduction projects within the
community, we can keep that fire
behavior moderated, so it gives
the firefighters a greater
ability to defend structures and
suppress the fire.
Onto the next slide.
At the parcel level.
We look at risk reduction as a
coupled approach.
So that's reducing the exposure
to the home from the fuels that
surround the home, as well as
simultaneously increasing the
resilience of the structure by
building new homes and
retrofitting existing homes with
more wildfire resilient building
materials.
Onto the next slide.
So from our research, we've been
able to develop a program that
we have implemented in
California so far and and look
to expand that across other
Western states called wildfire
Prepared Home program, and it is
a systems-based approach to
wildfire mitigation at the
parcel level. On the slide,
you'll see uh components on the
left hand side of the slide that
identify the wildfire Prepared
home base level designation
which prepares a home for.
exposure from wildfire embers.
And addresses things like the
roof and materials, uh, building
features like gutters and vents
and the defensible space that
immediately surrounds the home,
in particular that 1st 5 ft
known as zone 0, that is so
critical to home survivability
during a wildfire.
At this level of designation is
much more achievable for an
existing home.
Um, but when we're building new,
we need to ensure that we build
to the next level of
designation, the wildfire
Prepared home plus level, which
incorporates all the other
features that you see on the
right hand side of the slide
that addresses all the other
building components of the
structure as well as that 1st 5
ft in the defensible space that
surrounds the home.
So in order to uh onto the next
slide in order to break the
chain of conflagration, wildfire
risk reduction programs like the
Wildfire Prepared home and
wildfire Prepared neighborhood
program need to be implemented
at scale.
In order to achieve this
communities and homeowners will
need some assistance.
This is where grant funded
programs can provide significant
value.
Two programs that I am very
familiar with from my time
having my previous career with
the California Department of
Forestry and Fire Protection are
known as Calfi is the um
California Wildfire mitigation
Program and the wildfire
Prevention grant program, and
these are state-funded programs
that distribute mons down to the
local level to implement
prevention projects like fuel
reduction projects, home
hardening, defensible space.
Public education and uh planning
documents like Community
wildfire protection plans.
And uh with that, I'd like to
now turn it over to uh Laura
McCarthy.
Oh
Thank you, Steven, um, just.
Gonna cover these next couple
slides quickly, Mr. Chair. Um,
so, cover them quickly so we can
get there. Absolutely. Um, so a
few goals that were identified
by a coalition working on this
issue, uh, are as follows one
reducing the risk of wildfires
and resulting property loss are
are the top goal here,
maintaining access to property
insurance and high risk areas
and recognizing the need for
affordable housing and right
sizing our approach is going to
be.
Critical and in doing that we
developed some principles for
action, one being that homes are
most likely to survive wildfire
if mitigation steps are taken to
prevention is absolutely
necessary, but it's not
sufficient to fully address the
problem, which is why we have to
have um 3 here existing homes
can be retrofitted, new homes
can be built to wildfire safe
standards, um, for implementing
risk-based mitigation standards.
increases the likelihood that we
can maintain insurance access in
an area and then finally, any
approach should investigate and
address the possible unintended
consequences of regulation and
make sure we have the right
sized approach to addressing
this problem and really
targeting efforts at those high
risk areas. And with that, I
will turn it over to Mr.
McCarthy.
Uh, Mr. Chair and members, I
will go through the rest of the
slides very, very quickly, um,
agency roles, um, the point of
this slide is that since January
when IBHS came to New Mexico,
uh, and presented to agencies
and insurance companies. We have
4 agencies that have been
working together, Mnerd OSI, but
also the regulation and
licensing departments,
construction industries
division.
And the state fire marshal.
We've been meeting practically
every week and uh meeting with
IBHS which we consider to be an
incredible resource for the
state of New Mexico as well as
the Rocky Mountain Insurance
Institute insurance association.
What we've been talking about is
how can New Mexico reduce
wildfire risk and preserve
insurance access, and we've
identified 3 primary strategies,
wildfire prevention.
That's education, mitigation for
new properties, which is
primarily gonna be around
building codes and standards and
mitigation for existing
properties which is gonna be
around funds for local
government to assess existing
properties to determine um help
homeowners figure out what they
need to do and can do and then
potentially uh funding for low
and moderate income assistance.
Um, I will go through.
this super fast, so on the
education front, we know that
80% of our fires are started by
people. Can we get that down?
Well, Utah has done that.
They've taken the number of
human-caused fires and reduced
it by 60% in four years with a
$600,000 a year that they spent
on a communications campaign. If
we can get New Mexico's fire
starts down, then we have
Fewer conflagations to deal
with. Um, go ahead then to
mitigation strategies for new
properties. Uh, the emphasis
there really does need to be on
building codes. IBHS science is
extremely important because
that's what the insurance
industry considers to be
reliable. They and the
International Code Council are
working together on the next
iteration of a wild wild land.
Urban interface building code.
We have a couple of counties in
New Mexico that have already
adopted the 2021 standard. They
include Santa Fe and Taos
Counties. There are some others.
I'm sorry, I don't have them all
memorized, uh, but for, for the
counties that really have the
high wildfire risk. This could
make sense. However, not every
county in New Mexico would need
to adopt those standards, and
that's where the mapping is
really important. Ener
produces a communities at-risk
report that goes to the
legislature on December 15th of
every year, uh, you've probably
never noticed it. Uh, we do turn
it in on time and I hope this
year that you'll take a close
look at it and help us improve
it so that it can be a tool, um,
so that in the future if we do
get to a time where we do have
building codes for the highest
risk areas for new construction,
we can use
Also state of the art mapping so
that a realtor or a home buyer
can know, am I buying a property
that's in a risk area or not? Am
I building a home to the new
code for wild and urban
interface, uh, risk reduction or
not. We need some certainty so
that our economy can continue to
grow. Um, moving on then past
building codes, uh, you'll see
a few examples starting with
strengthen Alabama home.
Where insurance industry and the
state have worked together to um
create state-funded grant
programs for home hardening that
reduce the risk in the case of
Alabama, their issue was roofs
coming off in hurricanes.
$10,000 grants that they gave to
low income homeowners have
largely solved that problem.
Insurance in Alabama is still
accessible because of that.
Another model
That's about wildfire is in
Colorado, and that's the
wildfire Partners program. It is
county administered. One of its
most telling features is that
they use the funding to employ
21 people, uh, local our local
governments are very stressed
for capacity. We know that. We
heard that this morning. Um, if
we're gonna get our arms around
something like wildfire risk,
we're going to have to look at
what the needs of counties.
And hear directly from them. Uh,
and we've been in a process with
New Mexico counties with Joy
Sarson and others to start to
have that conversation, but it's
not um as fully formed as it
needs to be. What we know is
that in Boulder County, where
they've had this program in
place, they still have access to
insurance. Um, moving on is the
California Wildfire mitigation
program that is more like
strength in Alabama.
homes with the grants to help
the homeowners uh deal with the
cost and um finally, the second
to last slide there is about
federal funding. I want to
highlight that there is a
federal program called the
Community Wildfire Defense grant
program and that in the last two
years we've had $400 million
come into New Mexico for uh
primarily for fuel breaks and
for outreach to
Private landowners of
significant land holdings to
help them with risk reduction
with that, Mr. Chairman,
probably a record for 14 slides.
Not the record, but close.
Secretary.
Uh, thank you and um and I have
very little uh original to add
to what has been said already.
Um, I would like to first, in
closing, reiterate what I said
in opening and, and I think uh
the incredible, the firefighters
for their commitment and their
work in in the instance of the
Rudoso fire and in all of them,
but also listening to this, I
would, I, I, I didn't think the
public servants
other public servants in
addition to the firefighters and
I include federal, state, and
local uh uh public servants and
and hearing from several of
them, I think that that's their
work is incredibly important
and, and we need to uh give them
a call out and I would also
underscore the importance as
we've talked about, um, of a
master plan, uh, I would note
that, um, uh, the, the
The knowledge base grows a lot
over time and so that master
plan would need to be updated on
a fairly regular basis, but I
think it's hugely important. Um,
it's important became evidenced
by today's uh uh hearing a very
important issues coming out at
this hearing that master plan
should address cross-cutting
issues that include but are not
limited to, and I've added two
to my list, just listening to
people talk here, um, trans
and bridges, we heard a lot
about bridges earlier today,
electricity, we didn't talk a
lot about that, um, in the fires
that we're talking about here
today, we had communications
problems because of electricity
problems and I think we really
need to look at uh electricity
and communications, and during a
fire and post fire, very
important.
We've talked about uh the hugely
important the post-fire recovery
insurance, hardening buildings,
not just homes, but commercial
buildings as well, usually
important for the community uh
that we uh harden those
commercial buildings, uh, the
water needs in the face of
drought, uh, hugely important
and, um, and the couple that
I've added uh since uh listening
to people, I addressing the
identified.
Risk areas, uh, that Laura just
talked about, um, and, and
again, that's another thing that
would need to be updated, um,
but what I don't want to see
happen is a risk area becomes.
Uh, uh, a problem, OK? We need
to work on mitigating those risk
areas, uh, rather than just
avoiding them. And so mitigate
that risk and then finally
alleviating the stresses on
local economies, which we heard
about earlier which I added to
my list, hugely important, and
how do we work as a state and
work with the federal government
to alleviate those stresses, uh,
expedite reimbursement.
etc. etc. and uh and work on all
of these things together and I
think it would be a contribution
that uh for the state of New
Mexico and that the state of New
Mexico could make to other
Western states if we put
together that master plan. So
thank you very much. Learned a
lot. Thanks.
OK, um, we're gonna go to
questions from committee member
Senator Sher your first.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, so
I'm looking at this as two
separate kind of issues, at
least in my mind. One is, one is
desire fire safe buildings, OK,
uh, and that makes sense to me,
especially if we can tie it to
the market. So if I have a
certified fire safe, then my
insurance is less. Uh, but then,
of course, you'll have to, to
balance that, at least in my
mind, OK, so if it costs an
extra $100,000 to make my house
fire safe versus.
Uh, you know, $10,000 to.
Not then in, and the insurance
is going to be 10,000. OK, well,
I'll, I'll go with the.
The lesser one, so we've got to
figure out what that balance is
and I don't, I don't even know
how to figure that out, but I do
think that that's important. Um,
I also look at, uh, like flood
insurance, if you live in a
flood zone, you have to have
flood insurance even though it
only floods once 100 years, OK?
Uh, so can we uh establish that
same kind of thing, OK, so
you're in a fire zone, you have
to have fire insurance. Uh, what
I don't like is the idea that
insurance.
On my house is going to go up.
But my house is not going to
burn from a wildfire. It might
burn, but not from a wildfire.
So
I would like to keep it.
that way. I know one of the
things that that has always
bothered me, uh, is that people
build their houses on the beach
and the hurricane comes and
destroys their house and, and.
And then insurance and so they
get a new house every 5 years,
and they like it.
OK. So,
We're
We're not really encouraging
them.
To either not build there or
build a house that's not going
to fall down when the when the
big bad wolf blows, OK? So,
That's, that's part of that and,
and.
No,
And we help the free market do
that?
The other part of this though is
at least in my mind, and I think
everybody else's mind because we
talked about this earlier.
We need the federal government
to carry insurance
because at the, the root cause
of this is their mismanagement
of our forests.
Yes, humans start the fire, but
if there's nothing uh if the if
the forests are properly
managed.
It doesn't become this giant.
Wildfire. It becomes a small
fire and then the smoky bear
plan if only you can stop force
fires works. That education
works.
But when our, when our forests
are so overgrown and so
mismanaged.
That
That's somebody else's problem,
and that's the federal
government's problem. And, and
how we got here is do-gooder
groups all over the country sue
the federal government, sue.
Forest Service and say, oh no,
we have to protect this critter,
whatever the critter is.
And so the Forest Service is,
OK, well, we won't touch the
forest anymore. We'll protect
the critter. Well, the spotted
owl doesn't live in overgrown
forests.
Because the spotted owl lives up
here and eats things that are
down here when the force is
overgrown, it doesn't eat, so it
moves to a force that's properly
managed.
So
We've not done anything, but
those suits are based on one
thing, the spotted owl or
whatever. It's not based on the
universe of nature.
By the way, we are part of the
universe of nature.
And uh
So if they're not going to do
that, if they're gonna, if
they're gonna not protect the
spotted owl because the spotted
owl can't eat there, then we
need to make sure that they're
carrying insurance, just like we
make sure that I'm carrying
insurance.
And if they don't, we ought to
sue them, just like the
do-gooder groups.
And whatever the cost of forest
fires in New Mexico was over the
last 10 years. That's how much
insurance they need to carry
with us as the beneficiary.
And I mean that seriously. I'm
not.
Because it makes me crazy. It
makes me crazy that we are
paying for the federal
government's inability
To manage a forest.
And it used to be that you are
forests were, were of many uses.
We could run cows on them and we
could do logging and we could do
recreation, and we, we don't do
any of that anymore.
Especially the logging part of
it, and that's important if we
want affordable houses.
Then we would cut down some
trees that looked like 2x4s, and
then we would have 2x4s, and
then we have affordable houses,
and we wouldn't have so many
forest fires.
Win-win.
And the spotted owl could eat,
win, win, win.
But we don't think of it that
way.
And we need to. And if the feds
aren't going to do it,
Then they need to carry enough
insurance to pay for everything
that happens.
Because their problem.
And, and, and so we go back to
the Smokey Bear education, only
you can prevent forest fires.
Yeah, that's important and I
agree. We don't need people
firing off fireworks, especially
in an overgrown forest.
That's part of the education.
But on some level, we also have
to educate.
The federal bureaucrats, the
federal judges that are making
these decisions.
That the root cause of this.
is bad management.
Fix that and you fix most of our
forest fire problems.
That's what I would ask you to.
Try to figure out how to make
happen. It's what I would ask
you to try to figure out how to
make happen. Goodbye
representative.
Go ahead.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'll be
real brief. Uh, I just want to
point out to the committee that
California funded our scientists
at UNM to model how uh fires
caused by utilities would spread
and where the major concerns
are, so, uh, at some point I
want to talk to the chairman
about making it a priority to to
pay our own university to do a
study for our state so they can
help with fire mitigation plans,
but also tied to that, I'd like
to discuss at some point with
agencies, the superint
maybe the potential or appetite
to cap liability for co-ops
electric coops due to forest
fires, uh, right now, any
lawsuit would put the co-ops in
bankruptcy and all that's going
to do is drive up costs for poor
people in our rural areas, uh, I
myself, I work at MS Electric.
There was a fire caused Las
Contras fire about 12 years ago.
We get a 20 ft white right away.
There was an 80 ft tree that
fell on a line that was outside
of the right way.
We got sued and we paid out $25
million or our insurance did. We
can't get insurance for more
than 2 to 3 million anymore so
uh, with the point I'm making
is, uh, we got to look at
putting a cap and the fact is if
we don't do that, we're going to
drive up electricity costs for
people in our state. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman, and I'd like to
discuss this more with the
panelists at some point.
like to me you're going to put
on a task force Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for your presentation.
I, I have a couple of questions.
What does, uh, what's the
definition of high-risk area?
Mr. Chair, and, uh,
Representative Armstrong, um,
They're, it's, it's, uh,
science-based. It's, uh,
probably a little more
complicated than I could get
into detail now, um, however,
Other states that have done this
have published papers.
Describing the methods that they
have used to outline their
definition of high risk, most
recently, Oregon published on
July 18th, and, uh, should New
Mexico go down this path, we
would very likely, uh, emulate
their methods.
Thank you for that. I just, you
know, I want to protect, uh,
rural New Mexico from.
Being the
Payers for all of the issues,
uh, people choose to live where
they live and, and sometimes the
costs are higher, but at the
same time, um, I don't want them
to bear the whole burden. So
that, that's a concern for me
because we're talking, uh, Mr.
Chairman, about wildfires. I
mean, specifically wildfires in
this paper and an insurance
costs. And so when we look at
the goals and I see the last
goal is supporting the goal of
affordable housing.
And then on the 2nd, there's
another one where it says
building codes.
And then there's other talk
about rent control.
None of those meshed together.
None of them.
Because in areas that I
represent, we have, uh,
We're trying to, to
Economic development we're
trying to do economic
development, but the building
codes require us to do so much
more if we go into an abandoned
building.
Or a building that's been the
electricity's been shut off and
we have to do all these upgrades
to make it correct. So we have
Thousands of buildings in my
district alone sitting empty.
Because they cannot afford to go
in and do the updates. We talk
about affordable housing,
building more housing. One of
the other one, provided
requirements for automatic fire
suppression.
Albuquerque has that?
Any house over so many square
feet you have to put in fire
suppression.
At an immense cost.
So I want to make sure that
people know that
Just to mitigate the insurance
part isn't fair to the people
who are trying to
Create economic development.
Build affordable housing.
When we look at the regulations
and the issues around
Uh, holding the
The person who's building that.
Accountable
And then we talk about rent
control. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Senator Woods, we're going to
stay on time because we're
gonna.
Get there in a hurry.
Well, I think we're gonna end at
12:30 sharp.
OK,
very quickly.
We have to do something to
protect the electric industry.
When they go through these
forests, we have to figure out a
way to mitigate.
Their liability.
Our electric costs are going to
be so high we can't afford it.
Anytime uh electric utility is
sued.
That is passed right in to the
rate bearer ratepayer.
And electricity costs goes up.
We have to figure out a way if
they followed something so some
mitigation.
Uh
Agreement and their right of
ways and that requires them to
have access to those rightaways.
It requires them to have a right
of way wide enough.
That the trees won't fall on the
lines. There's some things there
that needs to be done and, and,
but if they're following those
rules, they should have some
kind of protection against a
line going down if it's actually
a God.
Cause deal. So, and the other
thing I'd like to bring up is,
uh,
When you can't get property tax,
property insurance on your home,
you can't get a mortgage.
So you talk about all these
houses that need to be rebuilt
up here.
If the insurance companies are
saying
We're not going to insure them
at all.
Then it's only cash bill.
And it takes out a whole bunch
of people.
That will have the opportunity
to build houses up here. It
changes your community totally.
You really need to think about,
yes, if, if we have to go to
prescribed build, uh, mitigated
fire build to do that.
That may be what we have to do,
but that's also probably going
to raise the cost.
of some of these houses.
But if that's the only way you
can get the insurance, that's
what it's going to take, but
it's gonna, you're also going to
take, but it's gonna, you're
also gonna have to take care of
the risk to the insurance
company. Now nobody likes to
think about taking care of the
insurance company because
everybody knows they have all
the money.
But actually, there are injuring
risk and they've got to have a
lot of pool to ensure that risk.
It's pretty simple, pretty
simple math here in the.
Tab B, it's a big discussion
about that.
A big discussion about risk and
when we start talking about the
New Mexico
fair access to insurance
requirements, the fare plan.
The property insurance.
Even that
is not good for a mortgage. They
won't allow that for the
property insurance for a
mortgage. That's, that's the
last hope of insurance for some
people.
But because it will not cover
replacement costs.
It's not good for a mortgage.
You can't use it for a mortgage
lender. So,
I know I've talked to the, the
superintendent of insurance I've
heard the story, uh, I
understand the story, uh.
I've talked to the governor
about her plan.
And I don't know how the hell
New Mexico.
Itself can ensure fire and
flood.
I just don't see that we can do
that. We don't have the, the
resources to do that, but
We can ask for some mitigation.
That will help a lot with this.
So I, I, I see two things here.
I see mitigation and building
codes, and I see mitigation on
the rest of the electric
industry. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative Vincent. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. And my, my
question is to the deputy
superintendent of insurance.
So,
Being in this community for over
30 years and serving in the
municipal fire department for 25
of those and ultimately retiring
as the fire chief and being
responsible for
What you see now, uh, I think
that's what made my beard turn
gray prematurely, but.
Right now we have
Devastation in our community. I
can show you my inbox and I know
we can't get into the insurance
business, but what do we do with
the people that cannot get
insurance.
They've been canceled.
There's no policies being
written.
And the people that have lost
their houses.
They,
they want to rebuild. Some of
them do want to rebuild, but
they can't get insurance on it.
And the insurance that's going
to cover their house barely if
it does cover the mortgage,
they're gonna be lucky.
And then, you know, I, I've been
looking into the, I've actually
sent some letters to, uh,
Secretary Cisneros, and we're
talking about the fair plan
caps.
And the fair plan cap for
residential.
Doesn't even start the houses up
here.
Because a regular house up here
is 350,000 and the caps, you
know, 225.
And, uh, you know, I've even
asked for the commercial
properties.
That survived the fire.
And they survived the flood. Now
they're getting canceled.
And a $500,000 cap for, you
know, commercial property, it's
not gonna work. It's gonna have
to be doubled, if not tripled.
And you know, I've got plenty of
friends that's in the insurance
business. I'm not trying to get
the state to compete against
them, but what do we do with our
New Mexicans, especially in an
area that's been devastated that
want to come home, that want to
rebuild.
What do we do
To get them
Backho to where they can come
back in and build their houses
and get insurance. What's the
state going to do? And my second
question, because I know we're
on the time frame is.
I love the fact that we are
wanting to make our forest more
safe.
And I love your plan.
And I actually followed that
plan for decades.
But what gets in the way, money.
That's what you need. You need
lots and lots and lots of money.
We're not taking good care of
our state lands, because you
don't have the money to do it.
We're not taking care of our
federal lands because you don't
have the money to do it. And not
only that, our federal lands are
doubling down and they want 30%
more.
They can't handle what they got.
And they want 30% more, so does
the state.
You can't handle what you got,
and I don't mean that in a, in a
bad way.
If
Riddoso in Lincoln County has
been ranked number 2 in the
nation for catastrophic
wildfire.
For years.
And what happened?
We didn't get it thinned out.
And then we have our federal
delegations that put wilderness
areas, they wanna, they wanna
put wilderness areas and they
don't want no mechanized
equipment to go up there. They
don't want any kind of finning
going on up there and guess
what, guess what is right below
them, our community.
Guess which way the wind blows
right out of the Southwest.
It blows that fire right down
into our community and what I,
what I would ask that we don't
box things in every community is
different.
And if we can't, if, if we can't
go up there and manage that
forest, if we can't go up there
and manage our wild, our our uh.
Um,
The wilderness delegations.
We're going to continue to burn.
And, and what, what I'm looking
at now, and I'm gonna be very
aggressive in going after the
monies. We only have half of our
town left.
And if we don't take care of it,
Mother Nature will.
And we're going to be lucky if
we can get in some insurance.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative Garrett.
Questions answered.
OK, we'll wrap up. Can I take
hers real quick? I got one more
question. I'm so sorry. It's
12:28 and I was looking at on
your, on your flyer right here,
so under the fare plan, I forgot
to ask you this question lenders
do not accept this plan as
credible coverage to meet
mortgage requirements.
Mr. Chair, can I quickly
respond, um, uh, Representative
Vincent, I think all the points
you're bringing up are are
critical and I would like to see
if we can actually, um, get some
folks from IBHS together with
local leaders in this area to
see what might be able to be
done in the short term to help
um insurers feel like there's a
way to, uh, that the at a
community levels that homes can
be rebuilt in a way that um that
insurance could be.
offered, but on the other side
of this is that we are modeling
right now what changes to the
fair plan might look like. Some
of that is increasing the policy
limits, um, but the other is
whether we need to explore
particularly in area in large
areas where insurance taxes just
isn't available, whether we
think about a version of the
fair plan that would cover
replacement costs so that people
can get mortgages. So we're
trying to find creative
solutions here. We're in the
same boat as you.
You have, you know, if we can do
this through the competitive
market. That's the way to go,
but we've got to have a backup
plan if that doesn't get us
there.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And just a
comment on that is the sooner we
could meet and get the insurance
going the better because our
realtors can't even work. They
can't sell property if they
can't get mortgages and they
can't get mortgages if they
can't get insurance, so it's
just a snowball effect that's
it's hurting everybody and you
know, we, we need to get our
realtors back to work as well.
Mr. Chair, representative, um,
I'd be happy to help get folks
together as soon as possible to
have that discussion. Thank you
for the time, Mr.
Thank you.
Thank you guys for presentation.
I, I mean the modeling that
representative has talked about
is what I really want to target,
right, is how we make that work
in the state. California has it.
In
I was with the governor and he
said we're going to have to
model that California
legislation to New Mexico and I
really want to know what does it
cost for if I go into the state
in this program, $350,000. What
does it cost me to insure my
home?
You know that off the top of
your head per 1000 or what's the
max and what's, what does it
cost the monthly cost to do
that?
Um, Mr. Chair, I, I'm not sure
that, um, so what we're working
on right now is bringing that up
to different levels, what it
might be. I do have some folks
from my team here and I don't
know, uh, Melissa Robinson, if
you know the answer for insurer
$350,000 home, what is the cost
for that person to to buy this
policy through the state today?
Good afternoon Mr. Chair. Right
now, the average cost for a
$350,000 policy in New Mexico
runs right at $530.
A month or a year, a year. Well,
that's a
That's pretty damn cheap.
$530 a year, is it pretty cheap
policy?
Correct. Again, it
It is a policy of last resort,
and that is where we are running
into
The mortgage companies, you
know, Fannie Mae or
Yeah.
Uh, are not accepting it because
it is not replacement cost. It
is only actual cash value.
Well, I mean, you can insure to
any level you want if you're
willing to pay in the open
market, right?
And so that's just an additional
cost, but if you have a basic
$350,000 cash value on your,
this is cash value policy in in
your home.
You could say your home is worth
180,000 contents of 100 and and
get to 300. I mean, that is
still a reduced rate, pretty
cheap policy for 350,000 on cash
basis. I mean 500, if you had a
$200,000 home, it's $200 I'm
just seeing.
Roughly 250 annually in
replacement cost and you get to
the lower end and those people
don't even carry insurance on a
mobile home, right?
In the open market, which is
probably $200 and some dollars a
year which they could get
actually a higher value and so I
mean we're going to target that.
I mean that and the whole
problem with the insurance
industry, writing rates across
New Mexico based upon fires that
occurred in certain areas and
they're mitigating the risk, um,
most of these insurance
companies are now owned by hedge
funds.
And, and we have to watch that.
I seen that we lost a lawsuit to
State Farm, right? So Jake's not
really a friendly neighbor
anymore around.
Anywhere that I know of, uh, and
so, and they're the largest
insurer in the state, and so.
Be prepared to take that deep
dive, but we want to look at
those numbers and and modeling
and maybe.
You know, I don't know, I don't
know, I don't know if we should
insure a million dollar home,
but we should insure a home to
350 or some median income level
and Izzy's going to come up
right after lunch. I asked him
to stay and and see what those
insurance costs would be for low
income homes, but you know, in
in the business, you know, you
never know what you could have
an inventory on a day, right?
And so what is a what is an
insurance, the lumberyard that
burned down, he probably had
$1,000,000 in inventory there
alone, right, not including.
In building an asset. So what is
a commercial rate going to look
like, right?
And and how do we, how do we
look at that in New Mexico
because.
I hate to say it, but I mean
there're insurances.
You might as well just roll the
dice and
Right down the hall here and and
see if you can win or lose
against the insurance company
because they're gonna deny you
just like State Farm did when
you make a claim, so I think
that's something we're really
gonna have to look at.
So make sure you guys deep dig
that. Do you have enough FTEs in
that agency to do that modeling
or, or how many FDEs do you
currently have in there?
Currently with the
property and casualty Bureau on
our job tasks have changed
drastically over the last few
years.
Due to fire and our market was
extremely competitive and it is
becoming less competitive. We're
not a non-competitive market.
Right now we have
I have 3 on my team right now.
And I do have one retiring, um,
We are looking at staffing. It
is something I need, I think
right now we are at a tipping
point
of
Holding the industry
accountable.
And having transparency and
clarity.
And
I need staff.
That will allow me to hold face
to face meetings with industry,
um, be more involved in what.
The other aspects that are
causing rate increases, um.
ISO is.
A direct
It has a direct impact on rates
and
This year we're actually going
to see some retrogressions,
which that's going to have
effects on rates, um, and right
now we're running into
Where I need to be involved in
these ISO inspections, so I need
to be out in the field because.
Stopping these retrogressions.
Will also help slow insurance
rates, so we need staff. I need
staff.
And, and what about an
actuarial? LSI has they have a
couple of actuarials, I think we
had a problem a year or two ago
with actuars Mr.
Chair and thanks for bringing
attention to that. We were just
able to hire a very experienced
actuary, thanks to this
committee providing us with the
funds and the legislature for
providing us with the funds to
do that. We are going to be
requesting a few additional
actuaries to be working under
this individual so that we can
be much more rigorous
in reviewing rates and then any
sort of modeling on, you know,
policy changes that are going to
be needed, we can get those to
you as quickly as possible.
And then she'll need FTE so as
we move forward into October,
make sure you have that correct.
Don't go overboard.
trying to right size it for a
year. Thank you guys. Thank you
for your presentation. We're
going to go to lunch. We're
going to be back at 1:30. It's
down at the ballroom on the
Lunches and down in the ballroom
on the left hand side
