that point now we don't do that
and committees but you know
outside of the session but here
we are their new mexico end of
life absolutely there is a group
of eo
eolo a that provides free
consultations as someone would
like to exercise the medical aid
in time or sometimes another
states notice death with dignity
and that is the group that I can
share the resource for
outside of this I wanted to make
a common about something stated
earlier in cabinet said telecake
teleca that would be taste is
now but I know that it was
teller health more fun with
artificial intelligence but I
often say the people there's a
song and says me straight
there's an app for that in an
app for that in an advert that
in that and now I don't seen
that well but there is a program
for almost everything but every
application is different and it
often leads to lack of
engagement because there isn't
one centralized area to apply
for everything in one else it's
a lot of what keeps me busy but
last and final common i'll make
is earlier this morning it was
described as artism spectrum.
The.
But as a behavioural and mental
health disorder it's not a it's
not a behavioral or mental
health disorder it's a neural
date diversity that's product
perceived on the idea that
artism is developmental are
learning does that difference
not to be cured but getting
encompassed many other things
such as dramatic brain injuries
acquired brain injuries we have
very amazing powers on the
spectrum so don't try to fix us
our accommodators or diagnose as
mentally ill or you know
behavioral health diagnosis of
course there are components
available here are hard.
Presentation that could be
within an asd
presentation but generalizing in
that manner put a systemic
labeling that doesn't appear to
come from a non judgemental base
thank you so much for your time
mister chair madam vice termans
could leave thank you thank you
very much netbria.
Since you've made
so no we'll go to the afternoon
agenda and will start with a new
mexico academy of physicians
assistance and with us making a
presentation today as stephanie
richmond the president of the
board of directors of the
academy of physician assistance
welcome thank you for coming
you have to turn that I can.
Excellent.
The.
Thank you mr chairman members of
the committee my name is
stephanie richmond I am a
physician assistant and practice
in primary care for eighteen
years in new mexico.
I am also director of outpatient
p as in nurse practitioners at
the university of new mexico and
the current president for the
new mexico academy of physician
assistance it's a pleasure to be
able to present to you today
today I would like to be able to
provide some information about
pays in new mexico and i'm sorry
could you move your mike just
just position it yeah I think
that'll work
today I would like to provide
you a sim information regarding
pa's in new mexico and ask for
legislative sponsor to be able
to expand our practice in new
mexico so that we can increase
access to healthcare.
So it is a pa fuse or licensed
practitioners in every health
care setting through out
primary care and all specialties
there are over a hundred and
seventy five of us practicing in
the US and we see more than five
hundred million patient
interactions a year some weeks
it certainly seems like that's
about what i'm doing we also
really focus on patient center
team based medical practice and
have since I profession
inception in nineteen sixty five
when um pa roll was created to
expand healthcare access due to
a national provider shortage the
first class of pa's included
navy corpman that were trained
to do university medical center
and the curriculum initially was
based on the accelerated medical
training that was decided for
physicians during world war two.
Pa's work with a medical model
in our training our terminal
degree is a masters and there
are more than three hundred and
credited peer programs in the
country
entry into these programs is
highly competitive and it
requires a bachelors and
completion certainly of pre
racks there's one pa program in
new mexico currently and the
students are integrated with
empty students as well.
Prior to you becoming appear
student many pa's enter into
their program with more than
three thousand hours of direct
patient contact uh and the peer
program itself is about twenty
seven months in length it
includes a dedective portion in
the classroom and about two
thousand hours of clinical
rotations.
This can occur in both
metropolitan and rural settings
and in a variety of different
clinical sites that includes
family medicine community
medicine women's health
pediatrics behavior old medicine
emergency surgery internal
medicine primary care.
After we graduate from a peer
program we do have some post
graduate training opportunities
there are some residency
programs in internal medicine
emergency medicine surgery
critical currency country
we also can
obtain a certification of added
qualifications this is largely
with a surgery.
Focus and there are some post
graduate doctoral programs that
are available and this includes
a doctor of medical science and
a doctor of health science.
After we complete the peer
program from an accredited uh
institution we must pass a
certifying exam and then apply
for license or within the state
in new mexico's with a new
mexico medical board for our
licensing and regulation
in order to maintain our
certification we continue with
one hundred hours of continuing
medical education and repeat
recertifying exam every ten
years.
Pa is really have integrated
into all aspects of care and we
really treat the first patient
populations and could we ask if
they were fairly they're not
being able to pick you up
clearly on the webcast so if you
could move your mike closer to
you it'll pick it up
more
clearly
has that a little close even
yeah you almost have to talk
into
okay good better let's see that
that has some feedback for me
but I get.
Yeah.
Our technician will give us the
thumbs up that they can pick it
up.
I love being a pa test test p
a
think
i've integrated into all aspects
of specialty and we do treat a
diverse sufficient population
and help with some really
complex cases
in the united states uh piece
and nurse practitioners deliver
about twenty five percent of the
health care and patients are as
likely to see uh p a
for their initial work up their
long term care when you see me
and I do an evaluation conduct
physical exams do diagnosis
through ordering testing
prescribing medication of some
of my colleagues also assistant
surgery to hospitalists perform
tell the medicine clinical
research and hold some
leadership and educator
positions as well.
Additionally we also as work in
the nation's uniform services
and for the federal government
agencies including the.
And the pa employments lead you
can see a breakdown of new
mexico compared to some other
states where we practice it by
specialty in new mexico about
sixty three percent of us are
working in medical specialty and
twenty eight percent of us are
in primary care in new mexico
there is just over twelve
hundred pa that are practicing
and license to practice.
In new mexico also there are
about sixty percent of us are
working in some kind of medical
clinic and forty percent of us
are working in hospitals or an
urgent career setting.
Uh.
Fifteen percent of us are in
rural areas and on average we
complete sixty eight visits per
week and are on call about fifty
hours a month.
The.
As you know there is a
significant healthcare shortage
in the nation and in
specifically in new mexico
there's approximately twenty
five hundred and physician
positions and of course we
recognize how this really limits
access and how this is going to
be something that continues to
be a struggle for new mexicans
due access health care.
A bureau of labor statistics
report indicated that there was
an increase of pays from two
thousand twelve to two thousand
twenty one by ninety four
percent and md's increased by
nineteen percent.
Uh by two thousand twenty nine
the increase in these protected
to be at three percent and
thirty one percent for this is
going to continue to create a
mismatch of pa's two physicians
and it will continue to create
some challenges for us in pa
practice.
This map of new mexico shows
some primary care shortages
throughout the state and some of
the challenges that new mexican
face accessing health care
outside of a metropolitan areas
the total percentage of
clinicians per new mexico county
I found really interesting
that's the more world the county
the more likely that the patient
will be receiving care from an
app and mds and pa's have high
representation in counties with
hospitals.
Which makes sense because we
work and specialty and largely
in surgical specialty.
For family and internal medicine
clinicians
um apps do have a high
representation and some rural
counties and sometimes we are
the only option.
We believe that if there were
some legislative changes that
there could have be an
enticement for a pa's to be able
to practice in rural areas.
Also there is significant need
in new mexico for a psychiatric
providers and some changes to
some legislation would be
beneficial for place to fell
back gap and provide access for
care.
The partnership between pays and
physicians
is one that really embraces a
team based practice from its
inception and we continue to do
so well we're both trained and
educated in the medical model
and we use very similar clinical
reasoning and collaboration
between pa's and physicians and
we value that and find it very
effective to meet the care of
our patience needs.
The practice acts do varied by
state and they were initially
established when our profession
was established sixty years ago.
And some uh.
States have been modernizing the
practice.
In new mexico the current
requirements are then pa must be
supervised by a licensed
physician.
The supervising physician has
the responsibility to specify
what medical service is that a
pa provides uh must be able to
communicate with us immediately
that has evolved over time with
uh technology
answer we don't have to be co
located
we also uh when under a
supervisory license uh must
comply with quality assurance
requirements and the supervision
the md is responsible for making
sure that we are um practicing
within our scope.
Uh there is no current
limitation for the number of
pa's that physician can support
in new mexico it's up to the
individual
physician to make that.
Determination.
The current legislation states
that the supervision of a pa
must be rendered by a license to
medicine license supervising
physician and that are practice
limitations are determined by
the supervising physicians or a
specialty and the practice
setting in addition to our own
education and training.
New mexico is at the forefront
for creating a collaborative
license that passed in two
thousand and seventeen and this
applies to those of us that are
practicing in primary care
as the primary car provider if
you have been supervised by a
licensed position for three
years you can apply for a
collaborative license with their
new mexico medical board and at
this also requires a proof of
current malpractice.
And this is.
Lit again limited to the primary
care pays and also affords the
physicians are some legal
atonomy from us.
When they are in a clarity of
license with a pa.
However national organization
the american academy of pays is
supporting.
Legislative efforts for optimal
team practice.
The model state legislation
really supports some license
administrative process where the
pa presents their credentials to
the state regulatory agency and
we get a license so we're not
looking to have any kind of
changes with regulation from the
medical board and we think that
having some changes to the
legislation and changing this
supervision of a physician
assistance that must be
supervised by a license
supervising physician I should
be a modified to have the
determination of that
collaboration based of the
practice level.
Additionally this would help to
remove some of the
britain some administrative
constraints of and as there are
more pays than mds this burden
will continue to increase for
mds potentially taking them away
from.
Taking care of patience
if the determination of the
extent of collaboration was made
by the practice or the employer
or the group that credentials
asked for our privileges that
would online much more to you
what is happening in the world
world these were regulated by
the organizations that we work
with and that would be something
that would continue and like
every clinical provider we
believe that pa's are
responsible for the care that we
provide and the law should not
require or imply that a
physician is liable or
responsible for the care that we
give to patience unless of
course we're acting on the
specific instructions of the of
their physician.
This would also benefit
employers to look at pa's when
hiring due to needing to carry
our own medical liability
insurance as this is often a
barrier to pay string in a
practice when
speaking with employers.
There's otp state comparison
shows a breakdown of where other
states are at with changing some
practice laws but a third of the
states are are in have updated
or are in the process of making
some legislative changes.
I think that this mismatch of
pa'se out piecing physicians
entering the work force will
certainly
cause some.
Changes with healthcare access
if we're not being hired um so
we're of looking to fill in some
gaps in these horse healthcare
shortage areas on really expand
into rural communities by um
have been more
remore pa is being able to work
in private practices or their
own clinics we also are always
looking at the pa eligibility
for a direct payments by all
public and private insurers.
By changing the supervision of
pays this would also help to
reduce the risk of medical
professional liability for the
physician because we are
understand that healthcare is
the cifist when everyone
carrying for the patient
understands that we're working
together and building on our
strings to learn from our
mistakes if they happen in
clinical practice.
There have been several studies
that have shown that pays
in that position supervision did
not protect against payment
practice litigation physicians
and pays were involved in
litigation for the same reasons
and patients are with a
physician had lower mail
practice and litigation rates
than the physicians alone and
appears also have fewer
litigation claims and physicians
and we continue to be awarded
liability coverage by
institutions a past president of
the apa was quoted as seeing all
clinicians where both individual
insured responsibility for
patient current safety decades
of research a firm piece
consistently deliver high
quality and safe health care
autonomously and collaboratively
we do have a lot of oversight in
addition to the new mexico
medical board and we undergo
background checks uh we have.
Ongoing professional practice
evaluations in the organizations
that we work with we have a
national crediting body the ncpa
and we got through credentialing
processes through our
organizations so changing any
supervision requirements for
peace would not take away
anything from the medical board
for mick to insure the safety of
the care for that patience that
we are taking care of
by protecting patient car in the
clinical setting and this would
also help with pa's that may be
in a practice where an md
retires or moves or dies there
have been a number of instances
where this has happened
throughout this state and
because we don't have due to the
requirement of needing the
specific relationship to an md
um it can cause some
challenges for the pa that is
continuing to work in that
setting and can really cause
some significant disruptions to
care.
By optimizing care for new
mexico communities through an
optimal team
practice we really are looking
to
increase access in these areas
er and improve some attorney for
both piece and for the patience
really we think would help to
decrease some of the
geographical challenges and
would incourage pa's that are
from a community to be able to
stay there instead of needing to
move to a place where there is a
hospital or
a larger practice
because that's the groups that
are hiring us
we ask this team to partner with
us to modernize r p a practice
act legislation we also
are asking for
changes to how we are able
to allow us to sign for death
certificates currently in the
state of new mexico appears
cannot sign for decertificates
so physician or a physician
extender through the or my there
have been the number of
instances where this is impacted
the health of new mexicans
throughout the state by not
being able to provide
the death certificate for our
patience
limits that family from being
able to move forward with
services or accessing other
moneys as a result of the death
of this patient there have been
a couple of instances where
other pieces throughout the
state have cared for patient for
many years and because the
collaborative physician is in a
different city didn't have any
direct patient contact that
physician is not comfortable
assigning the desertificate
really creates a lot of barriers
that would be something I think
by adding ps to.
Legislation allowing us to sign
up for decertificates with uh is
low hanging for it and we'd
really give a big boom to our
state additionally further
collaboration with rmds could be
made through adding a chair
adding a seat at the table with
a new mexico medical board
currently in new mexico pays and
deals have about the same number
of providers in the state uh
keys have one position at that
board and deals have to I think
continuing to have more
collaboration with our fellow md
colleagues with b beneficial for
moving some legislation for.
Today I am also joined by a
seller pa that is from here in
silver city i'd like to
introduce
exactly
and have him give you some
of his experiences as a pa in
new mexico now when is it speaks
you need to turn your mike up
because only one at a time
otherwise we get feedback like
i'm creating right now and I
think you hit the person I can
it'll come out
can you hear me ok
thank you mister chairman and
members of the committee my name
is asucs or say to i'm a
position assistant as stephanie
know tandem i'm from this area
this is my home town I grew up
here graduated from suburb high
and did my pay training in
arizona and ended up coming back
to my home state um i'm the
chief medical officer to dog
medical services a federally
qualified health center that
serves grant county and hit the
older county and in grant count
who have a population for
approximately twenty seven
thousand residents there are
seven primarily care physicians
so the bark of the primary care
is taken by pays and nps and so
we are the backbone for the
health care in this community m
within our organization we have
a position assistant who works
as a sole practitioner and
animals new mexico and he is he
is it for that community and so
he is got about twenty years
experience in cardiology but he
has been transitionally to
primary care and so without his
help it would be there wouldn't
be a lot of health care and then
the southwest portion of the
state currently it as many you
know the landscape for health
care in mexico has been
incredibly challenging and and
as you all know while the the
exit and and physicians from our
state and at the rate physicians
are trained pays and nps are the
the individuals taken up to bulk
of the of the mantle and
provided care stephanie pointed
out help peas are trained in the
medical model and so in all of
my years which is about eighteen
of them working with physicians.
We problems of very similarly
weed we speak the same language
we have the same thought process
and so i've always had good
collaborative relationships with
my positions in my for
supervising positions and all
specialties and often times my
appears in the specialties are
the consultants for primary care
positions and so you might have
for example you might have a pay
that works in your allergy and
there are the consulting
practitioner for the primary
care empty or deal and so the
experience that appears bring to
the table as is deep and and
broad but due to the the
landscape and some of the the
practice restrictions and
in the mexico it makes it very
challenging for could do
something simple excited that
certificate this is something
that i've experienced personally
with some of my patience that
i've cared for for a long time
and have been um just intimately
aware with their medical
condition and know their family
well and have to say i'm sorry
III cannot sign your death
certificate for your loved one
so it had thus begin it's kind
of tracking down your
supervising position explaining
to them some of the past medical
history and what lead to the to
the death this individual and
getting a certificate signed
like stephanie was saying if we
could get that one keys approved
for a position assistance that
would be a huge benefit to the
people of new mexico
also the
mexico has been a leader with
our clabit of practice act but a
lot of other states are are
quickly making progress in
mexico is not leading as it was
since we'd love to see our
practice
resulted more autonomy for peers
because I think we've proven
that we can do an excellent job
a lot of the physicians I work
they've have always um expressed
their trust and physician
assistance and relying some
position assistance end and
their times have you been called
on me to help out with something
that they're not comfortable
doing some kind of procedure or
something to say you have more
experience you do this and so I
think they just speaks to the
level of training that we bring
to the community and are people
in new mexico.
As far as recruiting goes at
within our organization trying
to recruit positions has been
very difficult a lot of them
want to stay in areas where
there are more metropolitan it's
a more mitch baltimeres where
there are more specialties a lot
of the positions that i've
spoken to our our residence in
finishing their school so they
want to be nearer facility where
they can have
more consultants in some of that
but the hospital medicine that
they are used to in their
training so trying to recruit
them to roll the mexico has been
really hard and and again it's
been pays and then peace that
have really said we will will
answer the call will come down
to that area and and help out
and so I will stand for any
questions if the committee or
mister chair is any for me or
regarding peer practice what
it's like in southwest in mexico
thank you very much
did you have anything else
okay well before we go to the
committee I just want to get
clear do you have a bill drafted
on this optimal team practice a
change in the would it be a
change in your scope of practice
yes we've been collaborating
with a apa to have draft
legislation and we do have some
that we can chair with a so you
just looking for a sponsor from
this group here and there are a
number of likely candidates
representative jones is already
waving her hand thank you you
might want to get somebody with
more called but if you want to
settle for a representative
mister chair I would be glad to
specifies or the one in the
house built to fifteen in two
thousand and seventeen that got
you
away from directly underneath a
medical board so I would be
happy and add by partisan
sponsorship is always a real
asset so you might you have I
think you're going to have no
trouble finding sponsors.
Now what's the medical board say
about this new change
yes this is an elephant in the
room I have also gone to the
medical board with presentation
that we are seeking some
legislative changes I certainly
appreciate that there are
perspective is through a
regulatory I and that are they
want to make sure that we are
practicing safely with new
mexicans with the healthcare
that we're providing I think
that we have that with a lot of
the other oversight think when
looking at different states and
how they have approached these
either an expansion on the
collaborative license way on
being I think is the only state
that doesn't have any kind of
supervision for a pay but I
there can be a change of the
language that either mirrors or
expands upon what we already
have existing for the
collaborative license I think
that would make a big impact for
ps.
And I just got a text from
senator doctor martin hickey
says he'd be glad to be the
senate sponsors
but what so where does the stand
with the medical board do you
gave good reasons why they
should be supported but not the
support of yet no they're not
supported and that there's also
our national organizations the
apa and the american medical
association have been in some
current
somewhat content just
communications regarding some of
the other legislative efforts
that are moving forward in other
states are the me
is
against us from being able to do
this they think that it is scope
creep that we don't have the
training or the experience to be
able to have an expanded license
hopefully or our own medical
birth to be a little more in
latin than that but we will see
we'll find out good luck as if
you're getting senator hickey to
be a spot to help a doctor's
pushing it from one and but it's
no guarantee and we don't need
their
okay but it'll going to be hard
to pass it without it I think
that's why my take on it so the
other issue
come right to the other issues
that you're raised per separate
from the otp and that they
should have been able to sign
descertificates that might be a
separate piece of legislation
would they support that
when I mentioned that to them
they are reference that that
goes through different board so
that's not under our school both
practice that is regulated by
the medical board it's through
the bureau vitals and statistics
through the all at my yahoo
chair we did have a bill last
year to do just that
it they didn't pass but it we
could just resurrect it house
bill for seven d six mr chair
the sponsor yet we have.
And will will bring it back this
year let let's go for that again
mr chair if I could out about
the medical
the medical board has a lot of
vacancies right now and we don't
have any representation from
southern new mexico and we would
like to incur I would like to
encourage that those positions
be filled and we have some
applicants that are already
presented or you know put in
their application
governor
so I think that represent having
a broader representation might
help a lot of the different
issues that we're looking for
great let's go to the committee
and i'll go to start with your
senator I mean representative
jones because you you were the
first of volunteer and that
should be rewarded in some
action.
Thirty seconds extra thank you
so much yes thank you mr chair
and I appreciate your
presentation I actually have a
couple of draft bills that i've
been working on and so that
would increase your independence
at your ability to practice
independently and the
collaborative aspect as well but
I I just wanted to see
my peace about um signing death
certificates are so very very
basic I can't I I find it
astounding that you don't have
the ability to do that right now
surely you know you're well
trained enough to determine
whether someone's deceased or
not I know you
and and and I also think that
bottom line you know I
understand that the way we get
protective of our are practice
and so forth but bottom line I
think if we appeal to the
medical board about.
The terrible lack of access we
have especially rule new mexico
and the fact that we have pa's
right now practicing
independently all over rural new
mexico it's kind of like the
nurse practitioner issue with
our already addressed and fixed
that they are they are doing
this work they're already doing
this work and I did I have
discussed this with doctor
hickey
over the last past year as well
and I i'm i'm glad that he's a
greater to jump in with us too
so that's just I don't really
have a question but thank you
both for what you do appreciate
it very very much thank you mr
chair mister check can I jump in
I sponsored the bill for
autonomous well what I thought
was but we left basically the
role making to the medical board
and they did not carry out the
intent of the bill so
so
i'm just putting it out there
that it was done but it it was
down legislatively but the
medical board stepped in and I
mean with I assigned them to do
that but they didn't go the
direction that I thought the
bill told them to go to.
Okay let's go to the rest of the
committee and is our time keeper
i'm read three minutes three
minutes represent events it will
start with you think mister
chairman.
I'm also a big founder pays a
word to them for a long time and
do you guys are you able to
apply for a special skills
mister
mr chair members of the
committee yes we are we can do
that through additional
certification programs but we
can what really happens the
majority of the time is uh some
observation environment skills
in a clinical setting uh and
then an expansion of privileges
with in the care setting that we
practice in so I know a lot of
times I think we get this
feedback like or you're just
asking to be able to perform
some
really complicated or invasive
procedures and we would be
limited by that just based on
the scope of practice and what
the practice location identifies
thank you mister chair and thank
you president i've seen this
movie before and I know about
the special skills and I know
about the and I don't need to be
too direct but it's an eagle
thing is what it is and I think
that you're more than capable if
you show that you could apply
for a special skill you you
practice the special skill it
shows that you're competent in
the special skill then you
should be able to to do that
would you give me one example of
something that you would like to
change in the scope of work of
your practice that like you're
one of your top priority ones
you'd like to be able to
remove the requirement for
supervising physician and have
more of the
ownership of our regulation be
placed on the
facility that we're privileged
to practice out
okay thank you mister chairman
and i'm i'm counted with
representative jones on the.
The death certificate I mean
really
I mean what a what a suck in the
nose that
that you can that you can't sign
a death certificate I mean
because people depend on those
in the morning speed up the
process especially like what you
said when you have an intimate
relationship with with the
patient and you've been seeing
that patient i've worked with
plenty of and I know on fixed
rate at a time but I actually
liked one so good that I letting
deliver one of my kids and my
wife wouldn't have a big fan of
it you know I want to help him
along with getting some of the
stuff signed off I think you're
very competent and is that what
the shortage of medical people
that we have in the state in the
mexico
and thankful that you guys are
out in the medical community and
are they turning lots of
physician assistance out
annually
mister chairman members of the
committee yes
new mexico in particular has
undergone a recent change of
their heard been to pay programs
in the state and now
there is just the sole program
that's deleted with university
of new mexico.
A representative block
thank you mister chairman I
doubt i'll take my three minutes
but I might talk really slow so
thank you both I appreciate it I
think it's great that pays are
doing the work that we need to
supplement our health care
system you said about a quarter
of our regular patient visits or
pa visits and I think that
should speak volumes to the
amount of need that we have and
also it's great that pays can
prescribe you can do physicals I
mean I used to go to a pa
instead of a doctor now I have a
doctor but you know I love my
piers so I guess my question
would just be if if you did get
the regulatory freedom to not
have to be overseen by a by a
doctor do you foresee that a lot
of pa's would just start working
for the hospitals or would they
start their own practices cause
what we've heard is it's so
expensive with with insurance
costs and everything what do you
see with the problems of
potentially getting what you
want which I also want as well
mister chairman
mr chairman members of the
committee yes I hear what you're
saying I feel like with how the
current regulation is that's
part of why there are appears
that are practicing in surgical
subspecial to use rate now and I
begin the hospital will cover us
and I think that we just had our
new mexico academy a physician
assistant conferences were so
nice to see people from
throughout the state and just
hearing from so many people
seeing that they do have feel
some limitations of their
ability to practice autonomously
in rural areas so I think yes I
think it would benefit them to
be able to expound access and I
think if we had that is an
option uh then more people would
be potentially looking into that
rather than being so focused on
needing to work at a hospital
thank you mister chairman and I
think that's definitely
something to keep in mind
because we don't do want to make
sure that when we.
Do do this which I hope we do
and it whoever's listening I
hope we ensure that you have
that autonomy but that you can
practice because we need to
especially in rural areas like
where I live we need you guys
and it's so awesome that you you
don't have to go through the
whole doctor path if that's not
exactly what you want to do you
may just want to be a prescriber
due general medicine and that is
something that you should be
able to do especially in our
state where we're desperate
desperate to get good quality
people like yourselves to go
into communities and provide
health care so I just appreciate
you guys keep up the great work
I don't know how much time I
have left but you know I try to
take as much time as humanly
pass when I I guess i'll just
keep on talking mister chairman
since i've not been cut off
oh good I have twenty four
seconds I guess if you guys have
anything to add you should just
go for mr chairman
you get eighteen seconds thank
you
thank you representative block
representative
thank you mr chair and my
question to you is since this
piece of legislation has been
put forth before was there
something that the positions
were willing to compromise on to
allow the legislation to pass
there was some things that they
will consider but others that
they would not can you please
expand on that
mr chair members of the
committee yes the I think that's
how we ended up with a
collaborative license that is
for primary care providers it
the collaborative license is not
something that is extended to
specialty care and the my recent
conversations with the board
indicated that they are
concerned about the level of
care that happens in special to
settings um
that needs regulation
that's very vague so mr chair
and members one of the other
thing I want to ask is I just
saw that you and him.
Graduated their first set up as
issue and assistance in energy
zeology would they be included
in what you're working on now of
fifteen of them was the first
class representative heard they
are not physicians assistance
they were listed its assistance
will thank you they're
anasthesiology assistant and
that's out of position
assistance okay thank you for
their clarification
will continue to work on their
collaboration.
Thank you representative senator
rodriguez thank you mister
chairman I don't have any
questions I just want to say
thank you and I I really have
lots of confidence in pa's as a
matter of fact i'm going to make
this quick statement when I go
see if a station which is hardly
ever but when I do I am actually
happy that I got to see a pa
instead it's more attention or
individualised more patients
more understanding just I don't
know it's just great so yeah
thank you very much for your for
all that you do in supporting
all of us
thank you senator of
representative chasing the thank
you very much mister chairman I
I just wish we could trade more
piers in the mexico and clearly
there are qualified people who
are being turned away from our
pa program but I would have to
look at representative
thompson's previous bill and I I
am just stand as is represented
in jones and representative
heard and have helped the
declaration of um
of death or the death
certificate and i'm just
wondering if perhaps we could do
something as simple and at that
i'd have to look at what the law
is saying that
I don't know what he would
license
primarily care providers
must have these privileges in
new mexico and not let the
medical board mess with it
something about that these are
primary care providers they have
and once we go to and um you
know our current medicaid
director in what is now the
health care authority on one of
the dances
it is a certified doors
practitioner she was my mother's
primary care provider she spent
mine she
ran she was in charge of the
entire UNM senior clinic.
So I mean it's absurd to think
that she could
do this function
so that's it manager mr chair.
Thank you representative will go
over here to this end of the
table then and representative
robot cover you know
thank you thank you mister chair
and think is so much I am agree
whole heartedly with all of my
colleagues that have previously
about
the value of physician
assistance I think in particular
in the acute and urgent care
processes where we really don't
have an opportunity to see
premium care physicians
and we're seeing in that acute
and urgent care with by
physician assistance so better
than
assistance who are frontline who
have a more holistic practical
approach which I think is really
important
or often that I love my primary
care however there are issues
that the primary care has
difficulty relating to whereby
the first assistant relates more
readily too and so from that
perspective it's brilliant
to continue to support you off
my second point and final point
is
it's important to have a seat at
the table you are bring a
perspective where representation
matters in our case as well and
your case even more so because
you can make the case you can
demonstrate the skills you can
answer the questions and it
helps move us towards the more
progressive approach in rure
making an indecision making as
opposed to punitive approaches
and often times rules and
decisions are based on taking
punitive measures and we've got
to get away from that type of um
mentality mindset.
So that we can improve our
delivery approaches so I just
wanted to say thank you very
much for all that you do and i'm
very appreciated and how it will
wait that I can play a role to
support with my colleagues I
will do so thank you mister
chair
thank you representative senator
pinto you might want to
introduce yourself to because
everybody else has had a chance
to do that already welcome to
the committee this time thank
you mister chairman members of
the community and senator
shannon clinton I represent
district three which is a
northwest corner of the state
thank you for your presentation
the data the all what you
present it does that include the
house facilities as far as
you're saying there's a shortage
in the position
mister chairman of the committee
that's a good question it is
hard and difficult to get that
data because we are under the
license of a physician
and mister chair members of the
committee it may app was
probably when the few physicians
assistance for since I can
remember in our area give all
the shots and everything but the
concept death
if you're going to pronounce
someone is that also part of
filling in the desk certificate.
Mr chair members of the
committee yes
mister chair members of
committee and I think that's
probably what it things
especially in my area now
because we don't even know if
you have any
cause what I read from the bill
that there is an exception for
those that are nursing but that
their supervised and the
protocols are followed during
that whole time um
so I see a challenge in it in
the rural area because of the
united nations that can can
happen especially
the time
so and I think before the omari
did come before
in the tals and did try to
be kate for more assistance
because they were way strange
with them backlog uh trying to
keep up with with all of their
timelines of this five day and
ten day stuff being filled out
and that they're not able to get
around everywhere so but I
didn't think there because the
desertificate also is linked to
a lot of the benefits and I
looks like in twenty twenty two
there was actually
death that was ordered to be
overturned and the determination
of death was supposed to be
changed so I find it interesting
specially with all the
technology we have now and
that's just more about comment
than um
of what I remember the history
of what you're trying to do
about the decertificate thank
you mister chair members of the
committee.
Thank you senator of senator so
the olympics thank you mister
chair and thank you for the
presentation and for everything
you do it's such such important
work in our state
I and I totally support the idea
of the death certificate that
seems like such a no brainer
and i've I think I support the
the otp idea although i'd like
to learn a little bit more about
but I couldn't read the what it
what it said and I I guess I
just want to hear a little bit
more about how that works and
then you mentioned mail practice
but then
if you could just explain a
little bit more detail i'd
appreciate it thank you.
Mister chair members of the
committee yes I
there has been a variety of
different laws that have been
passed around for a different
states and and it has some kind
of
typically some kind of number
attached to some kind of
supervision before we can then
practice autonomously that's
what the majority of this detail
in a collaborative I have a
collaborative license as a
primary car provider and I have
to be able to show that I care
my own medical liability
insurance so that makes it a
little more power to ball to
future employers outside of
large organizations and so
that's the relationship is you
would be able to carry your own
mail practice is it very
expensive I this is the first
time i've heard somebody think I
want to want to pay you just to
the so-called
I think it's also just to be
able to reduce the liability
that a physician feels that they
have for and working with us
this
question may be a little off but
so we have so many problems with
insurance companies and
just the way they kind of put
profits before people in many
cases and so of course i've been
a very strong advocate for a
long time for single payer or
medicare for all and i'm
wondering how that would affect
you
just curious what how would a
single pair plan affect you
mister chair members of the
committee I think that if there
was a single pair it would need
to be able to recognize pace as
independent practitioners we get
reimbursed at lower rates
than our physician colleagues
well that's interesting lower
rates because as my experiences
you spend much more time.
With the patience then the
physicians do so i'm not sure
why the rate should be lower
but yeah but you bet I mean do
you would you see any kind of
problem with moving to a single
payer model has long as you were
reimbursed appropriately for the
services
mister chair members of the
committee I think that the
legislation would have to
recognize pa's as being
independent practitioners right
now with supporter got just to
be able to recognize us so that
we can get that reimbursement
directly absolutely ok thank you
mister chair
thank you senator representative
charges
representative for our thank you
mister chair
I appreciate all of the
discussion about you know
changing the licensing or the
practice so that you can have
the
notification of death
certificates it started when
what in my constituents couldn't
get
the desk certificate as a
senator pinto mentioned about
you know the benefit getting
benefits from
transferred from the person who
had passed away
and
we started it kind of late in
the last session so I think
we'll we're well I think we are
going to prefile and get it
sooner and nurse practitioners
already have that option so
we're just adding the verbic of
physician physician assistance
to be able to be included in
that being able to sign the
death certificate um because for
long a lot of people it means a
long time before the actual
physician has time to do that in
so it delays a light of the
different things that need to
happen so
that's something that we have
planned to do and with the scope
of practice I think that's
really important that we expand
it as much as possible.
So thank you for your work.
Thank you representative
representative thompson thank
you mister chair thank you so
much i'm a big proponent of
everyone practicing to the
highest level of their license
and I know there's turf wars but
I always say there's more turf
than we can cover so we don't
need to fight over turf if you
know for mid level provider can
free up a orthopedic surgeon to
do surgery as opposed to
whatever else that needs to be
done i'm a big supporter and
just in terms of the house bill
to fifteen that was my intention
was that you would have
independent practice but i'm
guess it was it was a while ago
and my memory isn't what it used
to be but my guess is that the
medical board would not speak
out against it if we gave them
control over the like the rules
essentially and I after ten
years I finally learned that
what we say in a bill isn't
necessarily what's going to
happen so i'm just throwing this
out to the world bet if we pass
a bill that was something that
you're interested in and you see
that it doesn't happen
like that desponse or no I mean
that's because naive me used to
think well where the legislature
and when we pass a law then it's
a law not realizing that there's
four hundred middle man down the
way who can make it say
something besides what we said
so
let's see.
The.
III i'm in strong support of a
pa on the medical board if they
oversee your working your your
practice then that you need to
have a voice and that's that's
just
I didn't restart the clock sorry
but thank you so much for this
then we
will be your champion I promise
so just to follow up on that you
you have one on the medical
board now right.
But you're you'd like to have at
least two mister chairman
members of the committee yes
you're increased representative
really too too hold voice
still and curious about two
things and and first one is if
if a physicians assistant is
working in as primary care
collaborative
practice and there it a
federally qualified health
clinic can they prescribe
psychotropics
can they do it basically
behavioral health but it's in a
primary care setting.
Mr chair members are the
committee is those behavioral
health laws are also pretty
specific can be somewhat
exclusionary of us
I differ to
for example could can you
prescribe attitude present mr
chair members of me yes
absolutely
as part of primary care a lot of
the depression anxiety those are
very common
concerns that patient spring
gets up with challenge more
challenging if somebody has an
estimate just speaking for me
some of my colleagues in primary
came may be a lot more
experience in I am but bipolar
disorders gets a friend yeah
some of those other diagnoses
having somebody that's more
experience with the appropriate
medications but yeah pays and ps
can definitely write for those
medications that would help
individually and often times we
will provide a refill of
somebody is in transition from
one
you know prescribing psychiatric
as I can try to psych etric and
key or pa in the they need a
refund we can give them the
supply until they can see that
person but yes and and few each
c absolutely okay thank you and
then you'd mention there was a
second pa program in the state
where was that in in what
happened where do they go
mr chair members of the
committee and there was a
university of san francisco
moderate that was started it was
a satellite campus and I think
that there were some challenges
with having it being a satellite
campus and probably related to
funding okay.
So radio union is the only show
and and how many graduates you
are now being able to produce
mister chair members of the
committee between twenty five
and thirty one that's pretty
good actually.
All right well I think you've
got a lot of support from the
committee I think you have
several.
People who'll be armed wrestling
for the privilege of carrying
the legislation
and I think the the death
certificate thing
I can't imagine that it wouldn't
this time but I i'm my record is
a prognosticator at legislative
successes pretty pretty bad
i'm still thinking that we can
get the.
The uh uh
single payer program in new
mexico paper but
that i've not been correct for
twenty years so I don't think
this one though I think we have
a good check so good luck and
thank you both for your
presentation thank you for
coming before us and and
representative john center her
draft of the legislation and
i've shared those who zad so
they can get him out and will be
working on that with you
excellent thank you very much I
appreciate that your time very
good thanks so much.
Members we now move to the
second item on or agenda for
today's afternoon and it is the
new extra hospital association
with eagerly look forward to the
hospital association coming
before us and so we have troy
clark the president CEO the
association
robert whittaker once again
there is back for a
bite of the apple and sender in
manual and l w
CEO of a hospital
and I parently social workers
make wonderful ceo's of
hospitals that's what I hear I
understand and there should be
more of them in those positions.
Okay so we have we'll turn over
you try will let you orchestrate
this and and get on the mister
chairwise and boots that sat
ball let you know we actually
have a second social worker it's
a ceo of the hospital on road so
yeah he spoke to his last year I
remember that I didn't I didn't
mean to do it but whole try and
find a third one for the next
time we need.
Alright mr chair and committee
to antroy clark ceo and
president of the new mexico
hospital association we
appreciate your invitation
to us to come speak with you
today i've brought with me
robert whiter or ceo here
locally at health regional
is that working.
Yeah.
We were looking for a hand out
but then it really is itself
screen right in front of our
eyes I think you should have
both
if we have handouts can we
please get him I thought I take
my notes.
Here they come
and as you mentioned also sandra
mandra robert will kick off
first give you a local flavor of
what's happening here and silver
city in the grand county area
and then he'll hand it back to
me
thank you mr chair members of
the committee.
Again I am rabodical ceo of heal
of regional medical center i've
been with the facility now just
about eleven months in its been
a wonderful experience
recommunity great medical staff
great hospital staff and it's
been a pleasure to be here as
far so hill the regional medical
center is a county owned
critical access hospital
we are licensed for twenty five
debts we have thirteen met
search beds and six is to beds
we have we do provide labor in
delivery and we deliver babies
we have four labor delivery
rooms and we also have a level
two nursery and so we have two
mets within our level to nursery
uhm a little bit more about the
the size of our facility we have
right around four hundred and
seventy five employees or tea
members or care give us as kind
of our culture is with with us
so it's it's a wonderful staff a
little bit more about uhm but
what we do and annually we we do
about three thousand surgeries
or surgical procedures annually
we we deliver
average of two hundred and
eighty babies a year
and we have seventeen thousand
er visits per year is is right
around where we average
rer is a level for trauma center
and uh we do have a twenty four
hour general surgery on call
that uh that goes with that and
uh that that's helped us out a
lot been at the base of the
the human national forced
we do see accidents from people
out in the wilderness in the
forest and and they come to our
says as well as sometimes from
the minds in some of the
accidents or things that may
happen there and in in having
that exignation in the protocols
and policies and things in place
of helped us well to just over a
patient to only that.
Service we do have a cancer
center it's a wonderful cancer
center we've we provide
radiation therapy as well as
medical oncology um we have
radiation on colleges who comes
to our facility periodically as
well as two medical anchologists
and we have a a couple and nurse
practitioner uh practitioners
who work in our I cancer center
we also
have a cardiologist on staff
and one of the things that we
provide with our card cardiology
service in our city is color c t
a ct and your grandma with a
company caught heartflowing they
use a I to
predict an analyze blood flow
when her blockages and and with
this technology and I I know
there are a lot of things that
happen with the state but we're
one of the few in the state who
you utilize this uh technology
with rct in our cardiology
program
we do provide twenty four hour
call service for or the pds I
mentioned general surgery labor
in delivery and pediatrics and.
We are part of what's called the
part of two roll hospital groups
one is the new mexico royal
hospital network and the other
one is a committee of the new
mexico hospital sociation it's
of real hospital committee and
and when within both of those
groups we we meet periodically
to discuss.
Uhm just a variety of topics and
and the things that come up over
and over gain or the challenges
that all the hospitals real
hospitals in our state face
healer regional isn't alone uh
members memorial is an alarm we
we all have uh challenges as as
a hospital is healthcare
providers in her state.
Uh there's been some discussion
about medicaid and and medicaid
as a pair and I think everyone
understands that uh medicaid as
a pair isn't that the best payer
out there the highest payer and
and with a higher utilization of
medicaid within the state that
does post challenges
that the cast of of providing
care is has gone up
substantially with inflation
with the cost of just labor in
supplies and pharmaceuticals and
drugs these pressure is put put
a lot of strain on unrural
hospitals and and there was some
discussion yesterday surrounding
that as well
the other part is that it it can
be a challenge when.
I I wish he the original I wish
we could be all things to all
people but but we can't have
just resources wise physicians
providers providing services and
so there are times we have to
transfer patience to hire
tortury centers and that can be
a challenge when those
facilities are for
you are calling two three four
facilities to to make a transfer
and that can be that can be a
challenge in and delay of care
of worth patience
some things that are are unique
to heal the regional are are
current facility is a is forty
forty years old
and uh you know the the way we
practice medicine today is much
different than it was forty
years ago and I imagine it's
going to be much different forty
years from now as well and so we
have some challenges space wise
with our with our physical plant
and are facility and
one of the things that uh uh is
that we're currently going
through a feasibility study of
building study uh four hour
physical plant and our facility
in our hospital about uh
the extensive cost to either
renovate and expand our building
and or to to build something new
and so
one of the things that are that
that goes in with this is just
being able to meet rates the
current health care needs and
what that is and as well as
being a little predictive and
understanding what's what's
coming down the road and what's
happening and what's out there
that we need to adapt and change
in and incorporate into our our
practice as a hospital.
One of the things I I do want to
point out mentioned that we are
a county on hospital however
there there are no
tax dollars that are livid
that they go to support our
operations there's the military
there's no indigent care find
that that we receive
and so all of all of what we do
is supported from our own
operations from the help of our
legislators with state capital
outlay and and with grants that
that we have seek out and
receive.
Uh one of the things that we've
just some of the the
cars and expenses we've we've
had about a fourteen percent
labor increase in our inner and
salaries and wages over the last
twelve months in order to.
Keep up with a market market
rates as well as providing
cinemas to recruit and retain uh
staff to rural areas.
Um it is a challenge in the last
presentation they talked about
you know people and and where
they want to live and
as much as I and and my family
enjoy living in silver city and
rural america a lot of people
going through programs want to
go to an urban area and want to
experience that and so there's a
challenge with recruiting and
retaining to to rule areas.
We currently have thirty two
traveler and contract staff and
so that's a combination mostly
our ends but we physical
therapist uh medical
technologist respiratory
therapists radiology tax
in another constraint and and I
I know that uh there's been some
discussions and and
data shared and and I can only
speak from my hospital and and
what I know and you know the
checks I write um and and one of
the the things and we take talk
about expenses and the rising
cost of that is
r professional and general
liability insurance medical
malpractice I was at twenty
three percent increase from a
last year to this year so
starting until I was a twenty
three percent increase
went from about one point one
million to one point four
million four years ago we were
about six hundred thousand
dollars
and and that's on our facility
of night having
a high number of claims or high
cost of claims as well so those
are just cost increases that
we've had.
A couple other the things they
are point to note that we that
we have here and and talks about
making plans in tracking
successes
I believe yesterday and in the
hospital finance
presentation there was that
table about the quality scores
that's within the new mexico
hospital value based purchasing
program
and that is
the current program where the
state provides uh supplemental
payments to hospitals and I i'm
i'm proud to say that we have
been in the highest here since
that his started at a tier one
with our quality metrics in our
quality scores and it's a big
success for our staff and are
care givers and their
commemorator ensuring we provide
the best care possible we are
currently going through with our
board a a strategic plan and
updating our strategic plan
again to to look at what are we
doing but what do we need to do
right to keep up with changes
than needs and and of course
we're going through as I
mentioned the feasibility study.
Some of the things that I I want
to talk about and I I want to
express my since serious
gratitude with the health card
delivery in accessact what what
is a
an important piece of
legislation important
change for hospitals in new
mexico and supporting and
sustaining the care that we gave
and provide and what we can do
uhm.
Some of the things that that
we've looked at and and we know
we need to uh address and
changes healer regional as I
mentioned previously we we
operate ems emergency medical
services within our county and
there are areas that
we currently cannot staff full
time
and we've we've worked at
expanding and and we have some
part time coverage in areas uh
we're were there maybe added
in members or in cliff or
embarrassed
in an uh the hda find so
certainly what will help with
with growing that one of the
things that was also mentioned
with silver city is a wonderful
place to live in and a lot of
people retire and and and move
here and so we have a a higher
than normal
senior population here and one
of the things that that I need
to do and and as has an entity
is explore senior career in what
that means and how we can better
serve
uh that population in our area
and make sure that we're meeting
the needs of our patience
the other part of that goes with
tell a house and I know there's
been some discussion discussions
of the last there too about tele
then tell a medicine in what we
can do and and creating for us
creating specialty clinics
surrounding tell a house and in
having that kind of a dedicated
space and and having those
partnerships in place.
Uhm just other other things that
are very important to us when we
talked about the family medicine
rule
family medicine training
programming and recruiting
primary care to our area it's so
important and for us we we need
space and and we're currently
looking at opportunities and and
places where we can expand our
our rural health clinic and
provide additional primary care
services
I am i'm grateful for that the
support that i've had with local
legislators
and my discussions with them as
well as uh with this committee
and with others that the support
rule hospitals in in what we do
and i'm i'm grateful for the
hospital association and and and
their advocacy for for rural
hospitals and and ensuring that
mechanisms and things were
employees to
provide rural hospitals healer
regional with the support that
we need to carry out the
services sweep provide.
Mr chair and committee members
thank you
to robert and he'll be here for
questions at the end
we were asked to come and
represent I think on the
financial financial hospital
finance one oh one.
Course that we've done a number
of times and I will tell you we
responded to that by bringing
some of that information
and base education but I will
tell you i've tried to also
update it so you're going to get
a comparison of some things we
shared in the past and where we
stand a day and things that were
working on with that uh the
hospital association represents
forty seven hospitals in the
state that it's easier for me to
explain the few hospitals that
we don't represent those are the
federally on facilities who
really don't operate in the
medicaid program they don't bill
and click for services or the va
and indian health services
other than that there are only
two postecute uh freestanding
poster coup facilities that are
not remember so all of the acute
facilities are in the state and
nearly all of the poster
facilities are members of the
association and i'm gonna do my
best to multi terror security
forget to change a page tell me
you've seen this slide before
and I love this slide to
reiterate and reinforce where we
set as a state and how unique we
are
each dot on this map represents
a hospital in the country and
you can see in the state of new
mexico how disperse are
hospitals are
like rare I spent twenty three
years running hospitals and
seventeen of those running rural
facilities and they think it
leads to the collaboration in
the relationship I have with our
rural facilities and making
certain debt in the state in a
mexico we can't just take care
of our urban facilities we must
take care of our rural
facilities and the loudest voice
for that or urban facilities
will talk a little bit more
about that uh in a bit here or
hospitals are the economic
drivers in our communities again
especially in our rural
communities often times the
highest
paying jobs in the largest
employers and a rural
communities uhm
are some counties as much as
twelve percent of the gdp of the
county
and in twenty two uh two
thousand twenty two.
Collectively our hospital
members contributed over twelve
billion dollars in total
expenditures within the state in
mexico that comes with a
responsibility
that also comes with a lot of
discussions
that we've had with the
legislature in maintain the
sustainability of that I know
there are some questions earlier
that I hope my presentation
addresses
the reliability of the
information we provide you
uh the sustainability of our
hospitals has been a issue we
are in an improving situation as
i'll get to later but uh
the underlying factors of the
high level of medicaid that we
have in our state with current
medicaid reimbursement.
Has left our hospitals in a
very.
Very tentative situation
very fluctuating when it comes
to our small volume facilities
about sixty just under sixty
eight thousand jobs which is an
increase of about four point
seven billion dollars from three
years earlier uh a huge increase
and I think that comes with no
surprise as things have been
discussed about the cost of
labor and what we went through
in the pandemic was having to
bring in so much transitory
labor and temporary labor at
such high costs.
It looks like the slide cut off
the top here but this was a
slide I presented uh
pardon me to under during the
legislative session and some
reference have been made to it
that want to make certain work
clear on
these are the hospital operating
margins for a twenty twenty two
representing each hospital i'm
sorry each of you care hospital
in the state.
If there is a red bar that means
they lost money in the calendar
in their calendar or fiscal year
that ended in twenty twenty two.
Since twenty twenty two in the
past year some of those margins
have improved we do not have as
many hospitals losing money.
However I want to recognize that
one of the discussions came
earlier about the
sharing and information in the
use by let's see if cost
reports.
It is very important to
understand
how difficult it is yet to use
cost reports for something
different than the purpose that
the federal government cms
designates them for
the purpose of a cost report is
to take a starting point and I
use that as a
neutral figure.
And come down at an exclude
certain costs to get down to the
very department hospital
department specific costs that
seem us what.
What varies from costs to cut
are a cost report to cost report
is the starting point.
Some of our hospitals are
organized in a legal structure
where their physician uh
services are part of the legal
energy and some are not.
And that affects what that
starting point on the hospital
are on the cost report is which
makes those numbers not
comparable or useful to compare
one hospital to another across
the board because how they start
off and the numbers that are
being pulled or the starting
points.
In those cost reports that
they're really not intended for
that it also plays into while
some of the figures while
they're correct on the cost
report are not accurate to
compare across one against
another given example on the
malpractice costs.
Cms will not allow in entities
who self insurer.
To book their annual costs
booked by their actuary of what
the cost is going to be they
only book it when they only
recognize expense and the year
it's actually paid out so you
see huge fluctuations in the
medical malpractice expenses
year to year
especially when you combine them
all together because those who
can self insurer are the largest
hospitals that are out there and
you see large dollars especially
after we went through the
pandemic when our courts will
shut down for a long period time
there were very few
adjudications
in various few settlements so
you would expect to see your now
practice costs down from a cost
report perspective but that's
not what the actually say the
actual costs are over time.
I'm not here to talk about
malpractice I use that simply as
an example on the cost reports
to say while we have had
discussions and we have worked
with lfc I understand their
position in uh reliance on a
cost report but understanding
what the data that is in those
cost reports on why it is not
reliable to compare across I
think it's important for you to
understand.
The.
With that
back to where I have shared in
the past one of the uniquenesses
of new mexico besides the fact
that we're so rural is our
parents most states average
between thirteen and seventeen
percent of their population is
on medicaid which results in a
payer mix or a percentage of
their patience that they see at
their hospitals about thirteen
percent being on medicaid.
In the state of new mexico
during the pandemic we got up to
forty eight percent of our
population on medicaid we're now
down to forty four percent after
disenrollment
is the latest numbers which has
resulted in our hospitals.
Only patience that they see so
not who it was enrolled that
who's actually utilizing
services seeing on average
across our state forty three
percent of their population
when medicaid pays below cost
and you have forty three percent
of the patient you see
you have financial instability
and has to be made up from
somewhere medicare is designed
to pay roughly at cost and they
say roughly because they exclude
some items so usually end up it
ninety eight or ninety nine
percent of cost and then you
make up that difference of the
shortfall on the medicaid and
the ability to run your
operations on your commercial uh
business if you see in most days
sixty seven percent of the
volumes they see in their
hospitals are made up on
commercial business
those are employer sponsored
plans in the state of new mexico
about fourteen percent.
The.
The.
And yet on the expenditure side
we've emphasised it's a people
business it was so refreshing to
listen to the last presentation
and the questions that came from
each of you and your support.
I can't reiterate enough hour
number one health care issue in
this state is access to care and
I think everyone if you feel the
same way
I even could argue and say it
may be the number one issue in
the state.
Someone argue there some crime
initiatives and maybe some
education issues but if it's not
the number one it's right up
there and it's absolutely the
number one issue
in healthcare in the state and
it's impaired that we all work
together to improve that that
has to be our focus the other
areas I seizes distractions.
There will be many bills that
come up and ideas to come
forward as bills that if they
don't help and improve the
access of a detract from it all
I would tell you that I think we
need to set those on the side.
We have to improve the access to
care for our citizens across the
state and that is urban and
rural and with added some people
business i'm in a in my comments
later on talking about work for
some come back to that concept.
But you see here the vacancies
that we've got these are
workforce challenges.
When we came out of the pandemic
and our hospital stayed fall
many people said that's the
delay in care and people now
just get in care and it's more
acute cause they delayed that
car.
I said then and I will say now
that was a piece of puzzle but
that's gone
the bigger piece of the parcel
that I think is now finally
being recognized on a national
level is the increase in the
demand for health care services
because we have this group that
we refer to as the baby bombers.
And if you look at how they
break out in the
age break out
classifications across our
country they're nearly double
the size of any other age group.
And they have entered the
highest health care utilization
years of their life.
And we will have that situation
for the next fifteen to twenty
years so we are passed the point
of having the delayed care
driving the utilization our
hospitals and yet we still have
extremely high demand for high
acute services in our urban
locations that we have hospitals
that are running at a hundred
and twenty percent.
Of their capacity design
capacity.
And license capacity and the
ability to staff for that makes
it even more difficult that
makes us go to that temporary
labor market who's not committed
to our communities and costs a
lot of money on the other hand
they're a life saver but without
and we would be shipping
patience out of state.
This.
A question that came up I
believe it was yesterday also
that we want to share that we
have shared is this concept of
how much community care and
community benefit is offered
you see here the dollars I broke
about two different ways one
between our investor owned and
are not for profit I believe
representative thompson was
curious about that so you see on
the left hand side of the graph
out of the roughly three hundred
and eighty six million dollars
of charity care provided across
the state by our hospitals are
you see the breakout between the
two I didn't.
Less than numbers but the number
of hospitals also plays into
that we do have more
individual counts of hospitals
that are not for profit than the
four profit included in there.
And then on the right side you
see it broken out my urban rural
as we look at this and see that
this charity care is not just
being given in the urban areas
it's not just being given by the
offer profits but uh the
responsibility seen by hour
members across the state in
contributing their communities.
While these volumes have
returned to normal levels in
most of our rural facilities I
mentioned how that transfer rate
to our urban facilities is
causing a lot of stress on the
ability of the workforce to take
those patients.
We have a work for shortage and
I think even though all of us
and if sender hickey was here I
believe he would throw his paper
up again as he has in the past
about the accuracy of the
workforce report
historically we have reported
day believing that report sixty
two hundred to sixty seven
hundred nurses that were short.
The department of work for
solutions just reported that
they went out and in a d d
duplicated manner which means
they removed all duplications.
There are currently eighty eight
hundred postings.
For nursing positions now those
aren't just hospitals at
hospital's doctor's office's
home help.
There are eighty eight hundred
open positions.
To give you an idea what that
means I put in the next bullet
point the total nurses lpns and
our ends.
Employed by presbyturian
loveless and you in m h are
three largest hospitals is sixty
two hundred.
We are short
mourners that are currently
employed by our three largest
hospitals in the state.
Discrete and inability to move
patience to post secure settings
mostly due to delays and
authorizations from insurance
companies.
That means we have patience who
are medically ready to be moved
out of the hospital to go to a
different level of career either
the home else to a skill nursing
facility to a long term care
facility and behavior health
rehab facility
and they remain in a bed in a
hospital that somebody else is
needing especially in our urban
area because we can't get
authorizations to move them
and if you ask me why can't we
get the authorization.
When it no longer cost the
insurance company a penny to
leave them in our hospitals and
we bare all the cost what's the
motivation to move them
somewhere aware they would have
to begin paying again.
Patient transportation is also a
huge challenge
robert mentioned when they have
a patient that they cannot
meet the needs of because the
acuity or the services that they
provide in uh silver city or any
of our communities and we need
to transfer we are short on the
work force of empties and
paramedics.
And that makes it very difficult
I think representative vincent
can relate to that and
understand from his days in the
ems we need those abilities to
move those patients toward the
car can be given but often times
that is delayed or it most of a
much more expensive alternative
to area beyond which is awful
about six years ago when I was
in my prior position in a study
we did
just under sixty seven percent.
Of the area beyond transports in
our state were not medically
justified
and it's not because of over
utilization or inappropriate
utilizations because there was
no other alternative the patient
had to go they couldn't find an
ambulance.
There was available so they had
to transfer buyer including
psychiatric patients.
So I brought this slide back
from twenty twenty two say what
were our greatest challenges
that we presented to you as work
forces medical malpractice and
sustainable medicaid
reimbursement.
I hope the message that you hear
as work force is still an issue
and that's going to be an issue
as long as we have this high
level of need uh in demand for
healthcare services
not so lead by them
pretty much due to the increase
number of baby boomers who are
now in that high health care
utilization that we are all
headed towards
but I also didn't mention that
show at the bottom that I think
we did make great strides and
even though there's been some
questions on it that I hope to
resolve in the next few minutes.
The hda health care delivery and
access act that was passed last
year is monumental
bought through the
sustainability and maintaining
of the current access that we
have and not losing it but also
in the ability to improve that
access in the future
we did come to you and say we
have a problem we have hospitals
that are not sustainable I
showed you the graph from
earlier of how many hospitals
were losing money and there are
two things that when you look at
finances.
That you need to understand.
One isn't the amount of money in
the bank account we make
references to hospitals that
have a lot of money they may
have some money in reserves at
bearing levels to pay bills as
situations evanflow the other is
how are we functioning each year
and if we are losing money that
means we're living off those
savings and when they'll savings
run out that is when the
hospital will close.
Last year we had three hospitals
that were in a single digit
number days of cash on hand
that's an extremely scary number
as part of senate bill one sixty
one are legislator required
those that are receiving funds
to have a plan to get to a
hundred days of cash on an so
there are some sense of uh
sustainability just to give a
perspective where things are
as of today I don't believe we
have anyone in a single digit
day's cash on hand but we still
have four hospitals that are
less than twenty days.
So we were together we got this
past in a great way
and important to understand and
that why did they get past it
did not take any additional
state dollars
when we talk about the dollars
that were there flowing through
the hda that came from the
hospital stepping up an agreeing
to tax themselves to provide
those dollars to get the federal
match to bring those dollars
back.
And more importantly the only
way it work was for our urban
hospitals to agree to pay a
higher percentage of that tax
so that it made the rural
hospitals sustainable in my
conversations and working with
the lfc the question was ask
well the the dollars that go to
each hospital may get so that
everybody is in the black
and my answer is as of today yes
it would there are so many
things that can happen variables
if we hit another pandemic if
there's an unfortunate scene the
incident I can't guarantee that
nothing will change on the
expense out of the equation.
But the way the model works
today on the projections that
once though once cms approves
that plan and the dollar start
flowing in either q one or two
two of next year
our hospitals will be in the
sustainable position hence we
will not lose access
that exist today and hospitals
will be in a position to be in
the black to be able to invest
to grow and improve access even
rohovis even rehobit
I will tell you the numbers that
were shared earlier or not for
the report that i've got but I
have talked with the local ceo
of roberts I have talked with
all of our rural hospitals and
one hundred percent of our rural
hospitals.
From the smallest of those rural
hospitals to largest
are giving they're not just
supportive of hda they're giving
that they can finally be in a
position to say have not having
to look at what I have to cut I
can finally start to look at the
needs they're coming from our
community health needs
assessment and try and address
some othe.
Yeah asked about rehoots because
as you know and that last report
even with the hda money they
were still going to be
twenty five or thirty million
and after all you know senator
money special appropriation all
the rest who were still going to
be in the hope that you you're
saying that they upgraded those
updated those figures and it's
not going to be that that way
they have made significant
improvements i'm not sure that I
agree with the fifty eight
million dollars lost figure
again looking at the
comparability of what a cost
report tells you I don't think
it's the most accurate way to
look at the financial
operations.
But I will tell you and talking
with bill patten their ceo who
is presented now twice to osi
and some of their uh
hearings that they're having on
mergers and acquisitions and in
if you happen to have seen we
put an operate out signed by
every one of the ceo's in
support of the hda they are
grateful because the urban
hospitals picked up a extra
portion of the cost of that tax
the assessment.
To make it viable for all
hospitals in the state.
So I guess I just hit on that on
the larger hospitals getting a
highlighted on this did not rely
on any additional state funds
this was all funds that are
coming from the hospitals.
To utilize the federal program
to move back to increase those
medicaid reimbursement rates so
we're no longer paying below
cost.
Further at your encouragement
with one hundred percent of the
legislators that I spoke with as
we were putting the bill
together
we had concerns about how do we
keep those dollars in the state
we don't want them going for
profits elsewhere we don't want
them going to yards for ceo's.
And we put in a provision that
requires at least seventy five
percent of those funds
the net new phones be
able to be represented reported
each year to the hca on how they
were spent inside the state none
of those reports exist because
as we said or later we haven't
even had the funds starting the
funds haven't started to float
because c m s has not even
approved the program yet.
It has been submitted we've
worked very closely with hca and
I would be remissionatics stand
huge courages to secretary our
meal and her team won their work
I think we have pushed them to
work at what I would refer to is
the speed of industry and they
have stepped up to the plate
we got the submission the
submission to see him as goes in
two parts the first part was
submitted by early may the
second hard on the disbursement
was submitted on august and
we've started to receive the
first round of questions in fact
we've gotten six rounds of
questions back on the despite
i'm sorry on the assessment
piece from c m as already
so that work is in process
and with better funded hospitals
that provides that opportunity
for some of those hospitals who
were significantly in the red to
fill those coffers to be back at
break even and sustainable but
for those who were moderately
losing money that now have a
four to five to six percent
margin to have some dollars that
they can invest a growth
services in their communities
when those hot small hospitals
do well our entire healthcare
ecosystem and state a new mexico
does well.
It was not difficult for me when
we put this together and put the
model to go to our large urban
hospitals and say you're going
to have to pay a
disproportionate share to make
this work
I had no resistance back as long
as it worked for them
as well they want to make it
work for the rural hospitals why
because they understand what
i've described you before as the
spiders were the fact you mess
up anything or touch anything in
our health care system in the
state and the entire state feels
it
if
union county in the northeast
corner about as far away from us
is could be closers.
Robert and his facility will
feel the impact because most
patients get spread to places
that they want to be able to
transfer patients to and get
care
i've shared some examples here
of some of the hospitals that
have been given as examples in
the past of what it means to
them
and what the
value of the hda will bring to
their community.
On this lied I share some of the
examples of what our hospitals
have expressed their ability to
use these funds will be
number one and these are in
order of the responses that came
back
first and foremost a recruitment
retention and far market wages
for employees and professional
staff.
Second equipment is support the
mass programs in their
communities staff education and
expanded paint internship
programs all right with the end
the guidelines of what we are
hoping to accomplish with the
hda.
The.
We know it has a sunset of jail
life first two thousand thirty I
will tell you I really to my
members every time we talk about
this you have a forduciary
responsibility you have a moral
and ethical obligation with
these funds.
To improve the care in our state
will be reporting this back to
you as a committee i'm sure as
well as to the legislature as we
come and ask to remove that sign
set class and intend to be able
to comprove to you the
improvements that it's made
throughout the state not just at
one hospital or two but through
the state it's critical to the
viability of our rural
hospitals.
It's critical for the increase
in excess of care which has to
be our focus.
The.
The.
So lastly I share one more slide
that I had from before before I
hand this over
you're gonna hear from me
throughout this upcoming
legislative session of an
emphasis on work force I mention
the numbers for nursing
but i'll work for shortages on
our physicians our pa's are nps
or nurse midwives are our ends
are lpn's I can continue down
the list from respiratory
therapist a radiation
technologist a paramedics the
emergency technicians there is
not a health care related
position
including our non clinical areas
of dietary and housekeeping that
we are not sure staffed and as
we continue to see an increase
in demand year over a year
that's going to continue to come
with the increased aging of our
baby boomers we have to find
ways to develop a work force in
their state.
Which will also be the right
thing to do for our rural
communities in an economic
opportunity for them to stay in
their communities and not have
them leave our state
so growing our own is going to
be not only critical but it's
the area that I see is the way
for us to find some success as
the entire nation is got a work
for shortage so we're not just
battling to try and improve
things here or battling against
keeping other people from
recruiting our people
as we put for this effort so
with that i'm gonna hand the
conversation over to sandy peak
i'm sorry to sandy a manual
front peak
may be not a saving peak as many
I thought it would be great as
we're down in the southern part
of the state and it is used at
committee of dealt.
So much would be april health
and behavioral half issues one
of our great
behavioral health facilities
resides down here in the
southern part not here in silver
city but down the southern part
of donate county which.
She will remind you or I will
mind you she doesn't even know
she sits in what's classified as
a class a urban county in san at
research she sits in a very
rural area and so when we handed
over to uh sandy manual
thank you mr chair members of
the committee thank you for
hearing us today i've been asked
to speak about challenges I have
I broke it down into three basic
challenges that i'll get into
but first i'll tell you a little
bit about the peak
I am an lcos I grew up
here in new mexico and have
lived here my whole entire life
have served as a social worker
for over thirty five years now
in los cruces specifically but
also have served the whole state
I have been with the peak since
two thousand and fourteen and
their ceo for the last six years
so my investment in this
impassion for this is is hugely
immense and and the work that we
do is hugely meaningful
the services that we provide
rrn sorry
we have impatient psychiatric
care I have eighty eight acute
psychiatric beds and thirty
residential treatment beds for
adolescence we provide
outpatient psychiatric care we
provide specific medical details
partial hospitalization for
adults and out of lessons
residential treatment I
mentioned we have a sort of
community treatment which is a
phenomenal program that services
seriously manily ill and
actually works to keep and
prevent rehospitalizations so
those cranic patients that have
the read mission after read
mission go to the ers come to
the behavioural health
facilities this program is
designated and design to
clinically support the semi
population to prevent that and
then we do substance abuse
treatment of course
so the three major challenges
that i'm going to touch on today
is navigating the complex state
process.
And this impacts are expanding
programs low rates in high costs
causing operational challenges
as well as work force
recruitment so i'm navigating
the state complete complex state
process i'll touch on five main
areas license and certification
if I want to expand a program
i'm a well established hospital
I have well established out
patient programs to expand I
have to go through the whole
license and certification
process all over again to open
into another community which is
a complex process it's a time
consuming process it's not
unbearable it's not possible but
it can be a deterrent medicaid
credentialing follows that
process and this enables us to
bill and when we opened our
partial hospitalization serving
the
espanola community for
adolescence it took us nine
months to get medicaid approval
that's nine months operating
that's nine months paying leaves
that's nine months having staff
that's nine months you get the
picture
urban classification yes I will
touch on that and I will talk to
whoever will listen to me about
this I am in sanitary set
community of I think five
thousand people I serve every
single corner of this state we
serve over three thousand
patients a year in behavioral
health crisis substance uses
crisis
and I am designated as an urban
hospital that has a financial
impact when you're graciously
received six percent increase on
our rates through a letter of
direction through the
legislative session very
grateful for that
that was for urban rural
received twelve percent so an
android touch down the hda
impact the difference between
the impact for rural vs.
Urban and on that financial
picture as well
residential treatment i'm going
to talk about our kids in
residential treatment and
education if you are operating
in a community and in a school
district where the school
district doesn't partner with
you you we are responsible for
these kids education so our cost
have gone up from i'm just say
what it is six thousand dollars
a month to twenty two thousand
dollars a month for online a
credited education for our
residence that we are providing
mental health substance use
careful that's a huge impact and
then lastly on the the state
processes is transportation
you're going to hear a lot of
what i'm sharing echoed there a
lot of what roberts shared and
troy to shared echoed cause we
do share the same
challenges we really do
transportation there's a lack of
resources it's not a lack of
desire or a lack of wanting to
get moved somebody from the er
who has a mental health prices
who needs to come to sanitary sa
there's they could set in the er
for days and that has happened
so transportation getting a
patient from point eight to
point b is a significant issue
and if you think about those
beds really need to be open for
the stroke the heart attacked
the broken arms the stitches
whatever whatever the case may
be then the behavioral health
crisis
so next is are a rates versus
our operational cost
we serve a challenging
population
and our residential program is
highly regulated
as as all programs should be
regulated and it comes in a a
greater staff in metrics even
though it's a lower level of
care that comes with the cost of
sta.
Um needing specialised
licensed collins is a challenge
i'm creating specialty programs
to serve population of kids who
make now be going out of state
to receive those services
finding and paying for that
specialized license staff is a
challenge educational
requirements I already talked
about
and then just yeah I mean that
that's really what it comes down
to your cost versus your what
you're bringing in and
it's really night it doesn't
match up does not match up
for work force recruitment in
the rural communities it takes
us a lot longer to fill open
positions about an average of
ninety days
it's very difficult it has been
challenging more so than I even
imagined when we opened in the
espenial community I am finding
license staff that are willing
to serve in those communities
we have a phenomenal team that
we've put together there and
incredible lcs who
is frame as beneal there
achieved the level of license
education and her experience and
has come back to that community
to serve in this program and
were a very grateful for that so
that's a blessing that's
incredible but I need more so we
can serve more patience and
I had to add a full fte a full
time recruiter that's something
i've been doing this for a long
time i've never had to have a
full time recruiter I do now
that's also an extra added ft in
my budget
so higher labor costs
i'm paying twenty percent higher
in the rural markets just to
attract the temple and that's
what the market is demanding
my turn over rate is higher my
overtime percentage is higher.
I'm sign on and retention
bonuses there's a financial
impact there again hd is going
to be a him huge
benefit for us to impact some of
these challenges that I am
sharing with you but just a
given example of salary and
wages and that is any operations
that's going to be the biggest
and the biggest impact on your
budget I have gone up fourteen
dollars in my average salary and
wage sense twenty twenty and I
used twenty twenty as a
benchmark if I go before twenty
twenty the the variances massive
I went ahead and just counted
covered in an and compared to
where I am today.
So what do we do about it as an
organization as the peak we get
involved as much as we can every
statewide collaborative
initiative that we can get
involved in and every community
that we are able to we get
involved and and because as
community have providers which
is not just the peak is all of
the behavioural health providers
we all have the same mission and
we all care about the same thing
we're not looking at each other
as competition we we all want
the full system to be better and
we all collaborate together for
the better man of those that
need our services out whatever
level of care that is and with
that I close
to
thank you mister gerald stand
for questions
we'll thank you all very very
interesting information and and
helpful um remember where we
started list I think we started
over here less time so start
over here representative you
want to start first broker cover
think you mister chair and thank
you to you off for a very
extensive overview and
very honest which I think is
really important because we have
to hear the real effects the
real stories the how we can
actually address the challenges
that you have a numerated I do
have a
on page seventeen
I just have a small request
and an i'm big on how language
and the words we use
a fact
what we do sometimes not always
but for the most part so I see
that you described charity care
in the world that I come from.
We're trying to reverse the
quote and quote stigma
associated it with poverty um
reverse the way we are
will remove ourselves from
inferring handouts versus
for example and other language
could be used as
assistance
those kinds of words because I
think we want in my view to
remove or to dignify poverty
because poverty is not it's a
social economic condition not an
individual condition if it were
up to individuals and they had
control mister chair of their
social economic will being
futures and all of that is we
know
things would be very different
so
this is my only no questions
because you gave a very thorough
overview but just don't the
changing of language because it
also has how we approach thinks
and arm I don't want us to be in
the monitor break away from
those stigmas so mister chair
and to panel thank you again for
your very extensive overview and
very appreciate thank you thank
you mr chair thank you we often
use the term community benefit
as well and
I appreciate your comment think
is that's a great term also
community benefit thank you
thank you representative senator
printed no questions senators
said the allocate.
Thank you mister chair
I don't know if you had an
opportunity listen to the public
comment that we had today about
hospitals being sold
rural house was ethino I should
start by saying i'm a huge band
of rural hospitals I been
supporting um the opening of
rural hospital and blends a
county for decades now because
my grandmother died on the way
to the in the ambulance on the
weight of the hospital in
albuquerque and mine's not an
isolated story so i'm a huge van
um but they public comment was
about the sale of these
hospitals to to public uhm I
mean to private equity firms and
um
I was just my trying to put all
of this together this the admin
is this a way to really avert
that from from happening the ada
because it would provide
financial support so that it
would not be necessary to to to
do this and if you didn't hear
that public comment I have a
copy if you want look at it
mr idea I think I recall that
comment but
do I believe that the financial
answer this little differently
that I don't know that that was
the intent of how we drafted the
hda but I will tell you that.
Hospitals that get in financial
distress often look to others to
help bail them out or to help
them survive so they can stay in
the community so by default
making our hospital are
especially our rural hospitals
but all of our hospitals more
sustainable financially would
remove that motivation for a
need to look for how words
others but I need to remiss to
say that we have a number of
hospitals in our state that are
both not for profit and for
profit some of the four profit
are owned by private equity some
or not some are republicanly
traded
and while yes there are there is
a lot of buzz around the nation
and there are reports out on
national implications I think
the experience that we are
seeing for the most part of the
state new mexico doesn't reflect
that directly and we have many
communities that would not have
health care providers without
the private equity investment
but answer your question
directly I do believe that that
would take out one of the
motivations that often leads to
a transaction whether that's the
private equity or we've had uh
one of our hospitals in home
agordo did so
pardon me did sell to enough for
profit uh company that happened
to be out of state for those
reasons but I think it would
mitigate some of that motivation
as I recall and I wasn't a coast
bunch of anything but as I
recall the bill there and
senator do hig and
representative of japansky
introduced was something about a
review process before that would
take place would you oppose or
support that idea of a review
process before a hospital.
Can you answer briefly thinking
i'll answer quickly
we are actually in discussions
with the us I am participating
in there are hearings as they
are preparing to have a revision
to that that was a one
pass that has a sunset of june
thirtieth of this year and
elements of that.
Yes are being discussed of both
community hearings and review
processes for certain
transactions
thank you mister chair thank you
senator representative shovers
thank you mister chair so I I do
have a couple of questions one
of them is for
health regional and western has
a rn program can you tell us how
many are ends are coming to work
at health how many of them were
actually staying in the
community
thank you mr chair members of
the committee that the last
class that graduated this past
december I believe there were
six nurses rans that sir joined
healer regional
approximations here a half half
of the class were from outer
state right so they get our kids
from arizona as well as texas
and and they go back to or
they're frame and and where they
live in and of the the remaining
half
those that choose to stay and
want to stay in and silver
we were able to crew and those
that wanted to go to albert
kirkin and more larger urban
areas that ended up but
so that was that was the number
and then the other question I
have is
about the hospitals that have
limited cash on hand tray I
think you said that there were
three and now there were four
for that have less than twenty
days which which hospitals are
those
mister chair and members of the
committee with that I apologize
that I don't have the freedom to
disclose that information for
those individual hospitals per
so I
at this point I can't respond to
that question is there any point
in time that you will be able to
mister I think each of those are
free to discuss their own
financial situations but they
don't give me that authority to
share their financial
information.
We're not
going up to
probably for a multitude of
reasons of both competitive
disadvantage with their
competitors with their vendors
suppliers and those who have
legal concerns with them
so then I have some comments
that I wanted to make and you
know I think that you know
there's several issues that you
are brought up in terms of the
difficulty and providing health
care and i've probably more than
once have said that in my
opinion what's really driving
and creating the problems in
health care to support profit
nature of healthcare and we
really need to get away from
that we need to change the way
that we provide health care we
need to make some major
changements and that it changes
then that I also heard you say
that medicaid processes are
difficult
there some you don't get
authorizations on time we've
heard other people talk about
other organizations mister
church speak about the fact that
they get there you know billing
is late
and so it seems like to me that
we also need to provide
supplement by that process as
well and I think having multiple
mcos is part of the problem
because you obviously have to
spend time billing each single
one of them and every single one
of them may have different
processes for your billing so
maybe we need to change that as
well
welcome well deal will the other
piece that I wanted to talk
about was really staffing and I
think that one of the things
that needs to happen is that
ceo's and hospital manager
really need to listen to their
work one of the things that I
have heard nurses and other
healthcare provisionals say is
that they are very concerned
about the number of patients
there that they are signed
because that creates
unsafe working conditions as a
matter of one are in who is who
has only been in our end for a
couple of years told me the
other day that she's got to part
time status.
Because of the fact that her
patient loads she feels as
unsafe and too happy so think
really think that that's another
piece that needs to happen
you'll need to think you know
need to listen to what the
workers are saying to you and
how they think that they're
working conditions can be
improved and maybe they'll stay
longer thank you mister
representative from
thank you mr chair
the information that we've
gotten is just you know so broad
it's hard to pick one thing to
ask you about
the why are you showing or a
rooping the public and the
private hospitals together on
all the presentations
i'll let you enter that first.
Mr chair and
representative for a i'm not
certain that I follow you when
you say grouping as we present
all of the financial information
or the volume information or
vacancies is that what you're
referring to
yes and and most of the
information seems to be not
differentiating cause it seems
like there is a lot more of the
private equity firms you know
buying up and and taking over
even our
hospit.
I don't believe that to be the
case in the mexico I in fact I
can't think of the last private
equity
enterprise that is acquired a
facility in new mexico in fact
in las vegas you had a private
equity on facility that was
actually acquired by an up for
profit energy it was gone the
opposite direction as the most
recent transaction I can take up
but the presentation was to look
at if there wasn't a strategic
reason of grouping it was to
look at all the hospital members
I represent all the hospitals
regardless of their ownership
status and they provide health
care throughout the states I was
trying to give you a picture of
what health care looks like in
our state
thank you man mister chair I
think in future maybe we should
be looking at that because it
seems like the for a profit for
a profit industry
you know has different types of
a motivation in our state and um
that it just seems like.
The
four profit you know is
cutting back on it a lot of
things that may be is making it
so that as
representative chaves was
talking about you know stapping
not being and as high as it
should be and also you know how
quick you know people are seeing
and that could be causing some
of the
amount practice issues and if we
could differentiate between you
know what rules are non profit
entities are doing as compared
to the four profit and equity
firms um we might be able to see
a pattern and also
we've heard where
some of the
hospitals are for profit are
taking their funding like out of
new mexico right away instead of
you know keeping it here and
investing more into our state
there is so many different
issues
that we we can explore later so
thank you
thank you representative of
send a representative of thumps
thank you mr chair and i'm gonna
start out at like no one is
surprised
that if you don't like the cost
numbers that were using provide
them to the lfc the fact that we
have to epra information about
hospital costs is completely
unacceptable I mean it but i've
heard you today and so you know
throughout the the malpractice
discussion etc etc that saying
the numbers are wrong well if
you want us to have right
numbers provide him to us
provide him to lfc we got that
we got that from the LFC report
yesterday.
That they have to ipra the
health care authority to get
that data so if you want money
from us we really want to know
what's going on and i'll just
leave that at that but on page
eighteen
the first bullet more acute
severe conditions why are they
more acuten severe
thank you mr chair and committee
and madam representative why are
they more acute I am not a
physician I can't diagnose and
say why they are other than my
experience I would say there's a
couple things
one you've got an aging
population
as a mentioned earlier with the
baby boomers that we typically
have more severe conditions
later in life so we have a lot
more people that are now having
more severe conditions I think
you also have situations where
people have delayed and put off
care
not just because
I keep and brief please I only
have three minutes so on page
thirty three for you ma'am
the kids that are in treatment
who have an ip are mandated by
federal lock to be covered by
their
local education agency so if you
get someone transferred in from
grants you should be able to
work out an more you with grants
to pay for that kids schooling
because they are responsible for
that i'm and then in terms of
the on page thirty four
i'm curious
yeah the cell of the
the twenty twenty salary and
wages was twenty two dollars and
twenty twenty fourth thirty four
dollars i'm is our ceo's and
folks like that their salary
included in this because we've
heard about some ridiculously
high ceo salary so.
You know if you if you see yours
making a million dollars it's
going to make
gonna make everyone look like
they're getting more money and
i'm just curious who's included
in that mr chair
members of the committee thank
you this it these numbers are
inclusive of my whole operation
in sanitary ser and especially
so every single staff member
from myself all the way through
the organization ceo's aren't
correct I thank you for that and
then and i've i've been looking
at my phone a lot because i'm
getting texts but
this is private equity risk dot
org the private equity risks
score for new mexico is very
high risk one hundred out of
hundred points new mexico's
amount in the top ten states
with the largest increase in the
share of private sector as well
as nursing holmes
changing
change in the share of work
force controlled by private
equity from twenty eighteen to
twenty twenty two forty nine
point two percent
let's see
average medicare patient survey
rating two point six
out of private equity controlled
acute first I don't understand
that one okay the rate of rear
mission of these are unreadable
so basically what i'm saying is
that
that
we are at risk for private
equity we know that's not the
best way to provide health care
that files go up infections go
up read missions go up and so
that's something that we as a
committee are going to be in the
osi is looking into ways to to
oversee this but that's a major
red flag for the state of new
mexico and we all need to be
paying attention thank you
mister chair.
Thank you representative we're
going out to a representative
incent
thank you mister chairman
on your recruitment and
retention
eighty eight hundred nurses how
in the world are we going to get
ahead of that
mr chair representative
mentioned that a great question
that we continue to push and ask
on all fronts I don't believe
there is.
He silver bolled a single answer
in fact we have to do everything
weekend
we have pushed for a new as a
legislature the last two years I
believe have
increased funding to the north
schools of nursing through the
state fifteen million each year
I believe is the correct number
to increase enrollment but
increasing and roment uh hour
schools of nursing won't come
close if I remember correctly we
had uh just under thirteen
hundred
students in the school of
nursing in each class in the
most recent class and just under
twelve hundred of them passed
the end clarks the certification
for a nurse in the past year so
if you had no one retire if you
had no one move out and everyone
kept working that's only twelve
hundred feeting into the system
we know there are retirements
and moves out there is an
international nursing is it use
of technology to ease the burden
on our existing nurse staff to
be able to take care of.
More patience in a lower uh form
and I don't want to insight
there the fact that i'm
mean suggesting we should have
nurses taking care of more
patience but I think we have to
look at always how can we do it
and effectively have that nurse
be able to take care of more
patience through the use of
technology to help with
documentation for instance and
other what I would call non
clinical functions with their
duties or got to look at every
measure that's out there now
part of that I would say
is we are already currently it's
not like when eighty eight
hundred down from where we were
last year in this mess already
in this trough and we are
finding the ways to survive but
my message in my signaling is we
went from upper six thousand
to eighty eight hundred or not
going the right direction and
yet the demand for care is
increasing which means we're
going to need even more and so
represented vincent we need
everybody's help representative
jones is a former nurse and
she's had great ideas I think is
going to take her great ideas
and your great ideas and
everyone in this committee and
everyone in our state try and
figure out how we do this and
it's going to be unoffered uh
whether that's additional uh
help from the federal level in
getting international nurses
brought in and it is it's
increases in our uh
education system I read here in
the state stop going back to
what I can briefly mention we've
got to get more of a high school
kids involved and engaged and
getting there
cork regular matter the way so
the when they finish high school
they've already got that a
financial benefit to them but
also we can get them into their
nursing school classes in
graduate them quicker it's gonna
take all the above
plus a miracle thank you for the
trolley and thank you mister
chairman I you know and and like
my colleagues are talking about
minimal staffing we can staff
what we got I don't know how
we're going to do minimal
staffing and the only other
thing I was going to see real
quick is
as far as putting a
i'm not saying that this needs
to happen but you know.
On an ambulance the possibly
put an apa on an ambulance and
put in a portable blood gas
machine there were you run a
panel on them and doing stuff in
the field and just you know
maybe it's not nine one one
maybe it's just gonna be rural
care
thank you mister chair
thank you represent have been
sent a representative block you
turn thank you mister chairman
let me start my time so thank
you try think you guys for all
you do I really appreciate what
you've done I think uh at least
for me I know i'm turning my own
horn in my community but I
really am excited about
christmas buying gerald champion
regional medical center I my
physician and all the people
that I go to in almogordo I feel
like the the quality of care has
just improved and it was already
very good as it was and I see
that it's like a lot more copic
and we've a larger network so I
I think that that's actually
probably a benefit to our
community to have that increased
investment in these local
communities because it as a
texas firm that has many many
roots across new mexico like in
santa fe and other places we
have more access to larger
networks of people so I I think
do you think that is a a big
potential
opportunity for the future for a
state have these these big non
profit energies help alleviate
some of the burdens on the local
levels to create a bigger
network of better providers
better care and higher quality
mister chairman
thank you mister chair committee
and representative block I think
having entities that can
consolidate when needed is a
benefit I don't say that
consolidation is always a
benefit but one of the things
that i've said is that often
times we look and say big as bad
and we often miss the opposite I
don't believe that bigger as bad
I think there are other things
that can drive bad but we miss
out unefficiency.
And every one of us I believe in
this room thinks healthcare
costs too much and yes the head
of the hospital association said
that so if I am dismissed by my
members tomorrow be looking for
a lot of job but healthcare
costs too much
and so as we look for
efficiencies one of the benefits
they do come with bigger is
efficiencies especially in non
patient facing areas in your
human resources department in
your billing department in your
legal department your data
department when we can find ways
to minimise those costs and make
those less so we can have more
money spent in the patient
delivery patient care delivery
areas that's a benefit.
Thank you mister chairman and I
agree you know I I think anyone
who wants to invest in a
community with health care is
doing the lords work and I think
we need to continue to help
pull everybody up together
instead of saying oh well you're
owned by certain people or your
own by certain people you know
their health care providers in
your community we should be
grateful that they're even there
at all and I think that's
something that we really miss a
lot of the time the legislative
process there's a lot of a
conjecture about all these evil
big corporations are and they're
really nonprofits and I think
that it's important to not
demonize the very people who are
keeping this system alive and
still investing in this
community so I I just think it's
great especially for my
community i'm very happy and i'm
very content to see the growth
that we've seen and I hope that
that continues across the state
in all the communities that we
have so there goes my timer
thank you mister chairman thank
you all and I appreciate it good
to see you again mister white
thanks
thank you representative
representative of jones wow
that's a talent taking that fast
I cannot do that then he was
here think you are for year
presentations it's just it's
overwhelming to think about
having to do everything at once
earlier and and I I wanted to
ask you troy
I heard you say that what we
could do as a committee and as
the legislature is get rid of
distractions and focus on
improving access to care would
you say that work force is the
primary issue in access to care.
Mr chair members of committee
and representative jones I think
it is one of the key components
there are many uh but if we
solve the others and we don't
solve work force we won't solve
access so it is one of the key
critical elements but then we
also have to be able to attract
the uh
physicians and priders to work
here and stay here and have the
funds to be able to support them
with the clinic and the staff in
the equipment that's needed so
it is multi dimensional but
clearly without work force we
want improve access
I I are kind of agree because
i've only been heard less than
two years now and we've already
gone from about six thousand
dollars a short that's the first
number I heard to eat eight
eight eighty I mean eighty eight
hundred that's incredible and
such a short time like you said
there are so many variables
there
thinking about just my own
nursing experience and and just
the small things that we could
do and i'm I don't know they
meet we may already be doing
them technology I know that some
of the hospitals I work for in
the past night here in new
mexico
they're using technology they
have one person on each floor
whose watching pay all the
patients just kind of a resource
person who's saying hey that
person looks like they're trying
to get out of bed those go get
him you know and the things that
you can't see unless you got
you know a monitor in there and
that's just one thing they
probably do that at you and but
i'm not i'm not sure maybe they
don't and that can really help
provide better career and eh and
then one thing we haven't really
talked about much that might I
mean it could help us just a big
campaign for nursing you know
the the pandemic was so hard and
and nursing you know we got a
bad wrap in a lot of hazard it
was just a real difficult time
but maybe it's time to promote
nursing in a way that would it
would attract young people to
want to serve others in that
way.
It's just just another thought
and a very small piece of a big
huge puzzle but um appreciate
all of all the other all of you
do and
I would love to see the peak
facility sometime i've got a lot
of tourists to do and that
that's one of them on my list
but i'd appreciate that thank
you all and thank you mister
chair
thanks for representative jones
representative
rate on time
thank you mr tear and present as
we've had a conversation about
the need for an increase in
doctors and nurses so I
understand that there was a
residency program in the
hospitals here at one time it
doesn't exist anymore my
question to you is is there plan
to bring it back and how can we
help
thank you mister chair members
of the committee yes there is a
plan to bring it back there was
a a panel yesterday regarding
that discussion in the progress
that's been made in and across
the state but here as well uhm
uh with hms and heal originals
partners with the primary care
of training consortium there
there are discussions happening
about bringing the
family medicine residency
problem back to super city and a
mr madam mr chair and mr speaker
do you have a debt line I
projected date for when this
might begin to occur
there's no projected date
timing is based on a cgme and
when uh when
medical students go into
residencies and the process of
that in having your surveys
worth the credit and
organizations and so it's uh
there's no timeline set just yet
thank you and and finally mr
chair and presenters and with
respect to the eighty eight
hundred and nurses that are
needed.
And the sixty two hundred in
this area I think you said sixty
two hundred are any of those
administrative nurse positions
are those just simply
that simply but are they are and
that to tell me what type of
nurses are you talking about
thank you mister chair and
committee again representative
heard and I would have to check
the details from a department of
work for solutions that the ones
you did the report
in the study I don't know if
they included or excluded
nursing leadership positions as
the way we had to refer to them
but I can tell you
proportionally that's always a
very small number out of the
total uhm
the year you're nursing
leadership positions are not
over a thousand
the main adding because I mean
i'd be five hundred it's a it's
a smaller number
and to be clear on that those
numbers that came from a
department of work for solution
survey of open posted positions
that are actively being
recruited for
now just for clarification mr
chair was that active noticed
nursing positions in this area
in this in this county are
around the state
actually I just got to go to
take the opportunity to defer to
linda single I didn't know she
was here she were closer with
there but I enter you to
statewide number but let me
defer over mr chair if I can do
mislend signal
thank you mr chair represent and
turned in actually the number
for july four are ins is eight
thousand eight hundred and fifty
two
d duplicated job advertisements
and that deduplicated means that
work for our service check down
to make sure there's no
duplication the only thing that
might happen is if somebody
didn't had hired and then
didn't.
Take them off that's the
category for our end only then
there's a category for cardiac
around there and you know
emergency room
and there are several categories
there's no practition
which is around eight hundred
shorts or advertised jobs so it
probably doesn't have very many
administrators in it
thank you madame chair thank
you.
Send to a rodriguez thank you
mister chairman I don't have any
questions I just want to say
thank you to the panelist for
your work and in special eighth
bristine on whether with such
great challenges you know when
linda siegel mentioned the
shortage of nurses you know it
hasn't gotten any better mister
chairman lend I remember we
heard it was six thousand and
some that was an under statement
just a year to ago and it
continues to grow so
I know we have a lot of work
together to do together thank
you very much
thank you senator representative
chase thank you mister chair I
have a couple of comments and
suggestions first of all when I
first started teaching and
california and I ended up taking
a job in the rural area they
were paying more for a rural
area and so I think that's going
to be just part of your equation
always
we heard some pretty compelling
testimony from doctors stiner
about how his practice has
changed over the years now I
don't know where he's am I
affiliated but we hear this
alert from primary care
providers who aren't now working
where there is a private equity
to take over of a practice
i'm familiar with that in the
albuquerque area and it changes
the practice of medicine and
they don't have the artime and
they aren't as happy and
patience owned his happy and
things
the weights seem to be much much
longer access seems to be
changed so that's why we won't
know the difference we and i'm
not going to be here I am
retiring at the end of this term
but I think the legislature as
the appropriating authority to
help them especially that has a
representatives.
We need to have the data
regarding public versus public
hospitals versus private equity
and because we want to have the
appropriate funding to support
our hospitals and I I do think
we should probably take note and
their may need to be somebody to
present to us at some time how
we got to the point where we
have such a high rate of private
equity operations in new mexico
when some of them used to be uhm
public hospitals and
i'm i'm not saying they're able
but i'm just saying there is
probably a disproportionate
salary level for a lot of a lot
of folks and I know providers my
chief of status husbandness is
certified nurse practitioner on
when loveless was taken over by
a private equity firm he decided
that he wasn't going to do that
anymore and and my nose
interrupted doctor is great I
still go there um I appreciate
everyone but we are losing
people because of the the lack
of autonomy in the practice so I
think that's what we need for
the future and I wish everybody
like and getting it.
Thank you representative chase
my first question has to do with
for you choice mister clerk the
health delivery in access act
has a
percentage in there that at
least seventy five percent
has to be of the money that's
distributed through the hda has
to be retained in the state and
spent here
that seems like a I mean I know
you said this is really good
because seventy five percent is
going to be kept here
where else I mean other than
going to corporate headquarters
for us with it go.
Thank you mister chair and
mister chair and committee
part of the recently developed
that percentages as looking at
not the overall operations but
the increase of those dollars
from hda part of expansion of
services and even existing
services we have to bring in
traveler labor from outside this
date we don't have we don't
acquire medical supplies from in
the state we're not we don't
have an in the state medical
supplier we don't have a drug
manufacturer some of the basic
operational costs of running the
hospital or simply acquired from
out of state and so that tell
that figure was dragged as we
work with hcae to really look at
what is the incremental amount
that we can see needs to be
expenditure in the state to try
and keep those dollars here
okay at your I guess I
understand pharmaceutical so
you're buying them from a
company and another state but
if you're hiring a travel
contract with the traveler to
come and work as a nurse in a
hospital aren't you paying them
here and they'll live here and
spend the money here so wouldn't
that be considered in state
mister chair you could protect
usually you are hiring those
traveler agencies not directly
as a one on one contract with
the individual they have an
agency and the agency is added
there are some agencies in the
state but the largest agencies
are not in our state that
control the majority of them so
the billing transacts between
two businesses one of which is
not in the state
will there and that gets me kind
of to my second question on page
eighteen you talk about.
The three largest hospitals in
the state loveless press between
and UNM
together employed just over
sixty two hundred nurses does
that include their traveling
nurses
that does not
mister chair sorry mister chair
that includes how many they have
hired they currently have
several hundred between those
two eight don't have a number of
top my head but they have
several hundred in addition to
that that are traveler nurses
or traveler positions clinicians
trying to take care of the all
your patience that they
currently.
Then make my other questions are
and this could fall into the
idle of curiosity
category but
over the less several years
we've had attempts to get more
psychiatric hospitals and of
course the big valency accounty
expenditure the fifty million
dollars.
Is there any progress that's
been made that you could share
with this about the valencia
county hospital that the
governor allocated fifty million
to thank you mister chair I
would not be able to answer I
know you would have a lot to
head of the hospital
I don't have much information
other than what i've seen in the
news as far as ground breaking
could occur sometime when within
the next two months but really I
know that I mean that's
progressive and we saw that in
the news within the last few
weeks
oh yeah you're from valencia
canadia you know
so it's not a myth there really
will be a hospital in the
account
message others controversy about
the location of it but it's it
does not look like that's gonna
stop
this tip we're going to go ahead
and build it regardless of where
the location
they think is there was a whole
issue
it looks like it's moving
forward the commission has
approved it in its ok I was only
been two years so I guess that's
now I then then this issue of
the psychiatric hospital we
heard this morning that the that
the uh
behavior of the program here in
in a grant county and and the
surrounding counties is
a catherine and and
what am I leaving out secure I
guess is the other one
that they're although that
they're very interested in
developing
a saturday and impatient
psychiatric facility here
we know last year that the
eastern plains four counties in
the eastern planes got an
appropriation from the
legislature of ten million
dollars for a psychiatric
facility in I don't know to come
carry clovers somewhere out
there
it seems to me and we've heard
that I mean we were going to
lost cruises a few years ago the
need for a regional psychiate
regional branch of the state
hospital.
What's what's your take on the
need for additional impatient
psych facilities and
I mean we apparently we've just
been leaving it up to the
private sector to step up and
take the risk of investing their
money in doing that
but the need is is is everywhere
we go were told the need is
great for for additional ones
thank you mr chair and i'm gonna
ask sandy the color commentate
on this I can tell you
I think there are differing
opinions of whether or not we
have enough adult
psychiatric beds in the state
and I think that stems from the
question of if we had adequate
outpatient services would we
really need more impatient beds
or not and I think there's a
debate in this spew over a yes
or no one I think where there is
no desperate is we are
underbedded on adolescent
behavior of that and I would
have not heard one person in the
industry and legislature in any
of my members ever question
whether or not we need more
adolescent uh benchmark sandy if
you can all met and you do have
a natalise in united states as
well don't how many beds is that
one mister charis idea and I
have thirty bets for residential
treatment and there is a
shortage of residential
treatment beds psychiatric
residential treatment in the
state of new mexico i'm in terms
of the the rest of your question
I will tell you that the
psychiatric hospitals that are
operating across the state right
now we all have beds available
we're all in communication with
each other I think that it's the
full continue of care and as
troy mentioned the outpatient
that were best out patient
services all of the work that
gets done to prevent a rear
admission or patient admission
in the first place a lot of
resources can be spent there in
terms of adding more impatient
security.
Beds I really think that there
we have good resources I think
it's utilization and and the
full continue utilization of the
for continuing will I yeah I
couldn't agree with you more in
this morning doctor are seated
psychiatrists to works here is
all good medical services made
the point that we've we've
created two options impatient or
outpatient and we would say
outpatient and that context is
usually a weekly visit to a
shrink for a
counselor for a med tweaking the
medication or counseling but
that there is a huge need way
bigger than that in between four
intensive outpatient programming
of all sorts
of and I had one last question
for you I I missed it I guess in
your presentation when you
started talking about hiring
somebody in espanola
why is sent the terrace uh
psychedric hospital hiring
somebody and has been your and
are the hiring people in other
parts of the state mister chair
thank you
opened a partial hospitalization
which is a very intensive
outbeating program in especially
that service at all lessons and
and so we're operating in
especially as well and where is
it
i'm sorry where is it housed
with what building are you using
mr chair we took over the old
police department and kay
allegra
well thank you for doing it we
have been trying and and and
nathan is aware of those we've
been trying to pull together the
resources in alberta of which
there are many more than in most
parts state to create an
intensive outpatient program for
alva kirky they would operate
two two different cateries of
patience a day
and we think we can do it but we
just have to be self to get iraq
together.
But thank you for taking the the
bull by the warrants and getting
it started doing it anywhere
else
we have plans for other areas of
the state next year yes sir
well anything else we have any
other loose that people want to
bring up
thank you thank you mister clark
and rabbit and the social worker
who runs the psychiatric
hospital
they're two social workers on
this committee by the way
representative charges and I
both social workers so it's
always glad to see a social
worker employed a lot of a sorry
because there's no jobs good
thank you so much okay members
tonight we have
we've been invited we have an
invitation from the medical
services did you want to say
anything about it give us we
have directions I guess in our
packet
how to get there
or this is oh I see you thank
you mr chairman and canadian
members the invitation is in
your pack that we hands out this
morning we're doing the tour at
five thirty at the two costs of
crisis center and immediately
followed by reception dinner at
the convention center little
couple blocks away from the tour
at six thirty so we look forward
to send you other
the tours at five thirty at two
castle in the address for both
locations on the card
it's
the card is in have little
envelope yeah
all right alright thank you and
with that the
the
september twenty fourth meeting
of the legislative health and
human services committee is in
recess until tomorrow morning at
