Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I'm
Representative Catherine Cullen.
I represent Sandoval District 57
is the northern part of Rio
Rancho.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
good morning, everyone. It's
great to be in, in Roswell. Um,
love the rain. Um, I'm Debbie
Serignon. I represent the House
District 21 in Bernal Leo
County. Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman.
State Senator Crystal Brantly, I
have the Southwest corner of New
Mexico, Senator Azel and Senator
Boone speak highly of Roswell,
and I understand why and so
we're excited. Thank you for
hosting us today.
Yes, Senator Pat Moon District
27, uh.
Oh, the
roughly from 7 or 2nd Street
North in Roswell, the the rest.
Jarvis County, uh,
Perry County from uh
The railroad tracks south, all
of Dubaca County, all Roosevelt
County, and then Lee County from
uh McDonald North. So I've got,
I've got uh remnants of 3
counties and pieces of two
counties of lots of, uh, roots
deep here in Rosville and, and
live about 65 miles northeast to
here in a little place called
Kinna.
At least to be here today.
Senator Thornton, District 19,
the East Mountains of
Albuquerque includes Bernalillo,
Sandoval, Santa Fe, and Torrance
County, and I'm, I'm glad to be
here in Rossville.
Good morning everybody. I'm
state senator Candy Spenceyi
District 32. I represent 5
different school districts,
which is the Rosswell
Independent School District.
Dexter Heckerman, like Arthur
and Artesia.
And I strongly recommend that
the LESC come down here at least
once a month. I'm gonna say that
they are responsible for
bringing the rain. We really
truly appreciate it.
Thank you for being here.
Thank you, Mr. Thank you
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm State
Rep Joy Garrett, the west side
of Albuquerque when you see the
volcanoes and Peter National
Monument, that's the heart of my
district, a retired teacher of
almost 30 years, uh, delighted
to be back and hope that there's
no lasting flooding damage while
we're here. Thanks.
Good morning everybody, Mr.
Chairman, my name is Andres
Romero. I represent House
District 10, which is the far
South Valley in Bernalo County
parts southeast Albuquerque,
current high school teacher.
You, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you. And, and I'm Bill
Souls, state senator from Las
Cruces, and again we've had no
rain until this, uh, storm
coming through, and so it's very
much needed, so.
It's a nice that the whole
southern southern part of the
state, I think northern parts
they've gotten quite a bit of
rain this year, but the southern
part is not very nice to be over
here in Roswell.
As we get started, a couple of
things when we get to questions
and things just so that
everybody has an opportunity.
I'll be timing you'll get 5
minutes for questions and
answers with the presenters if
there's time, we'll do 2nd
rounds with things. So try to
keep your questions short and
concise and so we can hear from
the presenters and if the
presenters are going on too long
on one of your questions. Feel
free to kind of break in and get
them back on track so that
everybody gets an opportunity
for that.
Uh
Kind of and it's a reminder to
me as well, turn off your phones
or silence them so that we don't
interrupt others and uh they're
allowed to reimbursement forms.
That little housekeeping types
of things. And John, if you'd uh
introduce your staff, you've got
lots of staff and lots of new
interns.
Here with us today. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Good morning,
everybody. Uh, just wanted to
say thank you to uh
Superintendent Luck and his
staff at Roswell, they've been
really gracious in walking,
walking, welcoming us here, um,
and setting up this, this
beautiful space for us. Um, I
also want to say my wife is from
Bertal so I've been coming to
eastern New Mexico for going on
plus 2025 years almost.
Yesterday was my 19th wedding
anniversary. And so that's what
I was hoping for all the odds,
and I spent it, yeah, having a
really pleasant day in, um.
So I almost feel like an
honorary eastern New Mexican,
although I don't think I can
bestow that upon myself. I'll
leave that to you.
Um, I'm gonna start back here
with our policy analyst Natasha
Davalos. I'm gonna skip Sophia
just for a second. Mark Montoya.
Uh, Connor Hicks,
Evin Chavez, Alonzo Baca, our
office administrator.
Arlo is here back there, our
research assistant.
you know stooping down and our
deputy director Jessica
Hathaway, uh, I'll introduce
Sofia Gonzalez as our intern for
the summer. I'll talk a little
bit more about her later. And
then, um, Wesley Guyer, who is
our teacher on special
assignment, and they'll get a
chance to introduce themselves
to you all later in the meeting.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Wonderful. Thank you.
Um, and I think any other
comments or questions that we
Representative if you introduce
yourself, please.
Good morning. Thank you so much.
Imitarola. I just arriving from
Albuquerque. I represent the
Weserque teacher also so it's
it's always nice to be around
educators. Thank you.
Thank you. And on the mics,
these don't seem like these are
those super sensitive ones we
sometimes have up in the
Capitol, but do remember, turn
your mic on and off.
Um, uh, when you're done
speaking.
And with that, we'll go to first
order of business where a little
bit behind trying to get
everybody here, but
Um, Superintendentuck, if you
would please, you know, tell us
about your district in the
region.
Yes, sir. Good morning and, and
welcome to everybody to Rosal
and yes, uh, to echo Senator's
comments that we think that you
guys had a lot to do with the
rain that came this way. Uh, so
we're going to have to have you
guys back more often. Uh, I
wanna start just real quick by
thanking uh the uh FFA from
early college high school, uh,
they came in and, and greeted
you today. We have, uh, uh, 3
different high schools that are
gonna be represented here every
morning to, to greet y'all and
welcome. I want to thank them.
Uh, I would also like to thank
the, the staff that has helped
put this.
together are Roswe school staff
as well as the LESE staff that
has been nothing but a pleasure
to work with. And again, we want
to thank you for being here in
town for the next 3 days. So, so
welcome and thank you all for
being here today. Um, I have a,
a short video.
That I'd like to start off with
to kind of uh highlight some of
the stuff that we're working on
here with the roo schools.
So rule number one is get a good
video guy.
And then he can, he can make you
look really, really good. So I
want to thank uh Jerry Holme for
putting that video together.
topic, uh, which uh it's all
good.
I might let him speak. That was
awesome, um, just, uh, so many
things in that video, so many
things that we're proud of here
in the Roslyn Independent School
District.
Um, just a quick update as far
as who I am real quick. Uh,
starting my 5th year as
superintendent, about to roll
into my twenty-ninth year of
education, uh, my mother was a
teacher. She had 3 sisters that
were teachers. Each of them had
one of their children that went
into education. My wife is a
teacher, my daughter is a
sophomore at Eastern studying to
be a teacher, so I want to say
that this may be something that
I know a little bit about
whenever we speak education, so,
um,
Uh, again, very proud to be part
of the Rossly Independent School
District. It's the only district
that I've ever worked in.
I held many different jobs. Uh,
currently, Rosa is home to 24
schools, uh, one early literacy
center, 11 elementary schools, 4
middle schools, 4 high schools,
and one district charter school.
Uh, we've been blessed to work
with PSFA as far as funding the
remodel or uh standalone builds
of just about 95% of our
schools. We have one that is in
progress, an elementary school,
one that is in the design phase
and another.
School that is in the hopper. So
we want to thank PSFA, uh, very
much as far as the work that
they're doing. You're sitting in
a building, uh, that at one
point in time said,
Uh, directly to the north of us.
This is what I would call one of
our more brand new buildings.
Uh, it houses close to between
550 and 700 kids, uh, so we're
extremely grateful and extremely
blessed to work with, with the
state.
As far as that goes, typically
maintained enrollment between
8500 and 10,000 students. Uh, it
just depends the population ebb
and flow right now is about to
trend in a downward, uh, uh,
downward cycle for us, um, we're
an agricultural-based community
with a rapidly growing aerospace
industry. In fact, we'd like to
see that go a little bit
quicker, um, with a lot of work
and a lot of industry that's
occurring out at the base, uh,
that does impact our school
district greatly. Uh, we're the
largest employer in Chavis
County.
Uh, a little bit of bragging
here. We're home to the national
dance champion Charlie's Angels,
uh, as well as many other uh
state champions, for instance,
the 58 football champion Ras
High Coyotes and multiple Skills
USA and FFA.
State.
Um
Alllifiers and winners.
Uh, Roswell is home to a high
performing early childhood
program. If you don't know that
about Roswell and would like to
come back and see that on
another day. Um, we have a very
uh exuberant for Y and now a new
3Y program here in Roswell.
378 pre-K students currently
enrolled at 6 neighborhood
locations we have a 4Y program
embedded in our elementary
schools as well. We work
collaboratively with Chavis
County Early Childhood
Coalition, and as well as the
100% Chavis County. This year,
we piloted the 1st 3 Y typically
developing 3 year old program,
which means that traditionally,
if you were in the 3Y program
and or are housed at one of our,
our part view early learning
center, that means that you're
on.
REP and we have piloted with the
state right now with ECECD to
bring in children that are not
on an IEP and start integrating
them with our three white
children at that point in time.
Uh, currently have 311 students
enrolled in that program.
One of the things that we're
most proud of here in Rossville
is that we've reduced our rate
of chronic absenteeism last
year, that was something that we
were challenged with and that
we've worked very hard for that.
Um, we were involved with uh an
entire community uh uh focus
group that we kicked off last
year. You may have seen some of
our signs that are might want to
look for some of our sizes with
success with missing the U and
then at the bottom it says the
only thing missing is you.
Um, so,
8 of our 24 schools reduced
their chronic absenteeism by
more than 10%.
7 of our schools reduced rates
by more than 5%, 4 of our
schools, uh, between 1 and 5, so
for a grand total of 22 of our
24 schools were able to bring
down their chronic absenteeism
this year and we're very, very
proud of that and the results
are showing with a rising
graduation rates and a rise in
our state test scores and over
our interim assessments that we
use throughout the district.
Um, this was a major
accomplishment for us
considering that in October, we
had a significant
Rain events, uh, they did do a
lot more damage, thank gosh,
that we did not have that right
now, uh, and it, it, it had an
impact of that, of that flood 82
students became homeless as a
result of the floods.
Here in Jos County, uh, raising
the number of students
identified as homeless, um, to
over 200 for the 2425 school
year. Uh, I cannot go on, uh,
enough to, to complement the
people that worked.
With those children, with those
families, uh, to provide for
them the necessities that they
needed, even as simple as, as
laundry detergent or clothes,
uh, you don't really know what
that, that looks like until you
lose everything and um that was
a huge effort, as you can see,
even if you drive through
Roswell, uh, we're still having
some remnants of that. We've got
a civic center that we're
working on, uh, the city's
trying to, to, to get the funds
to get that back up and running
as well as some other buildings
and some houses in the the uh
southwest part of.
uh, that are still, you know,
Uh
Being impacted by that flood.
Rosal Independent School
District has 4 community
schools.
There's a a booth out there to,
in the the hall there for that.
I implementing a community
schools, we've addressed social,
emotional, and academic uh
deficits by implementing
after-school programming.
Summer programming exploration
opportunities and by addressing
food shortages and hygiene and
security.
Through partnerships with food
banks such as the Road Runner
Food Bank.
Um, one of the, the primary
focuses that we've had this year
is on our mental health as well
in our community schools have
provided us that opportunity,
uh, should that opportunity
warrant, um, I received an
update yesterday, uh, from the
LASC, uh, uh, committee on uh
just some things that, that
y'all are working on, and I'm
going to quote, um,
From that, ultimately the brief
the brief that was quoted on the
article recommends that state
policymakers prioritize funding
for mental health supports for
both students and educators,
invest in students that threat
assessment programs and bolster
social emotional programs to
improve the school climate. Um,
and that dovetails very nicely
into my next presenter, which
will be Miss Cynthia, uh,
Priceobos, and I'm gonna let her
talk about the work that we've
done here and how y'all might
possibly
Pack that in a positive way for
us. So Ms. Go.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
committee members. My name is
Cynthia Covos.
I am the behavior intervention
specialist for Roswell Pin
School District.
Today I have the opportunity to
share with you Rosalindependent
School District's work over the
past few years.
This presentation gives you an
overview of our journey.
And I will start by saying I
received a forward email with
the subject line.
Given the current events, it is
essential to reemphasize
guidelines for mental health in
schools.
The email recognized that 25
years ago, UCLA worked with a
policy leadership group focused
on developing policy guidelines
for mental health in schools.
The group recognized the
following, I quote.
Policy must be developed around
well-conceived models and best
available information.
Policy must be aligned to create
a cohesive framework and must
connect in major ways with the
mission of schools.
Attention must be directed at
restructuring the education
support programs and services
that schools own and operate,
and we've school-owned resources
and community owned resources
together.
Incomprehensive integrated
approaches for addressing
problems and enhancing healthy
development.
Policymakers also must deal with
the problem of scaling up.
Underwriting model development
and the capacity for building
system-wide replication of
promising models and
institutionalizing a systematic
changes.
And in doing all of this, more
must be done to involve our
families and to connect the
resources of schools,
neighborhoods, and the
institutions of higher
education.
End quote
When I read this email, it
reassured me that RASD is moving
in the right direction.
I hope that this small amount of
time you can see the time, the
energy and resources it takes to
scale up our district to create
systematic change.
I hope that I can emphasize the
importance of building systems
of care versus throwing money at
one initiative we're talking
about one variable, such as
attendance and graduation rates.
It's more complex than that and
requires adherence to best
practices.
Models.
I can see why educators are so
confused.
It has taken us, it has taken
all three of these frameworks
nested together that have guided
our district's behavior and
mental health continuum of care.
While multi-layer system of
support focuses on
differentiated assistance based
on student needs that
academically and behaviorally,
positive behavior intervention
and supports takes it a step
further by using school-wide
approaches and database decision
making to improve our
implementation of universal
strategies and evidence-based
practices for behavior.
Interconnected systems framework
identifies inefficiencies of
co-located systems of social and
emotional programs, working in
isolation and applies the core
features of our multi-layer
system of support to
deliberately integrate mental
health community, school, and
family partners through a single
system of care.
All three of these public health
models emphasize prevention to
reduce pressure on intensive
interventions.
So where did we start?
We had to know our baseline and
where we measured up to specific
performance standards. It was
essential we started with
self-assessments. The first
baseline tool we used was the
school mental Health Quality
assessment. It allowed us to use
the national performance
standards to measure our current
services and supports annually
we pull in a team, a school
counselors and social workers to
complete the district
self-assessment on the national
standards.
Tear fidelity inventory is our
second baseline tool utilized at
the building level.
To assess each school's layers
of support.
As each school goes through what
we call a 4-year PBIS training
cohort. They use the tier
fidelity inventory to compare
their baseline year to their
implementation year for each
layer of support.
Each building's PBIS team
completes a self-assessment 2
times a year.
By utilizing these objective
tools, I have seen more
administrators, teachers, social
workers, school counselors and
support staff have a deeper
understanding of what it means
to have a multi-layer system of
support. In addition to
self-assessments, we had to
re-evaluate our data platforms
and or adopt what we didn't
have.
We identified that our current
system currently using our
office discipline referrals was
consumed with what we call dirty
data. Each school was entering
minors and majors differently.
The system was being utilized to
measure frequency versus showing
students' response to
intervention.
The adoption of Swiss for each
school was also strategic.
Schools have to complete their
tier one PBIS training before
moving into the new system.
This allows each school to
develop schoolwide expectations
for their classroom management
systems, minor and major flow
charts and reinforcement systems
based on student developmental
levels.
Once each school's tier one
system was developed, the Swiss
platform could now measure the
implementation of our tier one
supports.
Additionally, in PBIS schools,
we were taught how they were
taught how to use office
discipline referral data more
frequently to assess when
behavior can be addressed at the
building level, classroom level,
and student level.
This allowed each building to
measure the effectiveness and
utilization of high quality
classroom management.
Additionally, we adopted Dessa,
a universal screener for K
through 8. So school counselors
could identify social-emotional
skills and provide targeted
social-emotional supports
earlier.
Dessa also measured the
effectiveness of delivering
social-emotional curriculum in
the classroom setting.
It serves as a balanced
assessment to the core SCL
curriculum delivered by our RASD
teachers.
School counselors and general
education mental health
providers did not have a
documentation system consistent
across the district that could
measure frequency and duration
of our services across schools.
School counselors now use SUA to
develop a data-driven,
evidence-based school counseling
program that uses the American
School Counseling Association
National Model.
In general,
Mental health providers, general
education, mental health
providers now use our BH Works,
mental health system to complete
mental health assessments, case
notes for direct therapeutic
services. This system also
supports future Medicaid
billing.
In 2022, after an extensive
search to research our vendors
to train on PBIS. I was able to
connect with the vendoroy out of
Arizona.
Koi stands for knowledge,
outcomes, impact.
In vetting their professional
development, I took into
consideration the pace of the
training, the training
materials and the background of
the trainers before starting the
seven-year strategic plan to
move all schools through a
four-year training cycle.
Instead of attempting to train
all schools at once. We trade
how to implement, implement or
to train how to implement all
tiers or layers at, at one time.
We opted to create cohorts of 4
to 5 schools to ensure we could
support and monitor schools'
progress more efficiently
through these years.
The first year, the schools are
learning tier one supports and
gaining buy-in from teachers and
staff on schoolwide
expectations. Year 2, the
schools are learning how to
implement database decision
making, using screeners and
office discipline referrals to
drive interventions to to
include how to progress monitor
student supports.
Year 3, the schools are learning
how to implement intensive
student services and expanding
teams to include wraparound
services with the community.
In year 4, they're pulling it
all together and continuously
improving the system at all
levels to support sustainability
in their PBIS system.
All districts adopted curriculum
and interventions are vetted for
evidence and alignment with the
layers of support, ensuring and
constantly evaluating duplicate
initiatives.
We are working with community
supports to ensure they have a
better understanding of required
data reporting and alignment to
offering evidence-based services
to students in schools.
Additionally, we are
coordinating with community
services more intentionally to
educate them about our
frameworks and identifying what
layer of support they're
offering their services,
focusing on gaps, we are
currently in our system and not
just adding another service that
might be covered by another
initiative.
We are requiring with new MOUs
that community members are
providing evidence-based
services and presenting student
data that is relevant to student
outcomes in the school settings.
Blending and breaking funds are
essential to sustain this
continuum of care.
Here's a sample of our
curriculum's platform screeners
and initiatives that have
utilized blended funding across
multiple funding sources.
Ring has allowed us to
coordinate from funds from
different sources to support
specific yet interconnected.
prospects of comprehensive
school.
Behavior and mental health
systems.
You will see on this slide the
timeline of our journey. I will
not go over this specifically,
but I want to emphasize that
building infrastructure requires
patience and persistence to
understand that educator mindset
shifts and student outcomes do
not happen overnight.
As we have built this
infrastructure, we have taken
into consideration what we call
implementation science. We
remain focused on how innovation
is put into practice and
diffused across our schools. We
understand that each initiative
is at a different stage of
implementation and impacts the
level of organizational learning
and adaptation.
We have allowed soft rollouts on
many initiatives to give schools
providers, board members,
exposures, and connection to the
data systems curriculum and
services.
Additionally, it gives us the
opportunity to learn from our
mistakes and make continuous
improvements as we move to full
implementation with initiatives.
What I have presented is not
new, but it is new to us. It is
new to our educators in New
Mexico and it's one thing to say
we're doing something versus
showing student outcomes as a
result of implementing
initiatives, efficient
efficiently. In order to show
student outcomes across layers,
it takes an overhaul of our
current practices.
National Association across
Principles, Social workers,
SROs, school counselors, school
psychologists have emphasized
the need for blended and
flexible use of funding streams.
It proves staff ratios to allow
for the delivery of a full range
of services effective for school
community partnerships, develop
evidence-based standards for
district level policies to
promote school discipline and
positive behavior and supporting
a multi-layer systems of
support.
Additionally, the US Secret
Service published a 60-page
report on adverting target
school violence, supporting
public health models that
address behavior and mental
health across all three layers
of support.
We have had RTI and assessed for
years, but why is it new to us?
I say again, application is new
to us. Applying it all at the
school level is new to us.
It's one thing to say we're
doing it, another to show, and I
can emphasize enough that
barriers include improving our
own practices and revamping
current support. Staff roles in
order to be effective in these
new frameworks.
I list the following challenges
and improvements. One, we need
to increase the school counselor
and student ratio, no less than
the national standard of 120 to
121 to 250 students and even
better, 10 to 200 students. We
need to bring all support staff
who support behavior and mental
health under leadership in the
school districts. Having general
education, social workers,
special education social
workers, counselors, and school
psychologists, SROs and nurses
working together helps to remove
silos.
Of care and duplication of
efforts. 3, aligning our New
Mexico administrative code to
school counselors, social
workers, SROs, and nurses.
Annual evaluations, ensuring
support staff are bringing to
buildings all best practices
listed in their professional
competencies. Additionally
emphasizing in all Mexico
administrative code, the
importance of all roles for
support prevention.
Number 4, differentiating the
difference between a school
counselor and an academic
advisor to ensure secondary
schools are utilizing school
counselors in their full
capacity as counselors, and
ensuring that more time is spent
in prevention and targeted
services for behavior and social
emotional services.
And number 5, ensuring our
secondary schools are hiring
certified school counselors and
certified social workers to
support our layer one and layer
2 supports.
And lastly, I leave you with the
cafeteria plate. My
superintendent's favorite
visual.
Inanizing overall barriers to
the multi-layer system of
supports.
Support staff operate in silos.
Although we have made
improvements in our district, we
need a change at the state level
in order to effectively move
forward with creating a single
service delivery model using the
frameworks I've reviewed with
you today.
Thank you for your time.
Would y'all have any questions
of Miss Coboso?
Thank you, Superintendent. I was
just wondering, does it also had
Lucy Hall. Is that uh we'll one
more, but I didn't know if you
wanted to ask her anything while
it was still fresh on your mind
or we could wait till the end.
It's up to you.
I like asking questions in
between. I just wanna make sure
you know we're wasting time also
I'm good on time set
up for questions, uh,
Representative Garrett.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for that presentation. Two
things I'm glad to see you
mentioned 100% Chavez County. I
just discovered you already have
an app. So are the schools
closely involved with that
initiative.
I'm gonna say we're probably a
little, a little
Behind where we need to be, but
I know as far as getting up and
running, I know we're in there,
Miss Cole. Yes, we are. OK.
In involved. Now, it's um always
can get a little bit better, but
I know we're, we're up and
running.
Great. Well, it's, you know,
with COVID and everything, we're
all a little behind. I'm with
Berna Leo, but I was just open
the app and it's like, wow,
whoever did the app.
Terrific, right on our phones, a
lot of people don't have
computers at home, but they have
their phone. And then my second
question is the pay, are your
support staff, your SLPs, your
counselors, social workers, are
they on the three-tier system?
The, yes, ma'am, I I know right
now we're actually currently
involved in negotiations right
now on, on our salaries. I know
we've got some of the higher
salaries in the state for
educators and in and even our
support supplement, we could
always work a little bit better,
but, um, when some of our, our
mandates come out that it's an
all versus uh you get to pick
where some of that goes, it
makes it difficult for us.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate the presentation that
was very nice.
I'm glad to see that we're
getting mental health in our
schools. So I think it's very
important. We've got
Things going on in our
children's lives that sometimes
their parents don't.
Recognized.
I do. I have a question
regarding your community
involvement. Can you kind of
expand on that a little bit.
Tell me who you're working with,
how you got them involved in
what their role is.
So, uh, from the prevention
standpoint, uh, we have La Casa
Behavioral Health, who operates
our school-based health centers
at uh 3 of our secondary
schools. We also have a uh
prevention coordinator who helps
support our substance abuse
prevention in our secondary
schools as well. And we're
working to um add a targeted
support for a substance abuses
um this next coming year. In
addition, uh, our direct service
provider.
r s in the district are
providing our layer 3 treatment
options are going to be for
substance abuse, um, infractions
in our schools, so, um, in the
last year we're working getting
this next year and in previous
years we worked in conjunction
with the costs of Behavioral
Health to support um our mental
health services, our prevention
services.
OK, thank you very much for
that. That might be the lead in
for some of these other schools
that see the need, and I think
it's very important that the
involvement is at a local level.
I really do.
I also want to point out that I
have to applaud the Rossell
Independent School District in
those up and down the valley
here, uh, for
Buying, buying food locally to
feed our kids. I do appreciate
that. We do have a a provider
that's out east of Roswell, and
they do provide meat.
Plus the other commodities that
are grown in the state of New
Mexico, so go agriculture and
I'm glad to see all these young
people in the blue jacket
sitting here in front. Thank you
very much.
Thank you. Um, other questions,
uh, Representative Serana, thank
you, Mr. Chairman. Um, thank you
for your presentation. So at the
beginning, you talked about
absenteeism and graduation
rates. So as a teacher, math
teacher, um, getting the kids
there is, is difficult. So how
does your program help that or
were you seeing success in
getting kids to school.
So we're looking at more than
just a tendon, so as a secondary
symptom, we're looking at um
academic deficits. Are there
skill deficits in SEL, um, are
there parenting?
Skills that need to be
addressed. We put, put our
parents through our parenting
programs. We also offer triple P
parenting, but we teach our um
PBIS teams to look at variable
screeners, whether that's office
discipline referral, the
student's performance in the
classroom, SEL universal
screeners and then also in
bed, our school counseling
programs to support them, do
check-ins, checkouts to help
support some of our attendances
concerns as well. Do you
reinforcement systems to really
dive in and look at what is the
reason for a particular
student's attendance. There's no
blanket approach to that. It
could be a multitude of reasons
for tendon issues.
And so it does take a holistic
approach, um, and many
prevention and targeted
interventions to address the
whole attendance issue.
So are you seeing more success
in your Mr. Chairman, um, in, in
attendance with this.
So right now, our first cohort
will be starting their 4th year.
So our very first, um, they
started 4 years ago. They have
just finished their tier 3
training last year and going
into full implementation this
year.
So it's taken our district up
until 2029 for them to pull
through this whole cohort of
training. So, um, we're looking
at data each year to see how
PBIS will impact our attendance,
as we do know by research, if
it's done with fidelity, we can
improve attendance rates.
11 quick thing on your slide,
Mr. Chairman, um, I saw
cybersecurity. What was that?
Um, I'm, I'm more tech that
Homeland Security at US Homeland
Security, the last slide.
Beginning on your, your slight
deck at the very beginning at
cybersecurity and I was
wondering what that was. Oh,
that would be one of our, that
would be one of our teams that
has actually gone to nationals
for cybersecurity, and they've,
they've, they've won.
Last year and are headed back to
go again. Uh, it's, it's pretty
neat. They, they get up, they
get there and they get a real
world problem and they have to,
to put it all together. So
that's one of our teams from,
um, I believe that's early
College.
God, Godd high school, that
that's working on that. So very
good. Yes, ma'am.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Vice Chair Rometo.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um, so
Superintendent, what it is your
vacancy rate. So how many
vacancies do you have in the
district?
Our, our vacancy rate right now
is down. It's, it's kind of a
bad time of the year to go pick
a vacancy, right? Uh, as it is
this summer. There was a time
that we were operating probably
close to about 90% of jobs
filled where we were higher than
we've ever been, uh, here, uh,
in the last 1015 years in
Roswell, uh, being able to fill
that, um, our, our salaries are
some of the most competitive in
the state, um, and then the
ability to retain teachers, uh,
that, that want to make sure
that they can
Add to their hot five for their
retirement, as well as those
that were thinking of retiring
that it's, it's made a huge
difference, uh, as far as
retaining our teachers. I would,
I would say right now we're
probably uh in the 87 to to 92%
fill, uh, it kind of goes
depending on
Uh, as other districts around
here go and, and try to take our
people.
Mr. Chairman, do you have a
particular area where you have
higher vacancies than others.
Right now we're, we're still
spent, uh, we've got our, our
specialty, some of our, our
math, um.
The, um
Again,
Those two would probably be the
biggest two. we're, we're very
fortunate. We've been, we've
been lucky to, uh, to grow as
many of our own as we can. And
then, but we've also got a, a
window where we've got a group
that's that probably within the
next 5 to 6 years, um, we will
have a huge need for, I would
say, more math, science,
obviously, you know, I would say
sped math, science would be my
top 3.
And Mr. Chairman, would and and
Superintendent, um, do you have
a percentage breakdown of
teachers that are at level one,
level 2, level 3 in the district
or an approximation. I could do
probably an approximation, we're
gonna be top-heavy here in
Rosville with uh
Um, uh,
backtrack that. Level 1, level 2
would be the majority of my
teachers. We have a lot of
licensed teachers, uh, that have
come in, uh, so we're gonna
have, uh, year one to probably
year 11 would be my biggest
group, um, ironically, the, the
level 3 people will be uh my
smaller group probably.
20% of my staff would be in
that, in that bubble right now.
Um, but that 20% will be a huge
A hit when they start to retire.
Uh, we, we found that already,
uh, a few years ago and then the
salary is really took a jump
here and we had a lot of them
come back and it made a huge
difference for us.
And in Mr. Sherman and
Superintendent, one final
question is, what percentage of
your student population is ZLL.
We are
70
Percentage yield.
Uh, we're over 50 here, so I'm
gonna say between 65 and 70 here
in Rossville, and that could be
anywhere, even higher depending
on what our current enrollment
is fixing to look like here.
Cool. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you. Other questions
committee.
I have a couple of questions,
um, as you talk about all of
this, are you working with the
100% Chaves County group as far
as services for students and,
you know, the prevention of
child abuse comes with kids
having healthy community.
OK. Ms. Cole.
And my apologies real quick.
Jennifer Cole is my, uh,
assistant superintendent for
assessment instruction, and this
is, this is kind of her deal as
far as the, the 100% Chavis
County, um, she asked not to be
up here with the table, but I
did tell her I was gonna have
her here to answer my questions.
So M address that real quick.
Yes.
Please,
please.
Mr. Chairman, um.
Committee members. So yes, we
are, we are RISD is very
involved with 100% Chavez
County, uh, Dan Jennings leads
100% Chavis County. I believe he
created the app for that. Um, so
we have community school team, I
have my community schools here,
they're part of that early
childhood team, Salad Green, so,
um, we have several members of
our school district who works
with them, and they, uh, we
problem solve together to um,
uh, provide training to
community members. We just had a
early childhood coalition
meeting on June 14th. And so,
uh, they help with supports for
the schools, um, on each
initiative, and then, um, we
also in turn just to work on
community initiatives. I hope
that answers the question.
Yes, thank you. And lots of the,
the discussion has been around
the kinds of things that 100%
Chavez County would be involved
in ensuring those services are
available as you need to refer
out and taking care of the
outside of school.
Things that
Effect in school performance
type of things and so, and I
know County or 100% Jovis County
has been one of the very active
ones within the IJ Institute and
stuff. So, thank you.
Uh, other question I had is you
were talking about counselors
and the goal to get to one.
Counselor for 200 students,
where is Roswell District now,
what is the ratio of
Compared to what the national uh
standard or expectation would
be.
Some elementary schools are
below that, but some elementary
schools, um, if they have a
student population of 30,350,
there's only one school
counselor. We are fortunate for
the very first time in probably
2 decades or as long as I've
been in Ross Independent School
District. Every elementary
school has one school counselor.
However,
Sunset Elementary might have a,
a student population of 190
students, but De Nordy
Elementary has over 3. So we're
staffing school counselors by
building versus student ratio.
And then when you go into
secondary settings, that ratio
becomes even more, um, the
disparity on on those numbers
are even more our secondary
school counselors are probably
10 to 300 potentially. Um, also
our middle school counselors,
there's only one.
Building again, want to over
sometimes 300 students.
Thank you. And the reason for
that is, you know, that is one
of the conservative counselors,
and I like that you separated
out at the secondary level, the
counselors and academic advisors
often are seen as being the same
that those roles are very, very
different. And
We often pull the counselors to
do academic advising, which
means they're not available for
the mental health of our
students, um, and I guess sort
of a, a question for maybe staff
and I don't know if I have it
readily available, but
What is the ratio statewide to
at least as you indicated, you
know, the school has at least
one for every school, and what
would it cost as we're looking
at budget this next year to put
that in to get to that 1 to 200
and in elementary, at least one.
He building up to 300 and then 2
beyond, you know, up to the next
level, but as we're looking at
setting up budget, how do we get
to that ratio? Because it
I think uh Superintendent, you
indicated at the beginning that
your attendance is much better.
These are the people that help
attend this be lots better, and
we need to make that investment
if that really is important. And
so, you know, if we can kind of
start looking at that as we're
putting together a budget, what
would that cost to, to be able
to get there, assuming the
second part is, can we find
them, but
Thank you. Any other questions
for this?
All group
Well, if I, if I could maybe
just segue to the second piece
of this, uh, it's when, when we
start talking about why kids
don't come to school, one of the
quickest answers is, uh, we'll
just find classes that they
like. Well, let's, let's work
for some more hands on. Let's
work for some more CTU that's
more, let's work for some more
things that can benefit like
that. And my, my want with with
Miss Cobos up here today was
it's a bigger problem than that.
These things happen well before
they get to the secondary level.
And all of the, the
different layers that could be
impacted to get to that point.
If I could, just real quick,
transition into the what have we
done at the next level. So the,
the work does not stop with our
counselors, with our social
workers, but then what have we
done in as, as a district to
take the kids or the students
that we do still have and work
with them are our district is
implemented, uh, a career
exploration labs at each of our
middle schools, uh, we partner
with the Permian Basin
Foundation, Devin Energy and the
Cal Ripken Foundation. We've
added STEM labs and
One of our med schools.
And uh one of our elementary
schools, excuse me, one middle
school and one high school. Over
the past 4 years, we've
leveraged Perkins funds and
other federal funding sources to
implement 23 programs of study
throughout our high schools.
We've had a bit of a redesign,
uh, these programs can include
aerospace and aviation, Health
sciences, education, early
childhood education and
construction, to name a few. Um,
this last year, our high school
students earned 1,504
43 industry certifications.
You're talking roughly.
Uh, Roswell High has, give or
take, 1400 kids with Goddard
somewhere around 1200, not all
of them are seniors, juniors,
uh, so you're probably pushing
somewhere around 800 juniors and
seniors, 800 to 900 juniors and
seniors, and we all, we had a
little over 1500 industry
certification, 31 of our
students graduated with the
illiteracy seal this school
year, uh, and then our
graduation rates did improve,
and one of the key components to
that is the work that Miss Lucy
Hall and her team have done.
Lucy is the principal of two of
our high schools. Uh, she is the
principal of Early College High
School, as well as university
and high school, and they're
both located at the base, and
I'd like to turn it over to her
real quick to kind of talk about
some of the work that, that they
have done.
Good morning, Chairman, Vice
Chair, and all of the senators
and representatives who are here
today, we appreciate you heading
to Roswell.
Um, as Mr. Leck said, I am the
principal over both alternative
schools here in Roswell. Um,
early college high school, you
have some of my FFA students
here who greeted you this
morning and then university high
school and it would take me
a week to talk about all of the
wonderful things going on at
both of my schools.
And this morning, I'm going to
choose to focus on university
high school because it is the
higher need of the two schools
that I have.
Um, so university high school is
an alternative school, and it is
what you think of when you think
of alternative schools. It is a
school for those students who um
don't fit at a traditional high
school. Um,
Oopsie.
weeks.
Um, a university high school, we
know that every student in our
district has potential, but not
every student is around peg that
fits into the square hole. And
we have students in our building
who have um
Issues with homelessness, issues
with poverty, who have issues
with their mental health. Um, we
have students who are coming to
our school because they have
fallen behind in their credits,
but they still have the dream of
graduating from high school. And
we like to focus on the fact
that these students, even though
they might not be on the right
path, they're on their path and
it's our job to get them to, to
the finish line to get them to
graduation.
In my building, we have a very
robust grads program. Don't ask
me what grad stands for cause I
can never remember, but um we
have the highest graduation rate
for grad students in the state
of New Mexico. And what Brass
does is it is a place for our
students who have children who
are pregnant or who have um a
baby to come into the school
setting. We have a 3-star
nursery in our building or um
daycare. So we
can take students and they can
have their infant or their
toddler in the building with
them so that they can interact
with their child throughout the
day, and that grads program also
helps give these students the
skills that they need not only
to be successful students, but
successful successful parents as
well.
Um
So we have
A diverse demographic at
university high school. We're
also a community school, which
means that our students have
access to resources that are not
readily available at our other
two traditional high schools.
My, uh, community schools
coordinator, Miss. Debbie Webna,
who's behind me, is a social
worker, so she has really
wonderful um connections in the
community and is able to help
connect our students and their
families to services, um.
On an individual basis. If you
talk to my school counselor,
Tim, uh,
Fuller. Sorry, thank you. Um, he
creates an individualized
schedule for every single
student in my building. He sits
down and he talks with these
students and he makes sure that
they're getting what they're,
what they need.
Um, in addition to what
They want. And I think that's a
really fine distinction that we
have in our building. Um,
But university high school is
like almost every alternative
high school in the state, we are
in designation, um, and we are
considered MRI, which means we
are among the lowest performing
schools in the state.
Um, MRI stands for most rigorous
intervention. And so one of the
things that I do as a principal
at University High School is I
go to Albuquerque, um, 3 times a
year, 4 meetings designed for
for principals who are over
schools that are in designation.
And I really want to address
that with this committee today
because I feel like I have a
pulpit and I can stand on that
pulpit today and talk to you on
behalf of all of the
alternative.
of high schools in the state of
New Mexico.
So when you go into designation,
you're in designation for
several reasons. Um, they look
at our four-year graduation
rate, and that's based on SAUs
and I'll talk about that in just
a moment. It's based on my
student's SAT and ASR scores.
It's based on our access scores
for our EL students. It's based
on our attendance and then
finally on college and career
readiness.
So I'm gonna start
By talking about
For your graduation rates.
So
4-year graduation rates are
calculated using SAUs or shared
accountability units. And I
don't know if you're familiar
with what a shared
accountability unit is or not,
but I do want to spend a moment
talking about that.
Each school year is worth 4
units for a student.
2 per semester. And so for a
student, 4 times 4 is 16. Each
student is worth 16 shared
accountability units.
So if you have a student at God
or high school, and they start
at Goddard as a freshman, and
they graduate from Goddard as a
senior. They get 16 units.
Or one
full student unit.
Well, at university high school.
I don't have very many students
who come to me and stay with me
for 4 years.
In fact, if I look at my
upcoming cohort of students, my
upcoming cohort of seniors. I
have 3 students who have been
with us from beginning to end.
The rest I've had for a variety
of years. So if you're with me,
if you come to me as a junior, I
only get
8 units, SAUs. If you come to me
as a sophomore, I get uh
12 units. If you come to me as a
senior, I get 4 units and if you
come to me the 2nd semester of
your senior year, I get 2 of
these shared units.
And so, when you are looking at
Calculating a 4-year graduation
rate for an alternative school.
I don't have students that are
one student.
And so when I'm looking at my
essay uses for next year or my
4-year graduation rate for next
year, my graduation rate for
next year. Mathematically.
It's impossible for me to reach
a rate of 85%, which is what the
state wants.
With the students that I
currently have, the best
graduation rate I can hope for
is 57%.
And this is because of the way
we calculate.
Graduation rate based on SAUs.
That's math and I can't change
math.
Um, so,
One of the conversations that
I've had with my staff at
University High School is
What do we want to do? We know
what the issue is. But every
single educator in my building.
Believes.
That every student
Deserves an opportunity to be
successful.
And we see the potential in
those students. So even though
we know that our graduation rate
will probably never be 85%,
which is what the state wants.
We believe that every student
deserves the right to graduate.
So the other factors that are
affect that affect our
designation, our attendance, um,
while we have seen an
improvement in the tendance of
the district as a whole. Um, one
of the meetings that I attended
this past year is called here.
Don't ask me what it stands for,
cause I don't know, but it is a
um initiative by the state of
New Mexico to help schools that
are in designation and are
needing extra help with
attendance. Um, we are in the
phase of just collecting data,
not
Finding solutions just
collecting our data. And one of
the things that we know at
university high school is that
our um average attendance rate
is, um,
65% of my students are
chronically absent.
Or excessively absent, which
means that they miss between,
well, over 20% of school life.
And it's hard to get our
students in the building. We
have um conducted empathy
interviews with our students and
with their parents to try and
get it some root causes for why
our students are missing that
much school, um, and we're
putting that data together so
that we can have a more informed
plan moving forward for our
school.
Um, we also look at our SAT
scores.
Um, because most of my students
come to me as juniors and
seniors. I don't get to that
directly and um SAT scores we
inherit scores that come with
our students from other schools,
um, the same with the ASR scores
for science.
And then finally, access
scoring. One of the things that
I've been told about access
scoring as I said, if a student
doesn't exit, um,
English learning services by the
time they're in 8th grade, it's
less likely that they'll be able
to do so as a high school
student.
All of those factors affect.
My designation score.
However, one of the things that
we do at university high school
and one of the things that we're
really very proud of is the fact
that we do offer several very
robust CTE programs. Um, we
offer our students engaging
hands-on instruction, and we
find that our students come to
school because they want to be
in their CTE classes.
We offer CTE courses in
cosmetology, in construction
specifically in the area of
electrical.
Um, healthcare, we do home
health aid and EMT services,
human services, we have a child
um development program in
addition to um my instructor
working with students who are
interested in social work or
social work and um psychology
and then finally hospitality and
tourism or this year we
qualified several students in
FCCLA for state competition.
We offer our students
opportunities to earn
certifications in the area of
OSHA 10.
Which when they received that
certification, it stays with
them for their life.
We also offer CPR first aid, um,
because we have a cosmetology
program. We offer uh Barbasol uh
certifications which I did not
know existed until I went to uh
university High School. In
addition to office types of
certifications in Excel and
Word.
And this year for graduation,
um, almost 40% of our students
graduated as CTE completers, and
we were able to record them at
graduation and
For the first year, um, we offer
community capstones and uh
capstone projects are an
alternative demonstration of
competency for graduation.
And we were really excited to do
this for the first time this
year, and this Maya Phillips is
with me today. She is a
university high school graduate.
She graduated in May and she was
just telling me that she has not
done any public speaking since
graduation, which was just over
a month ago.
Um, but Miss Maya was one of our
capstone students this year, and
I would really like for you to
hear from her with that capstone
process was like, um, in or
underneath your little bag of
goodies. You have a copy of her
project, and I'm going to turn
this over to her now.
Hi, my name is Maya Phillips,
um,
The capstone was really
interesting. This was my first
time doing anything like this,
especially with the community.
I've done things throughout my
school care like um building
rockets and stuff like that, but
nothing like making a coloring
book and to be honest with
y'all, I truly thought making a
coloring book was going to be
the easiest thing I've ever
done, and it is not, it is truly
stressful. I have cried so many
times over this coloring book.
Um
But as you guys look through the
pages, I hope you guys like
them.
Um
We worked with our communities,
our well our community helpers,
so like the first responders,
um,
The police, the
The EMTs, the firefighters and
I forgot how to say them, but
um.
Yes, our.
SROs, so our SROs are the ones
are the police that are.
Doesn't need it to our school,
so my SRO is here. I don't know
if she's in here, but um Crystal
Gonzalez.
And this isn't the final
product, at least I don't want
it to be the final product. I
want it, I want to actually add
real pictures of our community
helpers, so our community
partners and the coloring book
and the reason why
I love this coloring book so
much, although it stressed me
out a lot, um, is because
I have had a.
Hold on. I don't know how to say
this. So,
Let me first start off with the
reason of the coloring book, the
reason of this coloring book is
to
Help children understand
specifically like kindergarten,
first graders kind of like 2nd
graders, um, understand that the
Community partners, so like I
said, the first responders are
our friends and they're not
there to hurt us.
Um
Personally, I grew up in a
household where you never called
the cops, and if you did, you
would get in trouble for it, you
know, or, um.
To where it was just a scary.
Experience just to be around.
Cops or anybody that is a first
responder just because of how I
grew up and I know that other
children grow up like that as
well.
Um
But an emergency situations,
children need to understand that
it is OK to
Call and to ask for help.
And so
The reason for me wanting to
have
Actual pictures of our community
helpers in the coloring book is
so when the kids hopefully get
this coloring book, um, they can
see like these are real people,
these aren't AI or anything like
that. These are real people in
our community that help us and
that are our friends. And so if
they were to ever have an
emergency and one of the first
responders in the coloring book
shows up, they're more
comfortable and they're more
open, and they don't, they're
not.
As scared and
They're more
Yeah, they're more comfortable,
um, with our first responders
in.
This book really means a lot to
me. Um, I didn't work on it by
myself. I have a partner, Dakota
Blosser.
But uh for me personally, this
book means a lot to me. I had an
incident when I was 14 years
old.
Where, um,
The cops had to get involved and
me and my siblings were there
and it was a very scary incident
and that has changed my life. It
has been 4 years and um
It still plays in my head every
day, but, um, as a 14 year old,
not knowing what to tell the
operator.
And just how to kind of
calm myself down along with my
siblings. I am the oldest.
Um
It was honestly very scary and I
could just imagine if
My sister Sylvia, we have to be
in that situation if I wasn't
there to handle it.
How would she be able to handle
it if my brother Adonis, how
would he be able to handle it if
the baby she was 4 at the time,
like, you know, how would they
be able to handle it and making
this coloring book has really
opened my eyes and it's put me
in
Kind of their shoes a little bit
just so I could see how they
would respond, and I've had my
little cousins read this
coloring books, so they get to
understand it, um, I've done
presentations on this coloring
book before and it was very, uh,
it was really eye opening.
And
I really underestimated kids and
it's probably just because of
the way I grew up, um, but a lot
of children understand.
Who first responders are and
what they do, and that really
meant so much to me.
Um, I really have nothing else
to say, so thank you.
So the purpose of a capstone
project is for students to take
everything that they've learned
in their high school career,
including their CTE pathway and
have a project that relates to
them personally, and you can
hear from Maya, this is very
personal product to her, and
Put all of that learning in one
place to show that the high
school was a meaningful
experience for them. Um, Maya
received a cord in health
services at graduation and human
services, and human services
also. So she received two chords
at graduation. Um, but in
addition to Maya and Dakota's
coloring book, um, which they
did spend a lot of time and she
has done a lot of public
speaking about this coloring
book. Um, we had a student who
was in our cosmetology program,
who
in and created a business for
cosmetology, and she worked with
our small business association
in order to put all of those
things together, um, our other
project was a solar panel system
that could be used to power
emergency generation emergency
generators in case of something
like, um, a lot of flooding or
firing fires like we've seen in
Riodoso and Roswell this past
year. And so we had some really
interesting capstone projects
that came out of our first year
as
um, a capstone school and
We were so proud of our students
who committed to doing this
because it wasn't an easy
process. It, it took a lot of um
their heart, and that they
poured into this project, in
addition to showing that they
can read, they can write, they
can perform mathematics, um, and
put it into a project that is
personally meaningful to them.
And then they have to present it
to a panel of community members
and um
Get, get the approval or the go
ahead for that whole project,
but like I said, that was our
first year doing a doing
capstone projects and um we're
really excited to see what our
students produce next year.
And I don't know where I am on
time, but I have one more slide,
so I'm gonna go for it. Um, next
year for university high school,
um, one of the things that we're
going to do, we're going to
continue to work with future
focused education, um, which is
who we worked with for our
capstone projects, um, next year
we're going to work on credit
recovery capstones where
students can recover credits not
on a computer.
Um, but through their CTE
courses because we know the
amount of math, language,
science, and history that's
embedded in all of those CTE
pathways and we feel that it is
a
A more accurate way of learning
because you're learning what
you're doing, and we just need
to figure out how we're going to
um show those competencies
within our current grading
system. And then, um, one of the
other things that we do for
accountability at University
High School is we use a program
called SOR, which allows us to
notify parents and students with
they have missing work. It also
works as a great way of reaching
out to parents with
notifications, um, especially
for our
Parents who are not using social
media or who don't have
immediate access to email. Um,
With all of that being said, um,
Maya and I will stand for
questions.
Thank you, um, and I had on
here, um, oh, representative
Mirabal Moya. I know somebody
had put it. I just slipped my
mind as to which one. I look at
my notes, please. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. um, thank you so much for
your presentation. Um, I, um,
I, I have a couple of uh
comments and questions. Uh, my
first one is, um, Miss Maya.
This is amazing, so you should
be, I, I know you're very proud
of yourself, but this is, this
is really amazing and, and, and
my, my question is, how do you
see this being utilized in the
classroom? Is it like the
teacher going through that,
through it with them because I
know there's lots of when I was
looking through here, there's
lots of uh places where like
when to call, when not to call,
that kind of stuff. Is it
something that they're guided
by, by an adult to to get them.
Kind of comfortable and, and,
and, and going through this, um,
together, or is it they're going
through as a family? What,
what's your intention for that?
Will my initial initial
intention was for students to
take it home with their parents,
so their parents could kind of
go through it with them, but as
I continue throughout the
capstone.
Um
I heard that it wanted to be or
yeah, that it wanted to be um
implemented in the schools and
honestly that is so amazing, um.
So if it is implemented in the
schools.
Um, the teachers can go through
it with them as like a.
Activity, I guess.
Um
But no, my initial intention was
to have the children take it
home for their family, so that
you work on it as a family.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Ms Maya. Um, I see a, a nice
little SEL program in your
future. Uh, so because, uh, I
think this is amazing and, and
being able to utilize the people
that they already trust, um,
that all of these children are
already trust in their as their
teachers and then get that
information from them and, and
being able to be guided through
this, I think it would be great,
and then they can go home and
share that with their families.
Um, so, good job. I'm proud of
you. Um, my other, uh, my other
question is, um, Miss Hall.
You talked about the designation
and the issues with um with uh
graduation rate. Um, we were at
an education summit in May and
uh we talked to a couple of
alternative high schools that
have the same frustration.
Um, and, and my question is, how
do you see?
That being fixed because it, it
can't be a blanket, one
graduation rate fits all.
Um, and so if you have that
alternative designation, do you
see something possibly being
like measured differently
because a lot of them do go to
you very very behind, and
sometimes you work miracles and
sometimes you just can't. Uh,
there's not a, there's not
enough quarters, you know, um,
and maybe it's just one more
quarter and maybe, you know,
that kind of thing, um, but how
do you see, do you have any
insight on how can we fix this?
Because I hate that all almost
all.
Um, if not all of, of
alternative high schools are in
this designation unfairly
because they're being measured
as the same of a regular
four-year high school.
So from what I understand, the
formula for um the SAUs is
federal.
And um
Because of that, it's really
hard for you to get around the
way that we do the math, but the
best thing for alternative
schools because alternative
schools have a purpose in New
Mexico. Um, would be to change
that formula so that so that we
can reach the potential that our
students can reach. Like I said,
under the current formula, um,
For example, last year, I, I had
72 seniors. We graduated, well,
we had 73 seniors. We graduated
72 of them. That's a pretty
phenomenal thing right there,
but my graduation rate was 47%.
And, um, so changing that
formula would be what would,
what would benefit all of our
alternative high schools the
most, because if you go to the
SIT meetings that we have, the
school improvement team
meetings, um, that we have, um,
Well, like I said, last year we
met 3 times, um.
Every single school in there.
is an alternative high school,
except for one.
And, and that should send the
message that we need to change
the way that we calculate those
essay use for alternative
schools.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. I, I
agree because I've, I've, I've
heard a lot of the frustration
and I know our own schools. I'm
a high school teacher at Bolen
High School. So, um, and, and,
uh, and I've spoke with um the
all alternative um high school.
And I know they have the same
designation and uh and a lot of
it is because of graduation
rate. And, uh, and it is
difficult and the fact that you
had that many seniors and
graduated them, but because you
may only have gotten 4 points
for that one and not 16.
Um, then that's where your rate
is down. So, um, but thank you,
thank you for your your answers.
Thank you. Other questions?
And
my question your comment was,
was very similar to
representative Moral Moya is.
Lots of times your school gets
the lower rate and you're
protecting the other school that
gave you the students that were,
were likely to, to not be on
schedule and things of that
sort. And so, yeah, I always
looked the alternative high
schools, every student who
graduates is a success. Uh, they
were, they were on track to be
failing, and they were saved.
And we ought to look at it like
that. Uh, I think lots of times
we do give it extra resources to
some of the.
schools that are.
That are labeled as, you know,
not doing as well, but we need
to get rid of those labels, um,
but on the other side, I also
understand that we spend a lot
of extra money on a few students
compared to the good for all.
And when we underfund education
in general, and there's not
enough money to go around, then
the other students are
suffering, um, on the other
side, we also understand won't
like this as much, but in some
ways when we uh talk about lots
of the early college high
schools and then hold them up as
look at their great.
graduation rates, it's not a
normal population that is going
there, and therefore they are
more likely to do better.
Similarly, yours is not a normal
population or a standardized
population, you've already got
students that are higher risk,
and then you get slammed for
higher having higher risk
students who aren't doing as
well, um, I think in the past
when we set the age limit and
some of the charter schools that
were dealing were uh doing high
school education for adults. It
was almost that same
Thing is they were doing well,
but it's very expensive at the
end to, to try and fix the
problems afterwards. Uh, we have
some of that with, with our
designated schools. Don't quit
doing what you're doing, you're,
you're saving lots and lots of
the kids and you're protecting
the graduation rates of some of
the other schools when, you
know, they moved to the
alternative high school. So
you're welcome to respond, but
just a couple of comments along
the same
So I would like to say, because
I'm also the principal of the
early college high school here
in town.
And, um, you're right, it is a
different population, but the
purpose of an early college high
school is to work with first
generation college students. And
um I always say I have the same
kids.
Across the street that I have in
my building. They're all,
they're all kids, um, but at
early college high school
instead of having a top 10%.
I have a top 2030, maybe 40% um
of students. Um, I'm very proud
of my early college high school
last year, uh, 60% graduated
with an associate degree and um
we had industry certifications,
um, every year since Eastern New
Mex Eastern New Mexico
University Roswell started their
aviation program. We've had um
several of our early college
high school students graduate
through that program for
aviation.
maintenance and um one of our
Early college high school
graduates from last year is a
team leader at one of our
aviation buildings this year
because they're the only person
who has the degree that
qualifies them for that
position. She's 19 years old and
she oversees 12 people. Um, I'm
very, very proud of my early
college high school students,
and I feel, um,
Extraordinarily blessed that I
taught there for 6 years before
I left to
Left the classroom, um, best
teaching experience I ever had
would never go back into another
classroom again because I don't
think I could ever match that
experience.
And in my comments were not to
slam early college high schools,
but it's just not fair to, to
look at their results compared
to the others, as it's not fair
on the other end to, to compare
different schools because they
start off with different
populations for things and
thrilled to hear about them if
they have any aviation
mechanics, we need them in Las
Cruces. I'm a pilot. I got an
airplane sitting with nobody to
work on it, so, um, any other
questions or comments?
Yes. Mr. Chairman, to follow up
with you directly, while the
designation status may be
determined at a federal level,
uh can who and how can the SAU
formula be amended, and is there
a role with the legislator,
maybe John, this is a question
for you. Can play in, in
amending the that SAU formula to
account for those transfer
students. Chair, Senator, so
the, all of, all of what you're
talking about is, is a federal
part of the federal process and,
and, and trying
to be aligned to the ESA, to
every student succeeds act, um,
all, including the formula. So
the formula is submitted to the
federal government for approval.
Uh, I will say that in the past,
uh, prior, prior to our
reauthorization or our new plan
going back to like 2015, I
think, um, we used to have what
was called a Sam's model, so a
supplemental accountability
model for alternative high
schools where they were
they were actually looked at
just separately, and so they had
different accountability
measures because as you all have
talked about,
You, you essentially designate
all your alternative schools
because of the populations that
they serve. Uh, currently, we
have a different model that does
account for SAM's a little bit,
so alternative high schools
where the department looks at
individual categories, so
graduation rates potentially,
um, the subcategories like
English learners, if a school
is, is underperforming in, in a
particular category, some
alternative high schools are
designated for those reasons,
um, there are probably some
alternative high schools that
are not being designated.
Even though there's like they're
their metrics would still
qualify them because our state
plan essentially says there's a
certain proportion of each.
Of schools in each of those
subcategories that can still be
an uh an alternative high
school. So it's kind of a middle
ground where it's they're not
completely separate, they're
still embedded in the larger
plan, um, but we're not also
designating all of them for all
the things, otherwise all of our
our designated schools would be
would be alternative high
schools, so it's, it's kind of
an in between, but all of that
again is subject to federal
approval and it's the plan we
have currently. OK, thank you.
Representative Rola.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair, I
just, just a follow up
clarification. I remember when
we, or maybe when I become aware
of the MRI classification was uh
in the previous administration,
is that a state kind of label
the state, OK, that was my
federal MRI, OK, thank you.
Thank you. Any other?
Senator Thornton.
Just a quick comment to, to
Maya. I just wanna give her
credit again for her amazing
coloring book. I, I was flipping
through it.
And I went to the maze, you need
to make it harder, cuz I could
do it in about a minute, but it
was still quick, um.
I, I, I just thought that uh I
understand your intent behind
this was to help kids to feel
comfortable with the community
leaders and
Uh, community law enforcement
and community fire, fire
department, but, uh, I'm hoping
that in CTA they also taught you
a little bit about
entrepreneurial shit because you
should sell this.
And, and maybe become some uh
entrepreneur, especially if the
school decides to take it on,
you should, you should have them
help you in investing and, and
maybe promoting this throughout
the entire, uh, not only within
Roswell but throughout the
state, so I just wanted to
applaud you for your work.
Thank you.
Superintendent, any other final
comments? No, sir, just a quick
clarification. So, uh, Vier
Romero, 70% Hispanic, 14% e and,
and I thought I, I was like,
well, I totally screwed that one
up, so I want to make sure that
I got that one right. Uh, great
work going on in the Roswell
Schools, great people,
phenomenal support, and thank
you all for being here again. We
appreciate it.
Thank you and thank you for
hosting us.
Anyone needs to take a quick
break for the next one. We're
just 10 minutes behind schedule,
but next presentation on high
school graduation requirements
will start in about 5 minutes if
anyone needs a quick break.
And if we can get everybody back
to their seats, please, so we
can continue.
Yeah.
Senator Brantley, Senator
Thornton,
you'll start calling people out
by name.
Representative Garrett.
Just.
That's fine.
Oh
Breezy, please conti begin
whenever you're ready.
Thank you.
When the, good morning, Mr.
Chair and members of the
committee. Thank you for the
opportunity for me to speak with
you and present today. As you
are aware, through your
leadership and the legislative
process to refine and pass House
Bill 171.
Which will be implemented this
year.
With the incoming freshmen, New
Mexico has taken a major step
toward transforming the high
school experience for students
statewide.
As a result of this important
legislation, the state has
modernized graduation
requirements to make them more
flexible, meaningful, relevant,
and aligned with the needs and
aspirations of today's students.
In collaboration with this
policy shift, New Mexico is also
committed to ensuring that at
least
2400 additional seniors graduate
through targeted supports,
innovative programming and
expansion access to work-based
learning and other credit
earning opportunities. Together,
these efforts signal a bold move
and unified move to improve both
the quality and equity of the
high school experience across
the state.
Congratulations, class of 2024.
Some celebrations, class of 2024
for your cohort accomplished a
78.04% graduation rate, a 1.34.
Percentage point increase from
the prior year. This point is
the highest rate.
And the highest total of
graduating students in the last
15 years.
I also want to shout out, and I
always.
Emphasize this, that 95.77% of
our graduating seniors were
career technical education
students.
Shout out to Roswell Early
College High School.
Or being among the top 10 of a
class of 20 or more with a 96.52
graduation rate.
Schools that demonstrated
substantial progress for the
cohort of 2024 implemented
several shared strategies that
were instrumental in preparing
students for graduation and
future success. Looking at the
data, these included close
monitoring of student course
completion, making sure that
students earn their credits.
Implementation of early warning
systems to target those students
that need it the most.
Strategic planning through
school improvement.
Participation in our Perkins and
NextGen funding for career
technical education and ensuring
that students set their personal
goals through their next step
plan and met those goals and
requirements.
So to provide a comprehensive
overview of these efforts and
our focus on increasing
graduation rates, today's
presentation will highlight the
key changes to graduation
requirements as well as how we
are helping our local education
agencies understand and
implement them, starting with
the class of 2029. I will begin
with an overview of the
graduation requirement changes,
followed by highlights of the
revised Next Step Plan, and
finally share some information
about graduate profile.
Key change one, let's begin.
Demonstrations of competency,
beginning with class of 2024.
The demonstration of competency
requirement was removed.
Because it was seen.
As an unnecessary barrier to
graduation.
High school students are still
required to participate in ESA
testing as a sign that grade 11,
giving access and opportunity
still available for students.
Removal of requirements.
Algebra 2 advanced placement,
honors, dual credit, and
distance learning are no longer
required, but the students'
opportunity to take these these
courses, shall still exist.
They may not be
Good for all, but they pertain
to some.
This information is required to
be included in the next step
plan.
Essentially, the debate was that
algebra 2 could be a useful
course for some. The course is
only required of up to 14% of
New Mexico's workforce. The LFC
also said in its analysis of the
bill that removing algebra 2
could break down a barrier
standing in the graduation path
of some students. The same can
be said for advanced placement
honor sole credit or distance
learning.
Diploma pathways starting with
cohort 2029. New Mexico will
introduce two graduation
pathways. The standard diploma
pathway and the ability diploma
pathway. These changes are
significant, particularly for
students with disabilities, as
they are designed to ensure that
all students have a pathway to
graduate based on their
individual needs and abilities.
With the passage of Essa, signed
into law in December of 2015, it
emphasized
equity and high expectations of
all students, including those
with disabilities.
This meant that modified or
alternative diplomas no longer
count towards graduation rates
unless they met the same
standards as a regular standard
diploma.
Which brings us into key change
number 2.
What the law did too as well is
it incorporated best practices.
CTE and work-based learning for
core credit, flexible options,
students may now apply career
technical education, coursework
and work-based learning
experience toward core academic
credit in English, math, and
science. This opens the door for
more hands-on, real world
learning that is directly
connected to a student's future
goals.
Credits earned in middle school,
health, algebra 1, and geometry
can be earned at the middle
school level to count towards
high school requirements, if the
teacher of record holds a
secondary endorsement in the
subject area. Prior to this,
Health and algebra I were the
only um offerings that were
eligible at the at this.
Level, but geometry was added.
In House Bill 171.
Graduate profiles and next step
plans required, so all school
districts are now required to
create a graduate profile, a
clear vision of what skills,
competency and knowledge
students should should possess
upon graduation, determined at
their district and community
levels.
The next step plan has been
required since 2003, however, in
House Bill 171, the next step
plan must now align.
With their district's graduate
profiles, promoting intentional
and personalized academic and
career planning for students.
There was no change to the
amount.
Of elective credits, but what
the law did was it expanded
local level flexibility,
ensuring that schools can tailor
their learning experience to
meet the needs of their
communities. I also want to note
here that our department is
collecting information on the 2
units via a survey that was sent
to all districts and charters.
This information will be made
available on the graduation page
with updated information as
districts complete.
form.
To support implementation of
these requirements, the college
and career readiness Bureau,
work together with multiple
bureaus to develop the high
school graduation requirements
guidance manual. The manual was
then reviewed by the graduation
guidance advisory Committee,
which is comprised of parents.
Teachers, counselors,
principals, and superintendents.
So the grad manual includes the
key changes, information on
career technical education,
work-based learning, allowed for
core academic credit, the
diploma pathways, everything
that is needed, um, as a
reference is in the graduation
manual.
Additional resources created
include um flyers and one pagers
that have graduation
requirements.
A Q&A for frequently asked
questions is found on our
website.
In addition, we created cohort
checklists for counselors or
advisors to help with that
process of making sure that
students are meeting their core
academic requirements as well as
graduation.
The department has presented 18
times to various groups,
including educational leaders,
Indian education office hours,
offices special ed, office
hours, attendance office hours,
charter school leaders, and the
Department of Vocational
rehabilitation. The
presentations will continue to
be ongoing, and we will present.
When anyone asks us to.
A survey was distributed to all
LEAs to identify their desired
supports and to inform the
development of high quality
professional learning and
assistance for schools and
districts. Results from the
survey and some transcript
audits, we conducted internally,
clearly indicated a need for
targeted supports.
This included
Us putting funding towards.
Best practices such as career
technical education. Research
shows that students who
participate in these high
quality career technical
education pathways are more
likely to graduate on time and
transition successfully to
college and careers.
Innovation zones.
These require schools to
implement those best practices,
such as career technical
education, work-based learning,
Capstone projects,
social-emotional learning
supports through new
instructional models at flexible
scheduling and learning
environments. These need to meet
the needs of the students and
aligned to graduate profiles.
Students who earn credit and
participate in work-based
learning or more likely to stay
in school because they can earn
while they learn and see a
direct link between their
education and future employment.
When families.
When families.
And students are well informed
and involved, students are more
likely to succeed. You were
given a little flyer that says
60%, 62% of students turn to
their families for information
about careers and moving
forward. So when they have the
information and they are well
informed, the parent engagement
is a key predictor if students
are going to persist and they're
going to graduate and students
understand that path to
graduation. They're more likely
to stay on track.
So this leads us to the next
step plan. The next step plan is
a graduation requirement in New
Mexico, designed to help
students plan for their futures.
It ensures students, families,
and schools work together
annually to prepare the student
for post-secondary education,
training, military or career
pathways.
The level all platform is
designed to assist high schools
and their families in navigating
the post high school journey,
including college, career
exploration, financial planning,
and pathway planning.
CCRB partnered with Level all to
create a next step plan journey
to help students explore,
document, and achieve their
goals.
Over the past year, it has been
piloted by approximately 80
schools and 31,000 students.
The level all platform is a
resource tool that contains
multiple libraries of
information and content for
students to explore, such as
career exploration and college
preparedness that they can use
in coordination with their
counselor, their advisor, um,
anybody who their mentor to
complete the next step plan.
This platform has allowed for
continuity of next step plan
completion because all LEAs that
are utilizing the platform if a
student transfers to another
school that is using the
platform, all of their
information, including their
next step plan information will
also transfer with the student
and be readily available.
The content library consists of
all of these resources and
features that help inform the
aspects of their college and
career planning. There's a
comprehensive library. There's
multiple forms of engagement
with this generation, their
attention spans sometimes are
really short, so some of these
are very short videos and they
get to the point and students
are able to go through them, so
they're similar to a TikTok
video or You.
YouTube video and when they
click on it, it creates a
prescription for the students,
so if I clicked on um
electricity. I want to be an
electrician. It starts to create
a journey for me with things
about an electrician.
Here is an example of what the
homepage looks like.
On the left, what we have on our
home page is the next step plan.
So students, once they select
those videos, this career plan
starts for them.
So currently, the way it works
right now.
Is the next step plan is
downloaded as a template for the
student to add to a Google Drive
and fill out. It is very
interactive, so if you can see
the links here, um, when they
click on a link, it'll take them
to information about that. So if
they want to learn, if they
click, well, I want to go to the
military. It shows them all of
the branches of the military and
what you would need to do in
order to get into the military.
If they are looking for
information on FAFSA, um, on the
12th grade next step plan, we
have questions like that. Did
you fill out the FAFSA, do you
know what the FAFSA is? It's,
it's, it's to provide supports.
It's not to collect data, it's
to provide the supports and
understand why students are not
filling out a FASFA or they
don't know how to fill out one.
So currently they download this,
they click on the links, they do
all of, um, they fill in their
next step plan. And then they
download it and send it to their
parents uh for signature. This
should not take away from the
meetings that the counselor and
the mentor and the students
still need to have to plan. It
just helps them with a year-long
process of looking at what that
pathway is.
So what some of the changes that
are happening, so no more Google
Drive template moving forward
next year, Level all has worked
with us to make sure that it
stays in the system and so um
parents are going to be able to
log in the system and they're
going to be able to sign off in
the system, um.
If level all is integrated into
a student statewide information
student, um,
Platform, the platform would
capture the signed date for the
next step plan and directly
uploaded into the SIS. This
would make next step plan
validation easier for the LEAs
as well as easier for my staff.
The current platform engagement
report from Level all shows the
high interest from districts to
launch the platform? Not all
LEAs are currently using the
platform, utilizing it, but this
is great because level all can
also pull up the reports for us.
We can also see if next step
plans are completed by students
as well, um, this year we pulled
the data a couple of weeks ago
and 47% completed their next
step plan within the platform.
So there's still a lot of work
and there's
still a lot of um personalized
professional development that we
need to assist in this process.
Graduate profiles are emerging
trend in education across the
nation and in New Mexico. They
have been at the core of
innovation zone sites, and we
support the addition of grab
profiles to House Bill 171. The
legislation asks schools to
expand on academic competencies.
It also instructs the counselors
and advisors to use these.
value statements when creating
next step plans with students.
In short, graduate profiles
communicate to the students and
all parties involved, just what
a district expects from their
students beyond just meeting
those graduation requirements.
By designing definition, they
are highly personalized in this
example, Hatch Valley
acknowledges that their core
values are leadership, work
ethic, mindfulness, resilience,
and time management. This
communicates to employers.
What they can expect from a
student with a diploma from this
school. This confirms to
teachers what they'd like to see
embedded within classroom
discussions and projects and so
forth.
We have moved as quickly as the
procurement process allows to
build our own capacity by
engaging a highly respected and
skilled contractor, Advanced
CTE, who has completed a
landscape survey to gather
existing profiles, has engaged
in interviews and focus groups
to gather feedback and determine
the needs in any field, they
have built a set of minimum
requirements for our LEAs. We
are currently reviewing and
revising this for release in
July. We just had two focus
groups and are
working on a tool kit next, the
final phase will be small group
and 1 to 1 technical assistance
for schools to develop their
graduate profiles.
So thank you, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee for
your time and attention today.
The changes to New Mexico's
graduation requirements mark an
important step forward in
aligning our educational system
with the needs of today's
students in tomorrow's
workforce. The public education
department is committed to
ensuring that this transition is
both smooth and successful. We
are prepared to provide
comprehensive support to
schools, districts, and
educators from technical
assistants.
to professional development to
clear guidance and ongoing
collaboration so that every
student in New Mexico all means
all, has a meaningful pathway to
graduation. We look forward to
working closely with you and our
education partners across the
state to ensure these efforts
result in those stronger
outcomes for our students. Thank
you again for your continued
leadership and support.
Thank you. I'm never quite sure
whether I should call you Miss
Guchetis or breezy. I've known
you for a while about things, so
thank, thank you, Breezy. Uh,
questions committee
vice chair Rometo.
Thank you Mr. Chairman and thank
you for the presentation. Um, I
had a question about the
district level required credits,
um, how you all at the
department are tracking those
categorizing those and offering
assistance, as you mentioned to
um the schools, but I guess more
succinctly like what are the
trends in classes, um, are you
all seeing in terms of those
district uh required credits.
Thank you, Representative
Romero, Mr. Chair.
We sent out a survey to all
districts to collect that
information to see what those
trends are, um, we're in the
process of receiving responses
to those. Um, what I can tell
you with conversations and some
initial responses that have come
in is, um, financial literacy is
very hot on the list, uh,
personal communication is also
another one, there are even um
submissions of a menu of
A menu of selection and so, um,
it varies across the state, but
um we are collecting those and
they will be in a centralized
location on our website for
other schools to be able to look
at that because what is stated
is when a student transfers
those districts should accept
those credits, even though they
might they might have a
different locally determined.
District credit.
And
Mr. Chairman, um, thank you for
that. I guess, how have you all
had conversations at the
department how you might assist
school districts if there are
all these different sorts of
classes offered in any sort of
professional development,
technical advice, advising
school districts.
If they have different
Classes that are all over the
place that they're requiring.
Thank you, Representative
Romero, Mister Chair, um, we are
working on strategies to assist
with that process. Um, we have a
coach in our bureau, Judith
Cruz, who is responsible for
graduation requirements, and we
have a graduation requirements
inbox, and so she is readily
available, answers questions
within 24 hours of about
graduation requirements, um, so
as those come in, um, we
additionally sent out a sur
Survey to LEA's asking what
supports do you need in for in
order for us to not only get
this word out, but what supports
do you need for the people that
are on the ground working on
this, um, in order to um assist
with that process, so we are
planning like in our, in the
back of our minds we're
planning, um, regional.
Um, presentations going out to
the schools if needed, um,
possibly, um, multiple
conferences we have, um,
multiple conferences that we
have already um planned and have
put on, for example, right now
we have our pathways to career
summit going on right now. We
went over graduation
requirements, and we are doing
professional development and how
to improve math at that point
right now, and especially for
students with with um dis
ab il ities so we are in the
works to provide more of that
personalized support and
professional development.
Thank you.
Thank you, uh, representsana.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
thank you for your presentation.
I, I guess I got stuck on, um.
changes, removing certain
requirements, demonstration of
competency, um, as a math
teacher, that really, um, is
difficult to, to, to understand
because we were up in, in
another committee, we were up in
up north, um, the eastern part
of the state, and they're very
proud of their graduation rate
because it had gotten higher,
but the proficiency in math was
like less than 12% or between.
So, so when we get all these
businesses, we're trying to
bring economic development to
our state and they say, well, we
don't want to come to New Mexico
because you don't have the.
workforce to do technology-based
systems. They can't do math. So
I, I guess demonstration of
competency, why would we take
that out? Wouldn't we want to
know that our kids are competent
to do a job.
I, I, I just, what, what, what
happened? Tell me about that.
Thank you, Representative, Mr.
Chair. What I can tell you with
the background of removal of
demonstration of competency in
2022, PED convened a group of
stakeholders to review and
propose a new direction of or
policy requiring the prior
demonstration of competency in
the five subject areas, reading,
writing, math, social studies,
and science in the prior
graduation requirements in House
Bill 126. So the stake holder
considered the following. They
looked at states that have
soared on the high school exit
exam. Here's why only 8 states.
Still require students to pass
an exam in order to graduate.
Research has shown that the
presence of an exit exam doesn't
increase students' academic
achievement or employment rates.
Several studies have linked
these exam to increase dropout
rates for students of color and
students from low income
families. So they also saw it as
a barrier for students not to be
able to graduate. I was a math
teacher too. Um, in addition,
though, there are still, we're
not saying assessments are not
important because assessments
still are important when
I present on career technical
education, one of the 12 major
components is how are you
assessing students? How are we
understanding that students are
earning an industry credential
because they do have to take an
assessment for that too as well.
But what still exists is that
students still have to take a
final assessment in all of their
courses.
So that's the background that I
can give you on demons on
demonstration of competency and
why it was removed.
Mr. Chairman, so they have to
take a final exam. Do they have
to pass it? I mean, 12%
proficiency rate in math tells
me they don't know what they're
doing. And, and
I, but Girl Scout cook, um, a
couple of months ago, two of
them, and I gave the young lady
a $20 bill, and she gave me $27
back. So it's like this
shouldn't be happening. Kids, I,
I, I have 11 schools in my
district, so I've been
substituting around and I watch
them on their computers. It was
a first grade class, and they
were doing math and um they
didn't get it right the first
time, they didn't get it right
second time, they didn't get
right 3rd time. They got it
right the 4th time, but they
didn't really know what they
were doing. So I, I, I just
wonder what's happening.
Well, I understand why our kids
aren't proficient because of
some of the ways we're doing
things, but we cannot, we
cannot.
Lower the,
lower the level of skills just
to graduate. They need to be
able to go out into the world
and do a job and do it well, and
I just, I just wonder if we're,
we're helping them with, with
some of the things we're doing.
But that's that's all I have.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you, uh, Senator Thornton.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, thank you for the
presentation, Mr. Gutierrez. I
My line of questioning is
somewhere along Representative
Sarah Nias, uh, with regards to.
The, uh,
Coy, I guess I was gonna focus
more on the algebra 2 question
that you remove that as well.
And uh my question is to what
extent are schools still
requiring or recommending that
students complete the algebra 2,
since this course is kind of
prepares students for the
technical fields that we are
assuming Albuquerque, New Mexico
will be uh supporting in the
future. Uh, I'm a technical guy.
I'm an aerospace engineer,
retired from Sandy Labs.
And, um, algebra 2 is sort of a
basis to to move on to a
technical field. And so the fact
that you're removing this
concerns me a little bit, but so
I, I kind of understand. I, I
heard what you said was that up
to 14% of New Mexico workforce
only uses algebra 2, and so
maybe we're only talking about
the, the engineers, the
researchers, the Los Alamos
types who may be uh need that
kind of, and of course they go
on the calculus and everything
else.
Um
But my concern is that we may be
keeping students who, who may
have a proficiency and we do
need more engineers, so we do
need the folks and scientists,
and so, um, removing that
qualification kinda concerns me
because we're, we're saying it's
not that important. And so I,
I'd like to understand the
argument there. Thank you,
Senator Thornton. Mr. Chair, um,
Again, like I said in my
presentation, the removal of
those.
Came down to the barrier for
students.
To graduate. And we're not with
the flexibility of the House
Bill 171 graduation
requirements. This is not to, I,
I want to emphasize that this is
not to water down or um.
Cre give the misconception that
there's an easier way. It should
be there should be still as
rigorous, we still say these
courses still shall be offered,
you should still offer these
courses to students. We measure
in Perkins and NextGen funding.
We measure.
Access versus success.
And that's what we need to
emphasize with our high school
graduation requirements. How
many students have access to all
of these components. Not all
students need them or not all
students will utilize them, but
are we providing the access for
them, and when they access them,
are we providing the supports in
order for them to be successful.
So with career technical
education, I agree with you
there are some, there are some
jobs that require, um, mass.
At that level.
Our pathways to careers, what we
have done with math is we have
embedded career exploration with
it as well as labor market
information for students to make
those informed decisions. They
can click on an electrician and
it will tell him what level of
math and electrician should have
or should need to know for them
to earn a certification or a
degree or go on how much
education they need to know. So
providing the students with the
information with
With the access and getting them
to use that to make the informed
decisions. That is the
importance also of the next step
plan to make sure that you are
tailoring those individualized
experiences and.
Their pathway to what they're
interest is.
Mr. Chair, Senator, if I could
also just clarify that the, the
removal of algebra 2 isn't a,
isn't a PED decision that was
part of House Bill 171 that you
all of the legislature passed in
2024. And, and so that's, that's
something that's statutorily
defined in that, that you all
decided to do. I did want to
just really quickly talk, touch
on the demonstration of
competency piece, which is sort
of related, um.
Prior to the removal of
demonstration of competition.
We did have them, um.
But
What what ended up happening is
you had this sort of tiered
approach. So the first thing you
had to do was pass a test, and
in that time, I think it was
Park.
And if you didn't pack past the
park test, then you got to take
it again.
And then if you didn't pass the
part test, then you could take
an end of course exam, which was
specific to a particular math
class that you took. And then if
you didn't pass the end of
course exam, then you could
actually go and get a letter of
acceptance from a uh a higher
education institution, uh, to
prove that you were ready to get
in. But most of our institutions
in New Mexico are open
enrollment, so you just had to
apply. So in the end, this
demonstration of competency that
we, it was a sort of a false
accountability.
measure that we had put in
place, and I, I would imagine
it's similar to what a lot of
states were doing. And, and
really what's at the core of
this is instruction, and you'll,
you'll hear from the commi from
some presentations next month
about math. We're going to talk
about a lot of literacy in this
particular meeting. Next meeting
we'll talk a lot about math
because what we're really
getting at is whether or not
students are learning math, not
whether or not we set up sort of
these these false, false
accountability measures.
That are a proxy for actual
learning. And so I just wanted
to to clarify that one, this is
something that the legislature
decided to do in changing the
law. And that part of the
rationale for eliminating the
demonstrations of competency was
that even when they were in
place, they really weren't doing
that thing, you know.
I
Thank you for that explanation.
Doesn't make me feel any better,
but I understand, I understand
the rationale.
Um, uh, one other question, uh,
if students move between
districts and maybe you already
answered this, do they have to
meet the new district with local
requirements as well before they
can graduate. How, how does that
work now in this new system
going forward. Thank you,
Senator Thornton, Mr. Chair, um,
with the guidance, the House
Bill 171 in the graduation
manual guidance states is that
receiving districts need to
receive those credits for
students and mark them on their
next step plan that they created
local those
2 credits at the local level.
Mr. Jarret's all I have.
Thank you. Before I go on, I
welcome our, uh, Secretary of
Education walked in. I'm sorry I
didn't get in before that, but
thank you, it's always nice
having you show up at our
meetings and see and hear what
we're doing, and we also get to
chat with you informally and
formally, so thank you for being
here. Um, representative Mal
Moya.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you for your presentation. Um, I
might just put my little plug
of, of my frustration about the
demonstration of competency even
though we were doing, only
because I've seen the kiddos
when they have to take the SAT
and they ask me, do we have, do
we have to pass it?
And, uh, and, and I'm like you
have to take it, that's all I
tell him. I'm like, I'm not
gonna, you have to take it. And
but they know what I'm not
saying, and they click.
Uh, unless those few that are
needing a scholarship or needing
to get into a college or needing
and, and there's a handful in
every, in every class, but, uh,
a good majority of them, they're
like, especially by the second
half of the of of the of the
testing day. It's so long. Um,
they're clicking. They could
care less what they, they're not
even reading what's going on.
And but those scores then are
used to
Measure our success.
And that's what that's what uh
frustrates me is when they're
the tests that they're required
to take have no merit in their
life.
They don't care and, and I've
seen them, um, so that, that's
my frustration with it. I get
it. I get it that with the
tears, it really was, we used to
make fun of it as far as, OK, I
can just uh figure out a way to
get them to pass on because I
don't want to put up with them
next year. I didn't personally
do that, but, um, but, but
that's, that's the thing. Um,
there's um
There, there has to be something
that we can do to make sure only
because, um, like, um, uh
representative Serana as a math
teacher, I'm, I'm a high school
physics teacher, and so they
take my class as a junior, they
should have already taken and
and passed uh algebra one, they
can't do algebra.
In my class, that they struggle
with it. I am reteaching a lot
of the algebra with simple, uh,
calculations and, and everything
else, and, and that's what's,
that's what's frustrating is
that they passed the class.
But they still don't know it.
Um, so, um, that kind of gets me
to, while I love the fact that,
um, we're with the, with science
and and and math and English
that we're making it.
More personalized to the student
to where, let's say, um, large
animal science, someone that's
doing those kind of things can
get a science credit for this.
Um, my biggest struggle as a
science teacher is the fact that
that large animal science is not
preparing them for the 11th
grade test.
The anime, uh, ASR. It it's just
not.
Um, and that's our struggle.
We've had to revamp and totally
redo our whole science
department so that we can have
them, um.
Kind of a touch a a very base
level of all sciences, by the
time they get to those
specialized courses that they
don't have to take physics
anymore, because many of them
are afraid of physics anyway,
um, but there's a lot of physics
in that test, a lot, I would say
a good chunk of that test is, is
physical science. Um, but many
of them steer away from it
because it's because it's
difficult, and they would have
to use their brain so those kind
of things and and
And that's, that's the struggle
is that you have to, they still
need it, they still need to know
it because again, there's a test
that assesses their knowledge
and then in turn, um, uh, issues
of, of whether our school is
successful or not.
Um, but now they're not required
to take these classes, or
they're not, um, or, or they can
find, uh, you know, do this in,
in other ways, and, and I think
that's where, um, I, I like the,
um, I, I understood the intent,
cause even I was, you know, that
was right when I came in and I
understood the intent of, of the
Um
Making a a different pathways in
order to be able to get
different, uh, those, those
types of credit, but, um, being
in those core classes, it's,
it's very difficult to make sure
that they do know what they're,
uh, what they're supposed to
know in order to come out of our
school successful. Um, do you,
before I go on, do you have any
comments on that or anything? If
not, that's fine.
Representative Mr. Chair, thank
you for your comments and um
Relating your frustrations, um,
what I, what I can say from the
college and career readiness
Bureau's perspective is that
We are not trying to with career
technical education
specifically. I want to
emphasize that it's not an
either or, it's both. You need
to embed the academic standards
with the technical teaching, and
that has to happen with
collaboration between your core
content.
Teacher as well as your career
technical education teacher in
ensuring and making sure
there's a process that still
needs to happen when they are
substituting those courses, the
district has to show the
crosswalk between the standards
that are that they are showing
that are science standards that
they are meeting within those
specific courses. So that is a
requirement. So I hope that
helps.
Alleviate some of that.
Um, Mr. Chair and Ms. Gutierrez
represented that's 5 minutes
we've got some other people on
the list. If we have time, can
we come back to, to another
question.
You weren't here when I
announced initially, I think you
came in afterwards, you know,
that everyone has 5 minutes and
we'll come back and do a 2nd
round if there's still time. OK.
So I apologize. Thank you. uh,
Representative Garrett.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I just
want to acknowledge that
Secretary Padilla, Director Sea,
and probably others in this room
have been all over the state.
Yesterday, they were in Taos
Federal Secretary of Education
was in town Monday and Tuesday.
So thank you for being here.
It's rigorous, um, I want to
really thank PED for getting the
level off system and and doing
the next steps plan online. So
I've looked at it. I used, I
did.
8th graders, you're trying to
fill it in. Nobody can fill it
in. You can't read what they
fill it in. It's a mess. So this
is great news. Now, yesterday at
LFC Legislative Finance
Committee, there was a
discussion as to whether the
next step plans should go lower,
and I think we should explore
doing it in 7th grade, and I say
7th grade because our 6th
graders, some are in stand-alone
schools. Some are in 5th and 6th
grade schools. Some are K6, but
by 7th grade,
They're in middle school, one
way or the other, and in light
of the fact that there's 8th
grade courses that can count for
high school credit, um, that's
what I was thinking about and
and grabbing those kids, uh, so
that's just something I really
appreciate uh representative
Seranair like we were the peanut
gallery. Nobody could hear us,
but we're in the car listening
to the LFC saying yes, no. So,
but I
I really think everybody who had
the discussion and um I do want
to comment to Senator, um,
Thornton, um, with the more
robust STEM education,
people at a younger age are
getting exposed to the kind of
careers where algebra 2 is a
necessity, but I will say doing
a next step plans with a student
with disabilities who could not
literally add 3 + 9 and figuring
out how she was gonna
take algebra 2 in high school
was one heck of a headache,
just, just so you know that
implications of forcing kids to
take classes that are not
appropriate. Um,
And then my other, let's see,
time to, oh, the other question,
Mr. Chair, and, and, um,
I love the name Breezy. You can
call me Breezy. It's fun, it's
fun.
Is, is the time because when I
was at 8th grade teacher, I
think at that time, my first
period language arts class with
my advisory class, so I actually
had more time to know my kids
and work with them. I believe
the next set plans is one of the
most important things you do
with students in any state, not
just our state. And so my
concern is, is how do we make
sure there's
Adequate time to really
Spend on it, and I don't know
different districts, different
charter schools, what they're
doing, but to me that is an
issue that
There's time you can say the
parents can go in, they can do
it at home, but they also need
some quality time in the school
day to do that, so that's just a
concern I have that I'm sure
school district superintendents,
everybody has to to make it
really worthwhile, so that's
just another comment.
Thank you.
Thank you, uh, Senator Brantly.
Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. Um, while I do
appreciate the brief explanation
by the director. I want to
remind you that twice you have
said and words matter, that
demonstrating competency is a
barrier for New Mexico students
to graduate.
Demonstrating compensy.
It's a barrier for New Mexico
students to graduate. And so PED
removed it.
So I want to give you an
opportunity to further clarify.
I think one of the concerns that
we have is
Not that we just lowered a bar,
we're concerned that the bar is
completely been removed. And so
if you'd go back to slide 5, can
you assure us that we still have
requirements in place that we
are graduating a workforce to
fill the, the desperately needed
workforce void in this state as
legislators of a state that it
remains last in education. Those
aren't the words that we want to
hear. So removing this
particular cor.
and I do appreciate the further
explanation. Algebra 2, which we
know is key for, for techno uh
any career in technology. Tell
us then what is in place to
build a career ready.
Workforce with graduating
classes uh in our public
schools.
Thank you, Senator Brantley. Mr.
Chair.
Couple of questions there. I
just, I just want to clarify
that I gave the explanation in
the key changes, but New Mexico
public education department did
not remove the demonstration of
competency. I was just providing
some feedback on what
Shareholders took to the
legislation and then the
decisions were made not by
Public education department can
I'll I'll let Jackie.
Christos.
Good morning, uh, Mr. Chair and
Senator Branley. I'm really, uh,
happy that you asked this
question yourself in your role.
Thank you.
Yes, Mr. Terror. I'm Jacqueline
Costales. I'm the division
director of curriculum and
instruction. And so I'm really
happy that you asked this
question because uh
when PD convened, uh, the
statewide committee to have this
conversation. There was a very
rigorous conversation about that
and what recommendations could
be from the shareholders around
the state, uh, but there was
also, as you all probably know,
uh, preaching to the choir.
There's a very rigorous
conversation about this at the
legislature as well.
And one of the pieces that we
really looked at there and
hasn't really been mentioned
this morning is our Martinez and
Yazi students, the subgroups
that are represented there, they
are the most marginalized, uh,
in terms of, um, achieving
academically, uh, being involved
in school, um, uh, uh, a whole
level of things that I don't
need to, you all are right here
with us and you know this. I
don't need to um
You know, pontificate about it.
Um, and what we found that what
that committee found is that
algebra 2 and the um
demonstration of competency, uh,
had been removed in many or most
of the highest performing
states, uh, and so from that
perspective, the word barrier
has been used in the
conversation all along.
But the barriers are different.
So for a student who doesn't
feel engaged in school, right?
Um, you're forced by a
requirement to take algebra 2,
or you're forced by a
requirement to do a
demonstration of competency.
That right there, if you're not
engaged in school and you know
that you're not going to use
algebra 2, which is only used in
like 10% of professions, and you
might would rather have
statistics and then calculus
your senior year. They were not
able to follow those pathways
that led them to whatever their
postsecondary uh aspirations and
dreams were. So if we look at
this as a system, it's really
important to see what, that what
we're doing here is from the
student perspect
ive The adults in this state
said, Let's help you achieve
whatever your dreams and goals
and academic, um, you know,
where you want to be by opening
up the system. Most students are
going into a field where they
need statistics, um, whether
it's through um CTE or whether
it's like a traditional
four-year college path. Most
students do not need algebra 2
to be um successful. Some do,
which is why I think you
as a body very wisely said it
had to be offered, but it didn't
have to be required. That way,
students and their parents and
their communities, right, can
help them decide which pathway
is the right one. So in terms of
rigor, the more students are
engaged. This was really the
crux of the conversation, right?
Uh, both with you all at the
legislature and with the
community across the state, um,
we really, uh, at the committee,
the people that gave
But really wanted opportunities
for students to be able to
pursue what they needed to
pursue to be ready for those
dream, dreams and aspirations.
And this allows that to occur.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We're
over our time. I appreciate that
explanation. So the definition
of what we're calling competency
is still in place, and I think
the message we want to send out
is it's still very important to
our state agency and to
legislators that we are
graduating competent students.
So I, I do appreciate that,
that.
clarification. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, can I just answer her
last question about um what
we're doing to prepare students
for the workforce. So we carry
out Perkins and NextGen funding,
which is specific for career
technical education. So we
support school districts that
are carrying out high quality
career technical education
programs of study and providing
the funding for that too as
well. We have a rigorous
reporting performance data
process where we take
Um, the amount of concentrators
in the um state, which is a
student that has completed 2 or
more courses in that specific
program of study. And then we,
um, evaluate.
Did they graduate?
Are they proficient in math, are
they proficient in, um,
In science, are they uh
proficient in literacy? Did they
earn an industry credential? Did
they take dual credit? So there
is some performance indicators
that we have to report to the
federal government that shows
that those students had a high
quality process within career
technical education. And so we
are partnering with Department
of Workforce Solutions to make
sure that we are creating that
bridge and closing the gap
between our secondary
institutions are post-secondary
and our workforce.
Thank you.
Thank you. uh, Representative
Grola.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for for this presentation. I
especially enjoy the part where
uh you show us the city choices.
I think that was one of the
goals when the the bill came out
to the kids, the students could
have a, a choice when they were
uh trying to to finish high
school. I have a couple of
clarification questions and you
may have already mentioned this,
um.
The demonstrating competence.
It is, it's a, it's a big
spectrum as anybody who has been
in the classroom, we know that
sometimes the test doesn't show
everything that the students
know and we just have this
presentation from this young
lady from the Capstone project.
So, um,
Is those projects or the
capstone projects are still
being um part of part of the
goals to demonstrate competency
versus traditional testing
versus traditional ways of of um
graduating students, Mr. Chair.
Represent Gurola, Mr. Chair,
when students are demonstration
using a capstone to count
towards a core academic credit.
The district and the students
are required to align those
standards to that capstone
project to ensure that they are
learning those standards
specific to that core subject.
Mr. Chair. So yes, right, so
when the, this, this is being
used to demonstrate competence
is being aligned. OK, thank you.
That was just, I wanted to
clarify that um.
It it is important to have that
diversity in demonstrating that
so thank you for that. And my
last question, and you may
already have mentioned this is.
I, as a teacher me too, I have
students who came to me way
below grade level and trying to
and probably happen in every Mr
share in every, every content
classes, right? Uh, trying to
catch them up um is possible.
It just requires specific plan
for my specific diversity
population.
So, um, how are we measuring
college and career readiness in
early ages. So before going to
middle school, before going to
high school, so we don't arrive
to high school with students who
are so way behind that we're
trying to catch up and we are
not gonna get there and students
are gonna demonstrate that that
that gap by not going to school
apay living, I mean, all those
things that will add to to not
graduating, Mr. S.
Representativerola, Mr. Chair, I
can tell you, and I think, um,
Doctor Costales could help out
with this situation, but um our
college and career readiness
indicator score for
accountability model is only
measured at the high school
level. And so with those there
is a menu of options for
students to demonstrate that
college and career readiness
that could be a score on the
Accuplacer, the ACT, the PSA,
the SAT, earning AC or better in
a dual credit, earning a um
earning a
3 are better in advanced
placement, uh, completing a
career technical education
program of study, um, so there's
a menu of options at the
secondary level. I'm gonna pass
it over to Doctor Costello
because she might be able to um
um answer your question about
the earlier levels. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative Guola. So I think
in terms of the pre-K12 spectrum
and the career trajectory for
our students, we need to think
about the system as a whole, and
again, I'm really happy you you
asked this question.
Uh, New Mexico follows the
framework, the multi-layered
system of support, uh, and one
of the things that we're finding
as we work um across the state
is that we are not, we
consistently K through 12 are
not necessarily teaching our
students at their current grade
level. And every year, right,
when we're talking about uh uh
initial first teach core
instruction.
Um, if we're not using the
current grade level standard for
them, then they're already
behind because what they're
working on is from the prior
year. So the multi-layer system
of support actually addresses,
utilizing uh grade level content
every year to um help students
achieve, and part of this is a
mindset shift that we're working
on across our state. Uh, we have
some RAND data that shows that
when we ask our teachers, do you
have high quality instruction?
materials, they'll say yes. Do
you, uh, how often do you use
them? They'll say once or twice
a week.
OK, the high quality instruction
materials are the equity lover.
They assure that our, our
English language learners are,
um, uh, our students with
disabilities and a whole array
of student groups, right, have
access to the grade level
content, and our teachers are
saying they don't use them
because their students are too
low.
So imagine doing 13 years of
college, and your professor's
not teaching you what you signed
up for on the course, but
something lesser. So part of
that is how do we make a strong
core, and yes, the multi-layer
system support also addresses
targeted and intensive
interventions. And we also have
to make sure that those
interventions are supporting
what the student needs to pass
the grade level standard, uh, in
their assignment tomorrow,
right? It has
To be tethered to what they need
to pass tomorrow. We don't have
to make up 6 years' worth of
skills if they're a 7th grader,
right? We have to make sure that
the skill pluck out the skill
they need to pass the 7th grade
standard tomorrow in their
classroom formative assessment,
we pluck out the ones they need
and we support them rather than
holding them back and saying
until they know this whole body
of knowledge, then we'll give
them access to the grade level
content. It's a very long
pontificating, definitely.
Conversation, but this is what
we're working on in professional
development with our teachers.
Like our students and research
shows that the most marginalized
students benefit from ongoing K
through 12 on grade level
instruction aligned to the
standards.
Thank you, Mr. Cha. Thank you
for that answer, and I like, um,
I would like to hear what the
follow up on that because I
think teachers are ready, just
need that uh training on the
specific
points to do. Thank you. Thank
you.
Thank you. Um, I have a coup,
you know, someone else.
Sorry.
If, if we have time for a 2nd 1
and I've got it, but we're we're
running short so representative,
please go ahead.
Thank you. I did have a quick
question, um.
So since we have removed the
demonstrations of compassy. So
is, do we remove the, the
difference I'm going back a
couple of years, they could get
if they couldn't demonstrate the
com they had to get the
completion certificate of
completion instead of the high
school diploma, so has that been
removed now they just all get
the high school diploma with
that removal.
Yes, so
Representative Cullen, Mr.
Chair,
a pathway, which requires that
students um complete the
required 24 graduation
requirements in order to earn
that high school diploma.
Removed with that bill. OK.
Thank you.
Thank you. Any others?
OK, I have a couple of
questions. When you went around
the state, you know, asking
about the changes that we made
to graduation requirements, what
kinds of things came up. What
were the concerns? What were the
issues? How could we have
written the law better so that
it was implementable, is that a
word?
Um, Mister Chair.
Um, I think what has it.
We love House Bill 171 and the
flexibility of the graduation
requirements because again, it's
not specific to just one student
or a group of students.
Districts can make.
Help students make the decision
as to what, what courses or what
graduation requirements. I will
tell you that the challenging
part for us is.
Substituting a work-based
learning for a core academic
credit has been challenging for
us, and we have been working on
um.
That process since it came out
because we're trying to make
sure that we are meeting the
standards of the core academics,
but that the students have a
high quality work-based learning
experience that is going to
apply that knowledge. They
shouldn't be sitting in the
classroom learning about the
math, what they should be doing
is taking the math that they
learned and showing that they
are proficient in that. So that
has, if anything that has been
the challenging portion.
Um, the other component, um,
this is, this is very strange,
but what has been challenging
for districts is to determine
what those two local
flexibility, um, courses are.
Um, I think they're having a
hard time trying to figure out
what they want that to be, and I
think that is um graduate
profiles being a requirement,
great thing, and that's why we,
um,
Put out an RFP for a vendor to
help us, to help the school
districts create those graduate
profiles.
Thank you. Um, kind of about the
whole thing on the, the map,
there are, let's see 123 of us
that were math teachers and an
engineer and a physics, uh,
person and so you were math
also, so, you know, a number of
us, uh, and I taught math and
regularly
didn't understand algebra 2 trig
calculus or kind of a little
blip over on the math side. I
would taught statistics, which
is far more practical than most
of uh math and
He certainly as rigorous as
algebra 2 to know and
understand, um, and yet, lots of
the math teachers at the high
school didn't understand it, you
know, it's like, go talk to
somebody else. And so, you know,
I very much am in support of
high quality math, but it's more
practical. And for most
students, statistics is an
everyday event where algebra 2
and others, my guess is the 5 of
us and maybe 1 or 2 others might
be able to do most of high
school algebra 2 right now and
most of the rest with, you know,
they, they blank out pretty
quickly.
Um, if we, if we required
everybody to do that. So just
kind of a little aside with
that, um, as we get over to.
Or talking about the next step
plans, do you have any data on
the fidelity of how the next
step plans are implemented. I
know in my high school, we had
some teachers were wonderful. We
had a whole lot of other
teachers, I shouldn't say a
whole lot, but too many others
that, oh, it's just kind of a
free day, don't worry about it,
put your name on it, you know,
you're, you're good. Do we have
data about the fidelity of how
teachers are actually
implementing those and let me
include the other is a
professional development for
teachers on how to do it well
rather.
To then the ones that are, you
know, just see it as a free day
for the kids.
Mr. Chair, thank you for that
question, um.
You're right, we, we, we rolled
out the next step plan just as
the platform, but districts have
the flexibility as to um who
they assign the next step plan
to. Some districts, um,
put that responsibility on the
principal. Some of them put it
on a counselor, somebody, some
of them put it on an advisory
teachers, somebody, some of them
put it on first period teacher,
um, so it's an array across the
board, um, that has been with
the pilot, that's some of the
information we were collecting
as to.
We have given the flexibility to
say,
Here you go, implement it. We
gave him professional
development on how to access it,
what to do and so forth, but
now as I sat down with our
counselor liaison who um
oversees this, the next step now
is providing guidance on how to
possibly implement it, um.
45 minutes or more, or this
should be implemented in here.
We can't really tell them what
to do, but we can provide
guidance on what those best
practices are, so that is part
of um the professional
development and those, um,
supports that we will be
providing this year.
Thank you, and that's about my 5
minutes. We do have about 6 or 7
minutes for uh oh.
Senator Noel.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much. I need to correct you a
farmer and a rancher has to use
math every day and everything
that we do, if not, you're gonna
lose a whole crop out there,
you're gonna have a fence that
is not long enough to go around
your property, uh, gauging the
amount of water that comes out
of a well, you need to keep that
in mind because we do use it
every day. Thank you very much.
You stand corrected.
Thanks for the correction. Uh,
I'm talking about more of the
academic that, you know, can how
many in here could factor X2 + 2
x equals, what is it 2.
You know
Um,
2nd round, uh,
representative.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair, really
quick, uh, next step plans. I'm
very glad to see that it is no
longer the Google Drive template
that it's gonna be like, uh,
only because it was a nightmare
this year, as far as all of that
PDF it was in our, in our, uh,
student development classes. So
being able to, some computers
did it well, some didn't, some
downloaded it right, some had to
fill it out 5 times because they
lost it and and every
time they thought they saved it
and, and, and they were getting
really frustrated. So something
that could have been really
good, uh, for them to actually
look through they got way
frustrated in the process and
didn't care at the end of it.
They just wanted to be done
because I had to check their
name off.
So, um, but I do, uh, I, I
really hope that we can get some
uh uh some PD on it because
someone um that is computer
savvy like myself can fiddle my
way through it. There are many
teachers that aren't and, um,
and, uh, and so, um, that, uh,
having that knowledge so that
they can assist the the students
and make it a good experience
because it, I think it's gonna
be an amazing tool.
Um, but, uh, but I think, uh,
it's as crazy as it was this
year, I'm very thankful that
it's something that we don't
have to download, uh, have a
parent sign and then upload and
everything else and track all
that stuff that it's just
something that they can go in
and do this at home when they
talk to them, so thank you.
Thank you. Representative
Serana.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, um, I'm
gonna be a little bit obnoxious
as a math teacher, but I'm
gonna, I represent the math
teachers when you said start at
grade level.
When we take, so I taught
freshman and juniors, um, out
algebra 2, but when you have a
freshman class that comes in and
takes that initial skills level
test and your ranges from kids
who are at the kindergarten
level to let, hopefully you have
a few at 8th grade level coming
in. That means they're, you
know, their skills of first
grade and 2nd grade. These are
kids. It's 8, 3rd grade, 4th
grade, 5th grade, most of them
probably fall between 3rd and
5th, 6th, 7th, you're lucky if
you have 8th. You can't start
them at grade level.
Because if they don't have the
skills and they're coming in
without skills.
They're gonna sit there and say,
I don't know what I'm doing. I'm
not going to come back to this
class, and our biggest
graduation or our biggest
dropout rate is 9th grade or was
the last couple of years. So,
so.
That doesn't quite make sense. I
mean, we as math teachers try,
but when you have skill levels
that much, that diverse, you,
you really can't. You can try,
but you have to keep stepping
back to they don't have these
skills, so we got to learn them
in order to actually do the
math. So I just think just a
blanket statement that started
at grade level doesn't quite
work, not as, not in these days,
not with computers and phones
and all these distractions our
kids go through every day. Um,
it's not like when we went to
school we didn't really have
those distractions. Now there's
So many things for kids to do
and there's so many ways that
can be distracted, and there's
so many things to do instead of
math or doing homework or, you
know, even being home or even
getting sleep. So, um, it's a
different world and I, I just
don't agree with that statement.
Thank you.
Thank you. Other questions,
comments?
Not thank you very much, uh,
lots of the discussion,
particularly about the changes
in math requirements. It's why
math is one of the main topics
we're going to be talking about
this summer is math and math
instruction and, you know, and
how do we raise those math
scores because they are part of
what keeps us in the rankings
near the bottom, and it's time
we start talking about dealing
with from
how we prepare the teachers, how
the teachers are teaching to
requirements and students and
assessments and everything else
about math. So it, lots more
coming, everyone, so.
Any last questions or comments?
I think we're at the lunch
break.
Is that right? If not, we will
take a short recess for lunch.
And I believe Lynch is is here
for us.
Thank you. Thank you, Breezy.
Thank you.
