All right, folks, hope you all
had a nice lunch. We're gonna
come back to.
Structured literacy, so Merritt,
Tim.
Hi.
Please
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair.
Members of the committee. My
name is Mary Andrews, and I'm
your senior policy analyst.
I'm happy to be here today with
my colleague Tim Mdo to provide
a review of structured literacy
support models.
If you turn to tab 4 in your
binders, you will see a staff
brief we prepared on this topic.
The first page is shown here on
the PowerPoint. We'll be using
this PowerPoint with key charts
and graphs from this brief to
help guide our discussion. As
this is a vast topic. We'll be
focusing particularly on the
results of an LESC staff
evaluation to determine if the
state's investments in
structured literacy, as well as
program design have led to
meaningful changes in reading
fici ency rates over time.
That said, please know the staff
brief contains more information
beyond what is contained in this
presentation for the sake of
brevity. So please refer to the
brief in its entirety for more
information on New Mexico's
structured literacy policy and
program, as well as
implementation of structured
literacy in other states.
New Mexico embarked on a
strategic path to ensure all
literacy instruction is
evidence-based in 2019, with the
passage of Senate Bill 398.
The intent of this law is to
identify struggling readers
before they fail. Increase the
number of students achieving
reading proficiency and reduce
the number of students requiring
special education services.
Structured literacy is an
umbrella term to describe a
science-based explicit,
systematic, cumulative approach
to reading and writing
instruction.
Research shows structured
literacy is helpful not only for
students with reading
disabilities, but all other
students as well.
Literacy is a foundational
skill, but most students in New
Mexico do not score as
proficient in reading and
writing. However, data from PED
showed that overall student
proficiency in reading has been
growing recently from 34% in the
2021, 2022 school year to 39% in
the 2023, 2024 school year.
LESC staff evaluated if the
state's investment in structured
literacy, as well as program
design have led to meaningful
changes in reading proficiency
rates over time.
The structured literacy in New
Mexico initiative began in the
2020, 2021 school year with
required structured literacy
supports for all schools, shown
here in table one in the
PowerPoint, and on page 2 of the
brief.
This law requires universal
dyslexia screening of first
grade students early
interventions for students
displaying characteristics of
dyslexia and school districts to
develop and implement structured
literacy training for all
elementary teachers.
After the passage of Senate Bill
398 codified as Section 22 1332
NMSA 1978, PED convened a
structured literacy working
group to determine
implementation specifics of the
law.
In addition to providing letters
training for elementary
educators, which is an intensive
to your professional learning on
structured literacy that you
heard a little bit about this
morning in the opening. PD
mandated other professional
learning requirements, as shown
here on table one.
In addition to general
structured literacy supports
received by by all elementary
schools in the state, PEDs
literacy and Humanities Bureau
also facilitates an application
process to select model and
support schools which receive
additional structured literacy
supports and funding.
PD began offering additional
supports for schools selected as
model and support schools in the
2022, 2023 school year.
According to PED, model schools
are intended to serve as
exemplars of literacy
instruction, based on a
structured literacy approach.
PED selects model schools based
on a competitive process that
includes a written application
and a site visit.
To qualify to be a model school,
certain criteria must be met,
such as having all teachers in
the school letters trained. In
addition, teachers and
administrators must sign a
written agreement acknowledging
the work and expectations of a
model school, including but not
limited to having model
classrooms identified for
external visitation by educators
from other schools to enhance
learning.
Model schools receive the
highest level of support from
the state, including an on-site
structured literacy coach who
provides support to all teachers
in the in the school. The ice
station online curriculum
component, additional access to
professional learning, and a
$50,000 grant to support the
implementation of structured
literacy.
If you turn to Appendix A at the
very end of the brief, there's a
list of model schools from the
beginning of the program to the
present.
In the current school year,
there are 11 model schools.
Support schools receive
assistance implementing
structured literacy, research,
and evidence-based practices
throughout the school.
Like model schools, PED selects
support schools based on a
competitive process that
includes a written application.
PED notes selection of support
schools is based on need and
availability of coaches. Like
model schools, support schools
must meet certain requirements
to qualify and also agree to the
requirements of being a support
school.
Support schools receive a
moderate level of state
assistance, including a
structured literacy coach
assigned to the school, who
visits regularly to support the
implementation of structured
literacy.
Support schools receive grant
funding between $25,000 and
$40,000 depending on the number
of teachers in the school to
support implementation of
structured literacy.
Support schools are also listed
in Appendix A at the end of your
brief, along with student
demographics at each school
along with reading proficiency
rates.
In the current school year,
there are 67 support schools.
Every elementary school in the
state that is not a model or
support school is considered a
general school for the purpose
of our analysis. These general
schools might use SCG funds for
support such as substitute
teacher coverage and stipends
for for teachers taking letters
courses, but they do not receive
additional funding or supports
from PED other than the
professional learning
requirements outlined in table
one.
Most general schools, but not
all, have kindergarten through
5th grade teachers, letters
trained as of the 2023 2024
school year. The level of
fidelity to structured literacy
practices introduced in letters
varies widely, depending on
schools' understanding of the
program.
LESC staff analyzed whether the
state's investments in
structured literacy have led to
meaningful changes in school
level proficiency rates or
student growth over time and
whether those changes varied
between model support and
general schools.
Given that New Mexico has
invested in structured literacy
for approximately 5 years, the
state should be beginning to see
the impact of that investment.
Easy staff assessed of program
design, whether a school is
categorized as a model school, a
support school, or a general
school has a significant
relationship with student
achievement.
Saf also examined trajectories
for students as they move from
3rd through 5th grade in the
same school, asking whether
students in model schools and
support schools have
trajectories that differ
significantly from other schools
across New Mexico.
As shown here in figure one,
LESU staff analyzed student
performance on the state
summitative reading assessment,
the NM Masa in 3rd, 4th, and 5th
grade. With proficiency rates
analyzed at the school level
from the 2021, 2022 school year
through the 2023, 2024 school
year.
It's important to note data
provided by PED for the 2023
2024 school year is considered
preliminary, pending final
validation. This means results
for the 2023, 2024 school year
should be interpreted with
caution, as shown in figure one,
while reading achievement has
increased over the past 3 years
statewide. This trend varies by
grade level.
While 4th and 5th grade
proficiency rates have increased
from about 35% to over 40%. The
proficiency of 3rd grade
students increased from the
2021, 2022 school year to the
following school year, but then
fell into the 2023, 2024 school
year.
Structured literacy may have
played a role in increasing
reading proficiency rates.
Because a growing number of
students are exposed to
structured literacy each year.
The general trend in student
achievement in grades 3 through
5 may be partially attributable
to the statewide adoption of
structured literacy. As
educators grow in their capacity
to implement structured
literacy, proficiency rates
should continue to rise each
year.
However, the decline in 3rd
grade proficiency is also
notable. One possible
explanation for the decline in
the 2023, 2024 school year is
that this cohort of 3rd graders
were kindergartners during the
COVID-19 pandemic. It's possible
these 3rd graders are
significantly behind the
previous cohort of 3rd graders,
due to the challenges associated
with virtual learning for very
young students.
Another possible explanation of
this trend lies in the
implementation of structured
literacy itself, as the state
begins to transition to this new
method of teaching reading, it's
possible schools are working to
adapt to a new systematic way to
teach reading.
It's important to note that
given the amount of requirements
placed upon model schools and to
a lesser extent support schools.
It makes sense that it would
take these schools even longer
to transition to a new way of
teaching literacy. For example,
model and support schools are
required to use the IStation
curriculum. Teachers will need
to transition to this new
curriculum as well as applying
what they learned in letters.
Some amount of growing pains are
to be expected, especially since
transitioning to structured
literacy.
Requires buy-in and can be
psychologically and emotionally
taxing for teachers.
As shown on table 2, on average,
model and support schools serve
higher proportions of students
from economically disadvantaged
families, English learners, and
students with disabilities, then
general schools without model or
support designations. It makes
sense that schools raising their
hand for additional structured
literacy supports have higher
level of need than general
elementary schools.
However, it's important to note
previous LESC staff analysis
shows student proficiency rates
in schools with higher rates of
poverty, English learners and
students with disabilities tend
to have a harder time reaching
proficiency.
As shown on figure 2, Students
in model and support schools are
less likely to reach proficiency
than students in general
schools, likely given their
higher levels of need. However,
model schools may have begun to
close this achievement gap.
While support schools generally
mirrored the statewide trend.
Figure 2 shows an interesting
trend for model schools.
Proficiency rates held flat from
the 2021, 2022 school year to
the 2022, 2023 school year.
During the year when the rest of
the state experienced a growth
in proficiency.
In the 2023, 2024 school year,
the following year, proficiency
rates in model schools rocketed
upward, outperforming support
schools and showing some
evidence that the achievement
gap associated with high rates
of poverty, English learners,
and students with disabilities
may have narrowed. This trend
may indicate model schools face
difficulty implementing
structured literacy early in the
program, but as the schools
became more familiar with
structured literacy and the
environments of being a model
school, their achievement began
to benefit.
Additional years of
implementation and associated
outcome data will be important
to understand whether these
schools continue the trend
towards closing the achievement
gap.
As shown in figure 3, 3rd grade
students in and model schools
saw higher proficiency rates in
the 2023-2024 school year, while
other 3rd grade students across
the state did not.
At a time when proficiency rates
were declining for 3rd grade
students, as shown in figure one
previously, those students that
were kindergartners during the
COVID-19 pandemic. Third grade
students in model schools
experience a significant jump in
proficiency, as shown in figure
3, 3rd grade students in model
schools nearly reached
proficiency rates of 3rd grade
students in general schools
despite challenging demographic
characteristics.
One possible explanation is that
given model schools early and
intensive access to structured
literacy supports, they
addressed implementation
challenges associated with the
transition to structured
literacy in the 2022, 2023
school year, while other schools
across New Mexico may have
experienced these challenges
this year.
Additional data will be
necessary to evaluate how these
changes can take challenges
continue to play out over time
and whether the decline in
proficiency for 3rd grade is
temporary.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, thank you,
Merritt, for running through the
overall proficiency rates in
some of these schools that that
we've been talking about the
model and support schools
compared with the other schools
that received general structured
literacy supports. I'm going to
walk through a few more figures
with you, uh, just to discuss
some other methodologies, some
other ways that we looked at
this data to understand the
impact of structured literacy a
little bit better. Uh, the first
of these is figure 4. you can uh
see what
We've called, we, we are
referring to this figure as
student trajectories from 3rd
grade through 5th grade. So this
uh figure looks at about 15,000
students, uh, 9500 of whom are
economically disadvantaged
students, uh, and is trying to
evaluate whether that trajectory
from 3rd grade through 5th grade
is meaningfully different for
model schools compared to
support schools compared to
general schools. Uh, so I want
to start with the blue line on
the top of the left hand chart.
That's the average proficiency,
or sorry, that's the average
scale score for students in
general schools, and you can see
that from 3rd grade to 4th
grade, those students see a
pretty significant growth in
scale score that tends to
flatline between 4th grade and
5th grade, and keep in mind that
that scale score of 60 across
the top. That's the level that
you need to be to be proficient.
So on average, and this makes
sense with our proficiency
rates. You see scale scores that
are just below that level of
proficiency.
Uh, you can see that the, the
line for support schools
generally mirrors that trend.
You can see that uh schools,
students will increase in scale
score from 3rd grade to 4th
grade, and then sort of
flatlined from 4th grade to 5th
grade. What we do see that's
interesting in model schools is
sort of the opposite trend. In
3rd grade to 4th grade, those
students aren't making
significant gains at the same
rate as the other schools. Uh,
but then you see that they
continue to grow from 4th grade
to 5th grade, serving narrow,
narrow that achievement gap
after a
widened in the first year. Um,
so to me that that says that
there's something happening
there between that transition,
uh, from 4th grade to 5th grade,
where students are not
experiencing the same level of
sort of flat line or decay that
you would expect to see given
the statewide average. Um, those
students are setting themselves
on a trajectory that if they can
maintain that trajectory,
eventually you would expect that
red line to cross the blue
lines, uh, again, as Merritt
said earlier, additional years
of data will be.
necessary to see if that line
does continue, uh, if those
students do end up sort of
outpacing their peers when it
comes to um scale score growth.
The second thing that we'll look
at on this chart is the growth
for economically disadvantaged
students in particular. Uh, so
once again, the two blue lines
are pretty much parallel there.
You see a large amount of growth
from 3rd grade to 4th grade that
flat lines from 4th grade to 5th
grade. Uh, you see the opposite
for students in model schools.
So those students tend to see no
growth from 3rd grade to 4th
grade and then uh substantial
growth from 4th grade to 5th
grade. Once again, closing that
achievement gap and setting
themselves
On a trajectory that's actually
much steeper that if they were
to continue that trajectory, um,
that, that red line would pass
over those blue lines next year.
Um, those students could be on
the trajectory to outpace their
peers in general support
schools. Uh, again, more data
will, will let us know if that
is indeed what happens. Um, the
flat line that we're seeing from
3rd grade to 4th grade merit
already sort of touched on a
little bit. Um, we, we've been
sort of in the office
colloquially calling this the
growing pains, uh, explanation
that
As schools are transitioning to
structured literacy, um, that
it's a difficult psychological
transition for teachers. It's a
difficult transition for people
to pick up new curriculum. And
so that we're we're thinking
that model schools are doing
that a year sooner than and then
schools that are receiving the
general supports and the
support, uh, the supports that
the support schools receive.
Uh, if you'll bear with me for a
moment, we're going to shift
gears a little bit. I'm going to
talk about a regression model
that we uh that we ran to to
explain some of the variation in
outcomes that we've seen. So,
uh, we know that not all model
schools are identical. Uh, we
know that no two schools in New
Mexico are identical in terms of
their outcomes. Uh, but we put
together a model that tries to
predict what a school's
proficiency would have been in
in SY 24, given these variables
that you see.
Here on table 3. So if you
consider 2 years of prior year
proficiency, so from school year
22 and school year 23, uh, you
consider the percent of students
in that school that are
economically disadvantaged, the
percent that are English
learners, and the percent that
are students with disabilities,
uh, you can build a relatively
convincing model that describes
uh about 80% of the variation in
schools proficiency rates in the
in SY 24, and that's what that R
squared coefficient at the
the very bottom of this table
says, uh, that we've built a,
uh, if you'll indulge me, we've
built a very good model, um,
that uh that pretty accurately
in about 80% of cases will
predict what next year's
proficiency will be based on all
of these variables right here.
Uh, you can see that the
significant variables in this
model were the two prior years
of proficiency as well as the
percent of English learners that
were uh that attended the
school.
Um, that's sort of a segue into
figure 5.
And figure 5, you don't have
this version of figure 5 in
front of you, but um if you'll
bear with me for a moment, I'm
going to explain to you how we
built figure 5 using sort of
stepping stones to get there. So
the first thing here that you'll
see on the slide, but not in
your, your uh report is every
single school plotted on that
model, and on the bottom axis,
that's the predicted proficiency
rate for every school, and on
the uh vertical axis, you'll see
the actual.
proficiency rate. Uh, and so
theoretically, you can draw a
very strong line through all of
that and that's the trend for
all of the schools. And anybody
who's on this line, uh, the
model has done a very good job
of predicting what your
proficiency rate is going to be.
Uh, there are a bunch of schools
that you can see above that line
and those schools have done
something that we like to say
beat the odds, right? Those are
the schools that something has
happened where they have
outperformed their predicted.
fici ency rate, uh, and then on
below the line, uh, you can also
see a number of schools where
something else has happened,
where those schools uh suffered
some significant declines that
actually outperformed the model
as well. Uh, so you would say
for those schools, uh, something
is going on where, where the
state needs to look a little bit
deeper and figure out what's
going on there.
All of that is to say, um,
that's the general trend for
school and that blue line is on
figure 5 in your report.
Uh, if you erase all of those
blue dots and only keep the dots
that are model schools, uh, we
can take a specific look at
which of those schools are, uh,
exceeding their predicted
proficiency rate and which
schools are not, uh, and you'll
see generally all of those red
dots that are model schools are
sort of clustered around that
line. In other words, those
schools are doing about as well
as the model would predict them
to do. Uh, there are 3 schools
that fall above that dotted blue
that significantly outperforms
their predicted proficiency
rates. Uh, those schools
highlighted in your report or
Bell Elementary and Demming,
Loma Linda Elementary in Gadsden
and Los Ninos Elementary in Las
Vegas City. All three of those
schools, uh, something happened
with, with their implementation
of structured literacy that that
is worth us digging into a
little bit deeper.
Uh, also underneath that line is
the International school at Mesa
del Sol in APS charter school,
and you can see that something
happened there where it's also
worth digging into to understand
uh was there a failing in the
implementation of structured
literacy that policy can
address. And so all of this is
sort of setting up the next
steps for LESC staff in our
analysis. Um, once again, we, we
have presented to you sort of
rough proficiency rates, uh,
rough changes in student
trajectory.
um, all of this, it's, it's
worth mentioning is based off of
pretty much one year of, of
implementation. Um, and as
you'll recall, as you might
recall from our discussion of
the family income index earlier
this year. Um, it takes about 3
years for us to to really
attribute the impact of a
program to changes in student
achievement. So, um, this is a
very preliminary analysis and um
what we're highlighting for you
right here are some areas that
we as staff are going
To continue to dig into for you
to ask questions of these
schools, you know, what
happened? What, what is working,
uh, what are the things that we
can take away from your
implementation and turn into
policy that the rest of the
state can benefit from. Um, so
with that, I'll hand it back to
Merritt to finish up the report.
As Tim said, given our analysis,
it appears that differences in
outcomes between schools,
especially model schools
receiving these intensive
structured literacy supports are
likely attributable to
differences in implementation
strategies. Before diving into
this, I wanted to provide a high
level outline of some additional
context that's provided in our
brief.
Pages 10 through 12 outline
structured literacy supports and
requirements from PED such as
local literacy plans, as well as
an overview of funding the
legislature has allocated for
structured literacy.
Pages 12 through 13 provides an
overview of structured literacy
in other states, as New Mexico
is not alone in its legislative
approach to instituting
structured literacy with 38
states passing such legislation
since 2013.
The brief takes a close look at
Mississippi and Tennessee, which
have done particularly similar
work to leverage evidence-based
practices to teach structured
literacy.
For the sake of brevity, I will
let you examine this content on
your own, but as always, I stand
ready to answer any questions
you have, either at the
conclusion of this presentation
or offline.
As shown in figure 6, since the
transition to structured
literacy in New Mexico, the
legislature allocated funding
for structured literacy through
both below the line program
appropriations and through SCG
distributions to school
districts and charter schools.
Below the line supports for
structured literacy, total 42.5
million from FY21 to FY 25. SEG
funding totals 32 million from
FY21 to FY 24, with an annual
SCG distribution of 8 million
for each of those fiscal years.
In FY 25, while the legislature
again included language to fund
structured literacy through SCG
distributions. The language was
different and no longer isolated
SCG funding specifically for
structured literacy. Instead,
the FY 25 SCG allocation
included 59 million for
districts and schools to not
only fund structured literacy
supports, but also to fund
teacher mentorship requirements,
create an educational plan,
provide CTE programs, and
implement the community schools
framework.
This means an FY 25 school
districts and charter schools
could have spent between 0 and
59 million of their SUG
allocation to support structured
literacy. It's also important to
note that because these
allocations are through the SCG,
which is discretionary. School
districts and charter schools do
not necessarily have to spend
this funding in alignment with
enabling legislation that
established criteria for
structured literacy initiatives
in the state.
With that context, I want to
talk a little bit about our
plans for future research and
then dive into policy and budget
recommendations.
Our analysis of average school
level proficiency and student
growth trajectories have
indicated New Mexico is
beginning to see the impact of
structured literacy. While model
schools, which tend to serve a
higher proportion of
disadvantaged students may be
showing some evidence of closing
the achievement gap with other
schools statewide. Additional
years of data will be necessary
to show whether the trends and
achievement will continue.
Staff plan to perform case
studies of schools that
significantly outperformed the
statewide trend that Tim was
pointing to, to learn more about
conditions that lead to
successful implementation of
structured literacy, as lessons
from these programs can help
inform policy considerations for
the future of the structured
literacy program. Quittative
analysis of structured literacy
implementation in all schools,
but particularly in model and
support schools is necessary.
It's also important to note, as
Tim mentions, it takes time to
see the impact of program
implementation and education.
To fulfill the goal of the
structured literacy New Mexico
initiative to increase the
number of students achieving
reading proficiency and reduce
the number of students requiring
special education services. The
legislature may consider
continuing annual funding, as
well as a valuation of
programmatic supports.
To accomplish these goals, the
legislature should consider
continuing to allocate funding
through the SCG for structured
literacy to sustain letter
supports for new teachers,
continuing to allocate targeted
funding for early literacy and
reading support for structured
literacy model and support
schools as well as the
implementation of structured
literacy coaches and evaluating
the impact of model and support
schools on student achievement
and reading.
The legislature may consider
paying close attention to
Petey's budget request for SEG
and below the line funding
to the security gate go
go through the security gate.
To sustain structured literacy
supports as training for all
elementary educators comes to a
close, and the focus shifts to
sustaining practice and training
new elementary educators.
And with that, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, Tim
and I stand for questions.
Thank you both, uh, Madam Pro
Tem.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you so much for the update.
On all of this.
Um,
You know, uh, most places I go,
people ask me to talk about
education, and they said, and
tell us about that Mississippi
miracle.
Uh, was just opens the door for
me to talk about structured
literacy because, uh, as you
note in here, uh, they started
10 years ago.
They got their miracle after 10
years of work, not overnight and
not become somebody had a magic
wand,
uh, so, um.
And, and, and I tell you this
very specific, I, I've told this
story, this very specific story,
because to me it just shines a
light on on these issues and and
it's a personal story, so I have
this 8 year old, uh.
What do I call her step
granddaughter.
Uh,
who very bright, very smart.
Uh, missed.
2 years of school, uh, 1 and 2nd
grade. When do you learn to
read? 1st and 2nd grade, so
she's in 3rd grade and her
teachers tell her.
Very smart parents. She can't
read, and they go, what?
They found a 6-week boot camp.
Done by Slingerland.
One of the best structured
literacy programs you can find,
it's designed for uh kitten
special ed, but like we've said
all along, this is the best
evidence-based ideas of how to
keep treating through the
science of reading, so
Slingerland is just another one
of those programs. So 6 weeks.
Oh, all the issues are gone now.
I saw her myself reading a 3rd
3rd grade liter to at a 3rd
grade level, so you can do it
overnight if you've got 5000
grand, uh, it's what it cost her
dad and a a good literacy
program, 6 weeks every day, all
day. Not what we did. Let's do 3
weeks, 4 hours a day. It's a 6
week
Program. Well, we could only do
3 weeks, OK, uh, we put up with
all of those things in New
Mexico because we're all so
different all over. I think it's
gonna take us longer than 10
years, uh, Mississippi moved
from last.
Middle of the pack.
So we can't say anymore, thank
God for Mississippi, where it
truly lasts now on nape on the
nation's report card, the only
report card we've got that
actually compares states using
the same uh monikers, the same
paradigms, unlike the standards
based, you know, we all set our
own cut scores. The cut scores
are not set by the feds, we cut,
we set them ourselves, so, uh,
so, so it's going
To take us a while to do this,
and I've, I, I had a meeting
with our new secretary
designate, and I implored her
that this is can't be a one off.
We can't say, oh, we've trained
all our elementary teachers.
Everything is fine now because
our colleges continue to give us
new teachers without this
training in spite of the
governor's uh uh uh ravings at
them, uh, to get with the
program, you know.
They're gonna just do whatever
they wanna do. One of our
colleges actually tried to buy
the letters program
from Lexia and they said we
don't do that, we don't sell our
program to somebody else. You
can take our training. We'll
take your money, we'll train
everyone, uh, so I, I don't, I
still don't see us, uh,
embracing this the way we need
to do, so happy to hear the
core, a woman, what was her
name? Anybody
Remember.
Pardon.
Remember what she said.
She started off by saying.
This is driven by people.
Not curriculums, not training,
it's teachers that learn it. I
mean, I've had teachers say to
me, oh my God, I finally know
how to teach reading, uh, so in
others that are so angry that we
made them do 2 years of work in
the middle of the pandemic.
Uh, so we, we are not there yet.
We need to get the colleges to
teach the science of reading,
not whatever mishmash they feel
good about that day.
Uh, we need to have
administrators and principals
and superintendents take this
training so that we know what
it's all so they know what it's
all about, so they can go into a
classroom and see in a moment,
uh, whether or not those
principles are, are the
foundation of what the teacher
is doing in the classroom and we
have so many classrooms all over
the state that don't have good
curriculum materials in their
class.
You need decodable text, not
leveled texts. Uh, you need to
teach the alphabetic code, not
just have it be subject to,
maybe they'll get it.
About 5% of our kids will learn
to read no matter what we do.
Another 20% is all evidence
base, we'll we'll read no matter
what program. That leaves 75%
who are not learning to read
because we're not using a
science of reading in every
classroom, so I know you all.
I'm just on my soapbox again,
but it matters, it matters. I am
so thrilled with some of these
numbers. Superintendent Blakely.
showed me 3 schools that have
got double digits increases in
the middle of Albuquerque, and
these are not heights schools.
These are schools with our uh
readers that are struggling. Uh,
East San Jose and Mission, um,
they, they've all had East San
Jos had over 19% and Mission had
over 28%.cArthur had 32%.
I mean, these numbers are
shocking, uh, and this is when
you get schools that are like
the model schools or some of the
support schools that have asked
for help that want to do it
right, so.
We just need to settle in and
continue doing this work and
more training, not stopping it.
Yeah, we have new teachers, we
have teachers that never did the
training, you know, it's just
life. It's the way it is, um,
so, but unless we're all focused
on this, it won't, it won't be
the miracle that it was in
Mississippi, so.
Just that's my, that's my
soapbox. I'm gonna get on it
pretty regularly, but I'll get
off it now. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Representative Garrett.
Thanks thanks, Mr. Chair. Thanks
for this. Two questions. I know
that Mississippi holds back
students that don't meet a
certain.
Um,
Growth or level, have you looked
at what that is and how that
impacts reporting.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Garrett, yes, you're correct. So
on pages I believe 10 through 12
of my brief. I talk about
structured literacy in other
states, particularly Mississippi
and Tennessee, and you're
correct that Mississippi is um
holding back 3rd grade students
that um don't reach a certain
level of proficiency, I believe,
or getting additional supports
as well, um, I think that
Mississippi has said that
there's a multifaceted approach
to their initiative.
That they believe has increased
success, um, I also think it's
important to point out that
Mississippi has very different
demographics than New Mexico.
Thank you. And then Mr. Chair,
my um
My other question is, so we get
the training.
And what I would want to know is
as you look at who's very
successful.
Um, what reading programs are
they using? It says that that
model and support schools are
required to use the ice station
curriculum is that online and in
printed form.
Because I, I'm, I'm familiar
with the online, but is it
totally online? Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, my
understanding is like, yes, it's
the online curriculum component,
but one thing that Tim and I are
really interested in looking at
is differences in implementation
specifics as Senator Stewart
mentioned, I do think curriculum
is an important component of of
this. We've heard anecdotally
that this is missing from some
schools and in implementation of
structured literacy, but I also
really want to underline the
point that Corey made earlier.
about the importance of humans
in this and the importance of
how money is spent and if
they're spent, for example, on
interventionist as Kobra
mentioned, um, there's there's a
vast amount of things that make
up the implementation, and
that's something Tim and I are
really interested in diving
into.
I hope that answers your
question. Yeah, because Mr.
Chair, I think that's really
important to see because part
one is the training and part two
is implementing it and part 3 is
what and how are they
implementing our kids.
Loving Tariq. I mean, I always
have to ask that question as
well. Anyway, thank you. I, I
appreciate the further work
you've identified.
Other questions. Representative
Gurola, please.
Thank you, Mr. Sher. Uh, thank
you for the reporting is really
uh good to see that. How, how
things are working and hopefully
we'll get there too eventually.
Um, and my question will be
always the same, um, I was
trying to um to see the, the
data here. Um, do we have the
data for by subgroups too?
Uh, Mr. Chair Represent Gurola,
that's certainly something that
I could get for you. The only
subgroup that we, we called out
in this analysis is that
economically disadvantaged
students. We did a little bit of
work looking at English learners
as well, um, but didn't include
those charts, so it's something
I can get to you for sure. I
appreciate that. Thank you.
Other questions?
Represent Buck.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman
and thank you for the
presentation. Just to question
that popped up to me during your
answer actually, Merritt was the
demographics of states like
Tennessee, Mississippi, they, I
mean, technically on paper
they're very similar when it
comes to like.
The percentage of Medicaid.
Fools, the percentage of people
on government assistance, not
necessarily racial demographics.
I'm not sure about ability, for
example, but have we looked at
neighboring states and if
they've implemented similar
curriculum that we're proposing
with the science of reading and
teaching letters in states like
Texas, Arizona, Colorado, Utah.
Even Kansas and you know, close
by states, Madam Chairman, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Chair, Representative Block,
um, before I go to that
question, I just wanted to more
fully answer Representative
Garret's question because I got
some information. So in model
and support schools, we know
that 95% of those schools are
implementing um HQIM, so high
quality instructional materials
and that kind of leads into my
answer to Representative Block.
I haven't looked at all of those
states, um, but we have looked
at Colorado and, um, as you
likely know, in New Mexico, why
we publish a list.
of high quality instructional
materials. We also allow um
school districts and charter
schools to adopt their own
materials, whether or not that's
on that list, and we know that
in Colorado they look for a
structured literacy component,
um, in core materials for um
English language arts and
require um choosing off that
list. But we're happy to look
more into the other states and
get back to you offline.
OK, thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for that, because I
know at the PED level, right,
from my understanding, they,
they promulgate or they approve
any curriculum that can be
chosen by the district and the
district chooses from the ones
that have already been chosen.
So is it current in the rule
that it will be letters training
in every school district from
the.
The PED level directed to the
school districts, Mr. Chairman.
Um, so Mr. Chair, um
Representative block, so in
terms of it being letters
training specifically, um, there
is a requirement if you go to
the law that all schools provide
structured literacy training for
all educators, um, as I
referenced earlier, there was a
structured literacy um working
group that determined that
letters was going to be the
professional learning that PD
was going to provide free of
charge for.
Districts, but it also did allow
um some districts and charter
schools, a very small amount, I
believe 5, a small amount to
provide their own structured
literacy training that met a
rubric at their own cost.
Great. Thank you so much, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you for that. I
really appreciate it.
Any question?
All right, I don't have any
other. Thank you both so much.
Oh, Senator Stewart.
Uh, well, Mr. Sherman, I have an
answer for represent block, um.
Uh, for many years I worked with
Howard Stevenson, a state
senator from Utah.
Republican
chair of the Senate Education
Committee.
And uh Utah, I believe, is one
of the leading states in early
literacy. They didn't do
letters, but they did science
reading training, um, and they
have developed these programs
that are pretty amazing and in
fact we are using one of them
here and I just found out about
that through Howard. I don't
know exactly what it is. They
really focused on early
childhood. They focused on the
of feeding in early childhood.
It's a lot more fun in early
Chaka's game, it's game-oriented
and and uh music and sounds and
all that just to get them so
that they would start hearing
the different sounds in the
English language, which you have
a problem doing that if you're
not read to, if you, you know,
aren't talk too much if you etc.
don't have a lot of experience
as a kid. So, um, I will, uh,
put you in touch with Howard
Steve.
because he can tell you about
the programs that they have
there that are pretty amazing.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Well, thank you both so much. We
appreciate it.
All right.
So we'll go ahead with our SCG
presentation.
Uh
Give it a moment to transition.
We don't have a quorum of
members to adopt anything, so
maybe tomorrow, tomorrow.
We could have an agenda that
will mostly be through.
We are very fortunate.
Hm
Daniel, when you're ready,
please.
All right. Good afternoon, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee, my name is Daniel,
and I cover public school
finance for the LESC.
We are now on tab 5 of your
binder with the presentation
titled Revision of the State
Equalization guaranteed.
We're gonna get started with
slide 2.
Where we have the background for
our work on the SCG revision,
uh, which started with in
response I was more than 51
where you all instructed your
staff at the LESC to assemble a
working group to review the SCG
and identify its
Strengths, challenges, and
opportunities, and using that
information, you all tasked us
with identifying whether there
were any opportunities to revise
the SCG.
And in 2023, the working group
found there was a need to
increase the SCG's
responsiveness in a few specific
areas.
And since then, your staff at
the LESC has developed a
proposal for revising the SCG
and we presented it to the
working group on October 3,
2024, where they indicated their
support for the proposal. And so
we heard today to present the
same proposal and get your
feedback. And just so you all
know who was on that working
group, we included a list of the
members in Appendix 6, the very
last appendix before tap 6.
On slide 3.
Uh, we have an overview of the
SCG which was created in 1974 as
a student-based approach to
funding public schools, where
the characteristics of students
are the primary factor in how
LEAs generate program units and
receive an allocation from the
formula.
Since 1974, the formula has been
revised more than 80 times, most
recently with Kate, the creation
of K-12 plus and the increase to
the at risk and elementary fine
arts factors, and an FY 25, you
all appropriated $4.2 billion to
the SCG.
On slide 4.
We have an overview of the
Martinez Yazi lawsuit, which
found the state has failed to
provide low-income students,
Native American students,
English learners, and those with
disabilities with access to a
sufficient public education.
Uh, we include this overview of
the lawsuit because Martinez
Yazi was a key guiding factor in
what staff is proposing today,
and we believe our proposal
responds to the lawsuit in ways
that comply with testimony that
the court actually heard, but it
also complements what you all
have told us. You all
collectively and individually
envision for public education in
New Mexico. On slide 5.
We have an overview of the 2008
AIR study that recommended a
breakup of the at-risk index
into 3 separate adjustments for
income, English proficiency, and
mobility.
But those proposals were not
enacted.
On slide 6.
There was a joint LESC LFC study
of the SCG in 2011 that
recommended using a different
indicator for poverty, a
standalone component for English
learners and eliminating
entirely mobility from the
at-risk index and the SCG.
And while these recommendations
were not enacted, the framework
and rationale for those joint
LESC LFC proposals are the
foundation for what we're
recommending to you all today.
On slide 7.
We have an overview of changes
to the SCG since the AIR study
in 2008, including increases to
the at-risk and fine arts
factors, the creation of K-12
plus, uh, the creation of the
TCI.
Revisions to the size
adjustments and the removal of
credits for impact aid, all with
the goal of increasing the
formula's responsiveness to
local contexts.
So now that you all have that
context, we're going to move
into our proposal for revising
the SCG, starting with basic
program on slide 8.
In the SCG, each student
generates a different factor
depending on their grade level,
and that factor is largely based
on the cost of meeting class
size requirements, you all can
see the factors for each grade
level in the table on the right
hand side, which ranges from
1.44 for kindergarten to 1.25
for secondary and secondary in
the SEG includes grades 7
through 12.
Uh, combined basic program
generates 56% of the units in
the SCG or around $2.4 billion
and that proportion has been
trending down in recent years,
as enrollment declines and as
you all have focused on revising
other components in the SCG.
One important thing to know is
these weights were last adjusted
in 1993 and the wait for grades
7 through 12 was last adjusted
in 1976.
And that 48 year gap is the
primary reason, one of the
reasons that we are today, if
you turn to slide 9.
Proposing an increase of 0.05 to
the factor for grades 7 through
12.
And the reason we're proposing
that adjustment to the secondary
factor is because clearly public
education has evolved in the
last 48 years and communities
now expect and demand
differentiation in secondary
programming that often goes
beyond the capacity of some
LEAs, especially when those
communities are expecting high
quality CTE programs.
So our proposal is very
intentional in being responsive
to those trends in community and
workforce expectations where the
additional money for secondary
students would primarily be
intended for CTE programs.
Um, but in some communities,
differentiation and programming
goes beyond CTE and so the
additional funding could also
support secondary fine arts
programs or broader academic,
social or emotional supports for
secondary students.
And one of our goals was
supporting CTE and those other
areas with recurring funding in
the SCG is to intentionally
address the pretty stark
academic trends that we see with
secondary students, especially
those in middle school.
If you turn the slide 10.
You all can see proficiency
rates in ELA stagnate in middle
school and declined during the
transition to high school and in
math, we see a significant
decline in proficiency starting
in the transition to middle
school and sleep in the church
into high school, culminating in
only 11% of students are
reaching proficiency in grade
11, which if you turn the page,
those low levels of proficiency
in grade 11.
have been a trend for a few
years now, with a 5% point
decline for 11th grade in math.
And on slide 12, uh, we all know
that increasing student
engagement is the first step in
increasing outcomes and a big
part of that is improving the
relevancy of school.
Uh, we've already done a lot to
build that relevancy, especially
through the revision of the
graduation requirements, but one
of our key points of success has
been the strong investments that
you all are making in CTE, both
at the state and the local
levels, and we can see that that
success in the high graduation
rates among CTE concentrators.
And so I know none of the data
in the presentation is new to
any of you. Uh, you all know
student achievement declines
beginning in middle school and
then accelerates in high school
and our response as a state
until now has been to invest
below the line, adjust other
components of the SCG, uh,
revise the graduation
requirements, but we've been
pretty reluctant as a state to
to reassess basic programming in
the.
and we believe that has been a
pretty substantial gap in our
response to the Martinez Yazi
lawsuit.
And even though you all have
significantly increased the SCG
in the last few years. Most of
that money has been earmarked
for specific purposes, whether
it's insurance, compensation, or
at-risk programs, and we haven't
been intentional in targeting
dedicated and recurring funding
for the pretty stark and
widespread needs that we see in
secondary schools.
So our proposal, staff's
proposal is intended to be
responsive to those evolving
needs of secondary students, so
that we begin to build a
foundation for subsequent growth
and achievement.
And by now you're probably
thinking, OK, we see the data
showing the need, but what does
the increase factor pay for?
And the answer to that is it
depends on the context of the
community. Uh, our intention is
clearly for the money to to
primarily support CTE and for
communities like Hobbs that
already have strong CTE
programs, more than likely the
additional funding.
It's going to be used to
strengthen the quality and
availability of what's already
in place.
But for communities like
Gadsden, that don't have a
single facility for CTE.
This additional money could
still support differentiation
because if you know Gadston
where I'm from, uh, you know,
there, there's a pretty strong
interest in STEM in Chaparral.
Uh, a strong interest in
secondary dual language programs
and agricultural programs in the
valley.
And a lot of interest in early
college in the south.
And providing that range of
programming is pretty expensive
and the increase to secondary
factor is a way, is one way of
providing flexible and
consistent funding that can be
used for that locally responsive
programming.
And for those LEAs that don't
have a strong commitment to CTE
either because they don't have
community partners or because
that's just not the priority of
the school board. Um, there is
still a lot of other costs
associated with providing and
engaging learning environment
for students, whether it's the
higher cost of training subject
specific teachers like in
physics or calculus or hiring
guidance counselors or just
reducing reducing barriers to
opportunity where students
aren't having to pay fees.
Uh, to rent band equipment.
This money could also go a long
way toward ensuring more
communities have the resources
they need to make their middle
and high schools, uh, not only
more responsive to their
workforce needs, but also in
just making their schools more
inviting and engaging for
students, uh, to the point where
they want to come to school
because it's a place where they
can explore their interests and
challenge themselves in ways
that could lay the foundation
for growth and achievement.
And if you're thinking schools
can do that now. Um.
If they are doing CTE or they're
providing broader supports for
students. Many districts or
charter schools will tell you
that they're not doing so at a
level, they would define as
adequate or sufficient.
And part of the reason for that
is that we're using a factor in
the SCG that was designed in
1976 and we're expecting it to
be responsive to modern
challenges and trends.
And before we finish with basic
program,
We want to emphasize our
proposal is intended to support
the programmatic components of
CTE with recurring and
consistent funding, but that
does not mean that you all
shouldn't also continue to
invest in CTE below the line.
Uh, we've heard that concern
from a few people, from a few
superintendents around the need
for continued capital funding or
the need for continued targeted
investments and work-based
learning, and we want to
emphasize for you all that we
don't intend for the increase in
the.
factor
Uh, to be the sole way that you
all support CTE because we know
that small dishes and small
charter schools need a certain
base amount of funding to scale
their programs and begin their
programs initially, and everyone
needs money for equipment and
maintenance. And so our proposal
is just one piece of what needs
to be a comprehensive strategy
for supporting CTE.
And that is it for basic
program.
If you turn to slide 13, we're
gonna talk about the at-risk
index.
In the last few years, you all
have done a lot to increase
support for at-risk students,
which the SCG defines as low
income students, English
learners, and mobile students
and the at-risk index now
accounts for $380 million or
around 9% of the SCG.
And we think your investment in
at risk at-risk students are
yielding outcomes because if you
turn to page 14.
You'll see in the last 3 years,
proficiency rates for low-income
students have increased in both
ELA and math, while they've
decreased for non-low income
students.
And that is just proficiency
rates, which are the typical way
that we've looked at student
achievement in the past, but if
you turn a slide 15.
You'll see an overview of the
LESC's framework for measuring
student growth, uh, which we use
to measure how much a student
has to grow each year to reach
proficiency in 3 years.
And that pace becomes the growth
target that they either meet or
do not meet each year.
On slide 16.
You'll see that when we use our
framework for measuring student
growth, we find the number of
low income students who are
reaching their growth targets,
um, each year has increased
between FY 23 and FY 24. Well
they declined for non-low income
students in in ELA and only
modestly increased in math.
And so based on this data, we're
starting to see some meaningful
growth for low income students,
and we believe that growth could
be partially driven by the
strong investments you all are
making in the at-risk index.
On slide 17.
We also use our framework for
measuring student growth to
assess trends among English
learners, and we actually found
some really meaningful results
that we've included in the chart
for students who have never been
identified as EL 46% met their
ELA growth targets and school
year 23 compared to 40% of EO
students, and that variance is
why EL students are included in
the at-risk index to begin with.
However, once a student exits EL
status through access.
The percentage reaching their
growth target jumps to 45% in
the first year and then 52% in
the second year.
And we're focusing on the 2
years after the exit EL status
because rule and federal
guidance requires that a former
EL student be monitored for
academic progress for the 1st 2
years after the exit EL status,
but it's important to note the
SCG doesn't generate program
units to pay for the cost of
that pretty extensive monitoring
requirement.
The trend is somewhat similar
for math.
Where we have 34% of non-EL
students meeting their growth
targets compared to 32% of EL
students.
But then that number jumps to
48% in the first year after
exiting EL status, and then
falls to 33% in the second year.
Uh, so this data we think paints
a pretty fascinating picture of
EL students because it's
somewhat defies research from
around the nation that says most
students usually experience
learning loss after they exit EO
status because they lose a lot
of the support that they had
while they were in Yale status.
But in New Mexico.
Uh, the variance between EL
students and non-EL students is
not that wide, with 6 points in
ELA and 2 points in math.
And that really points to we
think the strong support the
at-risk index provides to LEAs
for those students.
But unfortunately, despite the
trends that you see in the
chart, we're still struggling
with getting EL students to the
point where they even exit EL
status to begin with, uh.
Because every year, we only have
between 2 and 3000 students who
are in the first two years of
reclassification compared to
over 50,000 students in EL
status.
Uh, but once they exit, that's
when we see those meaningful
results in the growth model in
ELA and a little less so in math
among a minority of those
students.
So based on these trends for
both uh low income and EL
students. Our focus as staff is
not necessarily on the amount of
money that is generated by those
students, but the way that money
is allocated through the SCG,
uh, because we've heard from LEA
that the at-risk index is too
complex, uh, too opaque, and it
doesn't doesn't easily allow for
a district or a charter school
to intentionally target money.
To particular students because
of the way in which statue
groups three separate groups of
students into one bucket.
Many LEAs are also concerned
with our inability as staff to
validate the Federal poverty
data that we use in the at-risk
index. Others are concerned that
English learners need more of an
intentional focus, and that we
need to provide support to LEAs
for students who have recently
exited EL status and others have
said that that the the mobility
component is too burdensome and
too prone to error.
And we've also heard from
charter schools that it's time
for them to have their own
indicator for poverty and EL
because right now, uh, they're
assigned the at risk index of
whatever district that they're
located in.
And so we're here today to pro
to propose a revision to the
risk index that addresses those
concerns and will move us to a
place where the SCG we believe,
is more responsive to the needs
of both low income students and
English learners.
So on slide 18, you all have the
considerations for the at-risk
index, starting with the
replacement of the current
poverty indicator with the
methodology of the family income
index.
We will also propose a
standalone component for English
learners and for students who
are in the 1st 2 years after
exiting EL status.
And last, we are proposing
mobility that you all completely
remove mobility from the SCG and
move its funding to the poverty
indicator.
And just to reemphasize, each of
the considerations that we've
included in the in the page are
intended to primarily address
Martinez Yazi.
The next 3 slides include our
rationale for the proposal,
starting with poverty on slide
19.
Um, as we just mentioned, we're
proposing the current federal
data that we use to measure
poverty in the SCG be replaced
with a family income index, and
the reason for that is that we
believe as staff at the
concentration of poverty in the
community, not just the mere
existence of it has a
compounding effect on outcomes
for all students in that
community, regardless of their
income.
And because of that, we believe
increasing the poverty threshold
to 130% of the federal poverty
line.
is more responsive to the highly
entrenched nature of poverty in
our state.
We also believe each charter
school should have their own
unique poverty indicator rather
than being assigned the poverty
indicator of their local
district, because we believe as
staff that as a state, we cannot
achieve sufficiency as long as
the SCG does not accurately
reflect the existence of poverty
in each school.
As our proposal will require
that all LEAs, all districts,
all charter schools, be assigned
to poverty indicator that is
based on the income of the
students who are enrolled in
that district or in that charter
school.
As your staff, we also want to
have a formalized and structured
process for auditing the SCG's
poverty data.
Uh, which isn't feasible right
now because that data comes from
the federal government and
there's just no formalized
process for us to audit that
data.
Our proposal also strengthens
the ability of the SCG to
accurately identify fluctuations
in poverty because it relies on
data that we collect from state
income tax forms and public
benefits programs, and that
process has been so successful
in identifying student income
that are only 7 students were
not identified in FY 24 out of
over 300,000 across our state.
By embedding the FII and the
SCG. We also want to strengthen
your ability as a body to modify
the poverty threshold if you
feel it's necessary, depending
on the conditions that exist in
that time.
And finally,
We want to get to a space where
we're intentionally using data
from within our own state,
rather than relying on the
federal government to guide how
you all distribute state funds
and the FII is a strong example
of the innovative approach that
we can develop as a state when
we encourage collaboration and
data sharing between agencies.
And so based on all that
rationale.
Uh, LEC staff is proposing the
FII be embedded as the indicator
for poverty in the SCG and staff
will recommend an appropriation
to support that transition.
On slide 20.
We have our rationale for
proposing a revision of the
English learner component.
Starting with the general need
to center the needs of English
learners in the SCG, especially
because as a state.
We really haven't been
intentional in focusing on EL
students since the lawsuit.
And we think part of the reason
for that is EL students are
embedded as one of three groups
in the at-risk index, and
districts and charter schools
usually aren't intentional in
bucketing those at-risk funds
for the students that who
generated certain portions of
it.
So by removing EL from the
at-risk index and creating a
standalone component for those
students, we're trying to get
more LEAs to be intentional
about spending that money on
serving EL students.
Similar to our poverty
consideration, we also want
charter schools to generate
program units for the EL
students that they serve.
Rather than being assigned the
EL indicator of their local
district.
As I mentioned before, uh rule
and federal guidance requires
schools to monitor the academic
progress of exited students for
2 years, and that usually
involves a lot of
intentionality, uh, one on one
support, documentation, a lot of
uh parent engagement. And so our
proposal recognizes the cost of
complying with that state and
federal requirement in ways that
help sustain the progress of
those exited students so that
they don't
own experience learning loss and
then fall back into EL status.
And staff will recommend an
appropriation to the SCG to
support this transition. And
last on slide 21, uh, we have
our rationale for removing
mobility and shifting its
funding to the poverty
indicator.
Uh, first, the mobility
component is a significant
burden on both ELAs and PED
and most LEAs aren't even being
intentional in budgeting, their
at risk funding to meet the
needs of highly mobile students.
Mobility is also pretty
susceptible to human error,
largely because it relies on a
lot of local data.
And last, we believe there's a
need for the SCG definition of
at risk to align with the
definition in Martinez Yazzi.
And by doing that, we want to
target our at risk money, your
at risk money to the poverty
indicator so that LEAs have more
clarity on what the money should
be used for, and it can be more
intentional in how they use it.
And so because we are proposing
removing mobility and just
simply shifting its funding to
the poverty indicator, we will
likely not recommend an
appropriation to the SCG.
To support that transition.
And that is it for the at least
proposal for revising the SCG.
The next slide is just next
steps, uh where staff depending
on the feedback that you all
give us, we'll revise the
framework and the modeling and
the appendices, uh, we will also
engage with external partners to
detail the potential impact of
the proposal and we will prepare
a text for review by you all in
November or December.
Thank you.
Great. Thank you. Um.
Interim Mr. Chair, thank you.
Just I just want to add one
thing you'll, you'll, uh, I'm
sure you're, you're digging into
the appendices already looking
at some of the models that
Daniel's done to talk about, you
know, sort of what what these
changes might mean for school
districts and charter schools,
um, I think, I think you
understand this, but I'll just
say that these are all tentative
and based on your feedback, you
know, those might change, so,
you know, none of the numbers
here are are set in stone, so I
don't want anybody to panic or,
uh, but we're happy to, happy to
answer questions about them and
and make changes as appropriate.
All right.
Representing me Moya.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you, Daniel, um, I
I think the first time that I
ever heard that the last time
our, our, uh, revisions for the
basic weights was in 1993.
That's the year I graduated.
I've been out of school for 31
years, and the facts that, um,
The education or education back
when I was in high school is
completely different than what
it is right now. So the fact
that it's taken us this long to
do this, is it kind of blows my
mind, um, and then with the
secondary factor, since I was, I
was 2 since when it was last
done. That's, that's crazy, uh.
Um, so, so it's.
My, my question really quick,
um, I definitely agree with the,
with the secondary. Why not
increase, um.
Uh, all of them across the
board. Why just, I mean, I
understand why, why the, the,
the secondary because I, I
totally understand that like
even, um, elementary, um, the,
the extra costs just we have a
different way of educating
students, just the, the, the,
uh, components of all of our
technology. We cannot educate
without technology anymore. We
cannot, you know, uh, that and
that's expensive, especially in
our rural areas that don't, uh,
they don't have the.
availability that like a um
Albuquerque schools would have
or Las Cruces schools or
something that is going to have
a lot better internet or
anything like that. Um, so why,
uh, and I, and I get maybe we're
stepping into this in in chunks,
but um, what's, what was the
rationale? Why not all of it
just, just the secondary.
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Moya initially our plan was to
revise each of the basic program
components and that's what we're
initially doing up until maybe
around June or July, but we
quickly found that there was a
pretty substantial technical
lift associated with adequately
or accurately identifying the
actual incremental costs of
serving each grade level that we
thought were beyond the capacity
of our staff in the current
interim, and so the proposals
that you all
Have today are what we believe
are the priorities for the next
session while we reassess basic
program in the next 3 to 5
medium term.
Mr. Chair, if I could add, I
think the other, the other
component of this uh
representative is that secondary
is really the place where we're
hearing most concern or or or
getting questions about how do
we support secondary schools,
even though the the initial.
Thoughts were to sort of revise
all program units that was
primarily based on, for
instance, we have no 1.0
student, right? There's no
student that counts for one
unit, um, and so part of our
work is around resetting those
values, not necessarily
addressing whether or not there
were increased needs for those
for those students cause that's
not what we were hearing from
from elementary school students.
It was more of technical cleanup
and so to to Daniel's 0.1.
Feeling, um, a little
uncomfortable without having a
lot more information and doing a
lot more analysis about the
actual cost of providing some of
those services in the elementary
school grades that we decided to
go ahead and focus on secondary
because that's where we were
hearing the, the need for
additional funding potentially,
um, and as Daniel said, I, I
don't know that this is, um, the
last thing we'll ever do, but
it's something that we want to
monitor for a few years before
we make any other major changes
or that we would recommend that
at least.
And, and thank you for that
because, uh, Mr. Chair and, and,
uh, gentlemen, because, um, I, I
do get it that you, you wanna,
you wanna kind of do it right,
so it's better to wait and and
make sure that you, that you get
it right when you do it instead
of having to step it and step it
and you know, that kind of
stuff. I totally get that cause
I'd rather do it once and get it
right. Um, I do, OK, the next
question I have is on the uh
poverty indicator. I, I really
like that we're going with the
with the FII.
Um, that is usually adjusted,
uh, yearly, right? So are we
thinking that our, our
adjustments are gonna possibly,
I, I, I don't think it
fluctuates that much from year
to year, sometimes it does, but
are we just, are we gonna match
that? Is that what the hope is?
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Moya, the FII is done on an
annual basis and it's average
for the previous 3 fiscal years.
So if it's incorporated into the
SCG, it would be the average,
the 3 year average of the FII
and it would show some pretty
moderate fluctuations but not
significant fluctuations from
what we've seen.
And I think, uh, Mr. Chair and,
and gentlemen, I that's easy to
kind of monitor as far as our
budgeting type of way or
project, uh, because we do have
data since it was the, the, the
last 3 years. Um, I think, I
think that's about it. Thank
you.
Representative
Thanks, thanks, Mr. Chair. You
know, my question is about.
We, we've had heavy involvement
about the tribal remedy
framework.
And that was part of the
original Martinez Yazzi lawsuit
was adequate education for
Native American students.
And so, um.
In the at-risk index, it says
create a standalone component
for English language learners,
every classified students.
How are we gonna address the
education.
Of Native American students and
um.
Including languages because we
talk about ELLs, but we also
have.
The bilingual, multicultural
Education Acts which apply
particularly to Spanish and then
particularly to Native American
languages and I'm not, and I'm
sorry if it brought it up
before, but I've not seen it.
Incorporated here, how do we do
that? Because I'm sure we're
gonna get a lot of feedback on
that.
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Garrett, uh, we intentionally
scheduled an EL conversation for
tomorrow morning, and so a lot
of that context and a lot of
that nuance will be discussed
tomorrow, not really too sure on
like the actual like nuances of
EL students, um, but one
priority of the LESC in this
proposal has been really to get
at the very unique and complex
needs of Native American
students initially, the
framework or
Advocates have been calling for
a standalone component for
Native American students in the
SCG and we think as staff that
the legality of that is probably
questionable. And so our
priority has been to really
focus on the proxies in the SCG
that indirectly slash directly
support Native American students
and that to us is the poverty
indicator and the EL standalone
component and I think now is a
pretty good time to have.
Uh, to go into if you all want
into the actual appendices so
that you all can see the actual
district by district impact of
what we're trying to do with
some special attention on Zuni
and Gallup. So if you all turn
to one second, Daniel, Mr.
Chart's OK, just to, just to add
one thing, and I hate to still,
uh, we had to reschedule
actually our EL conversation. We
were hoping to have that before
we had this conversation. PED is
going to be here tomorrow and
could only make it because
they're actually at their
government to government, um,
meeting this.
And so, you know, we had a lot
of conflicts and we've moved
around so that we can
accommodate folks. We were
hoping to have that conversation
before this one so we could talk
a little bit about that, so I
don't want to steal Natasha's
thunder cause she's gonna talk
about this tomorrow, but I think
two things are important to
mention here. One, as Daniel
said, we have had some folks ask
about either a Native American
factor or specifically a Native
American language factor, which
is different, um, I do wanna,
and we'll say this tomorrow
again, not complete English
learners with bilingual.
Right, so you can have English
learners in bilingual programs.
And you can have bilingual
programs that serve folks who
are not English learners and so
they're they're not, they're,
there's some overlap, but
they're not the same. Um, and so
we felt like the English learner
component here addresses the
supports for English learners in
a way that then that they at
risk factor did not.
While we still have the
bilingual multicultural
education programs that we fund
through the formula with its own
factor for those language
programs which could also
capture some of those native
language. And then the last
piece of that obviously is the
Indian education fund itself,
which the PED uses to provide
grants for those kinds of
language programs too.
And Mr. Chair, and then we'll
hear more about that tomorrow,
because as you know.
It's
Complex and nuanced.
to be continued, to be
continued. Uh, if you all turn
to Appendix A, uh, we have the
SCG computation for FY 25. So
what the SCG is right now, is
included in the one pager in
Appendix A, and if you scroll
down to the purple line toward
the bottom, you see the at risk
index which is the percentage of
Title One lush plus EL plus
mobility times 0.33. If you turn
the page.
To Appendix B, you can see
visually what we're trying to do
in in this proposal, if you
scroll back down to the purple,
you now see that the at risk
units would be the family income
index times 0.4 times total
membership, and now we now have
a standalone component for
English learners and students
who are in the first year after
exiting Yale status and in the
2nd year after exiting Yale
status, and we have the same
factor 0.33 for those students.
And if you go up to basic
program, that bluish box in the
top, you'll see that grade 7 to
12 are now at 1.3% compared to
1.25 right now.
And if you go to Appendix C.
This is where you see the
differences in the poverty
methodology between Title One,
which is what we currently use
and the FII. So for the vast
majority of school districts,
they would actually see a higher
poverty indicator than what they
currently have right now, but if
you turn the page and you start
scrolling through, you'll hit
the charter schools on row 90,
and that's when you start to see
a
A lot of red.
The schools that have red are
the schools that have uh.
Lower proportions of low-income
students in their charter
schools, then the surrounding
school district. So remember
that a charter school is
assigned the at-risk index of
whatever district they're
located in, so if they have more
low income or more EL students,
doesn't matter, they still take
on the at risk index of their
district. And if they have lower
low income, lower EL doesn't
matter, they still take on the
at risk index of whatever dish
that they're in. So this is
where you see the the most
fluctuations in the poverty
indicator.
And if you scroll to Appendix D.
This is where you see the actual
dollar impact of what we're
trying to do. So we have every
district and every charter
school in the first column.
The program cost and FY 25 in
the second column.
And what they would get from the
increase to the secondary
factor, uh, no one would lose
clearly as long as you have
secondary students, you see a
gain in your formula
distribution.
And in column 4, we have the
aggregate impact of the changes
to the at risk index and the
total change from both the
secondary factor and the at-risk
scenarios, along with the
percentage change. So just to
scroll through the districts of
the people who are currently
here. If we go to Al Mogado El
Maguarddo on row one has a $63.5
million program cost in FY 25,
they would gain almost $800,000
from the secondary factor.
and they would also gain from
our initial projections, uh,
$1.2 million from the at risk uh
considerations for a total gain
of $200 for FY 26 or a 3% point
increase. And if you just keep
going down the row, say Gadsden.
He scored the Gatton.
Oh that
Where 32.
33 then.
33 1st page.
Uh
33 Gaston currently has a
program cost of $167.6 million
they would gain $2 million from
the increase to the secondary
factor, and they would also gain
$6 million from the at risk
proposal for a total gain of $8
million or a 4.8% point
increase, and that's the change
before any other additions or
subtractions from the SCG for
compensation or for insurance.
Uh, that's just the change from
the actual considerations, uh.
In this proposal.
We also had a uh
And ask to look at.
Including 6th grade.
In the secondary factor from
Representative Garrett, and we
have those estimates in appendix
E.
Um, the same numbers for the at
risk index, uh, but some pretty
substantial changes from the
increase to the secondary
factor, and if you just scroll
down, uh, you see that the
charter schools are the ones
that are the most impacted and
that's what you see most of the
red right now.
And if you go all the way down
to the bottom row. It's a total
impact in the SCG of $132.6
million 91.3 million for the
secondary factor, $41.4 million
for the at-risk consideration.
A total increase of 3.14%.
And that is it for the
appendices.
Do you have any other questions,
Representative Garrett?
And not at the present time
except the point of order. Did
you look into Magdalena?
Mr. chair that came up at a.
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Garrett, we are meeting with PED
staff on Monday to get
clarification on Magdalena.
Madam Purton.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you for what you just did
because I had only seen this
page and so I was changing this
page and then you pointed out
the second page with all the
changes, and then I was gonna
say what happened to 6th grade
and then you told me you didn't
change it.
So we're we're thinking about
that, um.
So on your changes for the at
risk.
So essentially, and first let me
say these changes are really
good. This really reflects a lot
of work that you all have done.
This is the 2nd year, in fact,
so I really appreciate this much
effort and boy, you look at who
is on this work group and
everybody who needs to be is on
that work. Charles Lee like
that, so my question is though,
on your changes for at risk you
basically have its.
Only family income index is the
only measure in that risk, so,
um,
I can see taking out student
mobility because it's hard to
measure. It is a huge factor,
um, but I, I agree with you that
poverty will take that place,
that mobility is completely tied
to poverty, people losing their
jobs, so they become homeless,
so they have to move to a new
school or they get a different
apartment, so it certainly what
happens in my district in
Albuquerque, so I guess my
question is, so, so Title One
is what's being replaced with
FYI. And so we're taking out
mobility, so at risk basically
becomes a poverty index using
FII.
Uh,
so, and the 0.4.
Uh, are we, I did not see us
increasing the at-risk units.
Did we, are we increasing the
at-risk units or is this just
what you get when you move from
Title One to FII. Mr. Chairman
Senator Stewart, the point for
is intended to first pull the
money from the now absent
mobility component into the
poverty indicator. So you need a
higher factor to pull that money
in. Another consideration that
we've had is that when the court
heard testimony from Stephen
Barrow, I believe.
name is, he proposed in the
court very much agreed with him
that the SCG in the SCG an
at-risk student should generate
25% more.
In at-risk money, then the basic
basic program. And so our point4
is intended to both pull the
money from mobility and also
hopefully reach that 25% goal at
the core has very much uh
indicated it's.
Goal is.
All right, well, that explains
it cause I was going to say how
can you keep the mobility money
in when you pull it out, so you
adjust the factor, all right,
um.
I really like the idea of 6th
grade.
Being in with secondary for all
the reasons you pointed to, it
just seems to be a cliff, um, so
I want to remind people though,
this doesn't mean there's more
money. This is just a
distribution formula. If you
increased all of these units,
you wouldn't get more money. You
would just get more distributed
there. This just distributes the
pie, we set the pie.
Uh, if we make the buy bigger,
great, um, if we make buy
smaller.
Horrible. I had to do that for
year after year after year. So
just because you increase a
factor doesn't mean anything.
It's what the budget has for
this formula to interact with.
Um,
So
Uh, I think those are my
questions. Thank you so much.
This is great work.
Represent my question pretty
much have been just been
addressed.
Thank you for the work. I
especially like the idea of
making the differentiation
between the language learners
and English language learners
and bilingual programs, I think
that's gonna make a huge impact
in some of our schools, but my
questions were great. Thank you.
All right, same thing with my
questions. They're addressed by
everybody else, but um I want to
express my appreciation for the
for the two years that you,
Daniel, other members of LESC
and everybody that was a part of
the work group have have put
into this, um, and I think the
work is reflected in that, so
thank you.
Um,
Don't have any other questions,
remember, they were all taken
up, but your microphones in
here. Oh, there you go.
No worries.
All right. Oh, did you want to?
Oh, OK. I thought that was a
request to talk more. Oh, OK.
It's gonna suggest we maybe in
the morning switch to decaf
coffee and then in the afternoon
switch to caffeinated coffee.
Oh, OK, um, oh, cool, thank you.
Yeah, um, so we're moving to
public comment, so we do have
some folks online. We have some
folks in person, um.
Is Tim, you're gonna set up the
folks online, um, it will go to
the folks in person. Would that
be OK, Tim?
You do that? Um, as they call
your name, you're going to have
up to 2 minutes, um, to address
us, you'll sit up here at
microphone 15 next to Tim here
and you'll have up to 2 minutes,
so first, Mike, we have Mike.
Mike
OK, I guess not. Um, Eliza.
Orally Eliza, Lisa, excuse me.
Elisa.
Hi
To give me one
scoot over.
All right, Eliza, you have up to
2 minutes. Welcome.
When the service.
When I started um
I am born and raised in New
Mexican, and one of the ways
you, I'm just an educational
activist because I think
education is very important. I
also created the EAE program at
New Mexico State University, so
that's my background, but we
used to bring all of the kids
together from north, south and
central um to for meetings here
in in Santa Fe and we always ask
the kids how many times did you
see yourself
Reflected in any of the books
that you see in your schools.
0
And that's important. You've
been talking about a lot of
things that have to do with
curriculum, that have to do with
reading. If you want kids
interested in reading, you have
to see themselves representation
matters.
You know, and the last time I
saw myself represented in the
school was in the 4th grade and
it was this wonderful history
about how New Mexico was
founded. Now that I think back
on it, nothing was said about
what happened with Native
Americans. So it was a history
that had no value. But you know
what, kids need to see
themselves reflected in those
curriculums kids don't know that
they have astronauts, that we
have other people that we have
authors that we have a lot of
people.
And a lot of nice places and we
need to see ourselves reflected,
so that's my bottom line por
favor.
No, we just gracias.
All right. Um, so Mike, going
back to Mike.
Are you there, Mike?
It's like the COVID years again,
right?
All right.
Uh, with my eyes, OK.
So we will go to the folks
online. So Ellen.
I was online to him.
Oh,
Ellen.
You have up to 2 minutes if you
would unmute yourself.
Please see that you've unmuted
yourself. You have up to 2
minutes.
Except we can't hear you.
We see that you are unmuted,
so.
Yeah
I don't know.
All right. So we'll go to Nat
and Ellen, if you'd hold on with
us, we'll try to figure things
out for you.
We see net with a raised hand.
Hi Nat, I see you've unmuted.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Which is awesome because that's
progress.
that you can hear me, but we
cannot hear you, so we're having
trouble. Give us a moment.
We try to figure out.
The issue may be.
Mhm
Mr. Chair, can you indicate
Mr. Chair, this is Nat Dean. Can
you indicate that you can hear
me?
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, if you activate the
captioning, you will probably be
able to read what I am saying.
Mr. Chair, the, the chat is
disabled. I have no other
mechanism to communicate.
Oh, we can, we can hear you, so.
Give us a moment here. Did she
go ahead? All right, so Nat,
please, you have up to 2 minutes
and we can hear you.
OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, um.
When all else fails, I can make
a suggestion enable the chat so
we can communicate um
technological challenges, and in
addition, you can turn on the
cap and then you'll be able to.
Read what I'm saying, but we do
have a.
We have a low adult literacy
rate in the state of New Mexico,
but for this committee, I am
very delighted that the literacy
rate is higher. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Um, I always appreciate
the work of the committee.
And there have been some tech
technological difficulties in um
participating in a meeting today
and so I missed the majority of
the materials, but I do want to
express my appreciation for the
ongoing rip of the committee and
the uh very robust statistical
tracking that is offered to the
staff for the committee and I
will attempt to follow this a
little bit more closely. I don't
want to take more of your time
because of the others that are
waiting in the Zoom room to make
public comment.
But I'd like to express my
appreciation.
Thank you.
Great. Thank you so much and
sorry about the trouble. We'll
try to remedy those, um, Ellen.
Let's give this another shot.
you're unmuted, but you're not
green.
This is Dean again, you may or
may not be able. Can you hear
me, Mr. Chair? Oh, we can now
for that unfortunately I was
going to say it was not my
intention to make public
comment, but I wasn't able to
communicate that because the
chat has been disabled, so when
I got the query, I couldn't
answer it. Uh, so thank you for
the opportunity and you can move
on to the next person. Thank
you. All right. Well, thank you.
Um, do we have anybody else
online that wishes to make
Pro comment.
Mr. Chair, this is Nat Dean. I
will echo Ms. Pynes' comment
that activating the chat allows
us to communicate in the Zoom
room and there is a difficulty
to um enable the
The auditory.
Options
So that would be a very
necessary feature in order to be
the most successful in
participating in the meeting.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. All right.
Thank you. Have anybody else?
All right. Well, thank you all
for participating in public
comment, um, we'll reconvene at
9 o'clock. I want to point
members before we leave for the
day, that under the
announcements tab.
We have.
A gathering tonight, so meeting
at Comfort Inn at 5:45. So check
the announcement tab, folks. And
with that, we'll meet either
this evening or tomorrow
night. Alright.
Thank you, folks. Oh those two
boys
Oh, wait, well, we we still have
folks, all right.
Yeah
All right, uh, Roxanne.
Hi Roxanne.
Sorry about that.
We still have folks.
Roxanne, and then we have a
ludum.
Sorry if I mispronouncing it,
please correct me. Oh, now
they're gone.
No, OK, I guess not. Cool. Well
then we'll see you all at 9
o'clock. Thank you, folks.
