Oh, New Mexico coalition of
Educational Leaders and New
Mexico.
Superintendents.
In the presentation is behind TE
six.
Mr.
Chairman, again, thank you and I
have with me my president of the
New Mexico School
Superintendents Association for
his re-engagement with you on a
2nd day, uh, Superintendent
Martin Madridge from Santa Rosa
schools.
I hope you will hear as well
today as you did yesterday's
enthusiasm out of my president.
He is a great educational leader
in New Mexico. Mr. Chairman, uh,
you have before you this, this
uh briefing in your, in your,
uh, notebook. I want to reflect
on, on history just for a
minute.
In 1983.
There was a publication.
Called a nation a risk.
In 1983, Stan Ros received his
Administrative administrative
license from the state of New
Mexico.
For my entire career.
Since then, which I believe is
42 years.
I have operated in New Mexico
under the Paul of a nation at
risk and we're still there.
With the nation risks said was
the public schools can't be
trusted, their leadership cannot
lead effectively, and that we're
not doing the right job of
educating our youth, and we're
destroying our nation.
And Mr. Chairman, I'm going to
disagree with that.
After 42 years of, of effort.
In those regards in positions of
leadership in the state,
including as your public school
finance chief from 1987 to 1991.
And the reason I'm going to
disagree is because you as a
legislature,
have not bought into that credo.
In fact, what you was as a
legislature has attempted to do
is to provide sufficiency of
funding for us to do our job and
to be sure that our children in
this state are well cared for,
are well educated and are
considered our best resource,
not some other aside in that
regard, and I thank you for
that.
But because of that, we're still
in certain conversations. Let's
talk about our recommendation
with that sort of
Spotlight on what we're doing
today.
Themes of school er Association,
the New Mexico Coalition of
Educational Leaders platform
champions.
The principle of local control
and let me tell you what we mean
by local control. The authority
granted the school districts to
make decisions tailored to their
specific community's needs.
This includes the discretion to
allocate funds for particular
and individualized needs such as
addressing unique educational
challenges.
Or enhancing specific programs,
additionally, local control
encompasses the ability of
districts to create their own
school calendars, provided they
adhere to your state law.
And ensuring that these
decisions align with the broader
educational standards and legal
requirements.
Sa in state statute.
By acknowledging the district's
needs and strengths in each
school district in New Mexico.
We believe decisions are most
effective when made closest to
the heart of learning.
Addressing the multifaceted
challenges and seizing
opportunities in our educational
sector requires collaboration
among school boards, educators,
policymakers, communities, and
legislators with a focus on
local expertise in
self-governance together, we can
shape a vibrant, inclusive, and
equitable educational system. We
believe these are priorities in
that mission.
We believe in local control and
sufficiency. The primary focus
of our legislative priorities
regarding local control is
centered on defining
sufficiency.
As I indicated earlier in the
partner's presentation.
You by the process of state
equalization guarantee.
are very purposed in what you
do, but it's around the average
costs the average issues as you
look at the 89 districts, which
is a reasonable way to go,
except that occasionally, when
you do averaging half our
winners, half are losers.
Uh, we believe that uh education
needs to be inherently
nonpartisan as we look at cash
and operational reserves and as
such districts need to be able
to support operations within
their jurisdiction in a manner
that is sufficient.
Where there that is, and there
are no winners and nor losers
and simply sufficiency varies by
district.
And is not an average.
So Operational cash reserves are
necessary for a lot of different
things including the continuing
issue of requests for
reimbursement.
And the daily operations of the
district.
It's about cash flow. It's about
staffing, it's about a lot of
things.
Though Newexo pet has gotten
marginally better in the process
of RFRs.
Often districts are left waiting
more than 90 days.
For fun.
I also remind us that on July
the first,
Districts are required to pay
100% of their liability and
insurance to New Mexico public
school Insurance Authority for
the annual fee.
And that's a large number. You
have to have the cash to do
that.
Let's talk about transportation.
Trans addressing the adequacy of
funding for student
transportation in the last
session, there were significant
winners and losers under the
decisions that were made to
remove certain factor in our uh
transportation form to each
district has specific needs to
adequately fund transportation.
A service that is guaranteed by
law.
On behalf of the state, not the
districts.
So we, we ask that you redouble
your efforts to work with us on
how we can fill that gap.
There are about 19 districts to
our latest count.
They received less money than it
cost them to transport students.
And for them, they're having to
go to their operational dollars
or the reserves to pay for that
transportation that we believe
is guaranteed through a state
requisite, not through a local
requisite. We ask you to work
with us on that, um, as we go
through the process, insurance
costs, evaluating the true cost
of insurance and ensuring that
we are fully covered for those
costs.
Uh, those move around your
intentionality has been good to
take care of insurance costs,
but at the end of the day, we
often see that the New Mexico
Postal Insurance Authority is
brought into post-session
discussions about readjusting
rates and things to meet what
your legislative intentionality
has been, and we think that's a
little late for that discussion.
We believe there's a
foundational, open the door cost
that we need to calculate as
part of our calculation.
We don't really do that. We did
back in my day in 1987 to 1991,
we, we resolved between the
legislature, the Department of
Finance Administration and, and
our offices that we would work
with, uh, and open the doors
cost that we could all agree to.
And it's, it's a swing on doing
business this year against doing
business next year, and it
wasn't just the simple notion of
if you've lost enrollment, we
should cut your funds. It's not
that simple.
And we would ask that we use
open the door costs and we've
listed there a number of issues
in that open the doors caused
that you can read and I won't
take time to preach to you
about.
And finally returned to work. We
are asking, we first of all,
thank you for the return to work
law that was put in place which
allows people to layout and
primarily teachers, but all
people including bus drivers and
others can lay out 90 days and
then come back to work for 36
consecutive or non-consecutive
months. We've met with
educational retirement
executives and board, and while
they're not carrying this
legislation, I believe you will
find them support.
but moving that to 72
consecutive or non-consecutive
months. I remind us that is how
we are leveraging uh a number of
our staffing shortfalls.
With qualified, capable
teachers, they're willing to
come back either part-time or
full-time for a specified period
of time. So we expect, we ask
that we uh increase that from 36
to 72. Let me turn to my
president, uh,
Superintendent from Santa Rosa,
Madrid.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, it's good to see you
all. Once again this morning.
I'm putting on a different hat
this morning, um.
And I, I wanna talk about a
little bit of the attendance,
you know, social and emotional
learning and behavioral support
resources that schools struggle
with. Now, in Santa Rosa, that's
a bit of an anomaly, um.
school because I have 3 social
workers on staff. I have a
psychologist. I have 2 speech
therapists, so I have plenty of,
of social uh emotional support
workers at my school, but that's
not something that I did. It's
something that the people in the
community did and um, you know,
they figured out that there was
these jobs in the community,
they wanted to stay in Santa
Rosa, went out, got their
degrees and came back and and
were hired on by the district.
These are district employees,
full-time employees, so we have
Now that is not the case in most
rural districts in New Mexico.
I've talked to some
superintendents where they, if
they are lucky, they have one
social worker one time a week
that's provided by the REC.
Um, that is due to many reasons
in Santa Rosa we prioritize this
and
We have
Schools that are in in crisis
emotionally.
I talked to superintendents and
I talked to high school
principals across the state.
And that is one thing that they
deal with on a regular basis as
students who are in crisis for
whatever reason, and I believe
that reason is by just the
uptake of social media usage by
our students.
This is the world that our, our
students live in nowadays, it's
a social media world and it
provides a whole host of of
emotional problems for adults
and in particularly students.
Um, the bullying back when I was
in school, bullying was more
physical, more in your face.
Now, with social media, the
bullying is 24 hours a day, 7
days a week, nonstop, and we at
schools when these students see
each other or having to deal
with these types of issues. So
that goes to the point of, you
know, we need more funding for
more social workers, for more
behavioral supports for
attendance.
For social workers or attendance
coaches to be able to get out
there and find out what the
barriers are for parents and why
their students are not going to
school for uh social workers to
be able to uh uh do home visits
and uh bring these students to
school.
Regardless of whatever those
challenges are, um,
I, I really, really
I think that is something that
Uh, the legislature needs to
focus on is no longer are we
just educating kids. And I think
that's, you know, there's a lot
of stones cast by by certain
people around the state of
teachers and, and, and school
officials, right? But the people
that are actually in the
trenches or have been in the
trenches actually know what
teachers deal with on a daily
basis. Some of you all are
teachers, so you do know.
Um, it is no longer just, you
know, you show up and you
actually teach a a student, you
know, students aren't coming to
school well prepared, you know,
well fed, um, emotionally, and,
and, and physically to, to
learn, you know, so all of a
sudden, teachers are having to
be psychologists or having to be
nurses, uh, and all these other
things that are having to deal
with before they even get to
deliver any type of instruction
to students. So that is
something that we really are
going to focus
focus on and really get behind
any types of bills that that
support this type of work here.
And
I guess finally what I want to
end with is, is it's been
mentioned here today, but we
really are supporting as a
association, the reinstitution
of the state Board of Education.
I left here last night in kind
of a rush. I had to get back to
my district. I had a board
meeting last night. I made it
with 5 minutes to spare right
before the board meeting, but I
say all that to say this last
night my board extended me for 2
more years, um, and so I have 6
years after this year, and I'm
gonna have an additional 2 years
to do great work that you saw,
my high school principal, uh,
yesterday. Uh, I, I, I'm gonna
leave you with this. Imagine,
imagine this. If we would have
had a secretary for 50.
5 years, the same secretary,
imagine the work that could have
been done in education the last
5 years, um, you know, for
whatever reason, there wasn't,
but we do think that a shift
back to the board of education
can provide this type of
stability and the stability
that's needed across the state
with superintendents as well as
with the possible state
superintendent or a secretary,
so.
Thank you, Hanna. Thank you for
allowing me to present again. I
appreciate it. Let's, that
concludes our presentation. We
have a stand for questions at
the appropriate time. Thank you.
Great. Thank you all so much.
Right, NEA.
Hey. Welcome.
Good morning again, Mr. Chair
and members of the committee.
I'm still Mary Par Sanchez,
still president of NEA New
Mexico, and I'd like to
introduce Andrew Montoya.
Good morning, chair, members of
the committee. My name is Andrew
Montoya. I am the director for
NEA New Mexico's Center for
Community Schools. Great to be
here.
Today I present to you NEA New
Mexico member priorities. Um, in
keeping with the theme of the Ed
Partners uh stability and
progress, um, a ring, a
community schools, affordable
health care protected planning
time, competitive compensation,
class size and appropriate
staffing. Any New Mexico, um,
surveyed 1260.
For current New Mexico
educators. They're from 56
school districts, 8 job
classifications with varying
years of experience, as you can
see in your handout.
Um, these educators are from
Shiprock to Silver City, Ratton
to Roswell and Las Vegas to Las
Cruces.
We're gonna start with community
schools, educators feel by
supporting community schools
were not just improving
individual schools were
strengthening entire communities
and paving the way for a more
inclusive and responsive
education system. Here's what
our members say.
My own children attend and have
attended community schools since
we moved to New Mexico in 2019.
And because of them, we have
felt welcomed and supported.
While we are not always in need
of all the services provided, we
have taken advantage of the
health fairs and feel like the
schools care about our unique
needs. It is important to have
community involvement and
student learning.
For too many years, our school
systems need revamping. The
community school of Paradigm is
what is absolutely needed to
transform and make public
schools relevant. So this
infographic is not the first
time, it's, we're not bringing
this to you for the first time,
um, but I wanted to lift up the,
again the six essential elements
and really focus on the element
of creating a culture of
belonging, safety, and care.
The decrease, uh, last year to 8
million appropriation for
community schools led to layoffs
and stalled the growth of one of
New Mexico's evidence-based and
fastest-growing school
transformation programs, schools
opt into this program and the
appetite is greater than the
appropriation.
Recommendations from House
Memorial 44 Task Force that met
for 2 years, uh, where that, uh,
the funding uh below the line
should be 12.5 million um
increase from the 8 million last
year that um that funding for
the family income index, which
um I hope will not be done away
with this year that we could
really work to break the
funding.
With the community school
funding to support a more
holistic implementation of the
community school strategies.
And categorical funding in
fiscal year 26, uh, to uh shore
up certification and licensure
in um in community schools, 2.85
million. That was the
recommendation from the House
Memorial Task Force, as I said,
that met for 2 years and studied
community schools in New Mexico.
Our second priority from our
members is affordable healthcare
to fund 80/20 in New Mexico. Our
educators pay more than the US
average for health insurance
with higher premiums and higher
employee share of premium costs.
Here's what educators say.
The burden
The burden of health insurance
causes so many teachers to work
extra jobs, unlike other career
fields in which college educated
professionals can afford
healthcare costs.
We work in a petri dish. We need
health care.
This is critical. Healthy
teachers make better teachers,
not to mention the great loss of
seasoned teachers who could have
avoided health problems, this
should be taken very seriously.
The Legislature should cover
100% of health insurance
premiums. Educators endure
exposure to illness on a daily
basis and then have to pay for
their own healthcare.
Paying for health insurance
should not take half of income
that we need to live on.
I pay $856 a month for my family
of 3. This is so much money when
prices keep rising.
So here's what educators had to
say in the districts that moved
forward with 80/20
implementation, um, on their
own. I am blessed to work in the
district that now covers 8020.
It has helped significantly and
something I support for all
educators in the state. We did
it in Las Cruces, and it's been
a game changer for my family.
A district recently moved to
this model, and the burdens that
have been lifted as a result are
tremendous.
Educators need immediate relief
from health insurance premiums.
Uh, planning time is another uh
priority uh educators would like
adequate paid time to plan
lessons, work collaboratively to
improve professional practice
and assess and meet the needs of
students and families. And
here's what they had to say.
Planning time as as an
individual and also as a team
creates a successful classroom
and school without our planning
time, we are setting ourselves
up for failure.
This is something I can support
100%. My planning time is eaten
up with PLC meetings and IEP
meetings and anything else the
school can dream up. I need time
to be in my classroom planning,
creating and grading.
We are hounded daily to help
cover the lack of substitutes
during our planning time, and
now we have meetings every day
after school until the end of
our contract hours, so we're
often given zero time to
actually grade and to do the
things we need to do.
This is very important. We have
almost no time to work in our
classrooms. We also have a PLC
implemented on Wednesday. We
used to work in our classrooms
every now and then during this
time. Now we are forced into
professional development with a
one size fits all approach
doesn't work.
I am spending more and more time
at home to keep up with all my
paperwork, meetings, comms with
parents, etc. It makes me want
to quit teaching.
Uh, recommended steps for
planning time, please, at a
minimum, double the amount of
paid planning time for
educators, ensure that their
planning time is uninterrupted
and self-directed, prioritize
collaborative professional
learning over external experts,
revised the SCG funding formula
to allocate uh value.
For increased planning time.
Uh, competitive compensation is
the number one issue for
educators, uh, a 2024 New Mexico
educator vacancy reports, uh,
still over 1200 vacancies in
classrooms across the state.
Recent 7% wage increases and
tier minimum increases have
helped to avoid catastrophe, but
they're not enough policymakers
must commit to consistent
meaningful.
raises that reflect the true
value of educators work and the
economic realities that they
face.
Here's what New Mexico educators
told us about compensation.
There is going to be a shortage
of teachers in the upcoming
years. If we want to avoid major
issues, we need to start paying
teachers and all school staff
more. This is not on this not
only encourages more people to
come into the profession, but
also shows that the community
values existing teachers and
what we do.
We desperately need help on the
front lines of education in New
Mexico. Please aim for higher
wages for those of us that have
a degree in education, we need
to attract teachers who have
learned how to be a teacher,
rolling the dice on teachers
with just any bachelor's degree
is not always working in some
cases it does, but in just as
many.
Or more cases it does not.
Inflation is quickly outpacing
our salaries, and it is due to
get worse. This is an
all-consuming job with major
serious responsibilities. It
needs to have pay that is
proportional to inflation and
the arduous facets of the job,
otherwise vacancies will likely
increase.
I do feel it is extremely
important to have support staff
that is fairly compensated
certified teachers' salaries
also do not compare to the cost
of living and continued
inflation.
I think our biggest issue is
that we don't pay educational
assistance a livable wage. Yes,
we need to be paying certified
staff appropriately to keep them
in the field, but educational
assistants need better pay.
Yes, and to reiterate um the
compensation that Whitney, uh,
that is the the partners across
the board are asking for a a set
of minimum salary of 30,000 for
educational assistance and tie
it to uh to make it 75% of the
minimum uh level one teacher
salary so that we don't have to
keep revising it. We know that
we're asking for a 10% increase,
uh, for all educational
personnel and um and.
We're asking for increases to
the, the tier minimums of $5000.
Um, we'd also like to advocate
for significant raises for
classified staff.
Uh, finally, uh, we'll get to
our 5th priority, and that is
class size and adequate
staffing. Educators are better
able to meet the needs of their
students when they can provide
more individualized attention
with smaller class size and
adequate staffing in schools.
Here's what educators had to
say.
Reduction of class sizes would
solve numerous issues, including
providing better individual
support of students and students
receiving more attention and
helped individually. This would
improve academics and classroom
management.
Class size is directly related
to student outcomes, while
teachers are mandated to provide
all students with grade level
content, many students do not
benefit from whole class
instruction because they are so
far behind. Small group
instruction is key to working
with students exactly where they
are at. Smaller class sizes
means more small group time,
frequency, instruction, exactly
right for individual students.
Smaller class sizes improve
individual learning and general
education, my class size of 16
made amazing progress compared
to my class size of 27 the next
year.
Class size leads to learning or
not learning. It's hard to get
trained and skilled teachers who
can handle large class sizes.
Teachers and students need a
manageable class size to be able
to teach and learn.
Recommended steps, please place
a cap on individual class sizes
and statutorily prohibit blanket
class size waivers and
obfuscatory class size averaging
loopholes, create a reporting
portal and enforcement mechanism
by which breaches of statutory
class size limits can be
reported and addressed.
So we did a survey our members
on um cell phones and and and
banning cell phones or or
different um strategies there,
so, uh, clear, we wanted to show
you that uh compensation is
clearly the number one issue
with um health benefits up next,
so thank you for your time and
we will stand for questions
later. Thank you. Great, thank
you all so much.
So wait here.
AFT
All right, welcome, you too.
Good morning, Chairman, members
of the committee, Whitney
Holland, president of AFT New
Mexico, to my right is Doctor
Ellen Bernstein, president of
the Albuquerque Teachers
Federation.
I'll be first want to emphasize
our support for the education
partners agenda. These are key
legislative priorities that
address educational equity,
economic stability, and
innovation in our schools.
I'll talk first about our
economic priorities. We agree
with the governor's goal to
support children, strengthen
families and enhanced schools at
our local businesses and uplift
our communities. Significant
progress towards those goals
will be made if we ensure that
no educational employee lives in
poverty. Bus drivers,
secretaries, clerks, custodians
live in our communities, raise
their families in our
communities, and are often the
people, our students and
families meet first. They earn
poverty wages in our schools. It
is imperative that we support a
3
000 $0 minimum for our public
school staff to ensure that no
full-time worker makes less than
that.
This provides economic equity
for our vital school staff and
attracts and retains an
important shortage areas.
Next is higher education. AFT
New Mexico represents several
1000 higher education
professionals. Our state has
made a ground groundbreaking
investment in tuition-free
college, ensuring that New
Mexican high school graduates
can go to college, equally
important is ensuring college is
a positive experience for them.
Key to that, one that leads to
graduation are well paid
educators who stay hone their
abilities and engage our
students. Enrollment in New
Mexico universities is
increasing and so are their
class sizes.
We need to attract and retain
higher education teaching staff.
The issues with the tracking and
retaining educational adjunct
instructors who teach the bulk
of undergrads is low pay, lack
of benefits and job security.
Adject instructors in our
universities must make a livable
wage as well. All of these
issues have been discussed by
this committee through the lens
of K-12. However, no such
discussions can be held for
higher ed because of lack of
jurisdiction by this body. We
urge you to once again pass
enabling legislation so that
this group of educators can
study these issues further and
to be candid, we believe that
3rd time is a charm.
around this piece of work.
Our non economic priorities
include bills I've talked to you
about before, a public service
loan multiplier which it which
accelerates public service loan
forgiveness for adjunct and
contingent faculty. This past
House and Senate committees in
2023, and we hope it does so
again. This provides financial
relief for adjunct faculty.
The retiree healthcare financial
security work we have done
before. This supports
constitutional safeguards to
protect healthcare funding and
sustains healthcare for retired
educators and other public
servants.
And the student borrower's Bill
of Rights. This protects
borrowers by regulating loan
servicers and lenders in New
Mexico.
This bill is based on work from
last legislative session, which
passed committees that stalled
on the House calendar. It
ensures ethical loan servicing
and financial stability for
borrowers.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Ellen Bernstein. Thank you for
turning on my mic, um, I'm gonna
go over some more initiatives
that we think are very important
as we look forward, uh, into our
public education system.
I want to talk a little more
about something the partner
said, Research establishes a
direct link between classroom
temperature and a student's
ability to learn. And all of us
experienced this summer, and it
was incredibly hot in every
place in New Mexico, but many of
our school districts do not have
modernized infrastructure. We
rely in
In many places on swamp coolers,
if we even have swamp coolers.
And they don't work in these
temperatures and what we
experience are classrooms that
are too hot to learn.
It is an important time to start
investing in our infrastructure
and modernizing our HVAC
systems. Now, if we're able to
do that with some capital
outlay, perhaps matching funds
from the federal government
because they have those funds if
you, if we use solar, then
what's gonna happen is our
electric bills are gonna go up.
But if we, so if we use uh
modernized equipment then our
electric bills will go up, but
if we use solar, then they'll go
down and we'll be able to save
money in our districts.
Our planet is facing a climate
emergency that is true here in
New Mexico, the researchers
concluded.
That targeted investments in
school improvement projects,
raised test scores.
And could close as much as 25%
of the achievement gap between
lower and higher income
districts, so we'd like you to
start thinking about the
importance of phasing in
modernized school HVAC systems
all across the state.
We also want to start building
on uh what was done in house
Memorial 4 for middle school
students. We did an amazing job
last year looking at the high
school graduation requirements,
so that schools are designed for
students.
Rather trying, rather than
trying to design students for
schools, something that we know
actually doesn't work, um, an
important step.
Forward for middle school
students is based on the idea
that middle school is radically
different than elementary and
high school. Anybody here who
has taught middle school knows
that the unique qualities of
early adolescent learners.
Need specialized training.
We know that this is when
students start to experiment
with drugs.
With alcohol with skipping
school, and this is when
research shows that they start
to disengage, and they start to
drop out, based on the work of
House Memorial for if we start
to focus on a middle school
teaching license with expertise.
In early adolescent learning,
then we'll better be able to
staff our schools, will have
flexibility in terms of hiring
elementary.
High school or specialized
middle school educators for our
kids, and we believe our young
adolescent learners deserve a
middle school experience that is
developmentally responsive,
challenging, empowering.
And equitable, providing all
students with an environment
that can help them negotiate the
impact of puberty on their
intellectual, social, and
emotional lives.
And then we'd also like to talk
about.
The Martinez Yazi.
Um, decision and the impact in
the classroom.
We know that everybody's
grappling with what's the best
way to address the judge's
ruling.
But
If it doesn't change pedagogy.
Then it's not really impacting
the kids that are targeted in
this ruling.
So, the idea that equity
is in our pedagogy.
is a really important
Concept to addressing this
ruling.
Promoting equity in the
classroom involves culturally
responsive teaching.
An approach that recognizes
values and incorporates
students' diverse backgrounds,
experience, and learning styles
in daily instruction.
This method creates an inclusive
learning environment where
students have a strong sense of
belonging. They see themselves
reflected in the curriculum and
feel empowered to participate
fully in their education.
In order to really shift our
pedagogy from covering a
textbook to teaching the kids in
front of us and really
recognizing and respecting who
they are in all of their
intersectional identities. We
need adult time.
We need more time for the adults
to collaborate, to learn from,
from, uh, joint lesson planning
and to really advance our
pedagogy from coverage to deep
learning and valuing everybody's
identity.
And then finally,
Our legislative platform
includes support for lawmaking
that would help our immigrant
families and our students.
For example, codifying New
Mexico as a sanctuary state.
As has been done in California,
New Jersey, and Washington.
Rolling out stringent statewide
data protection laws to prevent
institutions from sharing
personal information with
immigrant enforcement.
Expanding opportunity
scholarships enabled by SB 582
and 2005 to include trade
schools and support for the
dignity not detention Act.
We would like to include in our
agenda paid time for all
educators and administrators and
school staff to reserve to
receive training on immigrant
safety.
We think this is essential at
this point in time in our
country.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
All right.
So we'll go to New Mexico
charter schools.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, um, I've made a
note for myself to bring some
friends the next time I'm not,
I'm here solo, um, but, uh, I
swear we have a membership of
over 80 schools, um, that has
the input on this legislative
platform. So thanks for having
me this morning. Um, I think
you'll have a copy of our
legislative platform as long as
well as a small deck, um, that
I'll go through here, um, this
morning. Um,
I always include the slides
about what a charter school is,
um, mostly because I think you
hear a lot from your
communities. Um, there's a lot
of ink spilled about charter
schools nationally and our
charter school movement looks
different. And so articulating
how our charter school, um, a
church school environment looks,
I think is important, so I just
note that, um, and before I jump
in, I just want to thank you all
for your service. Um, this is
going to be my, I think 15th
legislative session, and you
put in so much time, um, and,
and I just want to note that
and, and it's a note of
appreciation, um, so thank you.
The other thing I'll note is
that we're, we're coming up here
to the, to the um to the space
with the little feather in our
cap. We were recently admitted
to the uh to NIMPel as an
affiliate with the coalition of
Education leaders, and I want to
thank Stan Ros, who's in the
room, as well as my board
president Eric Bowes. Um, it
feels good to be part of that
crew and have those.
discussion, so thank you for
that. Um, so I'll, I'll kind of
breeze through these slides here
just because I think for a lot
of you, this is a this is info
you already know, um, but the
second slide here, um, just
notes some of the things that
charter schools are, including,
um, that are funding is, is, is
roughly in line with school
districts. We start off with 98%
of funding because we give that
2% to our authorizers so they
can fund oversight activities of
charter schools.
When we get into our legislative
platform, I'll note a few
categorical items that that we
we aren't getting, uh, we
aren't, we don't have access to,
and so that's something we'll be
focusing on this legislative
session. Um, I think we can skip
the next slide and move into um
the following one, which has,
um, 4 core features of uh New
Mexico public charter schools.
And I think this really speaks
to what the superintendent's
association.
was noting that local control
can lead to better outcomes. Um,
our schools are independent,
they're governed at the school
level, um, their community-based
every charter school of ours has
been started by a teacher who at
some point taught in that
community and said, you know
what, we need something,
something different just to fill
in a gap here. And so, um, uh,
you'll see that as well as the
fact that we're mission driven.
And so we have a mission, we're
focused on a certain type of
education we're focused on a
certain um
Uh, type of, uh, or we have
focus areas that that really
speak to our students and
families. And lastly, we're held
accountable in a really
different way, um, than
traditional public schools we
are authorizers.
Um, so we lead the way in a
number of different types of
programming, but I have to say
that school districts are
catching up, and I think that's
a good thing thing for families.
Um, we have a number of magnet
schools across the state, and I
think that is, uh, that's really
doing, doing good stuff, so
we're supportive of that as
well. Um, the more public school
choice that we can have in the
state, the more families
benefit. Um, we have some real,
uh, on the next slide here, uh,
and then just one more, uh,
thank you.
Um, we are seeing some results
that are that are remarkable.
Um, we are, we are seeing rates
of proficiency in math and
reading that have anywhere
between 4 and 6 points higher,
um, than traditional public
schools at this time, um, and I
think if you go to the next
slide, those gaps are holding
true for low income students as
well. Um, when we have the, the,
um, uh,
The data from, from last year,
we will do a full analysis of
the Yasi Martinez subgroups, and
we'll bring that to you. Um, and
they may not all look like this,
but we want to have the
conversation, um, about the
results that our students are
getting when they attend our
schools. Um.
And then after that, in the next
slide, um, we do, we do a poll
every year with research and
polling. This is um Brian
Sandoff's group, um, that just
takes New Mexicans, uh, thoughts
on charter schools. There were
56 New Mexicans in this sample
size, um, and 71% agree that
public charter schools help
improve public education in the
state, and I always list that
one first because it's, it's the
one that's important to us. We
really care about what happens
on our campus, but we care
about.
every student in the state and
by adding our public school
options, um, New Mexicans across
the state, uh, agree in large
numbers, um, that it's
beneficial. Um, we ask whether
we should continue to develop
and open more public charter
schools in the state in 73% of
New Mexicans support that. And
then lastly, um whether they
support or oppose a law that
would halt the growth of new
charter schools and 70% of New
Mexicans oppose that. So I'll
move into
Our legislative platform, um,
Which starts with, um, funding
equity for charter schools. So
we do a pretty good job in New
Mexico and how we fund our
schools. We are, we are right
there in the funding formula,
um, with our, with our
traditional district schools,
um, and you see us on all of
your physical impact analysis
because it really, you know,
that it applies in the same way,
um.
And that's because in New
Mexico, when we create a charter
school, we create a new
governmental entity. In most
other states, it's a nonprofit
who's accepting uh state
dollars. Here we do it a little
differently and that provides
for additional oversight and
transparency in how we're
funded. Um, the disparities that
we want to focus on are one, the
at-risk funding. I know you'll
hear more about that today.
We've long wanted um at-risk
funding to be generated at the
school level.
Um, we are concerned though that
if some schools are going to see
massive cuts to their budget,
that that that we don't seem to
be in a good environment for
that either, as a result of that
legislation. So I think um what
you'll hear later today, we, we,
this is something that's been on
our platform for years, but we
do have uh some concerns about
the downside in dollars for some
of the schools that would be
negatively impacted. Um,
transportation funding is, is
funded, um,
By the state, but not in the
first year. Charter schools have
to prove that the that the bus
route is viable, and they have
to use their operational dollars
for that. That's hundreds of
thousands of dollars that we
have to take away from
classrooms to save for that
first year transportation
funding, and it's a limiting
access to our schools, and so
we, we, we plan on proposing a
solution to that, um, that
doesn't have to do with the
formula, do it outside of the
formula and and allow those
operational dollars to go.
Where they're supposed to go to
the classroom.
Um, locally authorized schools
as their own boards of finance,
we brought this in the last 60
day session, it did pass through
Senate education. Um, right now,
if you're a locally authorized
school, meaning you report to
the Albuquerque Public Schools
Board or any other school
district in the state, your
money flows through them and
then comes to your charter
school. Um, there, there are
some complicating factors
sometimes in that, um, and I'll
name two of them, which um
First is that oftentimes school
districts take the overhead off
of federal funds, um, and that
indirect cost can be anywhere
between 12 and 18%. This isn't
something they're doing to
discriminate against charter
schools, they're just taking it
off the top and then
distributing distributing it,
but then the charter school is
in charge of administering
special ed funds or Title One
funds. So that overhead is taken
and given to the district, but
then the school just gets less,
and they have to administer it
on their own.
And so like getting funding
directly from the state, that
overhead isn't taken off their
responsibilities don't change.
Secondly, when charter schools
want to apply for below the line
grant opportunities as a locally
um authorized charter school,
they have to work with their
school district and become part
of one larger application from
the district, and that's
sometimes uh limits the
opportunities that our schools
have. So, um, the oversight from
the department
And would actually only increase
under this proposal, um, but it
would also provide a little more
freedom for our schools as they
move forward, um, on this. So
looking forward to that
discussion. Um, we request
additional funding for the
public charter school revolving
loan fund. We have $10 million
in there, the application opened
on Tuesday, um, and I, we have
already heard about so much more
um requests for that fund than
they have actual funding, and
just
As many of you know, $10 million
doesn't do much these days, and
so increasing that by 30 million
would would allow that fund to
serve 2 or 3 projects at a time.
Um, and would keep public
dollars in public institutions
in New Mexico.
Authorize a reform as a broad
category is referring to our 2%
funding. Um, we passed the bill
with all of your help, um, to
allow authorizers to revert some
of the 2% if they weren't using
it. Um, it was the choice of the
authorizer. There was no mandate
associated with it, that was
vetoed. Um, and that's something
that's important to us. If the
authorizer isn't spending the
dollars, these are SEG
operational funds, they should
go back to the school. Um, so
we, we
may look at that as well as some
structural changes with our
state authorizer, um, to put us
in line with national best
practice.
Next, um, and this just echoes,
I think some of Superintendent
Madrid's comments is, you know,
the role that our schools play
in supporting students has
really expanded in the last 20
years. Um, what it means to be a
teacher, what a school means to
our families has changed. You're
going to have conversations
about at-risk funding this year.
Um, we need to do something that
benefits all students to provide
student uh student support
workers, social workers.
counselors, a librarians even,
additional adults in the in the
in the schools that can provide
additional connections are
critically important for every
kid in our state, and I don't
know that our funding formula, I
recognizes that. Um, we direct
funding for at-risk students,
that's great. Um, but I think,
but, but we are of the opinion
that that supporting all
students with the kind of
funding for additional staff
like this at every New Mexico
school is critical.
And then lastly, I think this
has been largely taken care of,
but fully funding insurance
costs. Um, this was something
that I, um, I, I don't know what
role LESC had. We've been
talking to Namipsia, but, um,
the, the rate increase that
occurred right after the
legislative session was just not
in tune with the money that was
put in the budget, um, and so
that, that really hurt
everybody's, um, budget, uh, all
public schools. So we just note
that I do think what I'm
hearing is that the there's,
there's enough coordination
between the entities that that
it will be appropriately funded
this year, but we'll keep
talking about it, um, uh, until
we get the, the budget through.
So, thank you, uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, look
forward to the conversation.
right?
So it looks like that was
everybody. Um, so if we could
have all the partners and
presenters in the first few rows
just in case because we're gonna
have questions from committees,
so we don't know.
To whom they may be addressed.
Um, and so that we can have them
nearby.
Thank you and for members,
specific questions, please. So
if you want to point somebody
out, please do so. So Senator
Soltz.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I've got a
number of questions, comments,
and I'll try and keep things
fairly quick and precise, uh,
with the rhetoric coming out of
Washington about
The Department of Education and
where we have approximately 15%
and this is on the general page
from things coming from federal
sources.
Remind everybody New Mexico is a
wealthy state. You know, we have
put
10+ billion dollars into the
permanent fund in the last
couple of years. We have enough
money to backfill anything that
the federal government might
short us if we choose to.
And so, you know, that's a whole
lot, you know, on our finance
committee and others that we
make sure that, you know, we, we
can meet those needs if the
federal monies don't, and so,
you know, I hope, I hope we just
keep that in mind, um.
The second one that I kind of
highlighted here. I, it keeps me
up at night is the concern for
our immigrant families and
children and things of that
sort. Anything that we might do
as legislation this time would
not take effect until July, and
so it's gonna be very much upon
the administration, the
department, the superintendents,
the principals, and the
classroom teachers, the school
boards to
Protect our kids between now and
then, and that means, you know,
and Joe scan, you know,
potentially some pretty direct,
uh, in-service for people in
those roles on how to protect
kids and school sites. Uh,
there's been talk that they're
gonna do away with the agreement
that those are protected areas.
And so, you know, please make
sure that you're preparing
everybody up and down the line
for what that means to protect
kids and.
families, um, and that the
secretary level that has
responsibility that all children
are to be in school, and that
means not in cages in detention
centers that they are by law to
get education services in New
Mexico and there's some things
we can do between now and when
things might take effect in July
that we might pass and just make
sure that we've got that
training and everybody is ready
and prepared.
Uh, it's an area that keeps me
up at night.
Um
Let me see, over to the
backside, um.
Certainly I know we're working
in the budget on increasing
salaries for educational
assistance. I always worry when
we put averaging language about
salaries because everybody
thinks they're all going to get
it because we're all above
average and average means half
aren't, uh, and so.
And again, I don't know how it's
gonna show up in the final
budget because the, you know, a
word added here or there on the
last minute changes things, but
I've often advocated that we
potentially put in for the 10%,
something like 5% average and 5,
everybody gets 5% and then 5%
average that gives districts
some, some flexibility. Um, it's
on here about, you know,
increased salaries for
principals. I think we already
took care of that because
principal salaries are tied to
level.
3 teachers when those go up
principal salaries go up. So I
don't know that that's something
that we need to continue.
To to debate or talk about.
When there was all the
discussion about community
schools.
Couple of concerns or issues
there and, and certainly if
somebody like to address is
We hear lots, everybody talks
about local control, but then
you want us to do things.
Community school funding or lots
of the funding things are in the
SCG, which means it's now a
local control as to how those
monies get spent.
Where's the line? What do you
want us to require districts to
do and which things are.
or local things and so many
things in many areas, we talk
about additional money.
But you really don't want us
dictating everything from up
here on high, so Mary, if you
would.
Hi, thank you, um, Mr. Chair,
uh, Mr. Vice Chair.
Uh, it's a great question, and
it's one that really does need
to be asked because a community
school uh should be funded, um,
locally, more locally. I think
the 12.5 million as from House
Memorial 44 subcommittee was so
that we can still um engage with
uh
Schools that are interested in
adopting these strategies, but
ultimately we had hoped, and I
know the secretary, uh, Padilla
also had hoped that we could
blend and braid the the
community school funding with
the family income index funding
to really have some capacity and
and the at risk funding. So, um,
I think it's a, it's a constant
uh tension. We are trying to get
more schools, you know, we've
grown community schools since
2019.
When I first came before you,
uh, speaking about them um to
now from um
30 community schools to 150
community schools statewide,
most of which are funded, they
have been funded or are funded
by the New Mexico Public
Education department below the
line grant funding, but they are
um cycling out of that and and
to where there's they're finding
their own funding for uh the
onsite coordinators, so, um.
I know that that answers as
clear as mud, but uh it is,
there is a tension there until
we can get the strategies and
the school started, then it does
come from the state and and
which time it moves to um
The local and it and in Las
Cruces, for example, and he ate
national funded the community
school, the first coordinator
there that was Dave Greenberg,
and um the district picked up
that cost because they did see
value in those uh strategies,
so, uh, so now different schools
in Las Cruces are pet funded and
some are not. They've moved away
from it. So that is the hope,
but it's a process of blending
and braiding funding.
that takes time and we do
ultimately want to pull it from
the state. Yeah, no, I
understand all of that and
districts need to look at
avoided costs by putting in
community schools that they can
move money from other places,
uh, we need, yeah, again, we're
a wealthy state. We need to fund
all of education and quit trying
to do everything on the cheap
and fund it appropriately so we
can do all of these.
These types of, of things, um,
sort of on the community schools
are, is the community school
group working with the higher
education teacher preparation
programs because I've talked
with people who have gone
through the principal programs,
they don't even mention
community schools, and you can't
do community schools if you
don't have leaders that have
been through and know what it is
and start all of it, and yet
we're not preparing them in our
principal preparation programs.
To be leaders of community
schools.
Mr. Chair, uh,
Senator, uh, that's a great
question, and we are, um, yes,
we are and we, you know, I'll
tell you that we're the only
community school coalition that
works with the public ed
department in the nation, so,
um, that in and of itself is an
anomaly and it's a pretty
wondrous thing because the
public ed department as y'all
probably know, are not the most
easy people to partner with, to
collaborate with, um, but that
being said,
Hi, Ellen, um we've got lots of
other people, so please, you
know, keep things very close and
tight. Thank you. OK, yeah, I
lost my train of thought anyway,
so did you, did you have a
comment?
Uh, I do. Thank you, uh, Mr.
Chair, Mr. Vice Chair.
I'll get a hang of the
microphone. Um, I just want to
say we're starting to make those
connections through our
residency programs. The
residency program uh focused in
UNM places are residency
students in.
Excuse me, in community schools,
and that's a purposeful
connection. So there are some
colleges that are starting to
see how important it is that we
train our teachers, prepare them
well in the context of those
schools. Thank you. Thank you. I
recently talked to a recent
graduate at New Mexico State and
in the undergraduate, they never
talk about community schools,
they never talk about ACEs. They
never talk about social
determinants of health as any
part of the teacher preparation
programs or the
principal preparation programs.
Um, you know, I'm glad if UNM is
doing some of that, but it ought
to be a core part of those
curriculums of which we do have
some oversight of
Thank you. Um,
Certainly, and in the past.
couple of years, I've been one
of the sponsors for moving back
to a state board of education.
If the partners would look at
the old legislation, let me know
if there's anything that ought
to change in that as we get
ready to reintroduce that
resolution, uh, that you see as
far as the structure of how the
board might be made up, but
those are certainly things that
are on the
The
The docket, so to speak, um.
The specialized license for
middle school educators, I worry
that that may cause additional
problems if we require that. We
already, that's one of the most
difficult places to hire
teachers as a former middle
school principal, um, and if we
require a middle school.
Endorsement that limits that
hiring even more where currently
6th grade you typically can
hire.
We're up to 8th grade you can
higher elementary and or 7
through 12 secondary.
we,
we recognize that issue and
really we want to raise the
issue of how do you train
specially for that
and we believe it's something in
into our licenger process, it
may invoke CEU kinds of things
for existing licenses, but also
I think uh Ele can comment, uh,
invokes a change of, of design
in our higher education training
for for uh middle school
teachers.
Um, Mr. Chair, Mr. Vice Chair, I
was actually hoping that it
would increase our flexibility
in hiring for med school,
knowing that you could hire K8
or secondary, or
Uh, purposely prepared middle
school educators, and then
you've got that, that energy,
that synergy that uh creates a
more appropriate model for those
young adolescent learners. Yeah,
and you know, certainly again in
our colleges of education, there
needs to be more discussion
about middle school models that
worked, that was a big thing 20
or so years ago, and it's all
drifted away now as to how to
make those things work. Uh,
and this may be a
Question more towards you, um,
yeah, we talked a lot in with
the superintendents and the
school boards about local
control.
But under local control, we
didn't have anybody doing
structured literacy. We didn't
have anybody doing structured
math. We had to put a law in
place to kind of make people do
that, where is the balance of
what we have to do because
districts are not doing it under
local control.
So, Mr. Chairman, that's a valid
point, something we recognize.
It's really the joint operation
of, of legislative
intentionality and our practice
in public schools.
Uh, I would suggest that there
were districts that were doing
uh parts of structured literacy,
the issue becomes the financing
side.
The ability to put professional
development in place which we
now have done for uh the, the
teacher core that is there
without an agreement or the
support of the state, we can't
get there locally. And so we
look forward to a co-joined
effort.
At the end of the day though,
making it work.
And putting it on the ground.
is a local issue.
That we, that we have to manage
through and so it is in fact a
balancing act, Mr. Chairman,
but, uh, we will always lean
toward local.
Decision making and how you get
there.
If the capacity is built by the
legislature for us to get there.
And, and thank you, and as you
all know, being a former school
board member and stuff, I'm very
much for local control, but with
that comes responsibility of
budgeting towards those things,
not towards other priorities,
and I really don't want to be
passing laws from up here that
tells every district how to do
every little piece of everything
that we do,
but then we find things like the
structured literacy where for 20
years it wasn't happening.
And we had to pass a law and it
shouldn't be like that, um,
brings me, uh, the
transportation, you talked
about, um, and the real concern,
I mean, we know that in many of
our districts that are
underwater, uh, last week I was
presenting to the LFC and
listening to some of their
presentation that essentially
they did a report on those
districts and said they just
need to be more efficient, that
that's where the problem is.
It's very frustrating to me that
The LESC has a report that says
the formula doesn't work for
those districts and we need to
put more money in it to do that.
How do we balance those when we
have the finance committee
putting out reports contrary to
what the education committee
puts out, Mr. Chairman, we have
to continue ringing the bell,
number one. We have to look at
what are the facts.
If there were only 7 districts,
6 or 7 years ago, and now
there's 19 districts.
I purport to you that that is a
trend that we need to pay
attention to.
Rear rancho schools because of
transportation decisions, they
were forced to make going to a
four-tier delivery system.
Because they had inefficient.
funding
Lost an entire elementary school
of students over one year.
That isn't how the business
should be run.
The tail should not wag the dog,
and so we have to come to grips
with those realities of Mr.
Chairman, uh, I would challenge
anyone.
To come in and look at how you
would optimize routes.
The Superintendent in Las
Cruces, I bought the same system
that the state bought later to
determine route optimization.
So that wasn't the issue.
And Mr. Chairman, it is more.
convoluted than that. At the end
of the day, your statute
promises a student who needs
transportation to receive it by
state fiat.
You in that, in that statute say
this it is the state's
responsibility.
It is it is beyond my reasoning,
how we would allow a system to
fall into then the local cost of
side of this when I was
superintendent in Las Cruces, I
was $1.4 million upside down
with the highest optimization
you could do 1.4 million.
That that equates
Mr. Chairman, to 11 or 12
teachers that I had to give up
to run that system. That's
criminal. That should not
happen. Yeah, and that's very
much my frustration with kind of
the conclusions of that
particular report. Um,
Kind of along the same lines,
you know, there was a question
about increased planning time,
that's a straight up SEG total
funding to districts and then a
local decision on how they
actually spend the money that's
generated. Um, and so again, you
really don't want us legislating
required planning time, you want
us to put enough money so that
we can run schools well, not as
on a minimum budget, you know,
and.
It it drives me crazy that, you
know, instead of doing what's
right, we do what's cheap and
easy first. Um, and we need to
make sure that we increase all
of the money. Uh, the last
thing, the high cash reserves,
uh, and the issue with that is,
you know, we need to talk in the
state regularly about when we've
had cash reserves of the state
budget of 35, 38% this year, I
think the plan is at 25%, that
is swept billions of dollars.
into the permanent fund in Wall
Street that those money should
be invested in education. Every
1% of cash reserves in our
general budget equates to about
$100 million. I'd like to see
our cash reserves at a much more
reasonable than 25% and invest
those extra 100s of millions of
dollars.
In education of our kids.
Uh, money invested in education
is never lost in the next
economic downturn. So I'll end
with that. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
for putting up my comments to
the senators.
Mr. Chairman, I just want to say
to this committee, the reason
cash balances have grown
primarily is because during
COVID.
We received equalization.
But you were not required to
staff up.
In doing that, that created a
short term windfall for
districts.
I promise you in the, in the
next 3 to 5 years, you will see
cash balances in districts are
in the process of decline and
will. And so I think that's a, a
non sequitur as far as our, of
our discussions and Mr. Chair
and Stan, I was more talking
about this, the state cat or
the, yeah, the state level cash
balances, not the district level
Mr. Chairman, and I, I heard
that. I just want to sound off
on the why, because I think
that's lost.
Thank you.
Represent me.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you for your presentations. I
just have a few comments, um, on
some of them that most of them
that most of you talked about,
um, one of them was the, um, is
planning time, um, we all know
I'm, I'm a current teacher. In
fact, that's why I wasn't here
yesterday. I was finishing my
physics finals, there was way
too many that still need to make
it up. I couldn't leave that to
a sub. So, um, but, uh, but that
is huge, uh, because I know for
me.
I mean, I, I, fortunately, I get
to work in this, in this line of
work because I do, I do love it,
but I, but we are.
One of the very few, um,
Jobs where we work and not
really get paid. Like there's
hardly ever a time that I leave
before 5 o'clock. My contract
ends at 2:38.
And, um, and so, and I do it
because in my day in my, what is
it, uh, sometimes 3, mostly 2,
Prep periods, um,
One of those is taken up by
APLC.
Um, many other times it's taken
up um sometimes by many other
things that that are not
determined by me.
So when I have a 160 students
that I have to grade plan,
hopefully find the, the, the
latest uh innovating way to get
them engaged in everything else.
How do we, like, if I want to
totally revamp my classroom and
how I teach things and what I do
because, because the latest
thing has has showed me this is
how they're going to engage.
Where do I find the time? Where
am I gonna do that? If this is a
department thing, where are we
gonna do that?
In an hour and a half a week.
You know, like that's, that's
the thing, and, and maybe it's
outside of that time, like, um,
and that's, that's a
conversation that we need to
have. In fact, our science
department right now is having
that conversation because it's
an adoption year and we were
like, we need the, the, the
time.
That the district needs to set
aside so that we can vertically
align what what because so many
elementary school teachers are
afraid of science, because they
don't, they don't understand it.
Well, that's where if we had the
time to help them and teach them
and, and empower them and and
get them that sometimes it's
simple things that if they can
just get these skills going
starting earlier, it's less for
us to do and we can do more
things and have and have better
prepared.
People or students, uh, but that
is a huge thing now.
Senator So did mention if we um
if we properly fund schools that
they would do the right thing. I
would hope so, but some don't.
Um, you know, because I know
when we've begged for that
planning time many times we
don't get it.
Many times there's excuses, it's
not there, you know, and, um,
because that is like we, we
often, they, they require us to
do this and then whatever new
initiative is, is happening, we
have to spend all our free time
doing that. When do I grade my
papers?
When do I plan for the next, for
the next week? When do I do,
when do I like just do anything
because a lot of times,
Like, uh, many times you've said
that we do, I think someone said
that we are more than just
educating our students. There's
a lot of times where I'm helping
my student during my prep.
I'm helping them not only in
science, but I'm helping them
and teaching them in math,
because they know they can learn
from me, so I help them, so I, I
can't be that person that says
no, I need uh this is time set
aside for me and those are those
are the things, but.
I'm sorry, but 3 hours is
enough, uh, 3 hours a week isn't
enough. It's just not. And I
know that that was something
that we
We attempted to do, um, in the,
in the new graduation uh uh uh
like not the graduation
requirements, I forget which uh
house built it was, but to embed
60 hours of um um in secondary
and then when it went to the
Senate, that got cut in half.
And then when it became law, it
got gutted in.
And, and so like that, that it
is important and I get it if
you're not an educator, you
don't understand it.
But those of us that are.
It is needed.
It really is because that when,
when a brand new teacher feels
overwhelmed.
everything
learning structured literacy,
doing their microcredentials,
doing, uh, you know, all of the
extra things besides learning
how to manage their class.
And they don't and they aren't
respected enough to give them
proper time, paid time to do it.
That's why many of them leave in
the 1st 3 years. Many of them.
And I've seen it. I've seen it
over and over. I've seen it
where they're like, I can't do
this and and hold my sanity.
Because it is, it is a hard job.
Um, so please.
Mr. Chair, um, representative
Mitabba Moya, where you would of
my respondents because you sound
exactly like I got hundreds of
comments to each of these
sections in this survey and we
did used to do a better job, and
I think it's some parts of the
state we still do.
I know that
When I first started teaching in
1991, we did have um both a team
planning time in middle school.
I'm a middle school teacher
where we did used to do the
middle school, um, strategy and
model of having smaller learning
environments. We had a team time
and we had a personal planning
time.
And as the budget tightened,
this was something that the
public ed department had a hand
in and local districts, and that
is to make a decision to balance
their budgets, we went in Las
Cruces from having one planning
or two planning periods to
having one and and ever since we
made that decision and that has
been since like 2008.
Educators are more and more
desperate because they are being
asked to substitute during their
planning time. They are being
asked to learn new curriculum to
do letters training, to do, you
know, lots of different things.
So, um,
state
could also have a hand in
backing out the damage that has
happened since 2008. I think
that and that's what needs to
happen. It has to come from
From you all that it is
important that educators have an
opportunity to collaborate with
one another and learn from one
another. Thank you.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chair. Thank
you for that because I, I, I
definitely, um, I, I couldn't
say it enough, uh, because, and
that these are just things that
we've been
Dealing with
Recently, and I know we're not
the only one. I guaran I
guarantee you just about every,
every department. And just, and,
and the fact that, that I heard
that like a long time ago cause
I'm, I'm the
Um
Unfortunately, I get wrestled
into doing everything. Um, but
I, my husband says it's cause I
love chaos.
But, uh, but like being
department chair, uh, uh, my,
the veteran teachers said, oh
yeah, there was a time where if
you were a department chair, you
had an extra prep to be able to
do that.
And yeah, but no, but now that's
not a, you know, that's, that's
not something that's, that's a
priority. It is not, but those
are extra duties. Those are
extra, uh, the things, extra
meetings that you're that you're
doing.
But I don't get extra time.
Mr. Chairman, let me go back to
something Mary said, uh, Mr.
Chairman,
representative Moya.
You, you saved it very well,
what's happened. I was the
superintendent in Las Cruces. I
was first superintendent in
2008. I was Senator Soul's
superintendent 2008.
In 2006, when I came online, we
were recognizing those pressures
you're talking about, and we
actually had.
More time and days on their.
Contracts.
To deal with the efficacy that
you just talked about.
In 2008 happened.
What occurred was would pull
back state funding.
And so guess what had to go.
And it wasn't that it was uh
intentional desire to fork good
teaching and all the support. It
was simply the choice I had to
make was either remove that or
kill off more positions than I
did, and I still had to cut 3%
of our positions and pulled it
off simply to make budget.
And so what marriage has said,
which I really appreciate, is
one of the things at some point
we need to talk about.
And I pushed it with, with
center salt. I talked about with
the, with the present protem and
of all places of uh a couple of
days ago.
We need to invent a set of money
of 100 or 200 145 $250 million
to reinvest back in the system.
With no directionality, no
mandate in a, in an
appropriations Act, so that
districts can go back and redo.
holes they have in the system.
What you raise is real, it's
real, real.
And, and keeping teachers, it's
real. I've had so many of them,
even after I've left, just come
to me and go, you know, friends
I can't do it anymore. It's too
heavy. I, I just can't meet all
the requirements cause I don't
have the time to do it. We need
to recognize that crisis.
And, and, and deal with it.
And that's a hard sell because
every time you invest a dollar.
You want to know what you're
getting from. The problem is we
have 89 scenarios of imbalances
in budgets that somehow we need
to come to grips with how do you
backfill so they can do what's
right for them, because I'll
tell you, Texaco, New Mexico and
Las Cruces, New Mexico have
different issues of you framed
very well in your district, the
issues for US staff that need to
be dealt with.
And, and so at some point,
that's why I said about, about
the, the nation of risk. Somehow
we've lost the
Belief
That we can hand the money to
those of us in systems and that
will do the credible work that
needs to be done. And some are
rarely reinvent that faith with
each other. And so thank you for
framing that so well.
I was the dirty dog that did
that.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, the next thing that um I did
and, and actually you may just
stay up there really quick. Um,
the insurance, um, that is
something that is huge.
Um, and I know that's probably
if, when, when I talked to any
of my teachers, uh, my friends,
so that's, that kind of stuff,
um, that is one of his top
priority. Um, 80/20, so remind
me.
What is the current um uh
average or, or, um, um, cause I
know it it differs some
districts pay more because they
may have the money to pay more.
Um, and we all know the
disparities there. Some, it, it
shouldn't just be those that
have the money to pay more, uh,
of the of the of the percentage.
Mr. Chair, um, representative,
so, and help me out if I get
this wrong. I believe the
current funding tiers with New
Mexico public schoolsurance
Authority, which covers lin um
is 6044 um those persons making
over $50,000 50,000 dollars or
more.
It is uh 8020. Thank you,
Representative Mata for those
making um
Let's than 50,000, but we did
have some districts and some
districts do like some districts
will pay for the increase, you
know, there, we have Santa Fe
does that.
Um, I mean, districts are really
trying because they do listen to
their employees and they do
understand that this is
crippling.
Um, our system, and, and they do
work in a petri dish, you know,
and, and it matters, you know,
it matters that we keep our
educators healthy and um and,
and I just, if you, if I talk to
members anywhere, if this is an
issue that rises to the fore
right away. So it's presently
60-40 for most employees except
for those making under 50,000 a
year.
Oh thank you, Mr. Chair. Yeah,
cause I, um, thankfully, my
husband has a, a, a very good
job that we don't have to pay
for insurance and they do that,
so I don't have to use it, but I
know that there's um if we had
to, we that, cause I know when I
think there was a year that we
had to, and that, and um
And it was, it was taking out
just for my husband and I alone,
um, almost $700 a paycheck.
Um, and so, and, and that is
amazing in which the arguments
in which I believe me in, in,
in, um
Uh, the people around me, they
were like, well, that's not fair
for other um state employees
that we shouldn't pay if you pay
all of it, why don't you do it
for the other state employees.
And my question was, I would
love to have what other state
employees have. If we play the
same premiums, let's do it.
Like if that that go equal
because I guarantee you they
would. I know that other state
employees don't pay $700 a
paycheck.
Yeah
And, and, uh, because, yeah,
that's like, so that's like if
you wanna talk equal, let's talk
equal, um, uh, because it, it
is, especially when you have,
uh, cause often all too often
you have families where both um
husband and wife for both
educators.
So they don't have something
like I do, where I have a
husband that can pay for my
insurance. Um, but if he decides
to leave there, then we
We get to use it and, and
that's, that's gonna be a pay
cut, you know, um, but that's,
um, that's something that's
huge, and, and I think it's
something that definitely, I
don't see why uh Senator So says
we're, we're not a poor state. I
don't see why, why it can't be
done. I really don't.
Um, but, um,
The other thing and the last
thing that I'll talk about is
the return to work.
Um
I, I really, really think we
need to extend that.
Because we have
We keep trying to figure out
many ways of um
Filling
These positions that are empty,
but how many more? I mean, I
know of, of a couple in my
district, my high school alone,
that would, um, they're, they're
pretty much they're reaching
that, that end of the 36 months
and, and right now one of my
teachers is now co-teaching with
a brand new teacher that is
invaluable. You are, she is, he
is helping, that is 32 years of
knowledge, getting it poured
into this, this new teacher and
um and that's something that we
could have not gotten had this
not happened.
And, and not something that
we're ready to let go of.
Because, because those are
still, you know, what about the
next one, that those are years
that if they're still willing to
be here, they're still willing
to pour their expertise in
their, their invaluable
knowledge.
Um, to our, our newer teachers
to help them succeed.
Why can't we let them do that.
Not to mention that I, I
believe.
It doesn't, when they're taking
both, they're still getting it
taken out, but it's not going
into theirs. So
So, yes, please come in Sherman.
Um
The work I've done with the ERB,
I really appreciate their
efforts. Remember with me that a
year ago with sunset.
There is a law that had the one
year out.
Return to one.
That's essentially replaced
that.
I'll give you my intentionality
and I've been working with that,
with the exec there for the
insurance authority.
Every year deeply.
to see, is it having any effect
on the phone, and I'm happy to
tell you, no.
Because the point you raised
representative that
You still the employee is still
paying their part in the
employer part is being paid, but
there is no increase in benefit.
So that's when know when into
the fun.
So you're leveraging against if
people see that as a way of
going out early.
And then being in the system
longer for the, the question is,
and the question is, is there a
demarcation point where that's
gonna be the case.
So if my intentional, just so
you know, I'll be back.
Because after the 72 months
work.
We're gonna have employees, Mr.
Chairman, that you just talked
about that we want to continue
service beyond that limitation,
and I believe we should protect
that as long as and extend that,
as long as it doesn't affect the
fund.
And I believe it won't.
So we're taking this in.
Chunks at a time, 3 years at a
time to see if there's a
limitation to protect those who
came in with us.
And protect them through time as
they continue to do that.
I would hope eventually that we
would reach the point where
unlimited. It would be much like
the one year was. So that's the
long term forecast of where that
might go.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um
Here's the thing, we have half
an hour.
I'm gonna do a hard stop at
11:30 because we got to get
lunch in.
And we have a very packed agenda
for this afternoon.
The budgetary requests are, are
legislative priorities, things
like that. So, here's what I'm
gonna do cause I have 5 people
plus me on the list, so we have
quite a bit of the committee,
right? So what I'm gonna do is
I'm gonna go try something
different, so bear with me. I'll
call in a member. You'll get one
question. You
that question. I'll go down to
the next member, the next
member, each will get one
question and then we'll cycle
through.
You may get your 2nd, 3rd
question you may not, but at
least you'll be able to ask
questions that you want so we
don't cut anybody out of this,
all right? So that's represent
block.
It seems like you have a
jumpstart on my list. So
represent block, your one
question, please. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you, everybody.
Uh, quick question, this is for
AFT NEA Stan and Joe.
So
Regarding the state school
board.
I know the in the past, maybe NA
and AFT have supported it. I do
believe they may have, and I'm
wondering, Mr. Chairman,
The current legislation.
It has a
Makeup. I don't, I don't know
how many members, I think it
might be 9 or 10.
And then I believe 3 or 4 of
those were appointed by the
governor, and then a few of
those are elected. So, Mr.
Chairman, I'm wondering what do
you guys feel about all of the
individuals elected statewide or
in districts.
And then what, what other
changes may you perceive you may
need to be able to have it not
as stringent, so we can actually
have a good cohesive school
board. So I don't know if all
the groups want to talk about
that. That's a concise answers,
please. I want to give you the
answer real quickly, and it is
one, the bill that you have
looked at was 15 members, 10 by
district of existing school,
what is now the PEC.
And then there are which also
includes 5 appointed by the
executive.
Whether or not you retain that
as part of what probably needs
to be debated. Uh, we see
efficacy in
In that in that dialogue and,
and we're open to talk about how
best to administer. The other
thing I would note that we would
probably would hear from my
friend with the charter schools
back here is that there's a
concern that was expressed.
About the effect it would have
on charter reauthorization and
the role played by that. I think
those are the big.
Blocks will have to figure out
how to move.
Mr. Chairman, the
representative.
Our uh association has just come
on board in supporting this. In
the past, we had asked that it
should be considered. So we
haven't had time to look at the
bill itself. We just, we
supported this uh last week at
our annual conference, so we'll
be looking at the legislation
that has been prepared in the
past and I know that Senator
Soul has asked us to look at
that now. It does seem uh it was
a good balance back when it was
in, in place, as I recall, we
do, we do need
some additional input from the
executive side, uh, but again,
the majority of the members
should be at local elected
officials.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and uh
I appreciate everyone for their
input. Yeah, I do agree. I think
I, I have heard from current PEC
members that say that they spend
so much time traveling on the
road, they don't, wouldn't have
time to be the, the nuts and
bolts of PED and I feel like
that would be something
important to consider maybe
keeping those individuals
elected as well in a different
board is just elected as well
for the new uh state school
board. So, thank you. Appreciate
it. And uh I support the
concept.
Representative Lujan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you everyone for being here. I
really appreciate this. So I'm
gonna be, um, try to be as
succinct as I can, so, um, Mr.
Chair, my question is going to
go to our charter schools, um,
and as they're looking for
funding equity or more of it,
um, what I'm hearing today is
there's an imbalance in budgets
and their system and we need to
turn our systems to those who
can do the work.
My question is, how?
Are the
Charter schools.
Going to, um, create more fiscal
management with better internal
controls controls and oversight
when, uh, last week in LFC, we
had a finding or information
with
Out of the 158 findings for our
schools, 153 of those findings
were with our charter schools.
That's 40 more than were uh
found with them than last year.
Um, so how are you gonna do that
when we are carving out so many
things and you're asking for
funding, uh, from the SCG with
other with all districts and
everything for one part of your
budget and then we're doing, you
know, carve outs for other part
of your budget. I mean.
How do you get to better
transparency like you mentioned,
how do you get some more
oversight and please thank you.
Mr. Chair and Representative Lu
Han our, our first approach to
addressing this, this is a
conversation in the charter
community right now is through
training, um, of our governing
councils as well as our school
leaders regarding managing the
business office were held to the
same bar and we show up in the
same audit as um as either our
school district or our public
education department, and I
think it's just, it's an area
for focus, um, for us. Now, you
won't see dis disclaimed audits.
Um, but, but the number of
findings is not something that
we're OK with, and it's
something that we're focusing on
as a community and using
training to address it.
Mr. Chair, um, I just don't
think that's enough. I'd like to
have some, uh, better, um.
Information and, and uh how
you're gonna do that. I, my
concern is
That your budget is all over the
place and you're asking to take
money from one place and another
place, and we're giving you
money from other fundings. Um,
it's not just, I'm not, I wanna
be very clear. I'm not coming
down just on like because your
charter schools and you, you
know, you give a, gave a preface
of what the national movement is
and, you know, there's some
concerning um things there. This
is just the it's not consistent.
It's not, um, it's not in
balance, and we are respon
po n s i b ly fiscally to to
figure this out with you. I, I,
I take on that responsibility
with you. How do we figure this
out because, you know, we have,
we're talking about charter
schools, we're talking about
our, our regular public schools
and then our public charter
schools and then our other
charter schools.
It's too much. We need to figure
this out in an equitable,
holistic way, and I just, I keep
saying this every year and I
don't see this as coming to the
table to do that. And we have
these concerning factors and
we're looking at these audits
and now you have 40 more than
you did last year and you're
talking about maybe having more
charter schools come available
and when you do that, they're
their own governing entity.
So that even creates more
opportunity for more, you know,
imbalances in my opinion, um, I
would, I would suggest, and
maybe we'll have some
legislation to do overall study
of of what is going on in our
charters, our overall, not just
the charter schools. I just want
to be clear about that because I
do come hard at you all.
And I do that for the purpose
that we need, we need to read uh
and investigate and really look
at how we are funding you in all
the different components of
that, so that we do get to a
better balance. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Mr. Chair, I respond, uh, no,
because that was the one
question. So represent Royal
Caviero.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you to all of the presenters, it
was uh always very helpful
information. I through it,
there's a common thread
throughout that I found uh
concerning um student and staff
safety.
Also codifying sanctuary state,
um, and so my position has
always been that we should take
uh protective measures,
preventative measures rather
than punitive measures. So along
that same line, I think that um
schools at the local level.
Have to think very hard about
how we're going to implement
protections for our students if
their parents or their
grandparents or caregivers, or
caretakers are for some reason,
detained.
And they're left without.
A home or without family. That's
a real situation that
I have been confronted with
under previous um national.
Uh, attempts to create havoc in
within our immigrant and migrant
communities. So saying that, um,
I, I think it's just really
important along, so my question
is more general because it also
comes across these um addressing
social emotional health,
housing, and other kinds of
things, and then the cultural
and linguistic, and then there
was a reference to Martinez and
Yasi lawsuit. Within the order
of Yasi Martinez. It was found
that um we should declare or
have
Um
Nurses or healthcare.
Student, uh, counselors, social
workers, and other support
services considered as basic
education.
Would this, if we introduce that
piece of legislation again, my
question is, would this be
helpful?
To everyone here that has made a
presentation in all of your
capacities.
And if so, is this something
that would, you would be
supportive of and who, I don't
know if you could just raise
your hands or however way we
want to address that, uh, and if
anyone wants to speak directly
to it, Mr. Chair.
Yeah, briefly.
Mr. Chairman, we would support
that the issue is in the
logistics of how the money is
delivered.
Uh, to districts, the, the thing
that I, again, that I've, I've
worn you out on because we do it
on averaging.
Uh, when you're asked to
dollar's work, you might get 85
cents, and so we had to figure
that out.
But we do support the increase
of personnel to support
absolutely and would certainly
support that kind of
legislation. Thank you because
this would be very helpful in
setting up the protections that
we need to set up in the next
few years and the details can be
obviously, now that you know
that it's
Out there, if you could be
thinking about how to do that,
how to, how to work it into.
how best it would be helpful to
you all at all these levels, and
then if I would appreciate that
information. Thank you very
much. Thank you, Mr.
Uh, represent or sorry, Senator
Stewart, who was representing
Garret, but she stepped out.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I don't have a question, but I
have a comment. Um.
Uh, first, thank you all for
being here and for doing your
due diligence. It's so great to
hear what you want and think, oh
yeah, we're doing that. Oh yes,
we've done that. We're almost
there. Oh, we're halfway there.
We're in that direction.
Um, but I wanna just make some
comments about insurance.
You know, you're asking us to
fully fund insurance. We're not
responsible for insurance costs
going up.
Um
So we're $134 million in debt
right now that's gonna have to
come out of our budget in
January, um, because of the
state uh employee health
insurance costs. And because we
paid for more during the
pandemic, um, so when we talk
about wanting to put more money
into education. Who's the big
bugaboo?
It is the insurance costs. I
don't have any questions, Mary.
I don't want any comments. Uh,
so the 8020 is good, and we've
tried to do that and we'll keep
doing that.
We're now at the point where we
have to look at a salary
increase that will pay for those
insurance benefits were not in
control of the insurance
industry, every year they come
back with increased costs. We
have IA, I think iback has been
good. That's our inner agency
benefits advisory Committee that
includes NEMsia.
APS, the state, uh state
workforce and retiree healthcare
authority. They work all year.
They meet every month. They try
to get the best benefits we can
get, uh, uh, by being on in the
same group, it is more
competitive. They can bring
those costs down, uh, but we
still aren't in control of it.
They do the best they can. They
tell us, OK, it's gone up this
much.
And we say, OK, Medicaid, 40% of
our population is on Medicaid.
It is a huge part of our budget,
and now we've got 134 million
off the top of everything to pay
what we have gotten ourselves
into through the pandemic and
the last few years. So yeah, we
contrived the 80/20 again, but
it's, it's not up to us. It's
not, it's not in
Control, uh, I back does a
pretty good job, I think, um,
but I thought under assault, um,
by, uh, some of the new people
that are running our healthcare,
um, they want to do away with
it, or they want to force
everyone on IVA to do the same
program.
I thought
does RFPs, they get these lower
costs, but each of those
entities do their own, and I
still think that is a good
model. I don't want to do away
with that and I'm trying to
support it, but I just want
people to understand.
Where we're at with an industry
that every year will increase
costs every year, every year. So
we do our best, so not a
question, it's a comment.
Thank you. Uh, so would be
Representative Garrett, but I do
have a heads up on her question
though, cause she had shared it
with me, so I'll ask you if
that's OK to represent Garrett.
I'll take that as a yes. So, um,
180 day mandate, um, I think the
governor, that's something she's
interested in. What say you all,
Mary, if you want to start,
since you're there.
But briefly, please, have you
been in contact with the
governor? If so, what capacity?
If not, would you want to, I
have not. I've been in contact
with my members across the state
and they very greatly, but uh,
But really it comes down to they
believe that it should be a
decision that their school board
makes. And so that is where NA
New Mexico, uh, stands with that
issue.
Thank you. Any other folks, you
know, Stan is chomping at the
bit.
This chairman, I think our
filing was very clear and in
district court.
I'll let the committee know that
we've spent $100,000.
To move it to the point.
We're under
The judge's order at this point
to maintain your house for 1:30
provisions as they are.
And that's how we're operating.
We believe that is the proper
condition. Thank you.
Sure.
Mr. Chairman, while N SBA did
not join the lawsuit, we
supported it wholeheartedly.
Uh, and, uh, we believe that
decision rests with our local
school boards.
Mr. Chairman, AFT New Mexico
filed an amicus brief in support
of the lawsuit, and we have not
been in touch with the
governor's office.
All right.
So, um,
We go to my question. So it's uh
the return to the state school
board.
Um
He different things about the
status of the PEC.
And what we do with it.
thoughts.
Comments, issues, Matt, here's
your opportunity
Thank you, Mr. Chair for the
question. Um, our concern with
the move to the state school
board, if it would occupy those
seats on the public education
commission is their primary role
right now is to focus on charter
school authorization and their
portfolio of schools is doing
quite well. And so we think that
focus is a good reason for it.
We actually have a, a former
commissioner here in the
audience, but that
Focus on this one issue we
believe is helping the sector do
well, and so we're concerned
with piling everything under the
sun on education on that body.
Now, if we were to maintain a
separate independent authorizer
in proposals going forward, I do
like that, that's really the
issue, having them separate with
the focus is a big deal to us.
This chairman as we indicated uh
to represent Block's question,
which had some of the same
components.
We, we certainly understand the
issue brought forward by the
charters. A way to go is to, is
to move this, that body uh to
the public.
Education department.
Oversight, you could carve out a
portion of that that would
continue autonomously as a
subset of that body is one of
the options there. Another
option is to completely re
Do
The public education, um, or
what would be, I guess the state
Board of Education. So we want
to explore all of those options
as we move Mr. Chair, what Stan
said? I think there are uh a
variety of organizational
configurations that would help
ensure that we have the
stability of a state school
board.
Who hires a superintendent.
And different configurations to
take care of what um Matt Paul
talked about subcommittees
overlapping with the pad. I
think they're all we have to do
is get a little creative.
Chairman, as I recall, uh,
charters were just getting
started.
When we were last at a state
Board of Education.
Uh, and we did not know that
charters were going to grow as
big as they did since that time.
So the configuration, as I
recall when we were looking for
a a function for the uh state uh
public education commission was,
hey, let's give them charters,
that seems to be growing. It
grew to the to the size it is
now. I think that can easily be
done by staff.
Uh, I think that final decisions
on those can still come to the
commission, but I do think there
are ways to address it. Thank
you.
So we're going back around, so I
had you representative. I
actually represented Vera,
please, since you're a new
participant to our.
There you go.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. Uh, thank you
all for your presentation, um.
Uh, the tasks before all of us
are a little overwhelming
sometimes, and I, I had to sum
up this, I, I really just have a
comment more than a question. I
had to sum up this meeting, I
would say.
More money
A lot more money.
Uh, and going back for 6 years
on this, on this committee, it
kind of is the same thing every
year.
More money, a lot more money.
Um, and I think we've done a lot
of things over 6 years to really
Listen to everybody here to do
what we could to get salaries up
to try and get as much money as
we can out to the schools, but
we also have to come back to
the.
To the decision making of the
local school board level.
You know, we can do things and
we can put ideas out there and
we can do best practices and
best evidence and put those
before people, but ultimately
it's, it's to the uh school
boards at the local levels.
To kind of make those decisions
and carry out the intent, and
that just doesn't always happen.
I'm just gonna say that. So
that's it, Mr. Chair. I just, I
didn't have really, I mean, we
could dive in an hour on every
single point here, and we're not
going to, but um, you know,
certainly those of us on this
committee all deeply support
education, it's just uh how how
are we gonna get to where we
need to be, and what I didn't
hear today and and.
It wasn't the question that was
asked, but I didn't hear today,
um, you know, what are the
improvements, you know, how have
we improved because we did this
and this and this and this and
this. It was just, well, if we
had more money, we could do
better.
So that's just my comment as to
check.
Right. We're back to the top of
the list in round robin.
Representing Bloch, you're on
top of that list, you're good.
You're satisfied with your
answers, Representative Lujan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I'm trying to get to.
Based on new information, um.
So,
You know, if I'm, I'm
I I think I summarized
everything I wanted to, um,
regarding the, the, um.
PC charter schools, um.
My question then would go to um
some of the conversation today,
um, more common, I didn't hear
too much about our special
education programs and our
gifted education programs. When
we have a focus from the
executive on the special
education and um.
Um
division, our office that she's
created, which I'm full
supportive, I just say that I
feel like maybe we can, you
know, integrate that that
conversation into what we're,
um, with our asks and how we're
doing things, um.
As a as a parent with a child
that it has an exceptionalities
in another child, both gifted,
another child in the gifted
program, um, I think things are
OK, but I think there's always
improvements and I just would,
you know, I'm just not hearing
this in the conversation, so I
just like to make sure that we
get that in there, Mr. Chair. I
think that's, that's all I got.
I just wanted to make that
comment. Thank you. Thank you,
uh, representative Robot Caera,
you're next.
Thank you. So I'm, I'm, I want
to say that I really appreciate
the um under the attendance.
Component, the embedding equity
in pedagogy, that is.
Really getting to the heart of
making change, um, in our
systems and structures so that
we can change our institutional
um
Racist ways of having presented
educational curriculum. So my
question is, is there a
suggested
Um, list of textbooks.
That perhaps you all have uh
researched.
And looked into and are having
maybe perhaps conversations with
Higher education or other
partners, uh, because that's
really gonna get to the crux of
when we talk about embedding
pedagogy, I mean equity and
pedagogy, so.
Um, Doctor Bernstein, thank you.
Representative Mr. Chair
Representative, I believe that
it for myself as a teacher.
The more time I spent with other
practitioners grappling with the
question of what is equitable
pedagogy look like?
The better my practice became,
and the more
Equitable, it became. I don't
know of a textbook.
That I could follow.
Without my ability to understand
how to focus on every student's
identity or identities.
And craft my curriculum using a
textbook, but not only a
textbook to ensure that I'm
inclusive and respectful. Um, I
think there are a million
resources out there, rethinking
schools puts out an incredible
amount of thought provoking uh
research and articles that if we
had time as practitioners to
figure out how to craft lessons
that were equitable, um,
together.
Rather than just assume when we
follow a textbook that that will
be equitable, um,
Anyway, the point is time and
teacher learning.
Thank you, and then not just one
textbook, but ways in which we
could deliver, um, that teaching
that curriculum that embedding
within what we do, that's really
important, so I would suggest
that perhaps we charge our
university ethnic studies, uh,
women's studies, uh, all of our
studies, um, that are outside
the realm or or within the realm
of equity, that we may be
consult with.
them and maybe charged them with
creating or helping with that
task because I think that's that
that will get to the core of of
what we've been struggling with
in terms of um our schools and
and our populations Mr going
underrepresented. I'm sorry, no,
that's fine on that note, that
has to be intersectional work
with the colleges of that also.
Absolutely, thank you. As long
as it's understood and that we
can begin or or con continue to
go along those lines because
that's what we're looking for.
Thank you.
get my
second question in, we only had
2.
Was, um, and this is to any of
the folks who spoke with us,
but, um, particularly I guess
the partners that presented on
supporting the um
Funding formula task force, uh,
um, recommendation to increase
the secondary student funding
factor, um, something we're
going to hear a little bit later
on.
Why?
What would it do programming
costs, but what specifically
would we look for, what it does
is use a general formula
construct to deliver more
financing.
For that that sector of
education.
It's so it allows them some
viability, some, some
differentiation if you will, at
district level in your decision
making to take you to the level
you need to be. We sat on, I
think E and I both sat on that
committee, maybe others here and
uh that work was credible and we
support.
But the recommendation is coming
out. It may not be the final
final of what it would look
like, but it is the right next
step.
Mr. Chair, um, I also served on
the, on the task force this
summer, or in the last two years
here, but I would just note
that, you know, from our
perspective and Mr. Rounds, I,
I'm not sure if he agrees with
me on this one, but we should be
further articulating what base
units are for.
Um, when base units were
established when the multipliers
were established, we had a thing
in mind of what education looked
like, and it looks different
now, and we should name what
we're saying every kid needs,
and I think represent robot
robot Caballero, um, you're
alluding to this. I'm not sure
if your proposal is this, but we
should name what we're funding
with base units and
appropriately fund them. And I
think this is just one example
of a step saying high schools
need to do this, they need to
offer this for students and
So it should be baked in for
every student that enrolls in
those schools.
We all have a.
So yes, and um I'm glad Mr.
Chairman, um, and Representative
Garrett and I also were very
interested in others about, uh,
including 6th grade in the
secondary factor, uh, we believe
that it will also help with
career and technical education,
community-based curriculum,
which are all engagement
strategies for students that
have become disengaged with
school. These are all ways to um
you know, I was in attendance
coach for several years and I
did home visits, uh, from pre-K
to 12 and talk to students about
why they didn't or couldn't come
to school and um in order to
bring them back to school, we
have to be responsive to what
they, what they're telling us is
broken with school and and
relevance and engagement is part
of it. Um, there's a whole slew
of other things, but um, so that
money in the funding formula
that addition.
multiplier at the secondary
level would help with CTE.
And Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I hope this is an
ongoing conversation that we can
continue to have, um, to
representative Herrera's
comment.
It is clear that we need to
modernize uh our funding
formula, and this is a good step
toward that, but I don't think
it's the only step toward that,
and it would help us with our
ongoing needs and conversations
about how to equitably and
adequately support our public
schools.
Cool.
One final short comment, Mr.
Chairman. I served on the
committee as well. We looked at
a whole bunch of things
throughout the year last year,
and these came up as priorities,
I think, as everyone has
mentioned, uh, it's a good
start, but we do need to
continue to look at the funding
formula and make other
adjustments. Thank you.
Right, we're right at 11:30.
Thank you, folks for your
questions. Thank you all for
your recommendations and
hopefully you'll stick around
for afternoon session where we
start talking about our budget
and some of our proposed
legislation.
