Can you give them about 3 more
minutes?
Uh, I know because I said it.
10 and that's all.
Yeah. All right, folks, we're
gonna go ahead and get started,
so I'm gonna call the committee
to order, um, good morning,
folks and welcome to arisco
Heritage Academy High School,
um, super proud to be here in
the school that I've been
teaching at for the past 10
years. Um, and thank you to our
mariachi group for the very warm
welcome, um.
But yeah, um, so we're going to
start off with uh introductions
from our legislators. So Senator
Pope, good morning. Welcome.
Good morning, uh, Mr. Chair.
Senator Harold Pope Jr. Senate
District 23, uh, just outside of
this area, northwest
Albuquerque, Verillio County.
Happy to be here.
All right, Represent Figueroa,
good morning. Good morning, Mr.
Chair. Natalie Figueroa, House
District 30 Northeast Heights of
Albuquerque and really delighted
by the warm welcome that was
awesome mariachi this morning.
Representative Baca, good
morning. Good morning. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman and thank you,
um,
For hosting this year as I was
walking in, I was saying just
how honored and privileged I
felt to receive such a welcome
by your school district great
bunch of.
Young people and greater, so
thank you for that. Uh, my name
is Brian Baca. I represent House
District 8 in Valencia County
and represent the areas of Los
Lunas, Bosque Farms, Peralta,
and Bolin.
Thank you, Representative
Garrett.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Good
morning everybody. I'm state rep
Joy Garrett. I represent
Northwest Albuquerque. I drove
here on a Triscoll Vista all the
way from my house to the school.
So that was exciting. And, um,
it's so good to see, um,
everybody.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Gurola. Good morning.
Welcome.
Buenos Dias. Good morning. Thank
you for hosting us here, uh,
chair, thank you for letting us
be here in your school is um
nice to walk in with Amariachi
music. My, um, where I work at
Washington Middle School, we
started the marai program, so my
students stay in school because
of that, so I know the power of
of of those elected programs,
um, I'm also coming uh I
represent, uh,
the.
Inside of these areas, so I also
drove an I-40 in a Trisco Vista.
It's a nice drive to go against
the traffic, so it's pretty
cool. Thank you. Good morning,
everyone.
Thank you, Representativemio
Amoya, good morning.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Good
morning, everyone. Um, I loved
the being serenaded as we came
in. It was wonderful. Um, my
name is Tanya Mira Val Moya. I
represent Valencia County, which
is mostly Berlin and uh the east
side. Wait, yeah, east side of
uh uh my brain, um, of the
county. Um, I am a high school
physics teacher, so my kiddos
right now are doing a distance
and displacement lab, and
hopefully they're not bugging
their their uh
Um, so very much, but no, I got
good kids this year. Um, so
pretty excited to be here. This
is a beautiful school, so thank
you so much for having us. Thank
you.
Thank you. Welcome.
Represent block, please, good
morning.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman. I
apologize. I'm still waking up
over here. I'm State
Representative John Blockhouse
District 51. I'm in Alamo Gordo.
I have Otero County and I'm just
blessed to be here. It's been a
nice drive up here. It's always
nice to come up to Albuquerque,
and I'm so glad to see Mr.
Chair's school finally, so I'm
glad to be here. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, Senator Stewart, good
morning.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman, uh,
happy to be here, State Senator
Mimi Stewart. I live as far to
the east as you can get from
here, so I've just straddled the
city this morning. I think we
should require that we have
music greeting us every day
because I'm in a real good mood
after dancing through the
mariachis. Thank you.
Senator Souls, vice chair, good
morning. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I'm Bill Sols, state senator
from Las Cruces. The beautiful
Oregon Mountain East Mesa side
of Las Cruces.
Pleased to be able to be here
and heard a lot about the school
and driving up, it's like, wow,
what beautiful architecture.
What a great greeting it just
reminds us why we're here and
who we really are working for,
particularly on this committee
when we have kids greeting us
and showing us the incredible
talents that they have. Thank
you.
All right. Good morning,
everybody. So I'm Representative
Andres Romero. I represent House
District 10, which is the far
South Valley in Berlio County
and parts of southeast
Albuquerque, um, including at
Trisco Heritage here. I'm super
proud to be able to bring the
committee to Triscoll Heritage
and for you all to be able to
see firsthand all the awesome
things that we do here at Aha,
um.
And turn it over to um our
deputy director, John, just
John, please, if you would
introduce yourself along with
the staff today.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Deputy
Director John Senna, uh, also
really happy to be at a school
as a former high school teacher.
It's, I miss being around
students, so it's really, really
nice to be here. Uh, our staff,
um, I'm gonna start over at the
end over there, Jessica
Hathaway, a policy analyst, Mark
Montoya, Daniel Stupinan.
Natasha Davalos, Connor Hicks,
Merrit Andrews, Tim Biddeau, and
Alonzo Baca and uh I just wanted
to thank them publicly. They've,
they're.
Holding me up during this time
of transition. They're doing a
great job, so I just wanna, just
wanted to say thanks to them as
as well. Thank you.
All right, so we'll go ahead and
and start with our first agenda
items, some of our voting
issues. We'll get to a little
bit later, um.
With our members, OK, as far as
the agenda, um, we'll have some
talk if you look at the item
number 5, we have some personnel
update issues to go through and
we'll do the bulk of our voting
then, OK, members, um, but
first, we'll go ahead and thank
you, uh, Principal Lovato, for
having us here and hosting us
here at Trisco Heritage and
Superintendent Blakey, thank you
all so much. So please, when you
all are ready, welcome.
Oh, if you would make sure
Principal Lovato, if your
microphone's on, it should be
red.
Got it. Can you hear me now?
Awesome.
My name's Anthony Lovato. I'm
the principal here at Triscoll
Heritage, um, we're happy to
have everybody here today. I
wanted to introduce our school
for the moment, um, Driscoll
Heritage Academy is now 16 years
old.
And it's even in a relatively
short time we've created a great
tradition on this campus. Last
year we graduated 436 students
and 112 of them received their
bilingual seals, which is an
amazing number and we're happy,
we're proud to tell the world
about it.
We have over 2000 students, one
of the biggest high schools in
APS.
You may know some of our
athletic and club
accomplishments were ultra
competitive in boys basketball,
soccer, dance and wrestling.
But we also have great programs
such as our mariachi as you've
seen it this morning.
And our band, our band program
is amazing.
Academically, we're proud of two
career pathways programs,
business and culinary arts.
They are preparing students for
potential careers in those kind
of fields and their work is
amazing.
Speaking of food.
I need to mention that Driscoll,
uh, Heritage Academy Family
Center and APS Foundation are
hosting our meals for and coffee
for this week.
As a matter of fact, tomorrow's
breakfast is being prepared by
our culinary arts program, so
we're looking forward to that.
We have a great cross section of
southwest Albuquerque community.
We've been able to create a
pretty tightly knit group of
teachers, staff, students, and
parents who are determined to
achieve academically. Our
graduation rate is 77%. That's
not where we want to be yet, but
it's an increase of 7% compared
to last year.
I grew up in the South Valley
and graduated from Roro High
School in 1998. I was fortunate
to have a coach who pushed me
and helped me receive a
collegiate baseball scholarship
in Lamar Junior College and UNM.
I've been in with this district
for a long time.
I've worked in a variety of
levels from being baseball coach
at Highland High School to
Valley's dean of students. I've
also been a principal at all
levels, including that include
Mountain View Elementary, Taft
Middle School, and now Trico
Heritage Academy.
I've seen a lot in public
education, and I can tell you
that you will be impressed by
our school. We have amazing kids
and staff members, and we're
determined to succeed at the
highest level.
If there's anything you need
from us, please let us know and
we'd be happy to help.
Again, thank you guys for being
here today and now I'd like to
introduce our superintendent
Doctor Gabriela Blakey.
Thank you, uh.
Thank you, Mr. Lovato, um, for
the warm welcome to your school
and thank you all for visiting
our beautiful Trisco Heritage
Academy High School. Um, and
Representative Romero being able
to show off a little bit of his
2nd, 3rd home of all the places
he is. So thank you for the, um,
for being here with us and the
mariachi program is spectacular.
They, um, you know, when I've
talked to the students before
about the program, the pride
they have.
And what they do and they are
all around the state performing
and so not only do they have
great musicianship skills, but
the skills, um, of getting out
there and presenting yourself
and going and being exposed to
so many different things. Um,
and so we're really proud of the
program here. And on behalf of
our 68,000 students, I want you
to know that we value all the
work that you do for our state,
particularly in education and
impacting our work every day.
And
Again, here honoring, um, you at
our high school Trisco Heritage.
I know most of you probably know
I am new to the position I
started on July 1st, but I'm not
new to New Mexico or to, um,
education. I actually started
my, uh, career as a teacher
after graduating from New Mexico
State and, um, I left for a
while and came back because I
was really drawn to why I went
into education in the first
place.
To really give back to my
community, particularly the
community that helped raise me.
And so I came back to teach high
school at the high school that I
graduated from. And I was a
social studies teacher as well,
a high school social studies
teacher and English as a second
language. Um, and in that work,
I just kind of started in
education as, um, being a little
frustrated in the classroom with
some of the things that I
thought were barriers to me
being able to really do my job
and my colleagues. And so I went
into administration.
Um, to try to see if I could
impact the system in a broader
way. And I just mentioned that
because that's how I kind of
worked my way to the seat I am
in now is as the lens of a
classroom teacher of what I saw
wasn't helping in what we were
trying to do for our students.
And so I know that as a district
and as a community, we haven't
necessarily impacted students in
the ways that we promised them.
And the outcomes that I had as a
student.
the same for the colleagues and
that I have that I grew up with,
um, and so I really step into
this position to be able to push
on the system and push on some
of the barriers that are really
impacting our students and our
staff to be able to do the work.
And that's how I approach it.
And so I know that people, we
haven't had the best outcomes,
um, particularly in Albuquerque
and I recognize that and that's
why I'm so passionate about.
The work we do and being able to
really make changes that are
going to impact our students
rather than trying to get our
students to fit into the system
that we've created for them.
So we have a plan to try to
change it, um, and I know it's
not easy, and I know as a
leader, I take a lot of that
responsibility.
Uh, and I know that as I talked
to superintendents throughout
the state. We all have the same
kind of philosophy on how we can
work together to do better. And
I recognize as Albuquerque
Public schools that it has to
start with us in the sense of
how many students we represent
for the state. And if we rise,
then the state will rise as
well.
Maybe in the past we haven't
been as, um, committed to really
being focused on the outcomes.
They've been a little bit more,
um,
happenstance if they happen and
not strategic. And so what we're
trying to really look at is
where we see these bright spots
of things that we know work well
in education, and they are
impacting our students and how
we can leverage those
initiatives that we see as
promising practices. And so as a
district, you know, we'll see
great things. I mean, Mr.
just talked about the bilingual
seal, and how, you know, half of
our students at Triscoll
Heritage are achieving that
level of, um, performance when
they graduate. But it's not
throughout, it's not
systematized. And so as a
system, we have to get better at
being able to make sure that
we're using these practices to
impact all of our students. We
started a new system of
governance that you may have
heard of with our school board
and really looking at what the
values are of the.
community and articulating them
in what we call goals and
guardrails. And those goals and
guardrails were created by the
community through our Board of
Education and something that is
guiding us in the work. And
being in the field for so long
and being in the district, I
haven't seen this, um, sort of
connection before where we feel
like we're all on the same page,
so to speak, as far as the
direction that we're going. And
so we have 4 goals that have
been established now.
Um, we have a goal in early
literacy. We have a goal in math
at the middle school level. We
have, um, our goal 3, which is
looking at, um, college and
career readiness, particularly
looking at the number of
students who have achieved the
bilingual seal, career
certification, um, AP classes,
and then we have goal 4, which,
um, I always tell even the, the
teachers and principals I talked
to, goal 4 is looking at our
social emotional, what people
say is social emotional learning
of students. But in a very
strategic way. And it's not,
it's, I see it more as goal one,
because it's the foundation of
the work we do. We're actually
measuring for the first time how
students are achieving in
perseverance in, um,
Looking at how they have
self-efficacy and we're using
those data to continue to make
progress in how we're, um,
helping students throughout the
course of their, um, time. So I
always kind of speak to goal 4
as goal 1 in the sense of that
that goal is foundational in the
work we do and just talking
about the mariachi students, for
example, what they're learning
as far as perseverance, for
example, by maybe not
Getting the notes right and how
they practice and how they get
through those. Those are skills
that are really important to our
students. Um, and we know
impacted their success after
high school. We also are working
really hard on, um, House Bill
171. So thank you to the chair
and to members of the committee
who helped with that in looking
at how we redesign our high
school experience, particularly
in coordination with goal 3. So
it's really connected in the
work that we're doing and we
have a really good flow.
Of how we're using those data to
focus on what we know matters to
our community based on the input
that we've had.
Um, so we rely a lot on interim
assessments. And the reason that
we do that is because our
interim assessments are used as
measures of how we're doing on
our goals.
And they start from, those of
you that are not familiar with
the interim assessments. They
start from when the student
enters the classroom and then
they test in the middle of the
year and then at the end of the
year. And we feel really
strongly that that gives our
students and our teachers
real-time information on
They have impact on from the
first day of school till the
last day of school. And in those
interim assessments we've seen a
tremendous amount of growth for
a variety of reasons. And I just
wanted to quickly talk about a
couple of those. At East San
Jose Elementary School, which
one of is one of our top
schools.
The 3rd through 5th grade
reading scores increased by
19.1% points. And in math, the
scores increased by 19.7%
points. And that is a top school
and I think what East San Jose
has done as a result of TOPS is
pretty amazing in how they've
transformed the culture of their
school. And but that's not the
only school that we've seen
significant growth, Sandia-based
Elementary School, which is my
alma mater,
um, saw a 27.8% points.
Increase in reading Mission
Avenue Elementary School, which
is part of our engineering the
future magnet school, reading
scores went up 23.6 points.
McArthur Elementary School went
up 32% points in math, and I
only mentioned MacArthur because
as part of our right sizing,
we've closed 3 schools, um, and
one of the schools we closed
consolidated with MacArthur, and
that consolidation has actually
increased the performance of the
of the students because the
schools were so
small, they really weren't
getting the benefit of having
full-time interventionist,
full-time counselors, full-time
nurses. And so we've seen some
of that increase in, uh,
MacArthur Elementary School. We
also have some growth in our
middle schools where we're
really looking at math. Grant
Middle School 15.4% increase in
math and Eisenhower saw as 16.8%
increase in math. And these are
all as we track our interim
assessments, which is part of
our monitoring of the goals I
spoke.
earlier.
And, um, we started the TS model
as a model of innovation in our
elementary schools, and I think
this committee has some
background knowledge on it, and
it helps increase instructional,
uh, time, it helps increase
staff time for students. It also
includes genius Hour, which
allows students to spend more
time in school being engaged
while many of their teachers get
to work on how to better
instruct their students. Um,
they have increased time to
really focus on structured
literacy and make that part of
their own.
learning and it really
incorporates so many different
aspects of what we know works in
schools. And so we're really
looking at how we can, um,
Look at more flexible funding in
our budget because we have
started to see these promising
practices, but we really need
the flexibility and funding to
be able to initiate these things
from what we know is working,
um, from the ground and from
looking at the research and the
data. And so I feel like if we
do get as districts and not just
ours, this is across the state.
The flexibility to use money for
those kinds of efforts without
Limitations so we're able to
really move the mark on our
students, um, in a very specific
way dedicated to our community.
And I, I feel like, you know,
there are promising practices
throughout the state, but
sometimes our hands are tied
with how we can leverage funds
to be able to use that momentum.
And an example of, uh,
flexibility and, uh, funding is
we over the summer we received
$160 million of an increase to
SCG and since it was an increase
To SCG after the budget, we were
able to use that to, um,
continue work on our top
schools. We were able to fund
community school coordinators,
and we were able to really
strengthen what we were doing in
looking at the data for, uh,
student engagement. And so that
was just an example of money
that was, that we had that was
then we were able to really use
to leverage the work that we
needed to do. So I think that
also more flexibility comes with
responsibility. So looking at
the data
How we're showing what we're
doing is working. It's similar
to, um, a system that I'm doing
in the school district, which is
based on the performance
framework where we've divided
the schools into 4 different
categories. And based on their
categories of where they lay
based on data, schools have
different levels of autonomy and
accountability based on where
they are. And so that way we can
say specifically that here are
the schools that we're going to
kind of, they have more
autonomy, but they
have, um, they have less
accountability than the schools
that have more less economy and
more accountability. And that
way, as a district, we're able
to really tighten how we're
supporting schools and making
sure that it's not just a one
size fits all, but it's very
strategic. Um, we use, we're
really moving forward on high
quality instructional materials,
and we're one of the big things
we're looking at is making sure
that we're teaching on grade
level standards. And so this
summer,
We've worked to create units of
study to make sure that our
teachers are equipped to know,
um, that in 4th grade, these are
the standards that we're working
on. And we're kind of like the
post-COVID era, right? This,
this is how we make sure that
we're teaching on grade level to
the students that are coming to
us. And some of the, um, data
that we've seen particularly in
kindergarten and first grade is
really promising, um, in how
students are performing. And we
attribute some of that to the
Investment in early childhood,
um, and the investment that
we've had on structured
literacy, but we also want to
make sure that now we know kids
are actually coming to us at a
higher level than they were
coming to us before. So teaching
first and 2nd grade is you're
now able to do it at a level
that you might not have been
able to do it before, before
students were involved in early
childhood education. So I know
that a lot of people have kind
of questioned what APS is doing
and how we're, um,
the work of the state. And so I
just wanted to give you a little
bit of a, um, summary of some of
the things we're working on and
particularly how it's
monumentally different from how
we've operated in the past and
how we're really working
together to align our resources,
um, and particularly our
resources of people because
that's our biggest resource that
we have to really support our
students and leverage their
outcomes. Um, and I, I'm really
hopeful for this next phase of
New Mexico.
And what we have, um, for our
students. And I want to share a
very quick video with you all
this morning that I just use
because it really kind of sums
up that work across the state
that we're doing from our
students leaving the house to,
um, getting home after a day of
school and how we're working
around the state to really
impact our students. And so if
you just turn your attention,
um, to the screen for the quick,
um, video.
Mom and dad are just so.
You're sending me to go.
It
Again confidence.
Wish to find a voice.
To be silly.
To laugh and love.
To wonder
To be with my friends.
To create
To be
Hm
Sure.
So
Uh um
Is.
The opportunities.
that.
Yeah.
A family
Let's go together to bring a
brightest.
Mexico.
And yes,
Albuquerque Public Schools.
So I just want to end with that
video because I think it reminds
us why we're doing the work that
we're doing and um why we're,
we're in this work for our
students and so with that I'm
open um for any questions you
have for either myself or
Principal Lovato.
Right. Thank you all so much. So
questions from committee
members. Represent Baca.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I don't
know if you guys can hear me a
little bit closer.
First of all, thank you, Mr.
Chairman and thank you for your
presentation, um.
Madam Superintendent, one thing
I want you to say is you kind of
alluded to you not having the
outcomes in the classroom. I
wanna assure you that you guys
are having huge successes every
day in classrooms, even so far
as miracles, so the fact that we
haven't had as far as the
achievement scores.
That's what this committee, my
colleagues and I are committed
to help and support as far as
funding, so I just want to say
that is that we sometimes get to
focus on the numbers and we
forget about that it's down to.
those students as well.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, um, I do have
a couple of questions and I, I,
I don't want you guys to be too,
too late or Phil you have to
have too much of an explanation.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Madam
Superintendent, uh, Principal
Lovato, what are some of the
greatest challenges that you
guys face, um, in providing
instruction to your students and
support for your students. um,
from, I think we probably have
different vantage points on, um,
because of the levels of work
that we have, so I'll just turn
it over to Mr. Lovato for his
input on it too. I think that
one of our biggest challenges
We have is chronic absenteeism.
So our staff are working really
hard. We have these
opportunities for our students.
We, um, are investing in, um,
work on things that we haven't
done before, but without those,
sorry, it was like there's music
playing. Oh, it's it's the bill.
OK, because you both seemed like
you knew what that was.
Yeah, you, um, and so I
I think that without students
being there, it's really hard,
nearly impossible to impact the
level of work that we want to
do. And it's when we look at
chronic absenteeism, people
think of it as often and I've
been guilty of it in the past as
a former high school teacher
that is high schoolers ditching
or high schoolers, um, playing
around. But when we look at
chronic absenteeism in the early
grades, it's very alarming and
those are foundational skills
that our students.
learning and when they're not
there, it's really hard to catch
them up. So when we look at some
of the promising practice we've
seen with structured literacy,
for example, if students are
there only 1 or 2 days a week,
then they're not getting the
level of instruction that's
needed for building some of
these foundational skills,
particularly in the early
grades. So from my point, I
think that that's one of our
biggest challenges.
I would, I would agree with that
statement. I mean, we, uh, this
year we've hired an assistant
principal just to combat our
absenteeism, um, reaching out to
parents and um we've also had
additional resources for um um
coordinators to go out and do
home visits to make sure that
these kids are um actually
trying to get to class and
trying to get to our campuses,
um, but that's been our biggest,
uh, that's been our biggest um
issue with trying to get these
kids into into school.
get them learning.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Now
I'm gonna ask a question if you
don't have the answer. So what
is the absenteeism or the
chronic absentee of of both APS
as an average and as a high
school
is about 37%.
We're currently at 20 22% at the
at that Trico heritage.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh, and
I also want to say about the
video to my colleagues, I want
just to call the attention is
what types of activities we saw
our students doing. They were
e-sports, they were clubs, they
were auto mechanic, they were
CTE, they were athletics. And I
think that as a, as we make
recommendations.
Towards how we get our students,
because I don't care if they're
in band. I don't care if they're
in choir. I don't care if
they're in ROTC. We have to get
them.
To want to come to school.
We want to make them feel that
they have a place at our
schools. So as we're looking at
some of these challenges and
some of the opportunities for
this committee. I think that we
have to take a serious look at
funding these activities. I hate
to see athletic teams. I hate to
see clubs fundraising out their
car washing because we haven't
given them enough money.
We've given lots of money and a
huge investment. We need to take
a look at is funding these
things so that our students have
an opportunity to, to be kids
and to find something that they
want.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, I'm going to
end with this question, and this
is kind of a loaded question.
If you were sitting in my, if I
was to get up here and you're
just sit in my seat. What kinds
of recommendations would you
make from this committee, you
know, pie in the sky. What is it
that you need both at a school
district.
And as a school.
To, to help make a difference in
your lives of your students and
your staff.
From my vantage 0.1 of the
biggest um things I think is uh
what I alluded to earlier is the
flexibility. So whether it be
flexibility in funding
flexibility, um, I, I speak to
House Bill 171, for example, I
feel like it's a good example of
how there's flexibility and how
we know what the tights are of
it, but there's flexibility in
how we make it work for
Albuquerque Public schools. Um,
so each district is able to do
that based on
community. So the flexibility to
be able to um leverage our
resources in a very particular
way, I think is one of the
biggest things that can really
support us, um, from the other
side of the table is having
flexibility with, here's the
guardrails and then within that
the districts have flexibility
to um create their program.
I would agree with Dr. Blakey, I
think um she mentioned the TOPS
program and working at the
elementary level, I think when
students are interested in
coming to campus and given
opportunities to do different
things other than um.
But making it academic and fun
for the the students, I think at
every level, whether it's
elementary, middle or high
school, if we can provide them
that opportunity, I think we
would, we would be able to get
more more majority of those kids
back onto our campuses.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I'm
going to talk offline because
I'm gonna deal to my colleagues,
but one of the other areas
that's in particular two areas,
school safety, um, and as far as
middle school, so I think those
as I was driving up this morning
getting ready and my wife goes,
is that the high school that's
having some
Issues, and the answer is no,
but so I I would like to to talk
about that. I want to make sure
that we continue the
conversation because, uh, our
kids deserve the best that we
can offer them. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
And you remember some gear.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Mr. Lovato, for taking on the
principalship. um, I've heard
really good things about you. So
it always helps to get a few
kudos and thank you, doctor
Blakey for returning here. Um, I
do want to take off for what
Representative Baca said,
because there's a tension
between parental affairs on
safety, and you probably heard
there was an incident at Volcano
Vista, which is in my district.
How, how do we
Um, when I was at Painted Sky,
parents would pile in to pick up
their kids and there was a sense
of community. Now at a lot of
our schools, parents aren't even
supposed to walk their kids into
the classroom when they're late.
How do we deal with the tension
of safety, but building a school
community where families feel
welcome and as you know, many of
our families struggled with
school themselves, so making
them feel welcome is actually a
big challenge. To have any
things that you're trying to do
in that area, either of you.
Thank you, Representative, and
school safety is certainly of a
top concern for us, um, and just
looking at it from a broader
society perspective as well. And
so it's really interesting when
you look at it and may be a
little unfortunate that the
safety and the welcoming is
actually turning into being more
connected that when a school is
more secure, the community feels
more connected and that shift
has only happened.
I've seen in the past couple of
years that when schools at first
it was very like, um, security
is inconvenient and it's not
like it used to be, but then as
we see that things aren't the
way that they used to be, the
sense of culture and pride in a
school is actually growing when
students feel safe once they
come through the door and they
know that the outside is kind of
protected from them and it's a
safe place to be and whether
that be from
neighborhoods that they might
not feel safe in their homes
that they might not feel safe
in. We have to make it so that
at school they feel safe and
unfortunately, based on the
current times that feeling of
safety involves hardening of the
outside of the school so that
students feel a sense of
community and safety once
they're inside the school.
I think from a perspective of
running a campus that
communication is key with the
community, um, and I've learn
this the hard way, but we, uh,
we really try and do our due
diligence and get communication
out to parents to make them feel
comfortable. I also do send out
mass communication to the
students because, you know,
they're the ones here and
they're the ones that we need to
be concerned about, um, but I
feel like, um, our campus
security is is amazing. We, we
tend to to talk.
With my administrative team
about being visual and being out
so the students see us, same
with the teachers, we're able
to, teachers are able to do a 15
minute um um like a we call it a
duty, but they're, they're out
watching the hallways and and at
a campus this large, it's, it's
been very helpful for us to
maintain that security presence
here.
Thank you. And, and, uh, Mr.
Chairman, I'll just ask one more
question. What it used to be
that.
Districts really developed
magnet schools because of the
beginning of charter schools, a
lot of we lose kids from the
districts to the charter schools
which people have different
opinions on, is, is APS making
any effort to bring back magnet
schools where the school is
really part of the district, but
has a focus. Any movement in
that way.
So prior to coming over to
Tresco Heritage last year, I was
uh the.
Executive director of the Magnet
schools. So we're kind of seeing
where we were trying to, so
we're starting a new implement
implementation project within um
Mountain View Elementary, Los
Bailas Elementary, um, Polk
Middle School in Rio Grande High
School, and we're starting an
agricultural pathway to China
and um attract students to come
back to those specific schools,
especially in the South Valley
since we've been losing a lot of
kids down here. So, um, APS is
working on trying to get the
kids back and recruiting. We all
always, um, I mean, social media
is huge for us, so we're always
trying to get those kids back
and onto our APS campuses and
when I'm out and about, um,
we're always trying to get
those, you know, just having
conversations with community
members, parents, and basically
recruiting, call it like you're
recruiting college athletes is
trying to get them in.
Thank you. I'm, I'm, you were
obviously the right person to
have that here. Thank you very
much.
Thank you, Senator Stewart.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Um,
Uh, so I, I really like these
goals that you have set up as a
district, um, I, I just have a
question about your uh math in
the middle school and uh.
The improvements you have out of
Grant who uh has been in and out
of my district over my 30 years
in office and Eisenhower, these
are significant increases, so,
um,
Are you using a particular
program? What, what, what does
the math in middle schools
program look like?
Thank you, Senator Stewart. A
lot of the work in middle school
is um based on, well, we need to
do a lot of work on middle
school. That's a whole another
um presentation.
So the schools that we've really
seen some growth in, they, they
are very strategic in how
they're using IXL primarily, and
they're combining it in um.
Being very strategic and
creative in how they move
students around during a certain
time of the day, so in the past,
students would lose electives or
lose class periods to take an
intervention class and um I
personally don't feel that that
is a good use, especially when
we talk about what engages
students and then they don't get
to take those classes. So a lot
of schools, middle schools,
particularly in the district,
have looked at how they can be
Flexible with time within the
day where students are going to
different classes to work on IXL
that is connected specifically
to the skills that they're
learning, and then on the other
days, they also have like more
of kind of a middle school
version of Genius hour. And so
we've seen some of that be
really successful in um the
middle schools. Uh, Tony
Hillerman is another one I
didn't point out, but they also
had an increased, uh, high
increase in middle school.
math and they do something
similar as well. So it really is
looking at targeted maths
development skills that they're
using during like flexible time
for students.
Well, thank you for that, uh,
Mr. Chairman, and so the, the 4
elementaries that you mentioned,
um, uh, really significant
growth in reading. Are are any
of those the model schools that
we've chosen?
From the PED to focus on
structured literacy. I believe
two of them are model schools,
um, the other one that I didn't
mention that is a model school
and a top school is Bel Air
Elementary School, Bel Air
Elementary School has had a
significant increase in their
reading and math scores and um.
They also, I'm trying, I know
that the information isn't
currently out. There's uh
information that we've seen as
far as their state assessments
and their, um, short cycle
assessments that is showing
significant growth and so it
really we have seen a direct
correlation that I think that
the tops with the model school
also helps because they have an
extra hour a day the teachers
for um professional development,
and so they're able to really
leverage real.
Time work during that time, so
it's kind of combining all of
these things together with our,
we have about um 15 model
schools, um, in the district.
OK, thank you for that. uh, Mr.
Chairman, Superintendent, so,
uh, my last comment is about
this flexibility issue, uh, uh,
Senator Souls and I for many
years tried to put discretionary
funds into the SCG significant
discretionary funds in the
SCG cause I was lamenting the
program that we used to have in
APS that I was part of when I
first started, uh, which was the
early childhood liaison program.
We had, we have 11 high schools,
we have sort of 11 theater
schools and we had one of us in
each of those, and we looked at
kindergarten and first grade
kids who were not doing well who
needed some help, so it was an
intervention before you even
think about referring.
To special ed or whatever, so
that was a really exciting
program and I did that for 6
years when I was first tired in
19, wait for it, 78. How many of
you were born at that time?
So, um, it was a great program
and, and when I talked to uh
Sing Souls about discretionary
funding. It was some things like
that that we used to do when the
money got tight, that program
went away. Um, it's not a
required, it's not a mandate.
There's nothing in the funding
formula that gives you money for
it, but that was an an example
of a program that APS had, um,
that they cared very much about
for many years, uh, so the idea
behind
Discretionary funding is for
programs like that and it's
gonna look different all over
the state. But what happened
with our 30 million was that the
appropriators attached language
to it, uh, meaning it wasn't
really quite discretionary. It
was supposed to be used and
then.
They didn't send it out in the
first unit value work, uh, cause
everybody didn't know what to do
with this pile of money. So
hopefully we will train them uh
differently this year and they
won't attach language and we can
put discretionary money because
I, I believe we should be more
flexible and that we should send
funds to the district for
programs that they need and that
they want so uh just a little uh
Information about that. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Representative
Robocall.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much. I haven't
had the pleasure of meeting you,
uh, well, we have met, but
congratulating you your new
position, uh, superintendent and
also um Mr. Lovato, thank you
for being here. As many of you
know and my colleagues know this
is.
My pride and joy, this is high
school is in my district and uh
I always get up and talk about
Trico heritage high school for
all of the accomplishments. And
one of the things, uh, Mr.
Cherry do want to point out is
that this school has been
recognized nationally by our
national Hispanic legislators
and and as such they have
issued, I don't, I lost count of
how many scholarships, uh, to
our students.
To the graduating students and
I've been able to be the sponsor
of those students in their, uh,
I've kept track of 41 in
particular has completed law
school here at UNM and I
He's been with me in my
district. I followed him since
he was in middle school and came
here and then went on to UNM and
then UNM uh law school, and that
says a lot. The other students
are 3 women, um, one has, um,
they receive full scholarships,
by the way, uh, with leveraging
of the Hispanic uh scholarship,
and one is finishing the school
of her master's School of Public
Administration.
Public policy in California, so
there's a lot of success
stories, pediatrician, um, she
will be coming back uh to the
state and, and I say that
because this school has done
with a lot of
High school, I think should be
the model, and that is that they
have truly incorporated um the
community school model they the
families in this district
actually feel at home, the
students feel as if this is
their second home, that they
feel uh safe and secure for the
reasons that Mr. Lovato, and you
mentioned earlier about the
security, uh, Mr. Loretto and
how it's handled, it's not an
enforcement or
Um, approach, but it's more of
an engagement and involving and
um that's really important, Mr.
Chair, for schools to model and
in the other thing I wanted to
mention, of course, is the uh
health, community health, uh,
incorporating that into the
school. So there's a lot of good
things that we should be
modeling uh around the state
and, and
And actually being very proud of
as Representative Baca began
with his statement. It's not
just the negatives anymore, but
we now need to highlight what
works. So I'm, I, I wanted to
ask you, um.
Your goals, how your goals, um,
Madam Superintendent, uh,
rapping.
Into the core.
Of cultural and language
relevancy.
Because as you know, Yazi
Martinez addressed a lot of
things.
But the
The core of what it addressed is
our failure.
Uh, in the state to address the
cultural or to uplift cultural
and language relevancy. And in
this district in particular, we
have
Majority Spanish speaking in in
this district. Uh, and many
times first generation students
at all levels. So could you
speak to that a little bit, uh,
superintendent. Sure, thank you,
representative, and thank you
for your um words. I, I also
feel that we have to lift our
students up a lot and people
speak negatively about our
school systems or teachers and
our kids hear that and it
impacts them
And I really worry about that
and growing up as a student in
the Southeast Heights in
Albuquerque, I heard a lot of
people speak negatively about my
community, about my school,
about, and it impacts you and
you have to, it shouldn't be
that you have to fight over the
negativity, but that we lift
students up with the assets that
they bring and so I'm a big
believer in making sure that we
build on students' assets that
they bring to our schools, to
our community, and that
leverage that instead of um
using it as something that is
negative or they're trying to
fit into a system, particularly
looking at our goals, one thing
I do want to mention is our
goals, although they are broad
in the read, it sounds broad in
the way that I spoke about
reading and math. We are only
really looking at growth in our
Yazi Martinez and African
American students. So when we
are pulling the data out to
every month we review the data
with the
Um, those are the groups that
we're looking at to make sure
that we're impacting those
students. And so inherently the
way that we're monitoring our
goals is very particularly to
Yasi Martinez, an African
American students. And that is a
system change that we're not
hiding it anywhere, but you're
really using the data to see is
the are what we're doing working
for the students that were
saying we want to impact the
most, and we're
very strategically looking at
that monthly. And then that
filters to the work of the
school as well. And what we need
to do in order to make sure that
we're leveraging resources to
impact our students that we're
most concerned about. Um, also
leveraging their resources like
the assets that they bring,
we're looking at um in goal 3,
tracking the bilingual seal as
something that we're saying is a
value that
We want to see high outcomes
with. And so we're valuing the
importance of a second language
for our students, um, in how
we're tracking the bilingual
seal and making sure that that's
something that we're um
encouraging students to do
because we know that that not
only helps them as they grow,
but it's going to help them in
their future, um, leveraging the
being able my nephews can speak
3 languages.
And they're in middle school and
elementary school. And so I see
the opportunities that they're
going to have in front of them
because of their language
development that they've been
able to. So we really want to
see how we can leverage that to
be able to really impact our
students and know that the
culture that they bring to the
school is something that's an
asset that's making us all
stronger and richer.
Thank you, and that's exactly
what we've been emphasizing at
least since.
My tenure as a legislator is
building on the assets and
understanding that when these
children come into the
classrooms, they are already
enriched.
They're not at risk. They're
enriched, and we have to change
our our language in it as
educators, um, to acknowledge
that because.
Even at risk, um, says a lot to
our students.
And that's not, it's not a
positive thing, so even from the
public education department, we
need to begin from that point
all the way down. We have to
change the language we ourselves
are using, and so, um, that's
really important because I have
spoken to the students, Mr.
Chair, and they do feel put
down.
Don't put us down.
You know, look at what we are,
look at us for who we are is
what they conveyed and um the
thank you to Representative
Garrett for bringing up the
magnet because language is a
perfect magnet, um, you, you
started at early levels and then
it just keeps improving
improving and what we do know in
all of our other committee work,
Health and Human Services in
particular, is that we have a
shortage.
Of
individuals that are going into
career pathways that can speak
other languages.
And that's really important
because we have an aging
population.
Excuse me, that is gonna be in
very much need of language
assistance, besides all the
other assistants.
Excuse me, so, um, final
question.
I know also, um, from being
In and around the school, but
mostly speaking to parents and
families that um
School safety is really
important. So I know that in
capital outlay, I've done and we
have whoever is all of our rep
and Senator Lopez and all the
other representatives of this
area have been very intentional
about providing um necessary
funding for cameras, lighting,
um, technology that's required
that will help with security,
um, all of these types of.
Things. Do you find that?
This is continuing to be a need
and useful, and if so, will you
be then?
Um,
Applying for those funds and
then the secondary part of that
question about safety is also
the enriched the cultural
enrichment, for example, the
Mariachi group, they've, I've
seen them go out in the public.
But they don't, they're not
properly equipped with.
You know, the wireless mics or
other types of things. So that's
also very important how our
students perform in their
cultural presentations outside
of the school, so that's an
infrastructure capital request.
So how are you going to balance
those requests in the upcoming
year. Thank you for the
question, Representative. The
security that you all have um
kindly supported with us has
been
used to be able to cover all of
our schools with cameras and
secure vestibules. And so we are
at a point now where we are able
to have those in all of our
schools. If a school doesn't
Do come as a request because of
the lifespan, so they cycle
through and we need to upgrade
our camera systems as well as
requests for intercom systems
which we've seen is something
that needs to be upgraded at um
some of our older schools to be
able to communicate with um the
children and the staff if there
is an emergency and so that's
the last kind of piece of hard
security is looking at intercom
systems. The
Security that we need at this
point is mostly based more on
personnel than it is on
hardening of systems, just
having more people to be able to
um support whether it's in our
campus security aides or police
officers, um, that's really
where we're at now is looking at
how we use security. Um, some
districts have moved to metal
detectors in schools and that's
certainly a huge um amount of
funding. Uh, we haven't look, we
We haven't decided as a district
if that we're still kind of
looking at the pros and cons and
mixed reviews of outcomes of
having, um, metal detectors, but
that's the next piece that I
could see some um other school
districts needing support with
as well.
Thank you very much and and um
whatever support we are there to
support you and however we can.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you representing me.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you, uh, Doctor Blakely and, um,
Mr. Lovato. Um, I want to kind
of go back to what you mentioned
was your biggest issue is the
absenteeism because I'm a high
school teacher, I definitely
know if I can keep those kids in
there, then they're successful
when they're not there, they
fall behind way too quick. Um,
what is your biggest challenge
with that and what do you need
from say us or or anything else
in order to um overcome or, or
maybe better your
your percentage of your
absentees.
Um, thank you, representative
from my viewpoint, I think we
need to relook at the um
attendance laws that we have on
students. It is, um, kind of a
circle that doesn't really close
on being able to impact students
coming to school and so I think
my biggest ask is to relook at
um the attendance laws on
student attendance and how the
agencies are working together to
Um,
focus on how to get students to
school because it involves
different entities in um the
current practice and so I think
being able to tighten that or
come up with a different way of
doing it because I don't, I
don't think that the way that
we're doing it now is really
impacting the students coming to
school looking at elementary
school particularly, I think
we're like students are
developing bad habits by the
time that they get to the high.
School because of school maybe
being something um that is, it's
on the schedule if you are able
to go that day, um, but we've
turned it and I think it
probably was worse after the
pandemic now that if you have an
appointment that day or
something else, and that's what
you're doing that day. You're
not, you know, I remember when I
was little and it was like you
checked out of school, you went
to the dentist, you went right
back to school, and I was like,
can't we go get lunch and you
know, my mom was like, no, you
have to go back to school.
Um, but it's not, it's very, um,
now that's, you know, then the
whole family is out because
everybody has to go to the
dentist that day and so those
kinds of practices, I, I don't
think as a community, we're
working really strategically on
being able to impact early
children in elementary school
and the family focusing on how
we can get students to go to
school, um, in my like
dreamland, it would involve even
providers.
Having um times before and after
school so that we are able to
have um appointments for
children that aren't impacting
the school day, um, you know,
here is a great example, UNM has
a family practice clinic at the
school, so students and families
could go to the doctor and go to
school, um, because it's on the
same site, but that's ideally, I
mean, that's not at every
school, so we just thinking
outside the box on how we can
make whatever.
The reasons our parents aren't
bringing their children, lessen
it. The other, um, ask I have,
well, while you're all here, um,
is to relook at our
transportation, um, because
right now our transportation is
set up that it's um a mile and
then 2.2 miles, um, and students
aren't going to walk 2 miles to
get to school, like and, um, we
probably, I mean, think of this
school, if you go to Trisco
Heritage.
And you live within 2 miles and
you're going to walk up the hill
every day, um, to go to school
they're not, I mean, it's not
practical, um, for a lot of our
students and in some of our
other areas of town, it's not
safe to walk to school for 2
miles, you know, the school that
I went to, if I were to walk 2
miles, I don't, I would be
really scared going to school
and then just the feeling that
you have going to school and
knowing at the end of the day
you have to walk back to so
needless to say, I think we need
to
Look at our transportation
mileage, um, because even a six
year old walking a mile to go to
school every day across the
state. I don't think that that
is um something that a lot of,
you know, so you're relying on
transportation inherently to go
to school, um, private
transportation because you don't
want the six year old walking a
mile to go to school. So that's
another area that I think could
be impacting some of our
or making it more difficult for
some of our students to get to
school.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. Have
you noticed, um, uh, Doctor
Blakely, that, uh, you, I mean,
I don't even know if you, if you
guys have a way of tracking this
um that more of your bus riders
end up coming to school more um
consistently than those that
maybe their parents bring them
or something like that or and or
waiting on or or drivers with
high school, but uh, but is it
your is those that have that
transportation that's dependable
are the ones that that come more
often.
we have.
Um, we, we haven't tracked the
data um in a very like hard way.
It's a lot of this that when
kids are chronically absent and
then we're doing the home
visits. That's kind of how
they're finding out, um, but I
do think that we would be able
to actually do more of a cross,
um data on the impact of kids
who are riding the bus versus
kids that aren't in their
absences.
OK. And then, um, Mr. Chair and
Doctor Blakely, with, when you
said um changing the, the, the
laws and closing these
loopholes, is it that you would
like to have, um,
And I know many people have
complained in the past of there
not being any teeth to these
laws. There isn't any way it,
it's there, um, there isn't
anything that you can do cause
I, I definitely know when
there's some parents, um, that
they, it's not important to
them, and I agree with you when
you say, if we can get the uh
the parents to feel that this is
should be a priority to get
their kids to school, not, um,
uh, the ones that it's not it.
Kind of feeds into the kids and
then those are the ones
eventually once they get to high
school barely show up because
again, they don't have a parent
saying no, that is, that is your
job, you need to get there, um,
so do you feel that there's
enough teeth, or do you feel
that that's one of the loopholes
that needs to be closed. I
representative, I don't think
there's enough teeth, and I
don't think that all of the
agencies are working like close
together. And so, um, I know
that it does involve other
agencies all working together.
And I, I don't think that that
is working in a um very
strategic way that we can make
it better.
And uh thank you, Mr. Chair, and
Dr. Blakely, because I have to
agree with you because once you
get to that tier 4 level,
there's certain options and
that's kind of where you either
go one or the other, but nobody
really talks to each other. So I
think that that's where it kind
of um gets lost and and those
are the ones that you really
need to work with, but thank
you, thank you for.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Crola.
Oh.
Oh, maybe, maybe it's my fault
because I muted all the mics
apparently on here. I have the
power to do that. All right, so
just for the record, I have the
power to do that. So if we start
going over time now I know how
to activate it, but
Representative Brola, excuse me,
I'm sorry for the er. Thank you.
I I thought Mr. Sher, that you
were uh taking advantage of
being in at your home.
Thank you for the presentation
um for being here and, and again
because I have met with you, um,
congratul
about of you on your, on your
roles. Um, thank you for the
goals. I think it's really um
aligned with what we wanna do
and with the work that APS is
doing and my questions are
related to this. Um, you
mentioned, uh, uh, Principal
Lovato that half of the students
in a Trisco uh are part of the
bilingual seal. Reci the
bilingual seal. I've been here
seeing the portfolio
presentation that they're
amazing. Um, I, I have a
question. Um, is this bilingual
seal APS seal, I'm assuming.
And do you know if some of the
students receive also the state
seal.
So yes, um, this is an APS um
opportunity. Some of the schools
may or may not have certain, um,
so for example here, 112 seals
from last year, uh, and then 7
of them were were French
bilingual skills as well. So,
um, there's a variety of of
seals that you can get and yes,
they are the, the state steals.
Thank you, Mr. Mr. Chair and
thank youpalovato. That was my
question. So besides the
The dual language program that
you have here, you have students
also who get the state seal
because of a different
languages. So that
congratulations on that too.
Thank you. Um, I think that's
all, um, there are many ways to,
to work on career readiness,
that's one of the goals, um.
I have seen bilingual programs
is one of the paths, um, my
former student, what Sina Oaxaca
was in the news last year, uh,
with her APA classes. So how
many, uh, and this is for a
superintendent, uh, how many of
the students who are in a
bilingual program? Do you have
any idea how many of them are
taking AP classes or do a
language credit classes.
Thank you, Representative. The
majority of them, so I think at
um Trisco Heritage, all of them,
um, Albuquerque High also is one
where it's the majority of them,
and primarily in AP, uh, Spanish
language arts, um,
they, the students are taking
that as part of their pathway.
Thank you, that's impressive,
right? That's pretty impressive
and that's why sometimes put us
on the, on the map. Uh thank
you, and I think we need, we're
gonna work continue supporting
that to be working. Um, the
other question, um, Mr. Chair,
following with, uh, uh, Senator
Stewart asked about the trends
on the proficiency for math. Um,
and, and also connected to the
absentees. 37% absentee is
terrible. It's 1/3 of the
students not being present and
you were right if they are not
here and we have a
Curriculum to follow or we have
this training with this um uh
programs that we follow and then
with the students are not here,
it takes a lot of strategies and
a lot of initiatives for from
the teacher to supplement
diversity of our students. So,
uh, my question is, and is
related to the, the last goal,
skill, habits and mindsets. Um,
and I got the privilege to be
trained in APS in some of these
amazing uh sheltering
strategies, um, um, uh,
mindsets and, and
strategies to help in the
classroom that supplements when
the students are absent. We
definitely need to work with the
students when with families to,
to change that, but in the
meantime, I found, and maybe
some of my colleagues will agree
that some of these strategies
that we can use directly in the
classroom will supplement for
these programs, um.
Are there any initiatives that
you are aware that um that are
more, more successful with the
students, um, strategy trainings
that you are doing with schools.
I'm aware some, some of that
work that you are doing with
that, with the district, but
it's any specific strategies,
initiatives, uh, the, the
teachers have been trained
besides uh curriculum, so
besides programs that are
successful and help the students
actually.
Improve their their learning.
Thank you, Representative. One
of the things that we're using,
so we use um Panorama to track
um the skills, habits and
mindsets of our students and
through Panorama, um, we also
teachers have tools to be able
to adjust, um, to particular
students that it would show, um,
Gabriela is struggling in
perseverance, and here are some
activities that are really
tailored to the students. And so
a lot of the work
On the skills, habits and
mindsets it's coming through how
we can, um, individualize it for
students as well, um, in how
teachers are learning those
strategies that come through on
particularly being um strategic
about the skills, habits and
mindsets in teaching. I'd, I'd
heard you mention also the math
and how we can, and some of that
is the, the skills, habits and
mindsets are directly correlated
to how students um
Particularly in math, are able
to persevere and to problem
solve and so opening up our
staff to more um ideas on how
they can have those types of
activities in the classroom that
teach perseverance is really
important because a lot of the
math struggle is part of
learning math is embracing like
the struggle and persevering
through how you learn it. The
second thing that we've also
done is, um, this year we added
art and music.
In every elementary school as a
special for once a week. It used
to be every other week and it
used to be, um, kind of
sporadic, but we know through
brain development that
particularly in reasoning and in
math, that the more that
students are exposed to art and
music at an earlier age, the
more that their brain is
developing those skills, it's
not necessarily like learning
the multiplication tables that
how your brain is actually
developing based on what you're
learning in art and music, and
so.
These are other areas that we're
looking at to make sure that we
are working collectively to help
our students in the brain
development, particularly at the
early grades. Thank you again,
um, I had a privilege when I was
a teacher at PS to be training
Kagan and and aims of um um ask
you and all those trainings who
were very successful, well
implementing the program that
will supplement for all the
things that we can control in
the classroom. Um
And it's not a question that
next thing is just a comment
following up. Uh, we were part
of the summit, uh, middle school
summit a couple of weeks ago and
I'm just gonna
support what some
representatives here have
mentioned represented garages,
represented Baca were there, and
it was very strong when we heard
the students when they were
asked what do you want from your
school and the first thing that
they say was, uh, with no
hesitation, uh, feel safe at
school. And that was very
powerful for all of us. We know
that, but to hear it.
From 1213, 14 year old just
coming out their mind like that.
Uh, so I think it's something
that I wanna continue um
mentioning and hopefully working
and help supporting all the
initiatives to make sure the
students feel safe at school
too. Uh, thank you so much.
All right, other members with
questions. All right, so I'll go
ahead with, with a few that I
have, um, so I'm gonna talk
about the issue that represented
Miral Moya brought up in
absentee and absenteeism, um,
because, um, this was the
subject of a lot of work um
pre-COVID to get to the
attendance for Success Act, and
that was a product of our former
school resource officer here at
Eriscoll Heritage represents Pat
Riloba and we had over the
course of several
Legislative sessions, what to
include and some of it was
around um how far do we go in
terms of, of, um, punitive
action against their students
and one of the, the, the big
issue was revoking driver's
licenses for students was the
piece they got edited out. um.
But there's another piece that
at the time of the argument, um,
that I keep bringing up to the
districts that we go to is the
step that is supposed to be the
final step is referral to
juvenile probation and to CYFD
um to do these sorts of wellness
checks on families, see what the
real issue is for the students
who are really chronically
absent if I could use.
The term, um, because I don't
remember the exact term in the
bill right now, but I'm
wondering, um, superintendent
is, um, what's your thoughts are
on that sort of referral system
and how many referrals, APS
makes to help with that uh with
our attendance issues. Thank
you,
um, the
that step is, I believe, the one
that we need to work on. And so
right now what typically I don't
know the
number of referrals we have, um,
but you know, as Albuquerque
Public schools, we have our, uh,
police department. And so our
police department has a
restorative center within it,
um, which actually, um, Officer
Ria Loba helped at that point to
create, and so they really do
focus a lot on the going to do
home visits, um, prior to us
sending it forward as the like
last step. So what's happening
now is typically if we
For to CYFD and juvenile
probation, it gets back referred
to our police department. And so
it just, that's where it
started. So that's why it's a
circle, um, and so, um, we have
already done the our police
department has done those
interventions, and so when we
get it back referred to us at
the end of the cycle of the
process, it, um, kind of just
goes back to where it started.
And so that's, I think that's
the step, um, that we really
need to focus on is how we can
strengthen that part of the um
law that the step where it gets
referred to CYFD and juvenile
probation.
And Superintendent, when you say
strength in the law, are you
suggesting that we strengthen
the law or that it's within APS
what we should do, what the
district should be doing with
the referrals in that system, I
think that it would be
strengthening the CYFD process.
So, um, I think within APS we
have like this system of where
it goes, but we need to,
wherever that lays, we need to
figure out how to strengthen
what the process is for CYFD
when they get the referrals.
And, and I appreciate that
because one thing I've talked to
to um our, our deputy director
here about is, is bringing CYFD
um before us so that we can talk
about what they're doing in
terms of these issues, I guess,
superintendent, if we could get
how many referrals the district
is making to um juvenile
probation into CYFD and then
perhaps some of the results of
what um the officers are, are
working on with our students.
Because of course, um I keep
bringing up the fact that, um,
you know, it's supposed to be
that final step in that wellness
check and where our students are
and what sort of services they
may need or their family needs
is to get to to why students
are, are, um,
Or absence so much, um, and I
think that's a critical piece
because we keep having the
debate around, well, should we
amend it, should we do that,
this that or the other, and it
doesn't sound to me like as a
state we fully implemented it.
Um, so if we're going to keep
going back, change things and,
and, and give our school, our
schools whiplash from constantly
moving the ball. I think we need
to, to have things fully be
implemented and then we can see
what the results, um.
are from there, but I think
you're right. This is a critical
piece that we need to to start
buttoning up and I think part of
that is CY a big part of that is
CYFD, um.
I guess the second issue is, um,
superintendent, I was wondering
if you could talk about the HVAC
issues. Um, I know this is
something that's garnered a lot
of attention, um, throughout the
district, if you wouldn't mind
talking about some of the HVAC
issues the districts.
Experiencing.
Sure, thank you, um, Chair
Romero, the HVAC issues we have
are partly is kind of the
process in the scope of the work
that we have, so in Albuquerque
Public schools, we have 20,000
units of um HVAC. And so if you
think about that, if in August,
the week of August 5th, if you
were to survey in Albuquerque,
uh, 20,000 homes, and if any of
their air conditioning.
weren't working, you probably
would have about 2 to 5% of them
not working, which is typically
what we run. So we run about 5%
of um units that go down at any
given time, um, but the scope of
that over 20,000, it's, you
know, 5% at particular schools.
So there's not, I wish there
were a way to say there's just a
simple answer, but there's so
many compounding factors.
One is mechanical things break,
right? You could all of us at
our home, it was working fine
and then now, of course, it's
the day you're having company
over and there's a birthday
party and all of a sudden
you're, that's essentially what
happens to us across 20,000
units right before school
starts, right? You check them
all, everything's working, we're
ready for the party. And then
right before the party starts,
um, your air conditioning or
your oven goes out or so part of
it is just this magnitude of um.
Units that we have and the
workforce of being able to fix
them in a timely manner. So we
average, you know, of 24 to 48
hour response time, but a
response time could also mean,
um, a part is missing. They have
to order a part. They have to,
you know, so it just depends on
the complexity of again across
20,000 units, there's never the
same issue for everything, you
know, my
could go out and they say, um.
Oh, we think we fixed it, and
then the next week you're like,
it's out again. So essentially
you just multiply that by the
number of units we have, and
that's a compounding issue, um,
typically we have, you know, 70%
of our units are evaporative
cooling and because of the early
start of school we've moved it
up and up. We're getting closer
to starting it during monsoon
season. So what happens is a
unit, um, in for uh.
evaporative cooler can cool a
classroom 15 to 20 degrees in
normal what we used to know as
New Mexico humidity, but now if
you're starting school in, um,
beginning of August and then
monsoons later, the summers are
hotter, I think this summer, um,
we had more days over 90 degrees
and we've had ever and the
latest forecast was that by
2028, we would have over
50 days of over 95 degrees, so
that's like significantly
impacting the infrastructure
that we have in our schools. Um,
so that being said, the
evaporative coolers, um, they
are working often, but they are,
they're not, they're working as
designed. I have one at my house
and there's 2 weeks in the
summer where I'm like there
can't be enough movies playing
for me to go watch to be in a
cool area. Um, so part of it is
that, and but what
happens is people put in work
orders because they think it's
not working. So then that bogs
down like technicians go to
check and they're like, well, it
actually is working as designed.
Um, but then we have other
schools that have, um,
refrigerated air and that is
mechanical, it could break at
any time, um, that's then, so it
just kind of depends. I want to
say, but the um.
evaporative cooling doesn't help
because of the humidity and the
temperature is going up so high.
Um, but to, if you look at how
much it would cost, you're
talking like $1 billion to
change out because just changing
our units from evaporative in
these old schools also means
electric, it means the roof, it
means all these things I really
shouldn't know as a
superintendent, but I used to be
in operations, so I learned a
lot about it, um, but it means
that you have to like then
renovate the roof of the
building and you have to upgrade
the electricity and so there's
just
A lot of and you have to do new
duct work. So it's just not as a
simple fix necessarily as um it
could be if, but as the
temperatures go down of, of
course, you know, the classrooms
feel more comfortable, um, but
that's part of what we face
every year and every year we
start school earlier and every
year the summer is hotter.
And and I appreciate that you
bring up the issue between swamp
coolers and refrigerated air
because here at Orisco, we have
refrigerated air. Um, but we, my
wife works at K Carson
Elementary School in the
majority of the school is, um,
Or swamp coolers, and then here
we have a refrigerated air, but
we were having the same issues
and honestly, like a lot of the
issues that we've had with
heating and cooling have been at
Erisco have
been issues for years now, some
rooms get really, really cold
when the refrigerated air is
working and then when we switch
to heating gets really, really
hot, um, and it's been a
challenge to, I mean, I think
Principal Lovato probably knows
that a lot of these requests
come through um from, from, uh,
teachers, I have some neighbors
that, that one of them was out
in the hall, um.
Last week, um, because we had
one of those issues. So I guess
what I'm trying to figure out
because I know it's going to be
a discussion um for us and I
know there are advocates for the
HACC issue is, um,
How is the district remedying
these issues, whether it be
swamp coolers or refrigerated
air like we have at a Trisco,
um, because in some of these
schools that I get calls from uh
evaporative coolers, it's that
they're they're their cooler is
out. It needs to float. It needs
a new spider, it needs some sort
of maintenance that hasn't
gotten.
Hasn't been maintained. Um, and
I guess that's part of my
concern is that if we move
toward refrigerated air, which I
think is a good idea, but what
is that going to look like on
the district side because my
understanding is that when we
get, for example, here to Trisco
refrigerated air, heating or
cooling, it's through the
district and it's the district
primarily handled by that, not
necessarily on site staff and.
So, um, thank you, chair. The,
yes, the refrigerated air can
also break, so it's not a
failsafe and also when
evaporative cooler breaks, it's
sometimes easier in the sense
that it's connected to just like
one or two rooms and so you can
move things, you can, but at
some of the schools like here,
if, if the refrigerated air
breaks, it's gonna be a larger
section of what it's.
Cooling than individually
controlling the temperature, the
controls are set by the, I think
what um you're alluding to the
the temp controls. So that is
controlled by the district for
energy savings so the district
just like, um, if you go to
some, some hotel rooms or
something, they'll say don't put
the air conditioner lower than
68 or it'll freeze the coils or
whatever can happen.
And so to limit the excess that
can happen to systems if they're
left on or if they're left too
cold that then causes more
issues. The and to for energy
savings, the classrooms that
have refrigerated air that it's
controlled centrally between 68
and 72 degrees, I think, and so
the classroom can the teacher
can put it down or up just
within that window. That's,
that's the
No controls on it, um, and it's
mostly for energy savings and
for wear and tear on um systems
that could be left, um, on
because if you look at the scope
of the districts.
Um, that's the 2 minute warning.
Um,
so if you look at the scope of
the district, you know, it just
takes one school leaving it at
65 and then it breaks the whole
system, so that's the intent of
those, but they could be
adjusted centrally.
And those, and they're on timers
as well. So sometimes like if
people don't know that the
school is being used at night
and they think, oh, the air
conditioning is not working.
It's on a timer for energy
consumption, and so it is just
not on because the timer had
turned it off, then they can all
be over, there's overrides on
all of those systems.
And I, and I appreciate that.
Um.
I guess
You mentioned energy savings,
but um.
I mean, it's difficult for our
school when we have some rooms
that are getting and others
aren't and that it's controlled
centrally, so there's little
that are, are our maintenance
crew here on site can do about
it except call the district and
and get an order in, um, and get
it remedied, um.
I appreciate that. Um, one last
thing, and I'm sorry I skipped
over it. I'm gonna jump back
tabs and T rates, but um the
changes in school start times.
Um, I know several schools have
one start time last year,
another this year, we're ending
a little bit earlier than
before. Um, I was wondering if
you could talk a little bit
about the intent behind it and
and what you're hearing from
from families about the the
changing start times. Thank you,
Chair. The start times are
A little bit um complicated
because they involve a lot of
different factors. The primary
factor is based on um the
increase in instructional hours
at elementary school. And so
because the school day increased
in elementary school, it didn't
increase in um high school. So
we had more flexibility,
particularly in transportation
to be able to transport students
at different times because the
elementary day was shorter and
so
The time in between routes was
more flexible, but now that all
schools have the exact same
number of, um, of instructional
hours in the day, you're
compounding the ability to run
all of the routes when you had
the flexibility before of um
being able to have a shorter
elementary day, um, we had like
the early release Wednesdays. We
had, we just, we had, um, some
elementary schools that
Started um at 9, but they got
out earlier but now since the
time is longer, mostly what we
hear, so it's also really
difficult because just like all
of you hearing about concerns
across the state, across the
district, sometimes it feels
like the three little bears.
It's like this school starts too
early, this school starts too
late. This school starts. So,
um, because, and then you look
at the time that people work,
not everybody works like a
traditional time period. Some
people want their kids to be in
school later. Some people
want their schools kids to be in
school earlier, um, what we,
when we really discern like what
is happening, it is the time
that school ends, not
necessarily the time that school
starts. So we've always had
elementary schools that start at
9 and now schools that start at
9 are concerned because they get
out so late, but that's based on
the increase of instructional
hours that we have, um, in
elementary school. So it's kind
of a, it's hard because you
can't.
Just start 143 schools all at
the same time and everybody just
goes from 8 to 3, um, so because
you have to add that
flexibility. That's why we have
two start times for elementary
school and then one for middle
school and one for high school.
Now, ideally if we're able to
consolidate bus routes more than
we could have 3 tiers of buses
that we run and right now we run
4 tiers, so that could help, but
it's really the end time is
where we hear the most concern.
It's um how late students get
out and so we've worked with
community partners to make sure
that we can have before school,
um, for students and then after
school for students of the
schools that start early and
that's, that's really what's
compounding the um bell
schedules.
And I guess superintendent, if I
could put you on the spot a
little bit about that is Will
schools expect to be able to
keep these times next year
because I know some I just
talking to to Representative
Garrett in school in her area
changed times from last year to
this year, my wife's school
changed from this time last
year, will there be some
consistency for everybody to get
oriented into the new schedule
into next year and subsequent
years.
Uh, Representative Romero.
Yes and no, is my answer, and
um, so I, we hope to keep things
more stable. We also are hoping
to have a calendar that is a 2
year calendar instead of every
year everybody waiting for it.
However, there are things that
happen through primarily through
the legislature that impact us
having to change things. So
that's why if we keep it, um,
but if there's changes to
instructional hours or time or
then.
It could change. So that's why
I'm hesitant to say yes, it'll
stay exactly the same because
there's so many compounding um
factors that if there are
legislation that changes hours
or days or instruction or um
anything that can impact that,
um, as well as we still did hear
that there's concern that it
gets out too late. So if we say
everything stays, then that
means the schools that are
concerned that they're getting
out too late, we wouldn't be
able to move to 32.
So
we would like to keep it as
stable as possible, but work out
the issues we're hearing at the
schools that get out too late.
Yeah, and I appreciate that and
I know there's the effort upon
by the PED to increase the
amount of days for schools, but
I think we were all in accord
here that House Bill 130 from a
couple of years ago was the bill
that we were going to stay
committed to, so, so, um, we
apparently can't do anything
about the PED except some of
our, our, um, superintendents
who, who have filed the lawsuit,
um, for, for the added days,
but, but certainly.
Appreciate that and thank you
all, Principal Lovato. Thank
you, um, Superintendent Blakey,
thank you for being here and
playing host to us um these next
3 days. Thank you.
So, we'll go ahead and we're
going to talk about school
district, charter school, cash
balances. So we're going to have
a quick change of scene here for
a moment.
Thank you.
I just wanted to put a plug in
because we were talking about
extracurriculars that um one of
the things that was in the video
as well was drama, drama was,
um,
Pretty well highlighted in the
video and we're here in our
performing arts center here at
Trisco and um thank you to our
drama director, um, Mr.
Erickson, for allowing us to use
this space, um, they are uh
Enchantment award winning drama
programs, so they're really
awesome part of um the Jaguar
family here.
Not everybody.
Alright folks, so all of your
materials will be behind tab 3
in your binder.
So double check tab 3 if there
are any issues, uh.
Ask one of our.
Staff members, but they should
be t tab 3 we're there, we got
it, we're good.
Oh, bathrooms are out in the
hall, the hall, yep. And then we
have coffee snacks backstage.
You're good. All right. So are
you ready? Item 3, school cash
balances, which we hear a lot
about, so.
Daniel, good morning. Welcome.
Great.
Not yet, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, my name is
Daniel and I cover public school
finance for the LESC and I am
joined today by Giovanna Hanks,
uh, deputy superintendent of
Gallup McKinley County Schools,
who has been a great partner to
the LASC and LFC, and we are
very grateful for her and for
all the school business
officials around the state who
play such a vital role in our
public schools.
So we're now on item 3 of your
binder with a brief titled
Review of Cash Balances.
Before we start, I want to
highlight the new format of our
briefs that Jessica, Tim, and
Merritt, uh, worked very hard on
where our color schemes are
different and the placement and
size of our visuals has also
been revised, and I want to
thank them for their work on
making our content more
accessible to you all and to the
broader public. So thank you to
them.
So you all have made it clear to
us that you have a strong
interest in learning more about
cash balances and the reasons
they've grown so substantially
in the last several years, and
you've given us that directive
because there's a narrative out
there that districts and charter
schools are sitting on this
growing pile of money that
they're not using on students
and educators. And so the
purpose of our brief is to
establish a common understanding
in our committee of what cash
balances are.
And to provide you all with an
overview of where we are and how
we got here, and Giovanna is
gonna get much deeper into the
nuances of cash balance, cash
balances, so we build a pretty
comprehensive understanding of
the challenges and opportunities
that we have around cash
balances.
But getting started on page one.
You all have a graph showing the
growth in cash balances, and you
can see in that graph that cash
balances have grown from $141.2
million in FY 11 to $656.4
million at the end of FY 24,
with most of that growth taking
place during the pandemic.
If you turn to page 2.
You all have a definition of
cash balances, which is very
simply, the amount of
operational cash that an LEA has
on hand, but that number does
not include any of the
liabilities that an LEA has and
Javan is going to speak more to
that about how that is stored
somewhat our perception of LEA's
fiscal positions.
On the same page, we also have a
section on the measures you all
had taken in the past on cash
balances, which have ranged from
pretty punitive and prescriptive
statutes to a really hands off
approach to cash balances. So in
that table on page 2, you have
an overview of the previous
restrictions that you all
enacted on cash balances, the
first of which was in 2003.
And you'll see that there were
limits starting in 2003 on cash
balances depending on the size
of an LEA and those restrictions
ranged from between 2.5% of
program costs for the largest
LEAs to 9% for the smallest
LEAs.
And so in those laws, you all
said you cannot have a cash
balance exceeding these
thresholds, and if you do, PD
will will take a credit in your
SEG.
But when those restrictions were
placed on cash balances.
Uh, there was a disincentive
created for LEAs to think
strategically about how they
were using their money because
their primary focus is during
those that that time of
restriction was staying below
those thresholds by spending
down their operational money.
So in the next few years, you
all amended that statute several
times by increasing the limits,
and then you are completely
abolish the limits in 2011.
And that repeal was largely
because of a recommendation from
the government restructuring
task force that said abolishing
the limits on cash balances
would create an incentive for
LEAs to be efficient and
strategic in how they were using
their money and to reduce the
number of small LEAs that we're
requesting uh supplemental
funding. And so right now, you
all do not have a limit on what
cash balances can be relative to
an LEA's program cost, which is
why I
There's a pretty hands-off
approach right now on cash
balances.
And the hands-off approach has
resulted in the trend shown in
figure 2 on page 3.
In that graph, uh, we use the
cash balances and FY 96 as a
benchmark.
To show how much they've grown
relative to that baseline. And
for comparison, we also included
program cost so that you can see
the differences in growth
between cash balances and
program costs since FY 96. And
as you can see, there's a pretty
dramatic divergence beginning
around FYE 11.
When you are the same year that
you all remove the restrictions
on cash balances.
Uh, so much so that cash
balances are now 1,200% greater
than they were in FY 96?
Compared to around 250% increase
in program cost in that same
time frame.
And around now you all may be
wondering how have these cash
balances even accumulated? And
that's what we as I want to dig
deeper into, but a few things we
know right now are that the
shortage of teachers is
resulting in a vacancy savings
in some LEAs which contributes
to those cash balances. Um, at
the same time, the large influx
of federal relief funding during
the pandemic also played a role
as some LEAs were prioritizing
using their federal programming,
their federal funding for
programs and services.
But as this catch has
accumulated, you all have
enacted requirements for how
it's used.
And we have those in the text
box on page 3.
First, you all require LEAs to
budget the entirety of their
cash balances are estimated cash
balances in the next fiscal
year, but you do not allow them
to use that cash on compensation
or capital outlay.
So when LEAs carry that
estimated cash balance forward
to the next fiscal year, they
had to be very strategic in
where they're budgeting it, and
they usually budgeted for things
like professional development,
supplies of materials, and
utilities.
Yeah
And so now that you all have
that context on cash balances.
We're gonna move on to page 4.
Where we have some narratives
and context on some of the
reasons that LEA has cited as
justifications for maintaining
the cash balances that they
currently have.
The first of which is the grant
reimbursement process.
You all know that when you
appropriate money to the SCG,
that money flows out through the
formula, directly to the LEA and
LEA then EEAs then have that uh
agency to use that money however
they please.
But when you appropriate money
to a below the line program like
the Family Income index, those
appropriations are subject to
the reimbursement process.
And we have a flowchart of that
process beginning on page 4.
Starting when you all
appropriate the money to a
program or initiative in HB 2,
PED then creates the program and
the funding methodology of the
program, they ask for
applications.
They review and score the
applications. They issued
notices of awards and then they
issue award letters.
And so once an LAA has their
award letter, they have to use
their local cash first.
Before they ask for
reimbursement from PED.
And a similar reimbursement
process also exists for federal
programs, and you can see the
amounts of some of those federal
funding sources on page 5.
Including Taiwan, Title 2, N A D
B.
So as, as you all have increased
your investments and below the
line programs and our state has
continued to receive some pretty
strong support from the federal
government, that reimbursement
process has created a condition.
Where Ellie is have to hold cash
in order to take advantage of
those grants.
And on top of that are the
challenges we're seeing with
PED's reimbursement delays,
which you all can see in figure
4.
Where PD has missed its target
for processing reimbursement
requests since the 3rd quarter
of FY 22.
So even though you all have been
very well intentioned in
increasing your investments in
below online programs. You've
also created a condition where
LEAs hold cash to access those
grants. And that is one reason
that you all are going to be
hearing a theme from staff that
encourages you all to begin
prioritizing your investments in
supporting LEAs directly through
the SEG.
On page 5 and 6, we have an
overview of how fluctuations in
enrollment influence local
decisions on cash balances.
You all know that as a state we
have declining student
enrollment.
But that decline is not uniform
across the state, as you can see
in figure 5 on page 6.
Where there are a few LEAs that
have some pretty strong growth
in enrollment. Most are seeing
some pretty modest fluctuations,
and some are seeing significant
decreases in enrollments.
But for the LEAs that are losing
students.
They're losing revenue from the
SCG, but they're often not
realizing equivalent savings in
personnel costs or fixed costs
like utilities. And that's
because those decreases in
enrollment are often felt across
the district, and that district
oftentimes can't adequately
right size of operations in a
short period of time when
they're losing 1 5th grade
student in one school, 1 7th
grade student and another and a
5th grade student in another
school.
And that's why sometimes having
cash on hand is helpful to help
those LEAs navigate those
fluctuate those fluctuating
revenues and costs as a right
size their operations in the
medium to long term by revising
their attendance zones or
adjusting class. So enrollment
fluctuations are a very valid
reason for wanting to have some
cash on hand. But at the same
time,
It appears to us as staff that
we don't have mechanisms in
place as a state to help our
LEAs in practicing long term
strategic planning that would
help them identify emerging
challenges several years in
advance. And so we as staff are
exploring how we can promote
greater strategic planning at
the local level so that they're
planning how to financially
sustain their operations several
years into the future.
But for that to work.
We think there has to be a
conversation around how we
ensure consistent and adequate
funding for public schools so
that communities can focus on
thinking strategically into the
future, rather than focusing
solely on the following fiscal
year.
And so, your next panel is the
revenue estimates for FY 26. And
when LFC is here presenting
those numbers to you all, I
would ask you to reflect on the
historical volatility in revenue
that we've seen in this state
and the on the ground impact
that's had on public schools in
the past.
But then I'd also ask you to
reflect on all the things you've
done to stabilize revenue,
including creating the early
childhood Trust fund, increasing
distributions from the permanent
fund and passing Senate Bill 26.
And consider whether we're now
at a place as a state where you
all can commit to long-term
stability and consistency and
adequate funding for public
schools, and if you can make
that commitment to public
schools. Is there an opportunity
to promote longer term planning
at the local level, where LEAs
can establish their priorities
up to 5 years into the future,
whether that's residency
programs or literacy
initiatives, and those 5 year
plans.
Not only outlive changes in
local leadership.
But they also inform your
budgeting process, where LEEs
are now telling you all what it
costs to operate their local
programming rather than us
telling them.
And so by doing that, uh you are
may may be able to create a
condition where LEAs can begin
to revisit their cash balances
and perhaps start to draw them
down in a strategic and
intentional way. On page 6 and
7, we also have an overview of
the Calay process and the role
that cash balances sometimes
play in capital LA.
Uh, currently, statute bans in
LAA from using their cash
balances on capital outlay.
But an LEA can receive an
exemption if they are bondage
practical capacity, and PED
certifies the LFC that the use
of their operational money for
Capital LA is necessary and will
not unduly hamper the district's
current operations. That's
literally the statute.
And we've seen some LEAs in
recent years request that
exemption, and they have used
their cash balances for Capital
LA.
I'm not going to say too much
about Capital LA because it's
the least common consideration
that we've heard about, but the
main takeaways for you all uh
are that some LEAs want to use
their cash balances because
construction costs have
increased since they initially
planned the project, or they
want to exceed the adequacy
standards or because they want
to get a credit rating, and they
need a higher cash balance to
get a higher rating.
On page 7.
Uh, the last consideration that
we have, we have an overview of
the premiums that are paid to
NMSA.
Currently an MCA requires LEAs
to pay their entire risk premium
in the first several weeks of
the fiscal year. And we've heard
from LEA that it can oftentimes
be a pretty substantial cost in
several million dollars that
they're paying out by the end of
July. Uh, sometimes even before
they receive their first SEG
payment. And so LAA
strategically use our cash to
ensure those costs are paid by
the end of July, and as those
premiums keep increasing by
double digits in in the next few
years.
That's just gonna uh increase
the pressure on LEAs at the
beginning of the fiscal year.
However, we've heard from NMSA
that charter schools are
currently allowed additional
time to pay the premium, but
that option is not available to
school districts.
And turning to page 8.
Uh
I spent most of the time
explaining a few reasons why
LAAs hold cash balances.
But despite all that rationale,
Uh, we still need to acknowledge
that the $656 million in cash
balances has an opportunity
cost.
Because every day that money is
in those cash balances every day
that's not being used, uh,
directly on instruction. It's an
opportunity cost that's incurred
by students and educators,
because they may not be feeling
the full impact of the
investments that you all are
making in public schools.
And even though these are very
local decisions being made on
cash balances, they are still
influenced by the policy and
budget decisions that you all
make and the ways those
decisions are implemented at the
state level.
And so our focus as staff is on
how you all can revise the
conditions in which public
schools operate, so that you all
are encouraging the intentional
and strategic uses of that
money.
And so at the bottom of page 8,
we've included some
considerations that may begin to
create those conditions.
The first of which is for PED to
continue reducing reimbursement
times. We've seen some progress
in that already, and we hope
they sustain that progress so
that Ellie is not waiting on
those reimbursements. You are
also practicing multi-year
budgeting through grow that
provides consistent funding for
LEA's, uh, two LEAs for
residency programs and
differentials uh hard to fill
positions, and we believe that
continuing that approach in more
areas will promote greater
strategic planning at the local
level.
At the same time, as I
mentioned, there's also an
opportunity for you all to start
requiring or thinking about
requiring that LEA's complete
long term financial forecasts
that help them plan how to
strategically use their
resources, including their cash
balances.
And you all may also consider
prioritizing investing in the
SCG rather than creating new
below the line programs, and
there may be an opportunity to
start moving some of that
existing below the line funding
to the SEG and you will hear the
first introduction to that
conversation on Friday at our
joint meeting with LFC.
And finally at the local level,
there's an opportunity for LEAs
to start establishing some
formal targets on cash balances
that adequately meet their
operational needs, while also
maximizing spending on
instruction.
And that's it for me, Mr.
Chairman. I'll pass out to
Javanna who's going to provide a
lot more nuance to some of the
points that were included in the
brief. Thank you. Great. Thank
you, Deputy Superintendent.
Welcome.
Chairman Romero, um, members of
the committee, thank you for
having me. Um, I am the deputy
superintendent for Gallup
McKinley County Schools, and I
am very happy to have served my
community since 2002, um,
so long term employee for the
Gallup McKinley County Schools
and in dealing with school
finance.
So I will be kind of going over
today, a summary of points, um,
types of accounting, um, so the
different types of accounting
that the school districts use
can often produce different
numeric values that are reported
to you. Um, I have found that
with my own local governance
really detailing what type of
accounting method is being used
to provide the numbers that I'm
giving has really lowered
confusion, um, because often
when you hear two different
numbers, both referred to as
cash balances, and they are
significantly.
different numbers that does
create a little bit of ambiguity
and also lack of trust between
the reporting agency and the
committee, um, cash balance
estimates that are done are
often done in March or April, so
the cash balance estimates that
they're currently in the
operating budget management
system were done several months
prior to the end of the year. So
we are basically doing our best
estimate as to what our cash
balances will be rolling
forward. We are not allowed to
true up those cash balances
until our final.
Audit report is provided, and
that is often in February or
March.
Um, the current methodology of
reporting cash balances does not
provide detailed data of how
cash balances are being utilized
or the liabilities that we are
not currently reporting to PED
because it is not part of the
reporting structure.
Um, and those liabilities or
obligations or long term
planning can include the RFR
loans, payroll liabilities,
carryover purchase orders,
revenue bond payments, cash flow
concerns, or long-term planning
and emergency reserves. Um, I
will say that I have heard at
several meetings. I do listen to
your committee meetings online
and I go back and listen and but
I'm not able to do it during the
day. The discussion of
multi-year stability is very,
very welcome. Um, the year to
year planning, if you think
about the
financial investment that the
state of New Mexico has put into
schools is a more than $1
billion industry that seems like
we are managing on a year to
year basis, which no corporate
investor would ever invest in,
um.
So moving on to the current
guidance, um, currently we do
use the manual of procedures for
budgeting from the New Mexico
public um education department.
That was last updated in 2011,
um, so some of the statutory
references in there have changed
since that guidance was put out
in 2011. What we currently
follow is in the NMA, which is
that day to day business will be
done on a cash basis and that
annual financial statements will
be presented on a
accrual basis. Um, so there's
already two different
methodologies of how those cash
balances are going to be
represented. And if you think
about cash basis, so cash basis
is when you receive cash, you
record revenue when you cut a
check, you record an
expenditure, um, in, in the
Flore model, you are recognizing
revenue when it's earned and
paying out expenses when they
incur. And so those are kind of
two very different methodologies
of accounting, um, PE
only receives detailed reporting
from us on expenditures and
revenues on a cash basis. They
do not receive detailed
reporting from us on the
liabilities I'm going to go into
a little bit more detail on, and
so sometimes I think that there
is a bit of miscommunication
because when you look to your
leaders and say, OK, tell us how
many outstanding loans are
there? How many people are using
what dollar amount for
construction. It is hard.
For them to turn and get a good
number and, and this is kind of
why, um, I will also say that
the uniform chart of accounts,
which is a numeric language that
we utilize for reporting budgets
has a special object code for
emergency reserve. Um,
statutorily, we are allowed to
carry up to 5% um emergency
reserve, and I believe that's
been mitigated a bit, um, but
PED actually encourages us not
to utilize that because there is
a formal process to pull money
out of that.
code, which means we would
actually have to go to the
secretary and get formal
approval to use those funds. The
guidance that we receive is just
budgeted somewhere where it
won't be spent and if you need
it, you can move it. And so that
also does not provide
transparency to anybody who
looks and says, OK, who has an
emergency reserve? Well, the
majority of us don't have any
money budgeted in that object
code because the guidance that
we receive is it will delay your
need of that those funds should
you need them, so don't put it
in that object code.
And so that's another kind of
reporting restriction that
currently exists.
Um, uniform chart of accounts.
So again, we do use a numeric
language for budgeting purposes,
and there are 3 different types
of cash that are reported, but
kind of what I wanted to impress
upon with this slide is that
just because it is unrestricted,
i.e., operational is
unrestricted in use does not
mean it is unobligated. Um, and
so there is a restricted cash
which is typically utilized in
debt service and the
Tech funds. There is also a
reserved cash which is
associated with a special
revenue bond debt services
funds. But again, it is very
hard for the administrative
staff either at LAC LFC, or the
public education department to
look at this numeric language
and quickly be able to give you
an answer as to what type of
cash it is and if it has
obligations tied to it. Um, it
only tells you the restrictions
of the initial funding source
and it does not tell you if cash
is currently.
ligated to another, um,
initiative at this time.
The reporting limits, so we do
use the operating budget
management system to report all
of our data to the public
education department, and it
does not allow us, so I did
include a screenshot. This is
the screen that we actually see
when we report our estimated
cash balances, um, and then when
we drew up again in January or
February, it does not allow us
to tell the public education
department. I'm also carrying
this amount in purchase orders.
I'm also carrying this amount
for what I plan to
Move permanently to cover my
revenue bonds. And so we're not
able to fully translate to that
cognizant oversight agency where
some of this cash has already
been strategically obligated.
Um, the categories of funds
again, um, you can have
different cash balances and
different funds, but they are
often not Nicks and matchable,
operational is the only one that
can cover the temporary cash
balances for other funds. And if
there is a deficit in another
fund, then operational is the
fund that will cover it. Um, so
typically we have the 1000,
which is our general funds,
operational HB 6 tetrogen
transportation while
transportation exists within
that matrix, transportation is
codified.
Only for to and from travel of
students. So even though it is
in that general funds category,
it is very restricted in use.
Um, special revenue funds, food
service, athletics, titles, all
the title programs go their
capital outlay is in 30,000 debt
service is in 40,000 and then
enterprise funds is in the
60,000s. So the example that I
gave is 25145, which is impact
aid. Impact aid comes directly
from the federal government in 4
different forms to districts.
One of those forms is impact a
set aside special education. And
the special education under
Impact Aid actually follows the
exact same rules as IDEA. So
although it is impacted, it is
not free and unrestricted to be
used. However, an LEA may wish,
it must be used in the exact
same mechanism that the idea be
funds are utilized.
As was previously mentioned,
timeline is an issue, um, cash
balances are estimated in April
and June and then only trueed up
around February or March. And as
a business manager, you have to
do your best estimate, but you
have to keep these two things in
mind. If you underestimate, you
cannot true up your budget until
almost 6 months into the year.
That means if you have
outstanding obligations that you
anticipated to be paid in June,
but actually did not, for
whatever reason, get paid,
they're, they move into July
into the next fiscal year. You
may not be able to pay that
vendor until you get budget
authority because you cannot
expend funds for which you do
not have budget authority. So
the example that I gave here is
you estimate you have $1000 in
cash, whatever happens, delivery
of goods or services did not
happen prior to June 30th or the
vendor just wasn't capable
enough to
Invoice you in time for you to
pay them. Well, now you've only
rolled over $1000 but you
actually owe that vendor $1500.
You don't have enough money to
pay that vendor now because
you've underestimated your cash
on the opposite side of that is
if you overestimate your cash
and you really don't do your due
diligence to ensure that any of
your overestimation is
curtailed. You can inadvertently
overexpand. And so business
managers are kind of walking
this fine line of getting it as
close as possible, but in
they have enough budget
authority to pay out. So another
thing that you may see is the
cash balances that were
presented to you the next time
you see them, they may change.
And that's because we've all got
our audits and we're all
reconciling to true balances.
So,
Uh, the loans that were
mentioned, um, which are the
funds that we loan from
operational to the various, um,
title funds, federal direct
funds, and state-appropriated
below the line funds, um, these
typically have a couple of
compounding issues to them. So
word letters play a really key
role here. The earlier that we
implement a program, the better
it is for students because a
program that is implemented from
the minute students hit their
seats.
In the fall is going to be a
program implemented with more
integrity and fidelity than any
other program. And we'll produce
the best educational outcomes.
The second best thing about that
is that we can start spending
money right away.
So that we are spending money at
the very beginning of a program
really fully implementing that
program and then starting to
draw down cash. When award
letters do not come until March
or April, and we are still
trying to take advantage of that
money. We are spending very
quickly at the very end of the
year. And so we are accumulating
a huge amount of loans that will
be due to the operational fund,
and that plays a huge
consideration for us. Um,
Tipperary.
Cash transfers, essentially, you
tell us, here is your budget,
but you do not hand us any
money. Um, we start buying
things or we hire people, um,
hire a teacher, procure goods
from a vendor, they want to get
paid, of course, anyone that you
have on payroll must be paid
within the statutory limits,
which is codified in Chapter 50,
um, basically stating if they
work the first to the 15th, they
must be paid out by the 25th of
the month if they paid the 16th
through the end of the month,
they must be paid out to the
10th of the.
Next month. And so those are
considerations as well because
you actually take the cash from
operational to pay those
individuals and then when you
get the reimbursement back, you
pay back operational, the budget
accounting is really just making
sure that everything is in the
right expenditure code. If for
any reason PED does not
reimburse you, then it's gonna
come from operational. So if you
have miscalculated and spent
your money on something that was
unallowable or something that
you thought would be allowable
but is no longer allowable.
Operation will need to cover
that expense.
Um, if you do not have enough
money in 11,000, you will need
to start scheduling your
payments to be sure your checks
still clear.
And so, for example, at the
beginning of the year, I know
several districts who start
paying employees, but they won't
pay vendors until sometime in
August, and those vendors are
told you're not getting a check
until August because they don't
have enough cash. They have lots
of budget, but they don't have
the cash to pay the vendors. And
when vendors hear things like
that, they don't want to work
with us anymore, because they,
they have a business too. They
need to pay their employees as
well. And so these are all
considerations, especially the
smaller the
Organization is that have to be
taken into account when we talk
about cash balances.
Um, RFR loans, um, as was
mentioned earlier, the document
on the right, so the operating
budget management system or OBMS
actually can tell you how long
RFRs have been waiting for
reimbursement. This report can
be run at any time. And if it is
red, it is over 60 days, if it
is yellow, it is another count
of days and so on and so forth.
And so, as these things age, um,
the more money we
We have to spend from
operational in order to cover
those funds and that becomes a
cash flow issue for many LEAs.
Um, I will also say that you can
go in and see individual detail.
I am not in any way, shape or
form trying to lay blame on any
particular person, group,
organization, any of those
things. Because PED is our
cognizant oversight agency must
assure that we are spending
money in the way that it was
appropriated in the way that was
intended. Um, however, I do
agree that investment in
training is absolutely
essential. One example that I
gave is last year we had
pushback. We sent a group of
students on
The Title One field trip with a
full academic educational lesson
plan and some parents went along
as chaperones. They told us we
could not pay for the meals or
the entrance of the chaperones
with Title One funding. And I
said, oh, OK, can you please
provide me the rules,
regulations, statute, 2 CFR Part
200, what did I violate in doing
this? Because Title One, because
it is for economically
disadvantaged students who often
do not get hands-on learning
opportunities.
Also is a cornerstone of parent
involvement and after two months
of talking to the attorney, we
found out that we didn't violate
anything and those were OK
expenditures. And so I, I'm not
blaming the individual person
because they felt they were
doing what was right to protect
the funds. On the other hand, I
have to be sure that we fully
understand the rules so that we
are always spending money
consistently with the way the
law says that we should spend
it. And so if I need to do a
major shift in how we spend
money if I need to change.
Our guidance, then I need to
know what those are. And so that
delayed my repayment of those by
about 2.5 months.
Um, payroll liabilities, these
happen all year long and
essentially what happens is as
we pay individuals, we deduct
from their paycheck various
things like educational
retirement contributions, state
taxes, um, we're large enough
that our federal taxes are paid
immediately on that reporting
cycle. Some entities are smaller
and so they may report on a
monthly basis, um, and as well
as Nipsia, and Nipsey is always
paid a month in advance. So at
the end of the year is where you
see this culmination.
Reporting, when you have
different months of employees
who work and I'm kind of using
some old terminology here
because I've been around for a
while. So our 9 month employees
get the equivalent of 6
paychecks in June. Our 10 month
get the equivalent of 4 or 12
month get the equivalent of 2.
And so we are deducting the
educational retirement, which
will be paid out no later than
the 10th of the following month.
We are deducting the uh state
equalization guarantee, uh, not
stated the
State taxes which will be paid
out no later than the 25th. And
then Nipsey has has paid his
bill, so we will pay out
portions of what we deducted in
July, August and September for
those employees to have
continuity of insurance. And so
it's not unusual for our loans,
our our outstanding obligations
for liabilities to be more than
several million dollars.
Um,
Carryover POs are not currently
reported anywhere. Um,
essentially these are legally
binding contracts that we have
written as the LEA to vendors.
We cannot issue partial purchase
orders and I'm specifically
talking about construction here.
We are one of the few districts
that do actually use our
operational funding for
construction purposes. Our
bonding capacity is very
minimal. My last bond sale for 4
years was $600 total, and I have
32 schools to manage. Um,
So, for example, construction,
if I anticipated using $12
million the most optimal
timeline for building a building
is 18 months. And that's if
nothing out of the ordinary
happens and I don't need change
orders and I don't need
engineers to come in, but I'm
gonna have $12 million sitting
there for at least 3 years at
minimum. And so it does look
like we are sitting on cash. And
so cash flow versus budget
authority becomes again another
separate reporting point.
As was mentioned, there are
other things that come into play
here, revenue bonds, we borrowed
money to build tetridges. We are
very rural district and so we
use our operational funding to
pay for those revenue bonds, so
I take a permanent cash transfer
from operational to my revenue
bond debt service every year to
pay the principal and interest.
Liability payment, ours was $6.1
million due on August 1st.
Um, that's a good amount of
money due in a short amount of
time. Uh, restricted funds with
personnel, so I do receive
impact aid funding. It is the
one I often mention because it
is one of the few educational
currently funded budgets. So for
example, when sequestration hit
us in 2008, I felt that
immediately with impact aid
funding, and I have personnel in
those budgets. And so
conservatively I use current
year revenue for next year's
budget. If I don't, I cannot
stabilize the personal
that I have in those budgets.
Um, district savings, uh.
For the phase to match capital
outlay as was mentioned, many
districts have seen a
significant escalation in cost
from what they initially
anticipated paying for their
facilities. Um, and so there is
some consideration there.
Emergency funding, um,
especially smaller entities if
they have even a small decline,
um, for our district, we lost a
refinery, a power plant, all at
the same time, and the county
lost litigation over grazing
rights.
All three of those happened at
the same time and we dropped 5%
in our assessed valuation in one
year. It was significant for us.
Um, and then there was the
anomaly that was June 30th of
2021. So when the state lost the
2020 disparity over impact aid.
They actually reimbursed
everyone, all the LEAs on June
30th as well as the
implementation of House Bill 6.
So we received $30 million on
June 30th of 2021 and many other
LEAs received similar. So there
was this kind of anomalous event
that happened on that specific
day that we'll see being played
out over several years.
So all of what I've talked about
is kind of detailed in this
chart, so I was asked to come to
another committee earlier this
year where they told me we
noticed you have from this
fiscal year $186 million
budgeted. And so I started
looking at all of the budgets
that it aligned with, and I
looked at what was projected
versus what were the loans in
our June 30th, 2023 loans worth
$30 million.
That was what we were waiting to
be reimbursed from the public
education department on June
30th. And we're not, we're not a
very, I'll be transparent, we're
12,000 students. I love each and
every one, but we are no APS.
Um, APS has a huge volume of
students, and that's a number I
would anticipate seeing with
ABS, not with Gallup-McKinley
County schools. Typically our
loans are between 9 and $13
million. Um, payroll
liabilities, as I mentioned,
this is always a hefty sum total
we were at about 5.7 but.
alone was 5.2. Our carryover
purchase orders were 8.1. As I
mentioned, we are a district
that utilizes operational for
capital outlay and so you do see
those significant carryover
purchase orders and then the
revenue bond payment that we
anticipated, so we went from a
$50 million projected to a $5.3
million actual cash on hand.
And what we attempt to keep on
hand is enough to stabilize 2
payrolls and to to make vendor
payments.
Um.
With that, I did do just one
more slide that has the detail
showing the beginning from
operational all the way down to
the reconciled cash. PED can see
our loans, not through OBMS
reporting but through our
actuals reporting that happens
either monthly or quarterly
depending on the LEA. They do
not see our carryover purchase
orders. They can see them
anecdotally because we do upload
our general ledgers into the
actual reporting, but that
number does not encumbrances do
not appear anywhere in the PED
reporting.
Um, and then the revenue bond
payment again, there's nowhere
for me to demonstrate that that
long-term obligation exists
against operational because
there is no coding for it in the
uniform chart of accounts.
Um, with that, I'm sure that was
quite a lot. I am happy to
answer any question.
All right. Represent memoa,
please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, for the
first time I beat uh
Representative Baca for this.
Um,
uh, so I have a, I have a couple
of questions because I've, I've
asked, um, and, and thank you,
uh, Superintendent and, and
Daniel. Um, I, I've asked this
question before, and I think the
answer because I asked, why is
it that we are using, I mean, is
it because we have to, is it
statute that we're using the
reimbursement process for
anything below the line. And I
believe that the answer that I
got the last time I answered
this question is because we kind
of just followed, we have to do
it for federal, so we just did
it.
Um, so have we researched any
other ways of funding this
process or maybe even possibly,
uh, you know, if they're awarded
this, giving them 80% and, and
reimbursing the 20 to make sure
it looks something like that,
because the fact that they, that
these LEAs have to carry cash
balances to do anything that we
are giving them money to do is
ridiculous.
What do you, do you know?
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, I don't think there's
any statute or rule that says a
below the line program has to go
through the reimbursement
process. You all can very much
decide that an appropriation not
flow through a reimbursement
process. The reimbursement
process is very much designed to
ensure that the intent that you
all cited in House Bill 2 is
being followed. That's the
primary intent. Uh, I'm not sure
we've researched any other
alternative ways, uh, other than
the reimbursement process,
unfortunately.
We can.
Yeah, um, thank you, Mr. Chair.
That would be, I mean, I don't
know, I know it's a frustration
for, I know I hear my own
district. I've heard many
different districts, um, the
fact that, you know, what you
said, uh, some of your loans was
30 million at the end of the
year. I mean, those, that's,
that's money that you guys had
to fork out and hopefully you'll
get back and hopefully there's
not issues, uh, you know, like
you said, the issues that took
2.5 months to delay. Um, I'm
sure you, um, our finance
departments across the state are
very
Frustrated and, um, and God
bless them, all of them. No
wonder, um, that, uh, because
that's what those, those are the
day to day issues that they have
to deal with. They have to
basically, um, kind of rob Peter
to pay Paul in order to make
sure that everyone gets paid and
the the school gets, uh, kept
running, um.
We talked about I, I like, um,
Daniel, when you mentioned the
multi-year stability and then
superintendent, um, how you said
that is, that is welcomed. Uh,
explain to us a little bit more
how that would alleviate and
make you, your life a lot easier
if you can plan 5 years out
instead of just next year.
Chairman Romero, uh,
Representative Moya, yes, this,
this would assist us, and I
think that the state in all the
presentations that I've heard
and I believe the presentation
that you'll be receiving next is
really looking for that long
term stability. Um, I think the
term boom and bust is something
that we all fear a little bit,
um, because if you've been
around for a while, you know
that legislature has had to gone
back in and take cash balances,
you know, legislatures had to go
back in and sand appropriations.
Um, different things of this
nature. So that long term
stability would be very welcome.
Um, we are conservative by
nature because especially if
you've been here for an extended
period of time. Um, but one of
the things, for example, our
federal appropriations that we
receive are basically a 27 month
appropriation. So we should have
that full 27 months in order to
actually completely expand those
funds out. What we're doing
right now is we start
Spending our first year when we
get that initial award and then
we stop and wait for carryover
to be verified. And so that
carryover could come to us in
May of the next year or June. I
mean, I've received carryover
award letters on June 30th of
the subsequent year. If we were
able to keep going without such
a fragmented process. I think
that you would see, and, and
here's how I always try to frame
it. It is a benefit for finance,
yes, but that is not what I am
in education for.
I am an education to make sure
every student gets the very best
education they can. The primary
benefit in that model for
education is students get what
they need when they are in the
classroom. When I get money in
May, I am not doing a huge
service to my kiddos in helping
to support them increase their
educational capacity. It is bad
for finance, it's bad for
education.
Thank you, Superintendent. Thank
you, uh, Deputy um sorry.
Um,
Chair, Mr. Chair, um, and then,
um, Deputy Superintendent, um,
I, I agree with you because when
you get that money in May, it
all you can do is hopeful, maybe
you can do something the next
year, but then you have to play
that that money game and and
report and not report and
everything else and, and it is,
it's frustrating. Um, I, what
was the other one? um.
What was it? OK, so what I was
thinking is, OK, your estimates,
uh, do we know when you said
that you get a budget, but yet
you don't get money right away.
What is the time frame before
you, um, is it normal? Is it
vary by year by year, uh, you
know, what and, and what do you
think delays it?
Chairman Romero, Representative
Moya, so it depends. Uh, SCG
typically comes out in 112
increments, um, when we actually
get that payment during the
month does vary based upon the
year. However, when it comes to
grants, it all depends on how
quickly expenditures can be
ramped up and start spending and
then reimbursements. Our
district does reimbursements no
less than one time a month every
single for every single period.
Um, however, the issue becomes
when you submit your first.
for reimbursement and that
doesn't get reimbursed and then
you submit your second
reimbursement and that doesn't
get reimbursed and then the
third, and so they start
compounding on each other and
then as staff start looking at
those reimbursements if they
have any questions or concerns,
research takes time. They may
find something that was
unallowable, then you got to do
journal entries, so it could be
5 or 6 months before you
actually see cash related to
whatever that grant is. And if
it's a relatively small grant of
$100,000 for a district like
mine.
Not a problem. It's it's a 5 or
$6 million dollar grant. It's a
significant problem. And so one
of the things that you had asked
earlier, if I may expound upon
that I had said is that the
federal government does require
the public education department
to have a process for verifying
expenditures expended
appropriately and according to
the grant authority, um, prior
to reimbursing. I believe that
originated in an 0506 audit from
the public education department
because prior to that, PED was
forward funding.
Those grants. And so that was
the major shift is that 506 to
0607 moving into that. One thing
that could be done and could be
considered is that RFRs could be
reimbursed immediately from
state funds and then the state
could do its due diligence and
then if any concerns go back to
the LEA. The problem with that
is, is if LEAs get comfortable
with getting reimbursed right
away if they have a major
problem, they may end up with a
bill that they weren't
anticipating.
So that is the only way that I
have seen across the board if
the state continued to forward
fund, they would have to do it
from general fund reserves and
then seek reimbursement from the
feds after a full audit of the
documentation. That would
require a lot of restructuring
and a lot of training and all of
the things, but a good baby step
could be looking at those below
the line which do not have the
restrictions that the federal
government has, the state, of
course, has every right to know
what we are spending our money.
On and ask for request of
documentation of those
expenditures, um, and, and the
8020 model that you proposed
would be, would be welcome.
Thank you. Um, thank you very
much, chair. Thank you.
playing catch up Representative
Baca.
Thank you, Mr.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, um, and
thank you for this. I was
recently at a conference, an
asbo conference, and there was a
certain deputy superintendent
who grabbed the mic and said, if
there were legislators there,
That she would like to tell him
something, so who would have
thought a week later you're in
front of us now. So, uh, Mr.
Chairman, I only have one
question for the deputy
superintendent in 32 parts. Can
you please set the timer for 3
hours.
Actually, thank you for what you
do. Actually, uh, Deputy
Superintendent Hanks and I are
actually trusted colleagues and
friends, and I want to thank you
for what you do, uh, for the
schools.
I do have a couple of questions
and this is, um, page 3, Dan, if
you would turn to page 3.
And I want to just very briefly,
if you would explain the last
sentence in that top paragraph.
Um, about the program cost, so
can you define or tell me what
program cost is and what it
means about the cash balances
increasing to 1,200%. So first
off, Daniel, what is program
cost? the program costs are the
assumed cost that it's assumed
to be the cost of equity
operating uh public school
district.
So, Mr. Chairman and Dana, so is
that basically the, the cost to
actually educate a kid or a
student, is that kind of what it
is.
Thank you. So, you know, kind of
in layman's terms, so when we're
looking at we have the estimated
assumed cost of education and
then we have the cash balances
that have in I ran out of
figures, you guys are the, you
guys are the the business folks
or the math folks, about 5 times
the cost of um what it cost to
educate a kid in the amount of
cash.
Balances we have, is that
correct, sir? Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, so
this graph shows has a baseline
of FY 96. So the cash balance is
in FY 96 and the program cost of
FY 96 are the baseline in that
graph. The graph is showing how
cash balances and program costs
have changed relative to that
baseline, and the presentation I
talked about how that trend
pretty much aligns up until FY
11 and the trend then diverges.
Around that same time is when
the restrictions that you all
had on cash balances were
lifted.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Daniel, real quick,
just what is the average cash
balance of districts, um, that
we have and then also second
part of that question. We, I saw
on the back page there in the
appendix, uh, I forget the name
of the appendix, where we talked
about total amount of cash
balances.
What was our actual last year in
24, how much money was was
through the SCG given out to
school districts?
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee on the
first question, we don't have
the average cash balance right
now, but I can do it after the
presentation and pass it on to
you in FY 25, you all
appropriated $4.17 billion to
the SCG.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
I'll kind of tell you for also
sit on the LLC. I've I've heard,
you know.
I've heard some of the concerns
regarding cash balances, and
I'll say I'm in no, it's not my
concern is to look about
restricting it, but I think that
we need to understand what
they're being used for. So, Mr.
Chairman, down to um
Intimacy on the bottom of that
under current statutory
requirements. Can you briefly
talk about NMSA 228-41? Um.
So Mr. Page 3 members of the
committee, that's the statute
that I mentioned that you all
have enacted um that places
requirements on how cash
balances can be used. And so
that statue essentially requires
that LEAs carry forward the
entirety of their cash balance
of their estimated cash balance
to the next fiscal year. It also
prohibits a school district from
using their cash balance on
capital outlay or compensation,
but it does allow as Giovanna
talked about a school district
to budget up to 5% of their
operational expenditures in any
Emergency account, which they
don't typically do because of
the requirements that they get
approval from the secretary to
actually access that money.
And LEAs can also budget cash
balances for operational
expenditures other than
compensation.
I was determined and this is my
friend here, uh, Deputy
Superintendent. So we talked
about this and I understand
that. So what types of other
activities and you mentioned
briefly, since we can't use it
on capital, and we can't
necessarily use it on uh as far
as recurring costs of salary.
What are some of the examples
that you are districts use that
cash balance on.
Chairman Romero represented
Baca, yes, it can be used to,
especially if we have a funding
shortfall in another
programmatic initiative, um, it
can also be utilized. I know one
of the items that was mentioned
was um staffing shortfalls. Um,
so recruitment and retention
incentives in order to help
attract qualified individuals to
your LEA and to retain them. Um,
so it could be advertising
targeted advertising, in an
attempt, um, so
Some of those things where
you're seeing the cost savings,
many LEAs still are having to
come up with a solution. One of
the things I know is that
whenever there is a need, if you
don't have a staff member to
fill that need, you're always
going to need to do something
because you still need to
service that student, even
though maybe you weren't able to
do the personnel that you wanted
to.
So you may be pivoting to a
contracted service, contracted
services are typically much more
expensive than personnel, um, so
your initial estimates may need
to be covered by that cash
balance. Um, there, there are
various things that are needed
to be done. As I mentioned after
we, we started at 500 million
and when you look at Daniel's
representation, we're at 35
million in the subsequent year
and that's the spin down of
those kind of one time funds
that we saw with the passage of
HB.
6,
we typically do not have a lot
of additional cash balance to
use, but we always want to
ensure the integrity and
fidelity of programs that we're
implementing and so typically
our cash balances are to ensure
that if we need to utilize it to
maintain a program, we will.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I
guess my point it's also my
understanding that they could be
for professional development,
other types of training, it also
could be support
The other programs you talked
about the flexibility and
spending, you talked about
whether it be supporting
activities or clubs. Is that, is
that also a fair um
Bas summation of what they could
be used for. Chairman Romero
andative yes, um, our, our
county is the most impoverished
county in the state of New
Mexico, and one of the things
that we did several years ago
was we eliminated all fees for
students. Our students pay no
fees. And one of the things that
we saw was that students who
couldn't afford those fees were
often excluded from additional
benefits that they could receive
from participating in some of
those activities because they
weren't able to pay for the.
fees. And when they weren't able
to, then we were doing
fundraising. So then we were
getting money from the community
that was already pretty
significantly economically
disadvantaged just so that that
student might have an equal
opportunity. So one of the
things we actually did was
eliminate all student fees. Our
students do not pay fees to
participate in any additional
extracurricular activities. Um,
we encourage them to join
National Audit Society hosts a,
um, things of that.
Nature and as as was mentioned,
sometimes you can't find the
personnel and so you have to do
professional development to
upskill the staff that you have.
So that those students don't
lose an opportunity, but those
cash balances provide us a
little bit of.
Agility to be able to change and
pivot very quickly to do those
things and it's not, it is not a
significant amount. It is when
you look at it here, it looks
like a significant amount of
money. And if the RFR loan
process were to go away.
It, it would be significant.
Thank you, and I'm, I'm gonna
end with this, um, Mr. Chairman,
and this is just another example
to my colleagues.
We're talking about opportunity.
We're talking about access, the
fact that we're having school
districts across the state, and
we have kids and programs that
are trying to raise money to
participate in areas that
interest them. I think we as a
legislator with the monies that
we have, we need to step up and
we need to make sure I
understand we're funding for uh
academic programs. I understand
that we're funding for capital
outlay projects. It would also
be my recommendation that
somehow, some way, we're able to
help fund in school districts
and schools.
To help their students
participate, as I said, I don't
care in what area, from eSports
to marching band to athletics.
We need to figure out how the
money that we have, it shouldn't
come out for your operational
that could be for personnel. It
should be additional monies and
we make an investment of our
kids as Senator Sols says, we're
a rich state. Let's start
helping our school districts and
our kids to get re-engagement
and to get kids back in our
schools, um, and let's let's
like kids be kids again. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Representative Robo
Cavio.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh,
First, thank you for your
presentation today. Daniel, on
page one,
The I think it's a 2nd paragraph
where it begins with it is
critical. You say, um, I'm
sorry, second paragraph,
however, uh, the balances is
having a detrimental impact on
students and educators. Can you
give us an example of uh or
examples of the detrimental
impacts that you, um, research,
observed or got feedback on.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman members
of the.
Very
Upon reflection, I should have
said.
Maybe having a detrimental
impact on students and
educators. We don't have the
data or the research right now
to make a definitive statement
that the cash balances that
exist right now are having a
detrimental impact on students
or educators. You all are making
some pretty big investments in
public schools through the SCG
through below the line funding,
you've raised the at-risk factor
pretty substantially for low
income students, English
learners, etc. You made some
pretty substantial investments
already. And we just don't have
the data right now to
That what
what Ellie is holding right now
in cash is having a detrimental
impact. That's part of our long
term plan to really assess how
those cash balances have really
accumulated and whether there's
an opportunity cost associated
with those cash balances sitting
in those accounts. And if there
is an opportunity cost, is there
an opportunity for you all to
start revising some conditions
in which public schools operate
to get more of that money out to
schools and districts.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Daniel. Uh, so right when
you were talking about the data.
What, what will you be looking
at um when you, what type of
data will you be analyzing? So
Mr. Chair and Representative
Calero, uh, I think what, what
Daniel's referring to in the, in
the brief is if districts, when
we look at cash balances, if it
turns out that districts are
actually just not spending the
money that they receive in
whatever form, whether that's
SCG or or grant or well, not
grant funding so much in SCG.
What we're getting at is that
Students are not benefiting from
those services that districts
could be paying for. And so I
think what were we looking for
is
Even though we have anecdotal
information about why districts
accumulate cash balance. We're
not actually sure. We can't tell
you, for instance, for each
district yet, how much of that
cash balance comes from vacancy
savings, for instance. So let's
say a particular district is not
able to hire all the teachers
that they have budgeted, right,
so that sort of thing we need to
be able to get to that level of
detail, to be able to say some
of this is just occurring
naturally because they couldn't
find a teacher for a particular
position versus uh to the
conversation.
About long term funding, they're
not sure, um, how they're
spending their money on a on a
year over year basis and because
of that, they're, they're
accumulating cash balances that
they're just not spending funds.
Thank you, um, thank you very
much. So in the reporting,
Which is what one source of the
data collection, correct? Is
there anything that they need
that you're asking or that you
need from them to detail that
out more or is what they already
are reporting sufficient to make
that determination. Do we need
to add another column or do we
need that's what I mean. Who,
whomever would like to answer
that.
Uh.
Mr. Chair Representative, I
would actually ask the deputy
superintendent because I think
from from our end, we do see
quite a bit of of the
information that's reported to
PED, but whether or not, for
instance, we see whether a
particular FTE was filled over
the course of a year. I'm not
sure we have that level of
detail.
Chairman, representative Robo
Caballero. So there could be
several data sources pulled
together specifically just
thinking about the FTE scenario.
So in our actuals reporting, we
do report the amount of an FTE,
not just that we have an FTE
budgeted, but the amount of the
FTE. Um, one of the things that
has been discussed and I think
in terms of the long term
planning is helping LEAs to
organize and recognize how they
need to pivot and get
them the authority to do so, for
example, not having an FTE
doesn't mean you still don't
have a need. Maybe you're going
to have a substitute teacher
come in, the substitute teacher
per day is less than the
scheduled, you know, certified
teacher. However, the learning
loss that those that will impact
those students must be
mitigated. And so does that mean
districts then need to be sure
that they have prescriptive
lesson plans for every single
standard or within the pacing
guide. Does that mean that
needs to be additional training
with subs? Does that mean there
needs to be a teacher partner
that is paid additional time to
work with that sub and work with
that class, especially if it's
going to be a long-term absence.
And so I think that because of
the chaos generated by the year
to year boom and bust. We get a
little nervous. We get a little
nervous that the unit value is
going to go down, we get a
little nervous that if things
change, there's not going to be
a safety net to catch us. And so
for some districts that
emergency supplemental is
Just that safety net. In other
districts, when cash is
accumulating without purpose.
It's because they are not
pivoting to ensure that the
needs are still being served
potentially, and I, and I'm not
saying that in any way, shape or
form because you may have just 2
weeks without that teacher. So
you have 2 weeks of cash savings
and you're not going to be able
to do much with that two weeks
of cash savings. But I think
that the way that data is
reported, collected, and
analyzed, could be.
Improved, but that is going to
take quite frankly, it's going
to take a bit of a financial
investment to make that happen
as well as a concentrated
effort. One of the things I
mentioned was the guidance
documents for finance managers
hasn't been updated since 2011.
And I'm not blaming that on
anyone, because that's a huge
concentrated effort to make that
happen. And PED we all know is
having staffing issues. And so
it's, it's just one of those
wicked problems that that is
public officials, you guys are
going to have to figure out, you
know, what is the, what is the
plan? How much is it going to
cost and how long is it gonna
take to implement?
Thank you and thank you Madam
Superintendent, um,
You.
In all of the responses they're
raises some concerns, obviously
we're not.
As advanced as we should, 2011
last reporting, I mean, you
know, there was a lot of
improvement and I think we need
to get as digitized as possible,
but then that requires our
smaller districts to have full
broadband internet access and
speed and all of that, so
there's a lot of things that
need to synchronize.
In order for us to be able to
get to that point, because what
I think we're doing is
disproportionately.
Addressing certain issues and
that brings me to pages the uh
appendix A. So if I, I'm
glancing through this appendix
A, and I'm seeing the different
cash balances. There's a
difference.
Obviously
from large or larger medium to
larger school districts and
schools, um, and then your
charter schools, and then you
have some small, very, very
small charter schools was very,
very low, um, cash balances.
When just looking at this and
then rural districts like for
example, reserve School District
or versus APS or others.
There's just a disproportionate
amount of cash balances. And
then there was one on on the
first page, the, the one in red,
that is that they're a negative.
They don't have a cash balance.
So all this tells me, um,
Because I'm assuming this is,
yeah, this is a combination of
district and charter schools.
Is that there again, there's a
disproportionate way in which um
We're placing schools.
In a position
It may not be, I mean, they
already know they're poor, they
already know they're in the
rural area they already know
they're trying the charter
schools that are uh trying to
fill a gap already know that
they're at a disadvantage
because they're trying to fill a
gap because they're attending or
locating in a poor community or
addressing the needs of the of
the uh poor community in that
neighborhood or those
neighborhoods. And that's what
concerns me, um, because that
I mean, we're trying to remove
the disproportionate, um,
systems that we put in place.
Where are the, we're the ones
that put these systems in place
either by our legislation
requirements, but or by uh
administrative rules, whatever
the case is, it's not the
schools at this at these levels,
Mr. Chair, um, it's institutions
and how we set them up and
manage them. So my other
question is,
And this is a particularly
referenced to charter schools.
Several years ago, um, we heard
all types of problems and
concerns coming from charter
schools years back.
Representative, um, retired
representative Trujillo and I
and others uh sponsored
legislation to stop.
To a moratorium on the approval
of charter schools so that we
could get a handle on what those
issues were. That was then.
Today,
Um, that bill obviously didn't
pass. So the question is,
Has the ongoing approval.
Of charter school applications
affected the disproportionate.
Strength, physical strength of
the schools have they, have we
placed them in that position
because we continue to approve
applications obviously to fill a
need and to fill gaps. Can you
answer that, Daniel?
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, I'm not the charter
school expert on the staff, but
you're mentioning charter
schools, the fact that charter
schools.
exists in our state. They serve
different student populations
throughout the state. There are
some
Mechanisms in place that
somewhat aren't responsive to
the needs of charter schools,
and I'm thinking particularly
about the SCG.
Uh, you all know that we're
going to come to you all with an
SCG consideration later in the
interim, just an example for
you, for you as an institutional
perspective, the SCG currently
requires that a charter school
take on the poverty indicator of
the district that is currently
located in. It requires the same
for mobility. It requires the
same for English learners. So
right off the bat in APS if you
have a pretty significant
concentration of low income
students relative to APS.
You're somewhat penalized in the
SEG by that mechanism in the
formula. If you have a lower
concentration of low-income
students in your charter school
relative to APS. You're somewhat
subsidized, somewhat by the
formula. So that's just one of
the institutional mechanisms in
place that somewhat aren't
responsive to the needs of
charter schools. And so you
pointed out that one charter
school in the Xi has a negative
cash balance. That's not.
necessarily just a matter of
institutional responsiveness to
local budgeting needs. It's also
just a matter of how they've
managed their money at the local
level. It's a combination of
both. I'm not sure if the deputy
director has more context, Mr.
Chair and Representative Roel
Cavero, I think one thing to
remember is, even though that
that bill did not pass, the
number of charter schools has
actually remained relatively
stable since that time. We've
been, we've hovered about 100
for the last.
I would say 4 or 56 years,
because even though there have
been new, some new schools
approved, uh, PEC and local
authorizers have also closed
some schools, and so we actually
haven't seen that continued
growth in charter schools that
we saw for, I would say 10 years
between, you know, early 2000s
and, and, you know, 2010. So
it's actually that number of
charter schools is actually
stabilized quite a bit.
Thank you, thank you for that.
um, uh, just one final notation,
thank you for your response.
You're, you're, you're
absolutely right. We have some
mechanisms in place and others,
um, others not. And I, I just
point out the the the one
school, it's on, uh, well,
there's not, they're not page uh
numbered, but lacademia delores
Huerta, for example, has a one
was a negative and then this one
is a very low 17,000.
And I know that there are
factors that go into this, but I
want to make sure that when
we're evaluating and making
assessments that were not
overlooking um the
That we're not continuing
disparate.
Treatments for whatever reasons.
Could be recording, reporting,
it could be lack of whatever
that we're not doing that
unintentionally or intentionally
whatever are mostly
unintentionally, um, because we
don't want to keep continuing to
Grow that
Disproportion.
We want to reduce it.
And so in order to reduce it,
because we also want to make
sure that our students are
getting the best education
possible, which is the whole
argument, reference to charter
schools, right? I believe in
public schools, uh, you know,
there's a room in place for
charter schools. However, um, I
just don't want us to be
contributing to those larger
gaps. So, Mr. Chair, thank you.
I appreciate it.
Resent.
Thanks, thanks, Mr. Chair. I
just want to salute you both
because you're really
demonstrating, um, as a
practitioner in the field and as
an analysts that our budgets
really demonstrate our values.
And so I really appreciate,
especially Superintendent, you
made some comments about how we
have to make sure we meet
student needs. Thank you. I have
a question for Daniel on page 8,
you talk about fiscal and policy
considerations, and, and one of
them and I think it's really
important is assess.
whether some below the line
programs could be, you know,
should be moved to the SCG.
were any.
When you when you wrote that,
were there specific things that
you thought, for instance, this
might be one.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, you all will hear
actual considerations at your
Friday meeting, joint meeting
with LFC. I don't want to
preempt that conversation too
much, but there will be two
programs that we jointly
proposed to you all could be
more efficient and impactful if
they flow through the SCG rather
than below the line.
And Mr. Chair, I don't want to
preempt it, but at least.
Three of us will be in Las
Cruces on Friday.
um.
And with John's approval, sure,
uh, Mr. Chan members of the
committee going into great
detail. One of the
considerations will be um at
least one portion of your $45
million appropriation for CTE
programs could be more
beneficial if it flows above the
line in the SCG and it's also
tied with our secondary factor
consideration that we'll bring
to you all in October as a
revision to the SCG, um, another
program, I don't think it's a
joint consideration right now,
but it'll be an LEC
consideration.
Most likely will be that the
family income index, your $1000
appropriation non-recurring to
the family income index. Uh, you
all heard about that last
meeting about how we found that
it was an improving student
growth. Um.
That will also be a
consideration to move above the
line into the SCG from the LESE
perspective.
Thank you, very practical
information. I appreciate it.
Senator Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and thank you for um
This
Report with regards to um.
What we do with cash balances.
And of course, um, over the time
when we've had our economic
downturns in the state, that's
the first place that we've gone
to, um, when we look for cash in
order to keep doors open.
Um, and it's been, Mr. Chair, as
many of us know, uh, I think a
point of contention.
Do we take, um, where do we use,
you know, what our school
districts using the money for
and it just, there's, it's been
a continual conversation, not
just on this committee, but also
on the LFC.
So I'll be interested to hear
what conversation we have on
Friday. Um, I, I just wanted to
go back, um, on page 5.
Um, on your report and
There's a on figure 4, it talks
about, uh, it shows us not
talks, but it shows an average
days to process reimbursements.
And of course we can see all the
reds, which of course is
concerning. Is this due to a
lack of staffing, um, at PED in
order to
Um,
Kind of, you know, keep this a
little bit much more um in the
green.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, I don't want to speak
on behalf of the PED, but what
we've heard from them is that
it's a combination of multiple
factors. It's a lack of
staffing, uh, first and
foremost, it's also the sheer
volume of requests that they get
that creates a pretty big
backlog, log backlog on their
part, um.
Those are the two main
considerations that I will talk
about without their perspective
right now. Um, but they're
currently implementing some
strategies for reducing those
reimbursement times and you see
some of that progress in FY 24,
but they're still not below the.
Um, their threshold, their goal.
OK, no, and I appreciate that,
Mr. Chair, because, um, you
know, and this is an issue for
schools, but also for even local
communities when we have capital
outlay projects on the
reimbursement. I mean, it's just
a whole series of issues. And of
course, it's affecting our
schools. And I, I also
appreciate on figure 3 where you
talk about, where you talk, yes,
in black and white, but also the
visual, um, that shows exactly
the, the process that they have
that our schools have to go.
And then, um, Mr. Chair, these
are just comments is uh.
On, on page 8, and I thought
this was, um,
To the point also of
Maybe some differences between
the LEAs and some of our charter
schools, um,
When we talk about the
reimbursement where you have
here, um.
And just for those who may be
watching, um.
NISA is allowing charter schools
to apply for an installment plan
of concern that may not have the
capacity to pay their entire
risk premium at the beginning of
the fiscal year.
And so charter schools have an
additional 3 months to pay their
risk premium, so I can
understand that, but is there a
reason why we don't offer that
to the LEAs also.
Is there any, Mr. Chair, for
those who have some
institutional memory.
Um, I don't remember myself,
but.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee, NISA has
historically had that
requirement because they they
purchase excess risk coverage
and so they're required to pay
the entire premium for that
excess risk coverage in the
first month of the fiscal year.
So they bill LEAs for their risk
coverage also in the first month
of the fiscal year. Um, it's
just been historical practice
for them to allow charter
schools to apply for an
installment plan. From what I've
heard, only 2 charter schools
have historically applied.
For the installment plan.
In the past. And I, I just, Mr.
Chair, of course, looking to
make sure that we're all kind of
equal opportunity here, making
sure because maybe there are
some school districts that could
maybe benefit from this option
also.
And um.
I think.
Some of the highlights and of
course some of your suggestions
for fiscal policy. I, I
appreciate you listing those for
us too. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Reserved block.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Daniel. Thank you,
Superintendent Hanks. Appreciate
it. A couple of quick questions
regarding pages 6 and 7 on your
report, you know, talking about
the bond ratings of these
different schools, you know, and
it talks about here that.
If they get a reduced bond
rating, it hurts with their uh
with their fees. So Mr. Chairman
and experts, I'm just wondering
how many schools have been
downgraded in the last few
years, especially during COVID,
right? And then also what, what
is the cost with those fees if
you have that on hand, Mr.
Chairman. Mr. Chair and members
of the committee, Mark is
actually our expert on Capitol
Alley, and he comes from that
space before LASE. So you
promised to answer any questions
on bond ratings.
Thank you. We have the experts
here.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Daniel. I'll try and be the
expert and see some expertly
things here.
Um, so we did an analysis for
Daniel, um, when he was looking
into this and first off, very
few districts actually have a
bond rating. Um, it's a minority
actually, as far as who's been
downgraded, um, it's, if you
read Daniel's uh.
Memo, he does a good job in
explaining the complexities of
those bond ratings. So it's
we'll take a little bit more
work to actually see what um
districts were downgraded and
what really implemented that,
especially since they do benefit
from the state's rating, uh,
they're able to get an enhanced
rating with that. Um, and then
they're also supported by the
SUG which supports them by
making payments for them that
they cannot afford. so I could
definitely do a little more
analysis for that to see who was
downgraded, but it's a little
more complex, and a little more
nuanced.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you so much for that answer
that, that helps me a lot and
it's just interesting to hear
that not many of them even have
a bond rating, but I assume it's
just easier to go through the
state and utilize that, that
bond rating that the state.
Helps with that. So, uh, OK, Mr.
Chairman, another quick question
on, on the next page, page 7
we're talking about uh using
operations funds for capital
outlay. So we've heard in
multiple meetings about certain
school districts saying that,
well, we need to have cash on
hand to get these projects
funded and I guess it comes from
ops. So I'm just wondering, Mr.
Chairman, and maybe this is a
question for Deputy
Superintendent Hanks. I know
each school district is
different when it comes to needs
and capital.
Because in Albuquerque, APS has
a bunch of state representatives
and senators in the area that
dunk millions and millions of
dollars into projects. And in my
district, we have, we have 2 or
3, right? So it's, it's much
different. So I'm wondering, is
there something that you see
from a more rural district. I
wouldn't say it's a small
district, but a more rural
district, what rural schools
need more of when it comes to
capital outlay to have that cash
balance but also have.
Make sure that your projects
actually get finished, right?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Romero, uh,
representative block, so part of
the concerns is the adequacy
formula in the capital outlay
formula. So, for example, um,
off-site utilities or outside of
adequacy so if you need to
connect to a main line that's
100% on the district. Um, things
like a gym, uh, large enough to
fit the capacity of your
community. Gym space is
restricted with gymnasium space,
um, a facility like we're
sitting in today is not funded.
Um, so if you want a facility
like the one that we're sitting
in today, you would have to pay
for that 100%. We, we don't pay
for things like that because we
do tend to target our funds at
slightly larger classrooms. Um,
so to adequacy there's a certain
amount of square footage that's
allowed for classrooms. Our
district is a full college and
career pathway district. So
every um student in our high
schools, no matter where they're
located, has the opportunity to
engage in a pathway that can get
them certified prior to leaving
high school.
Also all of our students are
eligible to enroll in an early
college high model, which we pay
for, where they can get an
associate's degree before they
graduate high school. Um, so
there are certain things that we
do pay for that are outside of
adequacy that we do need to come
up with additional funding for.
We have pretty limited capacity,
um, because we are restricted to
6% of our assessed valuation.
Um, assessed valuation is
dependent upon the economic
viability of our county. Um, as
I mentioned earlier, we had two
pretty significant hits.
With the loss of the, um,
refinery as well as the loss of
the power plant and then our
county actually lost a
litigation over grazing rights
and cost of grazing rights land,
um, that, that, that issued a
pretty precipitous decline, um,
So we do have to supplement by
utilizing those funds. Our
district, um, is in
While our schools are maintained
well enough to get within the
ranking, um, the facility
condition index ranking by the
capital LA. We currently have 10
schools that are authorized for
full replacement right now. And
with the cost in the rural
areas, for example, if I, I, two
of my schools that are looking
at replacement is Navajo Pine
High School. And if you're
familiar with Navajo, New
Mexico, there is not a lot of
places for construction staff to
put up their crews. They're not
supplemental crews in that
that they're going to be able to
hire. So we're going to pay a
premium in order for them to
bring in crews to that rural
area. And so our cost per square
footage is coming anywhere
between $900 and $1000 a square
foot. And it's some of those
premiums that we are paying.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman,
and I, I think that's a really
salient point, especially with
the cost because any
construction project that we
have to, we have to put a RFP
out and get, get a bid and
everything. It's hard enough to
get a bit at all, and especially
in rural districts and places in
our state, it's even harder and
more expensive. So that's
something I think we need to
take into careful consideration
with and uh I just appreciate
your presentations, a lot of, a
lot of statistics, a lot of
accounting, it brings me back to
business school.
So I appreciate it, Mr.
Chairman, and uh I, I thank you
all. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. I don't have anybody
else on my list. Um, I did have
one question, um, Deputy
Superintendent, so you mentioned
there at the end, how PED is
tracking cash balances and
utilizing a couple of different
systems and then like with
encumbered, it's not even
tracked at all, um, but I was
wondering if what what sort of
issues do you see as um
Having the department track
these funds on different systems
or not at all? Or is it an issue
at all?
Chairman, that's a great
question. Um, actually, I think
that the, and this is, this is a
question we have in our district
as well. So we're, we've built
our own data dashboard. Because,
of course, we're trying to track
why or if programs that we are
implementing are working, are
they working well or are they
not working? What's the problem?
And so I suspect the state is
doing the exact same. And so
everybody always says every LEA
has a different story. Well, 89
school districts over 100
charter schools, that's a lot of
stories to hear every single
month. And so if
There was a consolidated
reporting, um, space where you
could see, OK, this school
traditionally has extensive
amounts of turnover. Well, what
do you ask after that? You ask
why? Why do they have extensive
turnover, those types of things
which could be generating cash
balances. Um, the other piece
about that that, that I put out
there is a very far away
concern, very far away concern,
is that because encumbrances are
not tracked, those are legally
binding contracts between the
LEA and event.
What happens if
Due to turnover. We do know
that, you know, our business
officials are not as extensively
turned over as our
superintendents, but there is a
cohort of turnover that happens
there. What happens between one
year and the next without
multi-year planning, you roll
over more purchase orders than
you have money to satisfy.
And what happens if that starts
happening at 10 LEAs, 15 LEAs,
50 LEAs. Well, ultimately, the
state's on the line for that,
and you don't even know what we
have obligated out there.
Right, I certainly appreciate
you bringing up that issue and
uh appreciate your expertise
today. Thank you, Daniel. Thank
you all.
Thank you.
All right, folks, so we'll move
on to our next agenda item,
which is the general fund
revenue estimates.
This will take a moment.
Remember folks, the next item
we're going to be talking about,
um.
Personnel issues, so it relates
to the committee, um, so we'll
need voting members certainly
for the next issue as it comes
up, but we're a little bit
behind schedule, which is all
right.
Daniel, alright, please. All
right, still me, I'm Daniel. I
cover public school finance for
the LESC.
I still Daniel, we are now on
item 4 of your binder with the
preliminary revenue estimates
for FY 26. Uh, as in previous
years, we are very grateful for
the partnership that we have
with LFC and the other Craig
members where they come to your
committee to give you an
opportunity to hear the revenue
estimates for the following
fiscal year, as well as give you
an opportunity to ask questions.
About the revenue estimates. So
today we have Jenniber Fabian.
Economist with the LFC here to
present the preliminary revenue
estimates for FY 26.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, let me move this
a little closer.
As Daniel said, my name is
Jennifer Fabian. I'm an
economist with the LFC. I have a
colleague here with me, Brendan
Gray. He's behind in case there
are questions that I can't
answer, playing a little bit of
a backup for me. Um, really
grateful to be here this
morning. I'm gonna jump right
into it. I'm working off of our
Money Matters brief. We
presented this last month to the
LFC.
It's our August estimate. We'll
have another estimate in
December, and that's the revenue
estimate that you all will use,
um, that the LFC will use and
that the legislature as a whole
will use, um, to form budgets
and the executive as well. So
I'm gonna jump right into it. I
know we're short on time.
So on the first page, um,
quickly that blue box just tells
you who the Craig is. The Craig
is now 12 economists from the
Department of Transportation,
the LFC, uh, taxation and
Revenue Department and
Department of Finance. We come
together a couple times a year,
um, come up with these revenue
estimates, and I'm going to get
into that now. So if I 24, um,
the, the budget year we just
concluded in June.
Revenues came in at $13 billion.
It's in the in the box, um, at
the top of the page. That was a
12.5% increase over FY 23. The
current fiscal year budgets are
revenues are looking pretty
flat. We're actually down 0.2%
from FY 23. This was very much
expected. It's actually an
upward revision from the August
or from the last December
estimate, um, a lot of this is
legislative changes, tax cuts
that the legislature has
implemented. I'll get into some
of those in more detail a little
bit later.
But just kind of 30,000 ft view,
revenue is basically flat in the
current fiscal year.
Looking into the budget year, FY
26, revenues are growing at
about 2.8%, up to $13.4 billion
pretty moderating growth and
that's going to be something I'm
going to say over and over again
during this presentation,
moderating growth, moderating
growth. Um, you can see down on
the bottom of this page that
chart in the bottom right, you
can see how high our revenues
climbed in FY 22 and 23, we were
looking at 20% growth, um, year
over year.
so unprecedented in our history
and that's only happened once or
twice before since the 60s. Um,
we're coming back down, like I
said, a little bit of a negative
revenue growth in the current
fiscal year and then moderating
into the out years. We just
presented our long term forecast
yesterday to the LFC and I'll
tell you that those kind of
moderating normal kind of level
of growth is what we expect in
the outyear around 3%.
So looking at the graph, the
first graph on the right, um,
kind of in the middle of the
page is our new money figure. So
the LSC and the Craig as a whole
kind of shifted our perspective
on calculating new money as
non-recurring revenue started
going up and became a much
larger share of the budget. Um,
looking at new money, just
looking at recurring didn't make
a lot of sense. Um, so we
started looking at new money as
money that's coming in above
total appropriations. That
figure is 6.
$660 million if you want to go
back to kind of the old new
money figure, that's about $3.1
billion. So revenues coming in
in FY 26 over the last approved
budget of FY 25, 3.1.
Money coming in over total
spending including non-recurring
660 million. So moving on to
page 2, that top left graph
shows you from FY 23 to FY 24
where that kind of negative $20
million is coming from. Um, our
GRT is up $84 million. Income
taxes are down. Again, a lot of
that was legislative changes,
personal income tax cuts, um,
child tax credits, increase to
working families in liter,
things like that that are coming
online, things that we're
phasing in.
Um, so we expected that to
happen. That was not a surprise.
Severance taxes are slightly
down, uh, interest earnings are
up $105 million rent royalties
from oil and gas is also down
slightly. Other revenues
slightly up. That gets us to
that, that $20 million.
Decrease from FY24.
I'm gonna go now into kind of
the underlying economic
forecast, the Craig uses
national forecasters and some
local forecasters to underpin
our revenue estimates. This is
coming from S&P Global, Moody's
Analytics, and Bieber out of
UNM, um, who does, they do kind
of a combination of national and
New Mexico specific economic
forecasts.
So on the bottom left of page 2,
you can see inflation is
expected to moderate over time.
That'll help bring some of these
costs down a little bit, um,
normalizing, uh, inflation over
time. That's going to follow the
federal funds reductions. Those
are expected to come back down
to 2.5% by the end of FY 26.
Looking at employment on the
next page, on page 3. You can
see New Mexico total employment
forecast is up from our last
estimate.
But again, moderation, you can
see that gray line shot up after
the COVID pandemic. Our recovery
in employment was really um
quite extreme. We are, we have
recovered all of our jobs. We're
up, uh, I think 3%, um, from
pre-pandemic employment numbers,
so totally recovered in
employment as well as wages and
salaries in the state. Uh, you
can see your your employment
growth is gonna drop from, you
know, 6%, 7% back down to under
2% and kind of stabilize around
there.
In the long run. But again,
starting to flatten out, things
are starting to look more normal
after we settle in after the
recovery of, of COVID.
Wages and salaries are similar
trajectory, steady inclines in
wages and salaries. This follows
inflation forecasts as well, um,
but wage and salaries are
expected to outpace inflation in
the state.
Moving on to page 4, we're going
to start talking about oil and
gas. Um, it's a major revenue
stream in the state, um, so kind
of underlying the oil and gas
forecast is, um, kind of looking
at page 4 and page 5
simultaneously, um, production
is expected to continue to
increase, although again slowing
in pace. You can see those kind
of S-shaped graphs on page 5.
We're going to be reaching our
production peak here in the next
couple of years. We're gonna
plateau for a while before we
start decreasing. Um, in the
long term, you can really see
that.
Pump, um, we're going to start
coming down. Um, we'll talk
about how the investments in the
permanent funds and the Early
Childhood Trust Fund is really
helping us insulate from some of
that a little bit later in the
forecast. But oil and gas has
really
Exploded in the last couple of
years. It's nearly quintupled
since 2017 production levels.
Um, you can see that in the
graph on the top of page 4, New
Mexico, um, just really the
premium basin came online really
in 2020 with full force. So
there are some advancements in
technology, some consolidation,
some real big investments.
Fracking came online and really
exploded growth in the Permian.
Uh, New Mexico drove 50% of
total US oil and gas growth.
year, New Mexico is really the
premium basin, especially on the
New Mexico side, is really
driving oil and gas in the US,
um, it became, became a major
player in about 5 years, which
is quite incredible. You can see
on the bottom left that growth
381% in New Mexico, Texas, 77%,
which is still an extraordinary
growth, almost doubling.
The US at 49%, North Dakota 21%.
So you can see New Mexico really
took off, became a major player
in a short period of time.
Moving on to page 50, and just
you can see on page 5 some of
the underlying assumptions for
oil and gas prices are going to
moderate $71 a barrel is our
forecast for FY 26, down a
little bit from what we saw this
year or last fiscal year around
$78 a barrel, um, volumes are
increasing but moderating.
Oh.
Background music. If I could
sing, I'd sing you this, um,
presentation.
Um,
so moving on to GRT. It's our
largest revenue stream into the
general fund, um, looking at
that chart in the bottom of page
5. You can see where GRT is
really coming from. Almost a
third coming from Eddie and Lee.
Almost all of that is
attributable to the oil and gas
industry, um.
Indirectly and directly, there's
transportation, there's
construction that has GRT on it,
as well as a lot of the
underlying, you know,
hospitality and leisure sectors,
a lot of that's supported by oil
and gas and Eddie and Lee.
So moving on to page 6.
MTGR, which is a great measure
of the underlying spending in
the state. Um, instead of
tracking just revenue, which can
be influenced by rate changes at
the, at the local level and at
the state level, we look at kind
of what's taxable under GRT and
how that's changing. It's very
consistent across time. Um,
that's what you see when it says
MTGR MTGR has really shifted in
23, the largest um driver of
that growth was mining. But as
we see that industry start to
slow down and taper off the
Basin is maturing. It's not
quite exploding. It's kind of at
a steady state. That growth is
really shifting into other
industries and some technology
and construction industries.
And you can see your growth from
24 and 23, and that kind of
chart with the blue bars in the
middle of the page, um, and
what's kind of comprising of all
of our GRT by industry.
So moving on to severance taxes
and federal royalties. Again, I
already talked about, um, kind
of the underlying forecast for
oil and gas, but talking
specifically about these
distributions. So I know this
committee is pretty interested
in how these investments are
paying off.
So what the legislature did kind
of at the perfect time, I have
to say, um, somehow read the
crystal ball, the oil and gas
was going to be growing. So, and
I think it was 2019 past the
early childhood trust fund bill
that kind of took the rolling
average 5 years of oil and gas
revenue and diverted the excess
of that into the early childhood
trust fund. You can see these
two graphs on page 7.
kind of a visual of what that
looks like those orange bars are
the early childhood trust fund
distributions. The blue bars are
the general fund.
So you can see in FY 22 and 23,
those years where oil and gas
really, really exceeded
expectations, um, picked up well
above the five year averages.
The early childhood trust fund
received significantly more oil
and gas revenue than the general
fund did in those two years.
As the fiber averages kind of
caught up to those exploding
revenue figures from oil and
gas. You can see that that share
that's going to early early
child trust and start to
diminish
that insulating effect kind of
started to go away, but we were
still experiencing revenues well
above what the general fund
really needed to support budget
growth, and so the legislature,
you all again had the great
foresight to cap oil and gas
revenues at FY 24 levels. You
can see those blue bars.
Excuse me.
Really, they just become flat,
um, after FY 24.
And what that does, that
difference between what the
early childhood Trust Fund was
receiving and what the general
fund is going to receive with
that cap is getting put into the
severance tax permanent fund.
I'll talk a little bit about how
interest earnings are going to
affect the general funded a
little bit, but basically that's
what you're seeing.
Um, and just some numbers for
you here, um,
together the school tax and
federal mineral royalty
distributions to the Early
Childhood Trust Fund.
Um, for FY 24, our preliminary
preliminarily estimated at $1.85
billion. And then from 25 to 29,
they're gonna, it's gonna
receive another 1.84% from
royalties and 1.25 billion of
severance taxes. So it's
continuing to get money, um, the
balances are
Very large, I think approaching
8 billion now and then estimated
to be over $10 billion within
the forecast period. Um,
Additionally, an estimated $3.2
billion of school tax and 4.4%
or $4.84 billion of federal
royalty distributions are
estimated to reach the severance
Additionally, an estimated $3.2
billion of school tax and 4.4%
or $4.84 billion of federal
royalty distributions are
estimated to reach the
severances Permanent Fund
between FY 29 and 25 and FY 29,
excuse me. So putting a lot of
money into those funds, um, and
now on page 8, let's talk about
what that looks like. So you're
putting this money in and then
it's gonna spin off interest
earnings back into the general
fund.
And so that chart on the top
left of page 8, you can see
percent change in recurring
general fund revenue year over
year and you can see interest
earnings are skyrocketing. It's
the fastest growing revenue
source the year to year average
in this forecast period is 12.5%
growth. um, while surpassing the
averages of every other revenue
stream we have which average
around 4.5% within this forecast
period. Um, and it's really
driving it. By FYA I think 2.
6, it's going to overtake
personal income tax as the share
of general fund and become the
2nd largest, uh, stream of
revenue into the general fund
after GRT. In the long run, it's
going to surpass GRT, um, within
the next 25 years and become
this very, very stable, um,
very, it's shielded from
volatility that we see in oil
and gas because it's just
spinning off from interest and
becomes really like the linchpin
of our general fund.
There is other interest earnings
that are coming out of the state
general or out of the
treasurer's office.
Um, it's caused a lot of
volatility in our general fund.
It's a small share of general
funds, um, but our chief
economist did a volatility study
of revenue, and state
treasurer's office earnings as
well as uh corporate income tax
earnings are two most volatile
revenue streams. I'm going to
talk about this a little bit
later, but it does inject some
instability. The state
treasurer's office earnings are
much more influenced by
short-term interest rates.
Not as stable as things that are
put into the permanent fund.
So moving on to income taxes,
income tax revenues decreased in
FY 24, which again, we expected.
Uh, this was, um,
Because of uh legislative
changes, tax cuts, as well as
just a softening of the labor
market, not quite as hot as it
was a couple of years ago, wages
kind of coming down, slowing
down. Um, so we expected that.
You can see the impact of the
tax expenditures on page 9. So
the estimate income taxes
without the last five years of
tax, um, expenditures in the
green and then the red is what
we actually forecast. So we've
had a lot of revenue.
You guys decided to give a lot
of that back to taxpayers, and
that's where we're seeing it
mostly in personal income tax.
Corporate income taxes are also
moderating. We're actually
expecting some revenue declines,
both in the underlying forecast
and as a result of increased
film tax credits. You can see in
the the middle graph on page 9.
The blue bars are our nets.
That's what the general fund
will actually take home. Those
orange bars, the film tax
credit, where we expect those to
do, and the total of that would
be the total sit, um, corporate
income tax revenue should the
film tax not happen and you can
see those lines do kind of dip
and come back up. There is some
decline uh there anyway, but the
film tax credit does exacerbate
that decline.
So just moving back to personal
income tax, uh,
and in corporate income tax as
well. Just want to make the
point that overall tax changes
between Pitt and Sit in 2019 and
2024, um, have totaled if they
had not been been made, the
total in FY 25 would have been
$778 million 834 million dollars
in FY 26, um, and your, your
growth in these revenues would
have been about 2.8% points
higher, which would have been in
line with historical.
growth rates. So we have eroded
the corporate income tax
intentionally.
Reversions have also been a big
risk to our forecast lately, um,
on page 10, you can see our
state agency general fund
reversions in millions. These
large budget increases,
especially with non-recurring,
but also recurring as well.
We're seeing larger reversions
than we've ever seen before. And
these are very hard to predict.
We usually don't know until
June, the close of the fiscal
year, which makes sense. They're
trying to disperse those funds,
get those funds out the door
until the last minute. Uh, and
then we get kind of slapped with
this big reversion, which is
side risk, it usually beefs up
our general fund revenues, um,
at the end of the year, but it
is becoming a much larger share
with increased budgets. It's
hard for agencies to get the
money out the door.
Just wanted to draw attention to
that. We expect that to
continue in the next couple of
years, uh, as these
non-recurring.
Appropriations, time out after 3
years or 2 years, uh, we do
expect reversions to continue.
There are some risks to this
forecast, um,
You know, the feds have a
meeting today. We'll see if they
do a 25 or 0% change. Um,
But we do, we have built into
the forecast that the federal
funds rate will decline and come
to kind of a, a baseline 2.5%.
Um, by 2026, at the end of 2026.
And that's all built in, that's
been expected for a while,
especially with the cooling of
the labor economy and such.
But there's always going to be
risks that there's another
recession, there's not one built
into this forecast, um, but I
will talk about on page.
13, we do some shock analysis,
some stress tests on these
revenue forecasts.
So on page 13, you can see kind
of 4 scenarios. We have in the
green line, a high revenue
scenario. This is if
Oil and gas does really well.
Um, prices remain elevated,
production continues. We don't
see the decline as soon as we
think. Um, it's really driven by
oil and gas in the high side,
but also just the general
underlying economy performing a
little bit better. The black
line is the baseline. The yellow
line is a kind of a depressed
economic scenario and the red
line is a is a detrimental oil
and gas bust, um, and we can see
here those blue bars underneath
those lines are the.
Avenue with some moderate growth
built into the forecast.
The blue is the recurring and
the kind of gray bars above that
or non-recurring. So we can see
here that reserves are at a
really good level, where even in
the worst case scenario, there's
enough money to kind of weather
this storm in the short run.
Um, on page 12, you can see here
that in FY 25 and 26, we would
need $1.5 billion in 25 $2
billion.26 to cover existing
expenditures if we keep budgets
flat. So in total about $3.5
billion are needed to cover the
next couple of years, um, should
this low scenario happen, this
lowest scenario, and reserves
are sitting at 3.1 billion right
now. So we're kind of right at
that.
sweet spot right now where
reserves could cover 2 years in
the worst case scenario. It will
not cover if that worst-case
scenario continues into the
future. But the great thing
about it is, at this point, you
guys would have time to come
back to the table as a
legislature reprioritize, um,
you're buying yourself a little
bit of runway.
They also, the great thing about
putting this money, all this oil
and gas money into other funds
is that they take the hit first
from an oil and gas bust. Uh,
the general fund is insulated
for quite a while. There's
quite, there's still billions of
dollars going into these funds
every year, and those are going
to take the hit first before the
general fund. On page 14, we can
see some trend lines. We do a 10
year trend just to see kind of
where revenues are hitting. Um,
last forecast, we were just
skyrocketing above.
Um, we had been under
forecasting for a little while.
No one really expected the
economy to do what it had done
in the last couple of years, but
we are returning to trend. Um,
you can see here, we're, we're
kind of right at that 10 year
trend line as we move forward.
severance tax revenue as well,
pretty helpfully above the trend
in the short term, but by the
out years, again, kind of right
on that blue line.
And then lastly, on page 15, we
have our reserve levels here
just outlined for you as a as a
reference for you all, um,
And with that, I'm going to
stand for questions. Um, I do
have some resources on land
grant permanent fund
distributions. I know that's
very important to you all as the
Common school fund is the
largest um receiver of those
monies. I will point out in that
first appendix,
The land grant permanent fund
interest into the general fund
in FY 24 was $1.2 billion. Uh,
most of that goes to the Common
school fund, um, which is a
general fund account, um, but
coming out of a land grant
permanent fund of that 240 is
that increased 1.25% that was
passed in the constitutional
amendment with about 144 going
to early childhood in '96 going
to public education, um,
So that is a result of that
constitutional amendment for
school funding. So with that all
stand for questions, I went so
fast, um, so I know I threw a
lot at you, happy to stand for,
for any questions you all have.
Great. Thank you, Senator Souls.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
How much is in currently in the
severance tax permanent fund?
Approximately
I'm gonna look to Brennan. He
just did our investment report.
About 5 billion.
$5 billion.05 billion dollars
because the numbers I'd heard
recently is we have something
like $28 billion is what are,
where does that number come from
or where are the big amounts?
Let me, let me check. I think I
have it here, and I may have my
titles of which funds off.
Here he comes. My numbers guys
and how much is in the early
childhood fund early childhood I
have in the appendix. So if you
look at appendix number.
5.
You can see in 2024 we're
sitting at $8 billion. This is
preliminary but pretty close to
what we think it will be. We
have most revenue figures, I
think through March, um, and
again growing to $12 billion in
the out years.
So maybe my question how much is
in the other permanent funds.
The land grant permanent fund I
know has um $27 billion. It's in
the brief, and I can pull that
for you. And then Brendon
Williams at the permanent that
might have been the one I was
asking about, but between those
other.
Funds that essentially we can't
touch without, you know, major
two-thirds things, how much are
in those funds? Mr. Chair,
ballpark.
47
billion, uh, and the severance
tax is $10 billion.
That was my 7 billion in those
funds. That's correct, yeah,
land grant, uh, permanent funds,
severance tax and Mr. Chair,
lots of this is talking about
how we're still planning on
sweeping additional money in.
How much money do we need to
have in those before we think
we've got enough?
That is a question for you all.
It's a, it's a just a budgetary
question um depends on how much
you want to be pulling out, how
much you want to be spinning off
to early childhood programs,
spinning into the general fund.
Um, it really depends. I will
tell you in the long run, at
this point, um, the break even
point between putting money in
the severance tax permanent
fund, and the difference between
spinning it off versus keeping
it in the general fund, that
break even where you're going to
be earning more than you would
have if you hadn't made those
investments.
Is FY 2040.
So Mr. Chan, you said there's 8
billion already in the early
childhood, so we've got lots of
money there and my understanding
is I watched, they're not
putting much of that money out
right now. And 47 billion. What
is the ROI on money that we've
got invested like that compared
to other places that we might
invested in early childhood, for
instance.
Yeah, the, the permanent funds
typically earn between 6 and 7%
a year. Their target is
typically 7%. Um, the trade-off
between investing it, for
example, in education or in
early childhood now in programs
is a very difficult ROI to
calculate. Um, it's, it's tricky
to know how these investments
are paying off in the very long
run. So again, that's really a
question about where you want to
appropriate money and your
priorities investing now versus
spreading that money out and and
setting up
Revenue into the future. Um,
it's, it's hard to tell. Mr.
Chair, the reason I ask is the
ROI for investments in early
childhood are very clear in
about 13 to 14 times, not
percent times.
You all are the economists. What
would the ROI be of just
investing it for the interest
long term, you know, isn't that
something that's calculable?
Or I mean, all of them are
estimates, obviously, but.
And I
You're right, Mr. Chair, Senator
Soz, I think it's, it's hard to
calculate exactly how state
fiscal funds would react to
investments in early childhood.
We know it reaps benefits in the
long run for outcomes for
children, how that trickles in
through our state revenues is
another, another calculation
that uh I don't think anyone has
really dug into and it would be
very difficult to determine. Um,
it would, it would flow through
general economic benefits of
those investments, how that
trickles into wages.
how that might affect GRT all of
those things are, are almost
indeterminate in the long run,
um, but I think you're right,
those are, those are the
questions that you all are
elected to to discuss and talk
about and, and it's, it's
tricky.
Mr. Chair, and my concern is
we've got kids now, they can't
wait till 2040 when these are
self-sustaining because
They're going to be adults and
they'll have lost their
childhood if we don't make those
investments now. Um, and for the
last several years we've had
cash reserves at 35, 37%, which
means that money wasn't working
towards building New Mexico's
needs, it was getting swept into
getting interest for the future,
those kids lost out and we
continue to have those kinds of
things. We have kids living in
poverty, the schools are in
need, uh, we lack housing,
families.
Um,
I guess.
Yeah, and I realized that some
of the finance committee, but it
certainly is the, the staff of
the finance committee is our
financial strategy to save money
and live off the interest while
we have
Almost half of our children
living at or near poverty, that
doesn't make sense to me. Uh,
yet that seems to be what I hear
regularly is not a plan for how
we're going to to help our
citizens live better and how
that's going to help economics
overall, but to continue to live
essentially off of the oil and
gas money by putting it in and
living off the interest in the
future so that we will be
mediocre forever, where we've
got opportunities to make big
investments and again, uh, Nobel
laureate, uh, Heckman.
indicated the ROI for
investments in early childhood
are 13 to 14 times, which is
better than you can get almost
anywhere.
Our strategy doesn't make sense
to me that, you know, we are,
you know, kind of gets back to
my initial question, how much is
enough if we've got 47 billion
in there, do we need 100 billion
before the bean counters are
happy with how big it is, you
know, is it $50 billion? How
much until we feel like we're
comfortable enough. Uh, let me
get back to a question.
Mr. Chair, I understand that the
cash reserves this year are set
for 25% is the target.
I don't, Mr. Chair, I unders, I
don't believe the target has
been set for the next fiscal
year. I think 30% was what was,
uh, the last budget year that
was the governors and the LFC's
target level, um, we're coming
in, I think around 35%.
So the target was set at 30,
35%.
That's approximately $500,000
over what the target was.
Have you looked at what Moody's
and the financial groups are
indicating ought to be our cash
reserve targets to whether
An economic downturns,
I just attended a Moody's
webinar on this exact issue last
week, um, they noted
really the, the rise of reserve
levels, but how it is pretty
appropriate given how volatile
revenues have been in the last
couple of years. A lot of states
have, um, seen these increased
revenues, cut taxes, and Moody's
is quite concerned that, you
know, the tax cuts are forever,
but the revenue increases
aren't, um, so they do
recommend.
the States, especially those
that have more volatile revenues
like New Mexico. They pointed
out New Mexico, Wyoming, Alaska,
as very volatile revenue states.
Um, they don't go as far as
setting a target level, but they
do say you want to have a couple
years' worth of um kind of that
shock, that stress test that
I've mentioned in the bank, um,
to weather that storm and buy
time to reprioritize.
Mr. Chair, and I just pulled up
the, the Moody's things and
Alaska is the one that's in the
most trouble in Wyoming, New
Mexico is 4th from
The best.
Yet we still are planning
reserves at well over 20% where
I think Moody's indicates for an
extraordinary downturn about
18%.
Last year, the target was
somewhere around 35% and I heard
from the finance chair small
that the target this year is
going to be about 25. What's
changed between last year and
this year?
To change the target by $1
billion.
I don't, I'm not sure the target
is changing that much, that
much, Mr. Chair and Senator
Souls. I will say Moody's did in
this last presentation that just
came out, um, they said that in
their stress tests, New Mexico
would take an over 25% hit,
um, should their stress scenario
bear out, um, and that's a
single year, um, again, multiple
years is nice in case that shock
is long lasting, in terms of
budget priorities, um, again,
that's, that hasn't been
published or discussed fully
with the LF.
I think they're just getting
budget requests now. Um, they
just received the long-term
estimate yesterday. So I think
those discussions are ongoing,
um, revenues.
The the forecast between last
year and this year haven't
changed a whole lot. It's a
little bit elevated in the near
term, but that kind of slowdown
is consistent with what we put
out last year. Um, so that
underlying factor, I don't think
it's changed much between last
year and this year, Mr. Chair,
you indicated Moody's has said
25%. Can I get a copy of that
memo or where they say that and,
and what that is because I
haven't been able to find that
as I look through any of the
things that they indicate on
their stress, things.
Substantially lower and closer
to what the historical cash
balance recommendations of 10 to
15% indicate. And so I would
love to actually see a memo that
says we recommend New Mexico
have this much.
Uh, because I haven't been able
to, to find it.
Anywhere.
Trying to think I have another
question or two.
Yeah, it, I just as I've looked
at this over the years, the
people doing the economic
forecasting have been wrong most
of the time by a bunch. I'm
looking on page 13 that shows
the last several years, you
know, missing the, the revenue
by about $1 billion you know,
over the rosiest of cases, you
know, it doesn't give a lot of
confidence in the, the
predictions that nobody saw it.
Saw those things coming and then
concern.
I'm trying to remember which
page it was on. We got a lot of
stuff, but that show that the
transfers to the general fund is
essentially flat over the next
several years, which looks like
it indicates not letting
legislatures and get the
finance, it's us doing it to
ourselves but not spending the
money to change situations in
New Mexico but but pulling it
all up into these permanent
funds. Um, and again, I go back
to we've got half of our kids
living at or near poverty, and
we seem to be worried about
their children.
or grandchildren in 2050. That's
concerning. Thank you, Ms. Sher.
Thank you. Other questions from
members?
Not seeing any others. Thank you
all for being here and answering
our questions and presenting to
us. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, thank you for being
here. On that point, I will say,
Senator Souls, we like to say
that we like weathermen are one
of the only employer, you know,
jobs you can have where you can
be wrong 100% of the time and
still be employable. We're never
gonna get it entirely right, but
we try our best
of them should be above and half
should be low and they've been
all wrong in the same direction
we did in the last 6 years.
With that on that point, you
sounded like you spent a lot of
time in the house, on the house
side.
Alright, um, so folks, we'll go
to item number 5 or personnel
updates. We'll have our deputy
director. Um, we do have our
voting members in a quorum here,
so if I could get a motion on
the agenda that we're half a day
through.
and vodka.
I make a motion to approve the
agenda, um, as presented. Thank
you. sick of it. Thank you,
Representative Garrett. Is there
any objection to our agenda,
seeing none, we have that. We
also have our minutes from the
July meeting. I'm sure you all
did your homework and your
reading, and they get emotion on
those minutes. All right, thank
you, Senator Stewart, seconded
by Represent Mino Val Moya. Is
there any objection, seeing
none.
We have the minutes from July.
Thank you. So Deputy Director,
please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, we've
got 9 minutes till our scheduled
lunch. My goal is to get us out
on time.
Um.
So, so that
The purpose of this is to do a
couple of things. The first one
is a personnel update for you
all, um, and I see
Representative Garrett looking
through our pictures that will
need to be updated soon. So
there's a couple of, of, of
changes, one of which I'll talk
about in a minute and you
already know about. The other 1
may not be as uh everyone may
not know it, and I'm going to
mention that one first, and
that's about Manny. So when I
introduced our staff this
morning, you may have noticed
that I didn't introduce Manny,
who's our committee services and
administrative assistant. He has
a
I think effectively gotten a
promotion. He's still working
for the legislature, but he's
working with IT with our IT
folks at the legislature now, so
he's still in the building. He's
been in the office to fix our
computers over the last couple
of weeks actually, uh, but he's
off, uh, I guess I'll say the
greener pastures for him at
least. And we, we miss him a
lot, um, if there are some
snafus in our, in our meeting
today. I'm going to chalk it up
to how good Matty was at his job
and how bad we are at replacing
him collectively.
right? So we're, we're um just
want to thank many publicly for
all the things he did for us at
LESC. He was a smiling face
whenever you came into the
office, obviously you saw him
running around doing all our
tech things and and other stuff.
Uh, you all got his emails in in
trying to organize all these
meetings and so we're going to
miss many, but we wish him the
best of luck in his new job,
and, and again, we're lucky
enough that we can still get to
see him.
So I just wanted to let you know
about that. We're going to post
uh we had a position, we have
his position posted where uh
having some thoughts about
whether or not that's the
position we need or with some
adjustments to that position
based on the need of the of the
staff and so we'll definitely
keep you all updated as to
what's happening with that. Uh,
the other, um, is, is one that
um
We're probably all very sad
about. And that's, that's uh
director Perea Warnerman's
decision to take a job with a
Lano Foundation as CEO and
president of the foundation for
the most of you already know
this, but she's, she worked
there for a long time before
being appointed deputy secretary
to PED back in 2019. And so in a
lot of ways, this is a
homecoming for her, but she gets
to call all the shots now, she,
you know, at at Lionel
Foundation. So we are extremely
um.
Sad to see her go.
I think we also want to express
very publicly our, our gratitude
and appreciation for all the
things she did for us as staff,
um,
We, I think we all grew
professionally and personally
because of her guidance and
mentorship. Obviously she shaped
uh in in large ways, our work
and the way that we present our
work to you and um a lot of the
forward thinking and planning
that we've, that we've put in
for you as a result of the way
that she thought of education
and in the vast experience that
she brought to her role as
director. And so again, we're,
we're um
Extremely sad, maybe no one's
sadder than me. Uh, we got, we,
well, we got, we worked very
closely for those of you who
didn't know, the two of us
worked very closely at the
department. I would say, and I
told the staff this, the two of
us probably work together on a
daily basis for better part of 5
years, more than 5 years, and
so, uh, we're all, we're all sad
to see her go. Um, the technical
pieces of that.
Um, is that we wanted to make
sure that um we suggested
transparency in the process of
both accepting her resignation
formally as a committee.
Um, and then making a decision
about filling the director role
on an interim basis. And then I
think the the chair can probably
say a little bit more about the
process to find a permanent
replacement for Director Pre
Ornament.
Right. Thank you, John. Um.
So I guess the first practical
side is we would have to vote on
accepting um our director's
resignation. Um, so if I could
get a motion for her
resignation. What happens if
reluctant, um, I, I don't know
if
We could take her from the Lano
Foundation, but we could voice
their disapproval.
Well thank you and the second by
Representative Mira Balmoya, um,
any objection, saying no.
Oh wow, well, I guess objection
to the proposal, but totally
understand that. Um, the next
thing is, as John mentioned, is
that we would need to appoint an
interim director, um,
so with that, obviously John has
served as deputy um for the
past.
years and has done a fantastic
job working with all of us,
working with our director Gwen,
um, on the initiatives moving
forward, so, um, certainly I
thought it would be best.
To have John continue in the
interim role, so we have that
continuity,
um because we do need a motion
for that, Mr. Chairman, um.
Did you have something to say
before we go to the motion? I
was actually gonna make the
motion I had Representative
Garrett, jump in first and just
because you took the last one,
I'm gonna get it here,
Mr. Chair, I move that we
appoint John Cena as the interim
director of the Legislative
Education Study Committee. I'll
takes Baca as a second on that.
Any objection to appointing John
as our interim director, seeing
none.
John
Interim director. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And then if I could, um,
The process for, um, I don't
know, I got.
And pop up ad when I was reading
the Albuquerque Journal on my
phone, um, for the directorship,
um, so council service is
collecting cover letters,
applications, um.
For the process, um,
Alonzo here at LESC is helping
out partly with that initiative
because he has experience in the
previous director's search, um,
so thank you for helping out
with that. Um, and we're
accepting applications until
October, I can't remember, it's
6 or 9, whatever that Friday is,
um, prior to our next meeting,
um, so a little more than a
month, we're accepting
applications and cover letters,
and that's something that'll be
to all of us, um, uh, here on
the committee voting and
advisory members, um, here's the
thing though, is that we don't
know obviously with it being
open open open application. how
many applicants we're going to
get. So, um, if there, if it
turns out that there are a large
amount, double digits, 7 to 10,
double digit amount of
applicants, um, then I would be
reaching out to members
Advisory and um voting members
to form a subcommittee to vet
applications for that um at our
next meeting. So typically we
have Friday's half day, I would
probably ask those members to
stay after on that Friday and
vet applicants and narrow them
down to about 3 to 5, um.
If we do not have a lot of
applicants if we were to have 5
or 3 or so, um, then I would
then move straight to interviews
of those candidates, um,
obviously inviting um
Voting and and advisory members
to the meeting to look over
resumes, um, we'll get those in
advance and those will be put
together for for members to look
over in advance, um, and then,
um, an interview process similar
to what we did when we first
hired um.
Uh, Dr. Pereo ornament. So, um,
I just ask a little bit of
patience with the committee
while we get those and um
applicants in and I may be
reaching out if we had a high
number of applicants to help vet
those candidates and narrow it
down. Um, but then, you know,
come down to a final vote of
voting members, but we'll have
voting and advisory members
there to be able to ask
questions of, of the applicants
as well.
So, I don't know if there are
any questions for me on the
process. Uh, Represent BCA.
Thank you, thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I actually have no
questions about the process. I,
I, I definitely agree with the
process. My question is, do we
have a current and updated um
job description, and is there
certain criteria that we uh we
have for somebody who would be
applying for this, is that
posted as well that's something
that is posted, um, and we, I
decided to go with the one we
had previously used, and there
are also several questions that
were attached pertaining to what
as he does, what their vision
for the committee would be in
answering those questions,
there's a question on Yazi
Martinez and thoughts from the
applicant on that. I thought all
those were very pertinent to um
our our continued mission here
at LESC.
Uh, Senator Stewart.
I think Mister Chairman, uh, uh,
thank you for laying out
everything, um, I, I missed the
part, are you, are you saying
that it will be, uh, say we get
5 or fewer, and then we would
interview those. Are you saying
we would do that in the October
meeting in Silver City?
Uh, that's a good question. I
would say that we would hold
that off till uh either a
special meeting in Santa Fe, um,
in November, but bringing folks
to Santa Fe is where I would
prefer to have this sort of of
um interview process.
All right, thank you for that.
So we could even do that, uh, as
part of our LASC meeting in.
That, that is what I'm thinking,
Senator Stewart. Thank you.
Represent.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. um.
Where is it posted? Last time we
actually wherever else it was
posted, we also posted it on the
LASC website, but I don't see it
there now. It is.
Mr. Chair Representative, it is
posted on the website, I think
if you if it says about about
LESC if you click on that tab,
there's a one that says
employment, and I think folks
can actually get to that, that
uh posting from the the larger
legislative website as well.
Thank you. And one more
question, Mr. Chair, is the
center of Law and Poverty, uh,
posted the motion for LASC. Are
we going to talk about that? We
will be as a part of our
director's report, um, our
interim.
Director is gonna go over that,
definitely, so you're gonna be
here for that, right? OK, OK,
it's tomorrow.
Any other questions?
Well, certainly appreciate you
all's patience with this in the
process, obviously, we have um a
lot of moving pieces. Thank you
all to the staff also um for
your continued work to this
committee and obviously to uh
director Pedda Ornament who, um,
since I have been in the
legislature in her previous
position atlanto, um, we got to
work together and that's how I
first became acquainted with
Doctor Bride ornament, so
obviously she'll be greatly
missed here, but certainly
look forward to your direction,
um.
John.
Hm.
Alright,
Representative Garrett. Well,
we're going to be hitting her up
a lot in her new role, that's
all.
And, and vice versa, I'd imagine
so.
All right.
But that's the process, so I'll
be reaching out to folks um as
we go along. So thank you all.
Thank you. All right, so we're
