Please raise your virtual hand
if you can that'll make it a lot
easier for us to follow. Um, and
then what we'll do is we'll call
on voting members of council
first. Give those folks uh first
dips to ask questions or or
provide comments and then we'll
we'll move on to other members
who, who may be interested in
providing comment or asking
questions. Um, uh, Jarrett, uh,
why don't we call the role uh of
voting members just for the
record.
Very good. Representative
Armstrong.
Don't see her on her. Senator
Baca.
Senator Brent
Representative Chasey.
Yes.
Senator Duhig.
Here.
Representative Martinez.
Yeah.
Well, Rosan Montoya.
Senator Neville,
I'm here. Senator Padilla, here.
Representing Romero.
Representative Rebo Caballero,
uh, Senator Shindo.
Here.
Spansy.
Here.
Senator Worth,
Here.
Mr. Speaker,
I'm here. Madam Pro Tem. I'm
here also.
And Bill Ream is here.
Great. We do have a quorum, uh,
folks, you should all have your
agenda, uh, emailed to us by uh
Shawna, um, over the last few
days, uh, with that, I'd like to
move on to the next order of
business approval of the minutes
from July 18th.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, I move we
approve the amendments from
July. All right. Is there any
opposition
He's seeing none. We approved
the minutes from July 18th.
Moving on.
Uh, folks, we have, um, we have
a couple of requests for
approval, uh, and I'll just read
this right straight out of the
agenda so you can follow along.
Uh, there's a, uh, a request
that council approve, um,
mileage and per diem requests
for one legislator who attended
in person the uh legislator
human resources training on
August 14th. This is the
training that was mandated by
council at the July 18th meeting
for legislators.
Or planning on hiring district
staff. Uh, is there a motion to
approve that request,
Mr. Speaker. OK. Is there any
comment or opposition to that
motion.
OK, seeing none, motion carries.
Uh, the second request is to
authorize $5000 for the court's
corrections and Justice Interim
Committee to contract for
continued work.
On a number of different policy
issues within the criminal
justice system in preparation
for the 2025 session. Any
unexpended funds, um, would, uh,
any authorized funds would be
added to CCJ's budget out of
interim expenses. Uh, is there
any, is there a motion to
approve that request?
So I'm to.
I'm sorry, I missed that.
There's a bunch of us that
moved. Oh, that's probably why I
missed it. All right. It's been
moved. Are there questions or
comments on that request?
OK, I'm not seeing any with that
motion carries.
I don't have a gavel, so we'll
just pretend.
Um, lastly, pre-session
approval.
Uh, legislative council approval
is required for our respective
chief clerks to hire pre-session
staff. Uh, note that the House
and Senate chief clerks intend
to hire some session staff in
mid-October. Uh, I believe they
are both here to answer any
questions you may have, uh, but
is there a motion to approve the
request from our chief clerks.
So I moved.
All right, it's been moved. In
the opposition to that motion,
comments, questions.
OK, I don't see any. Motion
carries.
Um, Shawna, I'll turn it over to
you, by the way, welcome to your
very first uh legislative
council meeting as our new
legislative council director.
Uh, I'll turn it over to you for
your staff reports.
Wonderful. Thank you so much,
Mr. Chair, members of the
council, as you know, I'm Shawna
Caer. Y'all appointed me
director of the council service
at your last meeting. Thank you
for your confidence, and here I
am to give my first staff
reports to you all.
Uh, so first report or just
update I'd like to provide is on
district legislative aid and
district office onboarding.
18 legislators have certified
that they took the HR training
required to hire district staff.
14 district legislative aides
have been hired and one district
office liaison has been hired.
The district office working
group continues to meet to
address questions that have
arisen in this rollout. The
working group is discussing
these questions, considering
potential revisions to the
legislative district office
policy that was adopted by this
council.
And we do intend to have some
recommendations for your
consideration at a meeting to be
scheduled. I'm suggesting in
late October, and I do encourage
members with questions or
concerns about the policy to
reach out to me either for
clarification there may be an
existing policy that is on point
or the issue may need to be
brought to the working group for
consideration and then back to
the legislative council for
potential revisions to said
policy. So I'd like to offer up
October 25th as a proposed.
potential date for a legislative
council meeting for this
purpose, and I've noted at the
end of the agenda to circle back
with you all on that question
for discussion.
I'd also like to let you know
about some new hires for the
council service, um, these new
hires were made to support
current operations and the
additional administrative
support that is needed for the
district offices and district
legislative aides.
Most of the new hires are in
legislative information systems,
IT, and human resources, and
they include Matt McFetridge,
who's a web developer. Isaiah
Achesa, who's a network
administrator, Manny Griego and
Ruben Vicuna, who will both be
primarily working on district
legislative aid, computer
specialist needs.
We've also hired or promoted
individuals into the HR team.
They're obviously additional
responsibilities there with the
rollout of district staff, so
I'd like to let you know that
Jamie Martinez and Brianna
Saenz, both were brought up from
legislative building services to
human resources or supporting
that team Rea Meza, she was also
formerly in our accounting team
and has joined the HR team and
we have one new employee, um,
Ashley Archuleta, um, and also
to increase the
To address the increased
responsibilities of human
resources, of IT, of course we
are going to need additional
accounting staff and accounting
is looking to hire two
additional staffers this fall.
Finally, on the hiring front,
I'd like to announce that Robin
Garrison has been hired as are
Americans with Disabilities Act
coordinator and Randall Cherry
has been hired as the assistant
director for legislative
affairs.
So that's the ending of hiring
updates um and kind of as a
segue from that, you know, it
may be obvious, but with with
new hires and and new staff,
space continues to be an issue
for the legislative counsel
service. Um, currently our HR
team, which is 5 individuals, is
using a committee room as their
office. We also have staff
temporarily using room suites
that are assigned to the house
and the Senate and necessarily
will need to be.
vacated in mid-December so that
the House and Senate can prepare
for sessions staff to occupy
those rooms. So I just want to
bring to your attention that we
are working on options to
accommodate our space needs, um,
but ultimately is going to
require a legislative facilities
review subcommittee meeting to
make final determinations on
that front. So again, I am, I am
working to come up with some
options and some ways to address
these spacing needs and just
wanted to flag for you that once
the necessary information is
gathered and I have some options
to
I will be reaching out to the
council to the pro tem, and the
speaker to get a facilities
review subcommittee meeting on
calendar.
So those are the staff reports I
have and I'd like to turn it
back to you, Mr. Speaker, to see
if October 25th is perhaps a
date that we could get on
calendar for the next council
meeting. Fantastic. Before we
get to that, uh, members, any
questions, uh, from you for Miss
Case beer with regard to her
presentation.
I see representative Alan
Martinez's hand up. Represent
Martinez, you're on.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh,
be, um, a couple of months ago,
I went up to the, the, uh,
Finance office.
On the 4th floor. Is there any
plan to expand that because you
have people.
rammed in there, I mean,
As, as a visitor walking in
there, I kind of had to stand
sideways to take care of my, my
travel request. Um, is there any
plan on getting them more space
up there?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr.
Representative Martinez, yes,
there is, and we are looking at,
you know, how many current
employees we have, how many
employees we're going to hire in
the next couple of months
looking at our current space and
seeing which teams does it make
sense to shuffle into different
spaces to move around to
consolidate. It's a little bit
of a puzzle because we
absolutely want to keep say the
account accounting team
together, the human resources
team together. That's really
important for.
and cross training and just
getting people up to speed on
what their duties are, so we do
need to look at some kind of
rearrangement some solution that
will give these teams the space
they need in order to perform
their jobs, so I am looking at
kind of the entire capital
holistically and seeing where
there may be underutilized
space.
Unutilized space and seeing what
might be some options for moving
our teams into those spaces so
that they do have the
appropriate office space
necessary to do their job.
Great. Thank you. Anything else
from your representative
Martinez? Uh, no, sir. Thank
you, thank you, Shanna for that
information. Um, I just
It was very, very cramped in
there.
Um, but I thank you for keeping
that on the table.
All right. Any, any other
questions or comments for Miss
Casburo?
Any condolences to her for
taking this job.
Great. Mr. Speaker, yeah, uh,
who's that? This is Antoinette
Lopez.
I'm sorry Senator, uh, go ahead.
Thank you. Um, Shona,
congratulations on the position,
but I also, um, I had a
question, um, is it, would it be
OK to ask questions about what
are the specific issues you're
addressing cause one of the ones
I wanted was um our ability to
use our
A district staff during the
session to be our legislative
aide, um, and that I understand
that's not allowed and I see
that's a real problem since I'm
working with that individual on
legislation.
The idea of training a new
person during the session seems
kind of silly. Is that one of
the issues that you're
addressing?
Mr. Speaker, Senator Sedia
Lopez, that is certainly an
issue that has been brought to
the working group's attention.
There are many considerations
with district legislative aides
working session one in
particular is that the hiring of
sessions staff is the purview of
the chambers of the Senate and
the House chief clerks,
and the space issue is also a
consideration and in addition to
other challenges and
opportunities of that question.
So the working group is looking
That issue and to date we have
discussed about DLAs will not be
working as sessions staff in
particular that the position is
focused on work in the district,
but it's certainly kind of an
ongoing conversation and as part
of those working group
discussions.
OK. Well, I, I, uh, Mr. Speaker,
I'd like to register, um, if
we're gonna hire legislative
aides, which I assume we are, it
doesn't make sense to hire
another person that doesn't
have, doesn't have the
continuity that our, our staff
would, um, and one idea that was
thrown out was to have the staff
resign from this position and
they get get hired on, which
again seems kind of silly to me.
Um, so I just want to register
that.
Um, appreciate that opportunity.
I know there's some other
issues, but that was a, a big
one for me.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, Senator. Representative
Huckman Bell.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Speaker, and congratulations,
Ms. Casper. We're really excited
to have you on.
Uh, just a quick question for
you. For those of us that um
have already hired our
legislative aides and our um
Currently looking to put a
district office together like an
actual physical space. Do we
know when any guidelines will be
put together for that, such as,
you know,
How much rent, uh, we would be
able to afford to pay those
responsible for paying the rent,
um, if we are, we want to buy
furniture for the space who gets
to do that? Are there budgets
for that, um, just a lot of
questions surrounding the, the
opening of the district offices.
So, um if you could, if you
don't have answers, exact
answers now, I understand it,
but if you could give us uh uh
uh a timeline as to when you
might have those answers it
would be extremely.
Helpful. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, Representative, we
don't have official written
guidelines on the office
arrangements except to the
extent that they are already in
policy, the council service,
legislative council service is
the one that would be entering
into those leases so if you come
across a space that you want to
rent, it's my recommendation to
work through um your district
office liaison or if your caucus
does not have a district office
liaison through the chief of
staff of that office.
And they will coordinate with us
in terms of reviewing that
lease, making sure that the
provisions are terms that the
legislative branch can agree to
and also looking at the budget
considerations. I've seen a
couple of leases to date, and
they range from free to below
market to market, um, so there's
kind of wide variability we are
looking at the budgets and kind
of earmarking or setting aside
an appropriate amount of funds
that would be able to cover
those leases.
But nothing is, you know, hard
and fast set in stone that each
district has X because it's so
variable depending.
On where the space is and the
entity that wants to rent the
space and how much they want to
charge. But if you're aware of
or if any legislator really is
aware of an office space that
you would like to use, I
recommend that you get in touch
with the chief of staff of the
leadership office of your
caucus, and then we'll all work
together to effectuate that
lease, um, and also the same
goes for furniture that would
also need to be flown through
the council service to make
those arrangements. There are
procurement code considerations
with buying or even leasing
furniture.
So we're definitely looking into
all of those options and again
kind of setting aside some
amount of the budget that was
allocated for the offices to
cover some of those ancillary
expenses, but if you want to
speak further, I'm happy to get
on a phone call with you, um,
and I do take note that having a
Q&A just a Q&A really of all of
the issues that are coming up,
so it's all in one place for
legislators, legislative aides
to refer to is important and
that is. And if I may interject
you, uh, Shawna
You know,
uh we highly encourage folks,
especially folks in in larger
urban areas like Albuquerque to
look for space that you can
leverage free of cost, uh,
community centers, senior
centers, universities, colleges,
where we can enter into a
partnership with that entity, so
that, you know, we don't fall
into a trap of, you know,
Leasing out the most expensive
office space with the best
furniture, uh, there's a lot
that we can leverage, um, in, in
most spaces. So, um, I, I know
that that's not an official
policy necessarily, but I would
certainly encourage us all to
look for those options, um, you
know, before we enter into any
type of expensive lease
agreement.
Great. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Appreciate it. You got it. Thank
you. Uh, any other questions or
comments?
All right, see, none, um, to the
magic question, October 25th,
uh, uh, Madam cochair, um, how
does the Senate feel about
October 25th?
Um, Mr. Speaker, I haven't asked
them, but I feel OK with it, so
I'll make the most and we accept
October 25th as Legislative
Council meeting. Fantastic. I'll
second it even though we don't
need one, but, uh, I appreciate
that. Uh, so we'll, we'll set
the next meeting for October
25th, uh, uh, Shana, you'll send
us, you and your team will send
us a notice and all that good
stuff. Uh, we are at the end of
our agenda, um, uh, Shawna, your
hand is up. Go ahead.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
I'm wondering if there's a
preference for a morning or
afternoon meeting on the 25th.
Morning. Senator Shendo was
first, so we'll take his uh
informal motion to do it in the
morning.
Uh, see how it's a Friday. I
agree with them. I think 9:30 in
the morning sounds good to me.
Perfect.
Thank you, Mr. Cha. All right.
Uh, so you know for business,
uh, with that, we'll conclude
our September 16th meeting of
the Legislative Council. Thanks,
everybody.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you.
Bye, everybody.
Um
