We're back on the webcasting, so
go ahead, Charles.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, you have
before you uh pack it for your
final review.
Uh, you've traveled around the
state, you've, um, met with
different communities, you've
heard different constituents,
you've had a lot of uh
presentations about what's
working, uh, what are the
challenges, how do we address
those? Um, uh, throughout the
entire interim.
You've got a staff that you've
increased to 45 that are
professionally year around
non-partisan staff that give
you, uh, advice on how to uh
construct this budget and how to
oversee it and make sure that
New Mexicans get uh good results
from it.
The committee has focused this
interim on 3 key
Uh, broad, uh, priorities. The
first, how do we use this uh
unprecedented surplus.
To invest in New Mexicans, how
to improve uh their per capita.
Earned income, and one of the
main ways that you do that is
your highest priority, and
that's through education,
whether that's helping people
get into the trades.
Whether that's helping them get
uh bachelor's or other technical
um uh certificates. The second
priority area that you focused
on in this budget focuses on is
on improving high quality access
to high quality health care, and
in particular, behavioral
healthcare.
The 3rd is on using this surplus
to improve the quality of life
of New Mexicans. That can be
everything from uh safe
neighborhoods.
Clean drinking water, the
basics.
To nice amenities. You heard a
report the center on the $90
million worth of investments
you've made uh in communities
all across the state for uh
recreation and quality of life
grants. Things like, uh,
dimming.
Building a new lake for families
with playscapes.
Cuba, having a nice park, rodeo
arenas, uh, using this to make
New Mexico a better place. And
so you've got, uh, before you,
Uh, staff recommendations that
we've been going through all
fall, uh, to, uh, modestly, uh,
increase recurring spending, uh,
pulling back the rate of
increase that we've been seeing
before. So the staff
recommendations really
prioritize, um, funding, the
basics, uh, for government,
inflationary costs.
Uh, prioritizing education to uh
focus on uh continuing to make
progress, uh, for funding for
at-risk students, uh,
compensating our educators, um,
Uh, rewarding higher education
institutions that are actually
performing at a, a better rate
than their peers, uh, making
investments in Medicaid for
provider rate increases,
including for primary care,
infant, maternal, um, for
behavioral health, DD waiver,
uh, and other providers, uh, and
you're able to do that with a
modest um growth in the
recurring budget, where you've
seen innovation.
And, um, a desire to get better
returns.
You, uh, have, before you
recommendations to test those
out, uh, through the grow.
So, CYFD is a really good
example of where uh they have
significant challenges. They
have significant opportunities
and needs, and you've again
provided them in this, in this
recommendation and opportunity
to demonstrate not only to you
but to people in New Mexico that
they can get it right before
moving that into the base
budget.
You have historic opportunities
for large investments in a suite
of packages, uh, using
non-recurring. Everything from,
uh, making sure that our funding
for water systems actually gets
deployed and people get, uh,
better water systems, uh, to
packages that focused on
enhancing and expanding our
behavioral health system,
addressing crime in our
communities, uh, making sure
that our roads both
State roads and local roads, um,
are in much better shape uh with
the transportation package.
Investments in economic
development as well as public
education.
The next suite of uh uh
recommendations that you have
before you to adopt today our,
for our statewide capital outlay
projects. I've talked to you.
Uh, all, all throughout the
interim. It's interesting when
you travel around the state and
you look at the plaques of like
state uh facilities and like how
many of them were built in the
70s and the early 80s. Well,
Those need to be replaced.
And the reason why we're able to
do so much of that, uh, during
that time period was that was
the initial oil boom, and here
we've got another one, to be
able to afford to replace our
medical school building.
And that's gonna be one of a
major project for the state, um,
going forward. I know it was a
uh a good presentation and a and
a good discussion that the
committee had, uh, and applaud
you and him for starting to
Plan early on, not give us a
spitball recommendation of what
they need, uh, to replace the
facility, but actually engage in
really good planning, and then
they're gonna be asking for some
design money, uh, in this
particular budget to figure out
what they can do differently and
dramatically to change the
health care, um, landscape.
With that Mr. Chairman, I'd be
happy to to answer any
questions, you've got some, uh,
uh recurring recommendation.
You have a non-recurring
recommendation, you have a
capital outlay framework.
Uh, you have some catch-up
cleanup items to make sure that
the land of enchantment, uh,
budgets, uh, uh, are all lined
up with the revenue that's going
to be coming from that permanent
fund that you created, uh,
including some adjustments uh to
the behavioral health uh
recommendations as well as uh
capital outlay to make sure that
um
Uh, our tribal schools, uh, have
an uh an even uh start for
funding considerations as you go
into the legislative session.
So we need to adopt the capital,
correct, Charles.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, at the right
time, I would request that you
adopt the uh recurring
recommendation and non-recurring
recommendation capital outlay,
framework for statewide, as well
as the ketchup cleanup, which
includes the behavioral health
adjustments and the capital.
Questions before we make that.
And what
You know what, probably the
luckiest legislator.
Group in the nation.
We have no taxpayer breathing
down our neck saying,
This is my hard earned tax money
you're spending.
We've got one in industry.
That finances anywhere from 40
to 50% of our budget.
In that particular industry
through statute has got to pay a
severance tax has got to pay
this money.
But think about it just a
minute.
Just a second.
Think
If this was money coming from
Mom and pop grocery stores.
The small businessman.
And we are collecting.
More taxes than we're spending.
And we're increasing budgets.
What would they say to you?
If it was a different taxpayer.
Then oil and gas.
I know it's easy to spend money
when it's available.
When you got a pile of money,
everybody's got a project they
want to do.
Hm
I don't mean to make this a, a
big long speech, Mr. Chairman,
but I just want you to think
just a second.
What if this was a different
taxpayer.
What if it was your neighbor?
Paying these taxes.
Yeah
Would you do something
different?
If they were talking back home
saying, why are you texting me
so.
I, I don't want to beat the dead
horse.
You did a very good job,
Charles, uh, with what you had,
you've got
If there's ever political
pressure, it's your job.
Lots of people pushing on you
every direction.
I appreciate what you do.
She just had the same with 2
cents. Thank you.
So was it harder to sign the
front of the check than it is
the back of the check.
And when you got to sign them
every quarter.
It's a lot different.
Any other questions?
Charlie Senator Rodriguez, no, I
was just going to make a motion
for those things, but you
don'rles capital has to get
fixed.
We've turned on a sprinkler and
It's gotten green, but nothing's
growing, right?
Nothing is grown.
And just like you said, we
haven't replaced buildings since
the 70s on college campuses, all
across the state, right?
And it's about time that we take
Capital and use it for its
intended purpose.
And, and build stuff.
Building costs are high, it's
gonna take more money.
Yim has a vision with their
medical school, which is great
because we watched the pharmacy
school.
Going to
The worst shape it's ever been
since it hasn't been, you know
it's been done since the 70s,
but that's you and M's fault for
not requesting that, and letting
it dilapidate and, and do that.
But we're gonna get really tight
with capital, and the projects
are gonna have to have to
change.
And we're not just gonna throw
money everywhere and say, oh,
here's money for you, here's
money for you. If you don't have
a plan,
You better get one.
And if you don't have a, a piece
of land to put on, you better
find one.
But all that stuff is gonna be
done because $6 billion.
is stranded.
And if we take $6 billion and
put it in the bank and do up the
staff did. That's 350 million
more a year.
On investment earnings. That's a
big chunk.
And
I mean, to the staff in in
Mercedes publicly. You guys are
the ones that in the last two
years with Charles's leadership
that have changed the way New
Mexico is gonna be.
And I can't say how thankful I
am. I know my kids are thankful
cause they'll be here working,
but
But how thankful I am and, and
how much people don't even
realize that, and that's hard
to, to put it up in and it's
hard to, to make people realize
that everyday person that
changes that happened in New
Mexico.
Capital outlay is almost gonna
be the same way in a few more
years, we'll be able to fund it
with almost all cash. Our bond
rating for the first time in
2030 years.
Ever?
Mr. Chairman, we expect a bond
rating to increase and with all
of this package, you'd be
reserves at 33%.
Yeah, but this is the first time
New Mexico has seen a bond
increase in what, 2030 years?
I believe so, Mr. King.
Yeah.
I mean, you can call yourself a
prudent, you can call yourself
whatever you wanna call
yourself, but this staff is has
set this up.
Um, for that, I mean, to get a
bond rating increase in 20 or 30
years, that's never happened
before. And, and spend money
wisely and and try to control
that.
I think really sends a message
to
Everybody in the legislature
that the work they're doing I
mean.
I hear it all over all over,
they're this party, they're that
party, that party. No, it's not
about that. It's about.
Where we are and where we're
gonna end up tomorrow, cause
Each day he better get up
running because
There's a lion out in front of
you that's gonna try to eat you.
And so the faster you run every
day and the more you do, the
better off you're gonna be, so
you better, you better get that
done. Representative Garcia,
we're gonna wrap this up.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Charles, thank you, thank you,
folks back there all those happy
faces that have made this
possible.
You know, I'm on my way out.
But we need to be really
cautious on our spending cause
like Senator would just finish
saying what it it was mom and
pop paying these bills.
You know, it's good right now,
and I hope it stays that way,
but possibilities are there that
might drop, but we need to be
really cautious, because as I've
been in office, I think the
budget has come up 60%.
And that's an 8 years, you know,
that's a big jump, you know, and
I just wanna thank everybody in
this committee for all you've
helped me with. I really
appreciate you guys, Senator,
Mr. Chairman, uh, everybody in
here, you're good people. I love
you guys, but you know, be
really, really careful in how
you're spending it, cause you
know, it's easy to throw it away
like Senator, you just said
we're not gonna start throwing
it away.
And that's a lot of time we see
it happening that way, where it
seems that way, but, you know,
just be really cautious because
at the end of the day,
If the oil goes away, we got big
problems. Thank you.
Thank you.
Charles, what you want to state
the motion again so we get it
right and
Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Chairman would recommend
that you adopt uh the
Recurring, non-recurring capital
outlay statewide framework.
All the ketchup cleanup, which
includes the behavioral health
as well as the adjustments to uh
the capital framework.
Um, and with that I stand for
question.
You have a motion for the
adoptions. Senator Rodriguez,
Mr. Chairman, I move a do pass.
Mhm.
We have a resentative Garcia,
any objection to the motion.
Oh
The woods
Shearer show voting no
representative Armstrong vote
you know in Gallegos voting
down.
no, no.
OK, it's adopted.
And
I think we have some
congratulations. We got to do
two things. We need a, uh, catch
up clean up or technical, uh,
we're gonna put Representative
Lee, Representative Chatfield,
uh.
Senator Campos and Senator
Woods.
And that's just ketchup. These
are, these are like if there's
technical things as we're
finalizing, putting together
the, the volumes, uh, to be able
to run by.
Right
And then what are we gonna come
back in January, Charles?
Mr. Chairman, we had talked
about, um,
We need to set up a date for
when you'd like to have your
press conference to release the
LFC budget. Uh, we can talk to
you and, and let members know,
uh, typically, LFC will have one
more meeting, uh, the day before
the session starts, usually on
Martin Luther King King Day, and
that's where uh you'll consider
committee sponsored legislation,
and I think we've got uh one
program evaluation.
OK.
OK, Senator Rodriguez, thank
you, Mr. Chairman. Just quickly,
I, I want to thank the staff,
uh, LFC staff and of course our
own Senate Finance staff,
everyone here today, my
colleagues, uh, for giving me an
opportunity to work with you and
serve you in New Mexico and of
course my district and uh our
chairs, Senator Monos and, and
uh vice chair Small and all my
colleagues, I can't, I don't
want to leave anyone out because
truly you've all made me who I
am. If one person was to
left out, I wouldn't be
complete. So I just want to say
thank you and I hope to see you
soon. I'll be here till the end
of the year and then we'll,
we'll see after that. But will
you take care of yourselves and
know that I appreciate you
immensely. Thank you. So.
Senator Rodriguez and
Representative Garcia kinda.
Leaving us, we, we want to thank
them, you know, Nancy and I, I
think in the beginning and it
depends how you voted, right?
And I voted for Tim Jennings and
there was a coalition vote and,
and they were on the other side
and we were on the other side
and and all time heal wounds and
it completely changed, but I can
honestly say I do not know a
harder working.
Lady that knows more about
everything that sits here and
points out every decimal point
in detail in the budget and
tells you thank you every single
day, every single time.
It's, who became one of my good
friends and
text me all the time and, and uh
this morning I was in the
grocery store, I ran into some
lobbyists who want to know who
the flowers are for, and I said,
I don't have a girlfriend, but
maybe I do. Oh.
So my, my wife sees about $100
worth of flowers on the credit
card you're gonna have to
explain that to her, but I know,
thank you. 35 years in
government, so 35 or 3636 years
in in government service
consecutive elected, I mean,
That's a lifetime, that's 2
retirements, right? That's 2
careers, and then you were the
county manager before that and,
and so.
You really want to tell somebody
that's heart is yellow and blue
with the symbol on it. It, it's
you and Senator Rodriguez. We're
gonna miss you.
You fill out that job
application today. And uh we're
gonna miss you though, but I'm
gonna miss our daily
conversations and you always
getting me coffee, do you want a
sandwich and, and trying to take
care of me and, and telling me
you need to go rest and
and really being a friend, a
true friend.
And, and, and we appreciate you
and everybody in this
legislature is gonna miss you
and you're gonna be a little
hole in everybody's heart when
you leave.
Thank you.
My hole is bigger in my heart
where I was.
Thank you, thank you for for the
beautiful flowers too. I took
him back there cause I didn't
want to knock one down. I wanna
look at every one of them, just
know that that truly those
flowers represent what I feel
for all of you, um, the petals
there, the beautiful roses and
flowers individually, your heart
in here, um, you all blew in my
heart.
You make my heart grow and feel
and move.
And love
Thank you.
Mr. Chair,
uh, echoing what the celebration
for the incredible Senator Nancy
Rodriguez.
I want to say on behalf of uh
all of us in the house.
Uh thank you to my friend, our
friend.
Uh, a true American hero.
And a hero for this legislature,
for his community, for his
wonderful family, uh,
Representative Harry Garcia.
When I, uh, think of
Representative Garcia. We think
of his absolute determination to
serve rural New Mexico.
A place that he comes from.
He's returned to after serving
our country in Vietnam.
Never forgetting.
The unimaginable for me and for
so many of us challenges he and
all of our other veterans face.
Bringing that back home and then
bringing that up here to the
legislature.
I also think and see somebody
who cares deeply for the land.
Uh, who cares incredibly deeply
for his family and who I've had
the privilege to spend some time
with the former judge.
Uh, his incredible spouse, um,
And his incredible extended
family, he's shown incredible
kindness to me, to my family, to
all of us here on this
legislature. There are kiddos
who are better off because of
Representative Garcia, Veterans
in our state are much in a
stronger place, although not a
sufficient place because of the
leadership of Representative
Garcia.
And um,
This is the time for us to
celebrate that work.
I think to learn lessons because
his quiet advocacy, although at
times very determined and very
clear.
Leaves a mark that you don't
always see right away.
But that is absolutely, um,
Unmatched in what we've seen and
what I've seen.
So, um, Representative Garcia,
hopefully, this isn't the final
time we say.
We say hi or or uh we ask for
your opinion, perhaps even ask
uh you know, that, that you'll
have the chance to represent
your communities again.
But this is absolutely a moment
we should take.
Celebrate you as a true American
hero.
Even more than that, as a
servant leader for the state of
New Mexico.
And even more than that, a
friend to each and every one of
us. Thank you very much,
Representative Harry Garcia.
If I may, um, Sherman.
You may not.
The, the biggest 2 honors I've
had in my life was one.
Serving in Vietnam.
Second, right. Thank you.
Thank you.
You know, and, and
The keys
My friend
Right? You're leaving this too.
We appreciate you, you've had 6
or 8 years of service.
And, and
You, uh
You deeply love the Navajos, You
deeply loved Native Americans,
you, you walk in beauty every
single day I watch you, right?
You probably get up in the
morning, look to the, say your
prayers, and start your day.
And for people that a lot of
people don't know, I know a lot
of nano in in the way you have
represented the Navajo people.
Exemplifies.
What they should do.
You show respect to every single
person you meet. You show
dignity.
You treat him as a friend. You
treat him as an equal.
I'm just watching as a person,
right?
That doesn't happen all the
time.
doesn't happen with me every
day, sometimes you get
frustrated, but each and every
day you you show you outclass.
You come, you sit in that
meeting, you listen, you make
your points.
You know what you want to talk
about, you know what your agenda
is.
And, and you set that direction
up.
And time here. Nobody's has,
everybody's noticed, right?
You watch how people serve and,
and how how they respect their
decorum of of the legislature.
They don't respect the decorum
of the registration. I have
never seen you not disrespected.
And that tells you the character
of a person that you are.
And I truly wish I could be like
you.
But sometimes I'm a little
higher level.
But the way you, you treat
people the way you characterize
yourself, the way you talk about
things that you're compassionate
about.
It really changed a lot and you
don't think I watched, but I
watch, um, and I appreciate your
time here.
You know you're gonna, you
missed two, there'll be another
hole in our little hearts along
with Representative Garcia.
Um, we become families.
We've become a family or
interact so much, right?
That we become a family in that
network, and I don't know how
you say that in Navajo.
Oh yeah,
we're we're kind of a clan, but
you may want to name us a
different clan.
But we've become a clan up here
in, and we'll always watch you,
we'll always help you.
Now I always look out for the
Navajo people.
Somebody has to.
Most important thing I learned
from Governor Richardson one
time.
Somebody has to help the now.
Somebody has to take care of
them.
Somebody has to, and you're
showing that in your leadership,
and I'm gonna continue to show
that my leadership, and we have
to take care of people that
don't realize what really
happens on the wrist, 60 miles
for water, 80 miles a day for
work. Um.
We have to sing that.
Song and, and make that tune up
in, in show respect to so.
I appreciate your service.
Um, your time here, if there's
anything we can help you with,
let us know.
It was in small.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
Chair, and, and Representative
Allison, uh, I would echo and we
echo the comments you've made
lifelong family across uh both
chambers, both aisles, certainly
in the house. You've been a
leader on house appropriations
and finance, uh, from the time
that I've had the privilege to
serve there. Your advocacy for
health care is unmatched and I
think recognized across both
chambers and
in both parties, uh, and
celebrated all across New
Mexico, especially in rural and
tribal New Mexico, as the chair
said, the dignity with which you
approach, uh, your everyday um
duties here.
Uh, your smile.
The stories about your old rodeo
days.
You don't want him to do that.
And um
I think the determination, hope,
and beauty that you bring with
you every day, that shines
within all of us, so thank you
very much on behalf of all of us
in the house.
Representative Ellison, I don't
want to think you that you're
left out, but I misspelled your
name for the engravers. So I
don't think you want something
that was misspelled, so we will
get you yours.
As soon as it comes in, should
be next week. Go ahead
representative Allison.
You're gonna have to use a mic
unless you wanna use that one.
Yeah.
I just want to thank everybody.
Like I always say, we came
together 6 years ago as
strangers. We didn't know one
another. You didn't know who I
was.
But at the end of 6 years, I'm
glad to say that.
A lot of people know who Anthony
Allison.
I, uh
When I was first campaigning, I
need to tell the story. There's
a young lady that I met. Her
name was uh
Eileen Sendos.
He said, Representative to be
represented out. What is your
goal?
I said, well, tonight, nobody
knows who Anthony Allison is,
but at the end of my term,
depending on how many terms I
wish to serve, people will know
who Anthony Ellison is, and I
think that with the help of
everybody, with the help of my
family here, that has come to
fruition.
We came together as strangers.
First, we became friends and
then as we got
Working with one another, we
became family. This is our
family. We are here together as
family.
It is said that I love my Navajo
people. Yes, I do love my Navajo
people.
But in addition
I love all people. I love all of
you.
And uh
I had the good fortune of being
asked to say a prayer on the
house floor, the opening prayer
a few times.
And I've always concluded with
my prayers that we will walk in
beauty.
And that is the Native American
culture is to say that we
welcome beauty.
And what I see with the
discussions and the LFC and the
HAFC is that we do not always
agree.
We may not always walk in unity.
But let us walk in harmony and
in beauty.
Let us walk in harmony and
beauty. So I leave that with
you. I love my veterans just as
much as I love all of my.
Let us walk in harmony and let
us walk in beauty.
Thank you, thank you so much
from the bottom of my heart.
Thank you.
I think we're concluded, right?
Let's all take a picture right
after we adjourned and get us
all together with the plaques. I
will get your plaque if I got to
drive it to.
You'll live in you live in
Fruitland or Upper Fruitland.
Huh? No worries.
No, I, I apologize for that,
but, uh, um, I will give it to
you cause probably buying hay
from your um, so we're, that's
adjourn and then let's take a
picture with, with our
Our legislators that are leaving
us.
Go on our way today. Thank you,
Charles. Thank you guys for all
your hard work. We appreciate
