And I go back into into session,
um, so we have a wonderful
presentation this afternoon, and
I encourage you all to stick
around. This kind of gets at um
the costs in, in healthcare,
which I know we're all worried
about. Um, I'm cheering this
afternoon as the, the uh chair
had another engagement, but, so
we will start in some most of
our presenters are online
because they're all over the
country, um, so we will start
with
Um
Global budgeting issues with
Donna Kinzer.
And Dorothy Moeller. Oh.
Oh, let me, let me look at the
uh the new agenda.
Sorry.
Oh, that hasn't changed, OK.
OK. OK, yeah, so then Michael
Guzmano, um, who's a professor
of College of Health and
associate dean for academic
programs in Lehigh will just be
um
Doctor Michael, doctor, yeah,
OK. All right. So whenever
you're ready, doctor.
Yeah, I lost your name.
Guzmano.
Hi, good, good afternoon.
Are you able to hear me?
We can hear you fine. OK, great.
Well, uh thank you, uh, to the
chair, to the entire committee
for inviting me to join you. I'm
honored to be with you today.
Uh, I'm just going to give a, a
few brief
Kick off remarks, um, that will,
I hope, set up the rest of the
presenters on the panel to talk
about um health spending
generally in the US and hospital
spending and some of the factors
that have driven it, as I'm sure
you are all aware the US spends
about twice as much per capita
as the next, next most
expensive, uh, country in the
world on healthcare services and
hospital costs represent about 3
of the total spending.
There are a variety of reasons
for this, and I'm just going to
touch on a few of the more
important ones, but I really
want to highlight uh the degree
to which our payment process,
our payment mechanisms and
structure really do contribute
to this. Uh, as you know, uh,
many people have looked at the
volume of care that Americans
receive, and it really isn't out
of line with international
standards. The big thing that
differentiates the US from other
countries is our prices are
quite high. Uh, price
s in the US are uncoordinated.
They're determined typically by
thousands of different uh public
and private payers depending on
the market, and a number of
studies have suggested that
price growth in the US is not
really associated with higher
quality, um.
Prices vary enormously even
within market there have been
some studies that have even
shown that there are different
prices being charged by the same
hospital, uh, for the same
procedures.
In addition, although overall uh
price growth and, and spending
growth in the hospital sector
has slowed some dimensions of
this have increased quite
dramatically, um, a, a very
important I think to the state
of New Mexico as my uh colleague
Gabriel Sanchez will show in his
presentation are the use of
emergency departments for care,
uh, and the average price you
see in a, uh, an emergency room
doctor went up from just over
$1000 in 2019, uh.
to just over $1000 in 2019,
which is a 57% from seven years
earlier, one contributing factor
to this has been so-called
facility fees, which are
increasing at an exorbitant rate
uh between 2004 and 2021
facility fees grew at a rate of
531%, which is 4 times the rate
of growth of professional fees.
Um, these fees are justified,
um, rightly so on the fact that
uh running an uh an emergency
department 24/7. Certainly, uh,
involves a lot of uh costs to
the hospital, but the growth of
these fees has sort of well
outpaced other dimensions of
this and has made uh emergency
care extraordinarily expensive,
uh, and it's also been tied to
surprise billing where patients
receive a bill that they were
not expecting from to cover the
facility fee.
To
And another dimension of this is
related in fact to hospital
consolidation and vertical
integration.
Which leads to increase, uh,
prices, uh, market power is
often based on a sort of lack of
competition in the geographic
area that can drive up, uh,
healthcare prices and again,
multiple studies conducted at
many universities have found
that hospital mergers uh lead to
a gain in negotiating power
which drive up the price of
services, uh, Zach Cooper at, at
Yale University, argued that a
single large health system
merger that has stopped can
prevent
billions of dollars in increases
in health care spending. Part of
that is also tied up with
vertical integration, uh, and
the effects of sight of care
payment differentials, uh, as
you probably know, um, hospitals
can actually charge more, uh,
for services then, then uh other
outpatients and um physician
offices for exactly the same
services. This has created an
incentive for hospitals to
purchase.
Physician offices and create
these so-called vertical
networks and so some of the
increase in overall spending has
just been driven by the fact
that under these different
organizational arrangements, you
can charge a great deal more.
But I want to sort of finish my
opening remarks by really again
coming back to the fragmentation
of the payment system. My
colleague Miriam Lageson, when
she speaks, will talk a little
bit more about this, uh, but
when a hospital has to track
Many different prices for the
same good from different payers,
public and private. One of the
things that clearly this does is
dramatically increase
administrative expenses within
the system.
Typically when critics of the US
health care system look around
and they look at our multi-payer
system, they argue that we are
wasting money because insurers
probably in private or
duplicating effort with multiple
systems, uh, but I really think
that's just looking at the tip
of the iceberg because the bulk
of the costs associated, the
administrative costs associated
with running such a fragmented
system are really at the
provider level.
Hospitals have to employ armies
of people to both negotiate
prices, keep track of them, and
bill and provide different sorts
of information requirements
demanded by the payers. Um,
This really does add a layer of
administrative waste that
doesn't add value and doesn't
improve quality.
Um, certainly one of the states
that you will hear about um that
has been trying to address this.
There are a number of solutions.
Miriam will talk about some of
them, uh, but is the state of
Maryland, which has gone to a
global budget system and so we
know that that uh there is
evidence that you will hear
about that that system has had
some success, uh, and CMS, the
Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services seems
enthusiastic, uh, about this
kind of approach, so I, I do
believe there are opportunities
for states
to experiment with different
ways of simplifying payment
models that can actually kind of
shift the balance of power in
terms of uh the prices uh that
are being charged, but also can
standardize prices in a way that
may lead to significant savings
and a reduction of
administrative costs.
So I will stop there. I'm
certainly happy to, to take
questions.
Doctor, if you can stay on,
generally we do all the
presentations and then do
questions at the end or uh we,
we kind of go along on our
questions and I don't want to
miss out on anything if people
have to leave. So I'm not sure
who's next, but um.
That would be me. OK. So this is
Donna Kinzer, um, who's a
consultant with Kinzer
Consulting former executive, um,
director of Maryland Health
Services Cost Review Commission.
So welcome and thank you, Madam
Chair, did we get this handout?
Um,
Did you want
Our presentation to continue.
Just trying to keep up with the,
the
Order. So go ahead whenever
you're ready. Thank you.
Hi, this is Miriamergeson at
Columbia University. Um, I'm
gonna pick up the 2nd.
Part of a presentation.
Oh, OK. I think
we have it in the wrong order on
our agendas, but I, I see that
um Donna Kinzer is at the table,
so it's Donna next.
OK.
Sorry for the confusion, um,
we're just trying to keep keep
up with things. So go ahead,
Donna.
Madam Chair and committee
members, uh, thank you for the
opportunity to be with you here
today to talk about my
experience, uh working with
global hospital payment models.
Um, I am in New Mexico resident,
um, happily, New Mexico resident
and um uh for for the period
from 2013 through 2018, um, I
left New Mexico to
Uh, work in Maryland to run the
Maryland Health Services Cost
Review Commission, and uh this
is an agency that implemented uh
global hospital payment models
for all of the hospitals in
Maryland. Um, I've had a
long-term career in uh in
healthcare finance and payment
models and um and I've also
worked with uh other uh states
in global hospital payments. But
today,
I'm going to focus primarily on
um my Maryland experience where
I ran the day today, um, uh,
implementation of hospitals
Global payments.
The, um, um, and I, I wanna say
upfront that there are some very
significant differences between
Maryland and New Mexico and um
that's not lost on me. Um,
Maryland is a small state with a
very high population density and
New Mexico is one of the largest
states with one of the lowest
population density, so there are
different.
challenges and um at the end of
the day, there's a a much more
rural focus and challenge to
some of the, the problems that
are facing New Mexico, um, and,
uh, and, and we can come to
that, but um uh I'll be um
wanting to start with the, with
the Maryland experience.
Yeah, I, I'm sorry, just to
interrupt, uh, Senator Stepanic.
We're working on it, there,
there seems to be like um kind
of an echo but not exactly, but
so we're trying to figure out
the technology or if I'm sitting
in the wrong position. No, no,
I, I, I, I have no, I'm not, I'm
not tech person, so I make sure
that your mics are all off, um,
and we'll just move forward.
Thank you.
And um you do have a copy of the
presentation, uh, in front of
you and um and I'm, uh, I, I
don't know if we're gonna put it
up on the screen. It's, it's not
important because you have it in
front of you. And I'm just going
to be using a couple of pages
out of the presentation, but I'm
going to turn in inside the
cover to the first page and um
and really just try to set the
stage of what is a global
hospital.
payment model just to uh uh
contrast that with the fee for
service system that underpins uh
most of hospital payments.
And, um, and, and when we look
at a global hospital payment
model. We're thinking of it as a
tool that can help us change the
incentives uh in the, in the
system, uh, to help us, uh,
support transformation of the
healthcare system to, to focus
more on chronic care and
preventive, and uh also uh as we
think about rural
hospitals and safety net
hospitals to stabilize their
revenues, uh, so that they can
function more successfully.
And um as we just to, to really
put a, a, a finer point on that,
as we set a global hospital, um,
budget, we are setting fixed
perspective payments.
For an entire year for all of
their services. So it's for all
of their inpatient services and
all of their outpatient services
and that budget is not tied to
how many admissions or how many
emergency room visits or how
many lab tests or radiology
services that they have for the
upcoming year. It is a fixed
perspective amount that they're
going
to uh have its predictable, um,
and, um, and, and why we're
doing that is um we are asking
them to focus on, uh, some
different things. We want them
to focus on reducing avoidable
utilization like readmissions
and um asthma admissions and
things that can be influenced
with better care. Uh, well,
that's kind
It's hard when you're on a fee
for service system and every
time you invest in that, it
takes your revenue down.
The other thing that we are
intensely focused on is, uh, is
exactly what Doctor Guzmano
talked about, which is stopping
the flow of low intensity
outpatient services into
hospital billing.
To be billed at 2 X, uh, or 3 X.
And um and and so that's a
second thing that we're uh
trying to change. Um, and
thirdly, and certainly a very
high priority is to shift the
focus to uh to health and
outcomes and improved quality in
the hospital setting. So better
outcomes and in that.
In the payment model, we are
having a fixed payment, but
we're also having a reward, uh,
an incentive system attached to
that for better outcomes.
So, at, at a high level, um,
that's what a fixed budgeting uh
hospital uh global budgeting
system is doing is shifting out
of the volume business into a
fixed payment approach.
And I want to move on to the
next page in the uh in the
handout.
And um and then tell you the
story about uh Maryland and um
it in Maryland has a unique
backdrop in that it really was
doing rate setting since the 9
1970s, so prices are already
standardized in Maryland as we
come uh toward the global budget
model. However, um,
And, and, and so we've got all
payers on standardized rate
setting, so we don't have all of
that extra cost that uh Doctor
Guzman talked about with the
negotiating with multiple payers
and multiple payment
methodologies.
Um
As we come into the um and and
that system was very successful,
um, until, uh, after, uh, they,
uh, around 2006, 2007 time frame
when the regulators in Maryland
squeezed down the hospital
prices to keep the um the rate
increases down.
What happens when we squeeze the
balloon. So, um, what happened
was volume started to grow and
um the, even though the rates
were uh favorable, the per
capita cost started to balloon,
um and increase more rapidly
than the national average, so
the system that was set up to
keep costs down, started to fail
because
Outpatient volumes, the same
kind that Doctor Guzmano just
talked about those low intensity
outpatient volumes came into the
hospital. Um, lots of one day
stays, lots of readmissions, um,
and those things were driving up
the cost in Maryland.
And um and and and Maryland had
a deal with the federal
government that as long as it
kept its costs down, it could
set rates for Medicare and
Medicaid, not just commercial.
So they set out to renegotiate
that deal in 2013, um, and, um,
that's when I came on board to
help finalize that and then set
up the new system and um and so
that in 2013, um, the federal
government approved a new
approach and the cyst we um put
all of the hospitals on global
hospital payments in 2014.
Um, now, we, um,
Uh compared to other states and
compared to New Mexico, we had a
major advantage because we
already had a lot of
infrastructure in place from
having done rate setting.
Um, but, um, we actually had to
double the infrastructure
because it actually takes more
infrastructure to run a global
budgeting than it does to set
rates and um and also, uh, we're
trying to transform care, so we
were investing in our health
information exchange, and we
wanted to keep small providers
to be able to deal with the new
system, so we were investing in
infrastruc
structure and support that could
help uh the smaller providers,
uh, be successful in the system.
And so that that was a really
important um aspect of getting
that, uh, implemented. And so,
um, when I in my poster child of
care that can be done outside of
a hospital is um a sleep center.
So when I started Maryland,
working in Maryland.
The hospitals were billing $100
million worth of sleep centers,
um, in, in, uh, in the
outpatient hospital setting.
When I left Maryland in 2018,
um, that number was down to 10
million. And so what happened in
the system is that the there was
an intense focus on reducing
readmissions and avoidable
admissions, which was
successful.
There was a virtual stop and
reversal of buying uh buying
practices and billing them out
at hospital rates.
And that there's in the back of
your uh handout for later
looking is a med pack report
that shows that between 2011 and
2017, that drove a hospital
outpatient volumes by about 80%
in Maryland, um, the increase in
outpatient volumes was less than
half of the national increase
over that period. So it really
reversed that situation.
Of buy and bill, um.
And um,
11 other thing that happened in
the process, and so this may
surprise you, is that hospital
rates actually went up.
Um, so the rate per unit went
up, but the cost per capita went
down because the hospitals were
not chasing low intensity volume
to make up for not getting
enough revenue to cover
inflation. So that's really a
dynamic that's a little
different than expected, but
that's really what we saw in,
uh, in that process. Um, we
worked very closely with the
physicians in the state.
And lots of hospital
transformation work groups. We
worked very closely with the
stakeholders and the physicians
to implement this. Um, the, the,
uh, um,
Medical society had a direct
dial. Uh, there was a problem,
they got immediate response to
problems, we implemented a
primary care payment model which
um with uh uh with the, uh,
along with the support of the
medical association and the
primary care practices in
Maryland.
We were able to um get a chronic
care or get care management fees
from CMS at uh to the tune of
$35 per member per month in
Maryland, which was an uh an
extremely good uh benefit for
the enhancing the primary care
in the state. Uh, we also worked
with the Medical Society to
design programs to work with the
specialist uh in the state and
ultimately um during um
during the 10 years that this
model has been in effect of
implementing um more population
health uh rewards, uh, in the
model. So, um, so that's a um
Uh, kind of, um, um, brief
overview and some of the results
that uh came from the model of
the reduced utilization,
stopping the uh buy and bill,
um, and, um, better chronic care
lower readmissions, uh, and
actually higher rates for
hospitals, which is, uh, as
again, it's a little unexpected.
Some of the lessons, um learned
that really were important to uh
generating this success. Um,
there was a tremendous degree of
stakeholder engagement, the
hospitals and physicians in the
process, um, throughout, they
were supported with a very
robust infrastructure, we
doubled the um
We doubled the regulatory
infrastructure to be able to run
the model compared to just a
rate setting program.
There is a long pathway. It was
a 5 year pathway to get the
model really up and running and
performing, um, well, it takes
time to build transformation.
Um,
And um and and one last thing
going thinking back to our our
rural hospitals in New Mexico.
It, it, it does take a bit of a
different focus to um to uh as
we think about what rural
hospitals need in a global
model, um, a part of uh what
they need to think about our um
supporting essential services,
and, um, and I think that will
wrap up uh
formal comments, of course, I'll
be available for questions and I
think our next presenter, uh,
Dorothy Mueller is going to talk
a little bit more about the
rural hospital environment.
Thank you. um.
Miss Moeller.
Whenever you're ready.
Right.
Uh, thank you. I'm Dorothy
Moore. Some of you have met me
before I, uh, presented, I
believe to this committee, uh,
last year on some of the work
that my
Partner and I did on uh
pharmaceutical purchasing just a
little bit in terms of my
background, uh, I started my
career a long time ago, working
as staff for the California
legislature and actually worked
for one of the co-authors of, of
one of the initial uh
foundational pieces of
legislation related to managed
care, which was the Knox Kean
HMO Act, which is still in use
in California and then uh
postgraduate school.
Uh, spent about 4 decades, have
spent the last 4 decades uh
consulting across the, the um
Uh, the healthcare industry
starting first on the provider
side, uh, unfortunately or
fortunately building many of the
large integrated delivery
systems which are now in place
across the country as well as
consulting to payers and health
plans of various sorts, and more
recently focusing heavily on
safety net programs and uh
Medicaid also worked on the
transformation of the Veterans
Administration and uh and have
been working
on the policy side, uh for the
last several years. Uh, I, I'm
going to just touch on my first
couple of slides very quickly.
Uh, and, um, the whole point of
these two slides is really to
just create some context for how
the industry got to where we are
and also to touch on how New
Mexico specifically got to where
it is in terms of the mix of
pears and it's
market, uh, the structure and um
the structure of its delivery,
it's healthcare delivery system
and some of the issues that it
that it faces, uh, uh, currently
in its delivery system. Um, real
quickly, um, unfortunately or
unfortunately, I had a front row
seat to the, the uh evolution of
the industry from the creation
of the first HMO Act, which
really did transform the state
of
The of American healthcare, uh,
prior to that, we had a very,
very different system, which is
very much was very much more
like the uh systems that other
countries still have so heavily
focused on both public, not for
profit, charitable institutions,
uh, community health, uh,
community hospital systems, etc.
and uh and provider driven uh
Health plans, which were
originally the blues, both, both
Blue Cross and Blue Shield as
well as a number of mutually
owned or member owned uh health
insurers. What we put in place
is managed care, largely, which
is the model that you see almost
exclusively across the country
at this point in varying
degrees, you still have some,
some
Fee for service insurance but um
but also have um uh for the most
part have moved to some, some
iteration of, of managed care.
Uh, the net effect of that is a
significantly much more
complicated system, uh, and much
higher cost system. I've added a
couple of data points at the
side, um, as many of you know,
healthcare spending in the US
during that time period, it has
moved from 7% of GDP to
Approaching at this, this year,
it will approach 20% of GDP and
um and we've been in the
process, we've grown a very
large
Uh, both, uh,
For profit and we still retain
some elements if not for profit,
but largely a for-profit system
has emerged in its, in its uh uh
wake. What I would add is that
um that, that unlike other
countries, even as the US is
continued to develop the managed
care system.
That we have in place currently.
Other countries have not
embraced that. There are no
advanced countries uh in uh
either the OECD or other places
that embrace the uh the managed
care model. In fact, there are
only a couple of uh countries
worldwide that embrace the model
that we have and they're
primarily smaller countries and
less developed countries. Uh,
going on to slide two real
quickly.
Uh, New Mexico was one of the
earliest, um, states as you
know, was one of the earliest
states to really embrace this
model. Uh, when I first started
working in New Mexico at that
time with what used to be the
Saint Joseph's Hospital system.
Uh, on my first project in the
state.
Uh, New Mexico was seen as the
most one of the most advanced,
uh, managed care markets in the,
in the country and we uh we're
all making projections about
what it would look like in the
future and um it was seen as
kind of the model of the future.
It was an early adopter of
Medicaid managed care. It was
home to Loveless, which at the
time was seen as one of the
leaders in kind of the new
integrated model of delivering
care, uh, and it was early, it
was an
early adopter of integrated
delivery systems. In fact, that
was uh my very first project in
New Mexico working with uh Saint
Joseph's. Um, but as in other
states, as um, uh, and, and
across the nation as managed
care has continued to grow, the,
the impact both on outcomes and
quality and costs. Um, really
haven't shown that they've,
they've delivered on the early
expected promises of man.
care. Uh, and I point out a
couple of data, uh, data points
on the left side of that slide
of uh New Mexico in particular,
which has seen significant
increases in its, uh, as you
know, significant increases in
its its expenditures for managed
care, uh, or for, for a
healthcare services more broadly
and um at, in the same time,
it's health outcomes have
actually gotten worse over time.
I pulled the last
10 years of data for the state
and, and um they're, you know,
they're quite honestly
surprising. One of the net
effects of managed care is that
um the emergence of managed care
and the reason why I placed some
emphasis on it and at the
beginning part of my
presentation is that it had the
effect of shifting the focus in
the system away from providers
away from the healthcare
delivery system to insurers. It
also added a lot of cost and
complexity because at the same
time, we were expecting uh
providers in particular
integrated systems of various
sorts to take on
responsibilities for care
management, and they have uh
delivery of services across the
entire continuum of care. We
were also asking health plans to
do the same. So you add it, you
just added layers of complexity
and you added layers of cost,
um, and, uh, even though New
Mexico is
has uh surprisingly, uh, escape
some of the worst outcomes uh
related to the, the emergence of
this model. In fact, it actually
has seen fewer hospital closures
than other states, Texas is the
worst in the nation in terms of
uh the number of closures that
uh that it's experienced. Um, it
still has had a very clear
Uh, effect on the healthcare
delivery system. So, how have
other states if we can go to the
next slide. How have other
states approached this issue.
Um, unlike some states, and I
wouldn't say all states, but
many states in the, in the
nation, um, New Mexico has
continued to focus primarily on
its managed care model.
Uh, and, uh,
And, uh, in fact, it has, it has
passed away. It has uh developed
waivers and gotten approval of
waivers that do focus on some
elements of the, the um of the
delivery system. You've got some
um very recent waivers that have
been, uh, that have been passed
that allow you to uh to ask your
manage managed care
organizations to pursue some
innovations and managed care. It
hasn't the, the uh
state of New Mexico hasn't uh
focused on delivery system
reform to the extent that other
states have. Uh, and, um, what
you see here on this slide is
just some of the examples of uh
of the types of delivery reform
initiatives that other states
have, uh, have implemented. And
this is by no means an
exhaustive list of, of all of
them. It is uh really just a
list of some of the more
significant.
delivery system innovations that
other states have put in place.
What many people forget is that
one of the key elements of the
ACA when it first passed, uh,
and went into effect around 2013
was that it included two very
significant programs, the
distrip program, uh, so that,
uh, delivery system reform and
innovation program and the SIM
program, which was another
delivery system innovation
program.
which many states embraced and
participated in to take a look
at what their delivery systems
were, um, how, how they were
being affected by the emergence
of this new model for delivering
and financing healthcare and to
shore them up. And in some
instances to shift uh the uh
shift forms of payment, um,
shift, uh, the way that services
were contracted for, uh
In many instances, creating new
organizations, uh, and, and, uh,
infrastructure to allow for the
direct contracting to with
providers, etc.
Uh, so that providers were both
strengthened in the process and
they also had a uh the
opportunity to actively
participate in the design, uh,
and, um, ongoing management of
the system for delivery of
services. Now, the primary
driver for all of this was
really the Medicaid program, but
the net effect, of course, is
that it, it, that the, those
changes in the, in the approach
to delivery and financing.
care, actually had the benefit
of er of, of um uh supporting
and uh providing additional um
advantages to other payers as
well. Just some of those that um
that, that were put in place in
our or designed through these
processes and we put in place
and are still in effect and um
your previous speaker actually,
uh, Donna Kinzer was involved in
some of these and can speak to
some of them in more detail, in
particular the
program. She's also had some
involvement with Pennsylvania,
um, some of those included the
creation of the main community
care teams and accountable
communities, the Oregon uh uh
coordinated care organizations,
which is considered uh one of
the most innovative programs in
the country because they
actually brought provider
organizations together to form
uh essentially uh individual
networks uh by region, which
Then uh are directly contracted
to provide services. There, it's
obviously uh more robust than
that, but, um, uh, but, but, um,
it, it really has become the
backbone for the delivery of
services and the management of
their um Medicaid program, the
Washington Accountable
Communities, the Colorado
Regional Health Organizations
and medical homes. Florida has a
slightly different version of
this called provider services
Networks, um, and actually
requires that provider services
networks all that they're at
least 1 or 2 by uh over a
particular um
Uh, geography within the state
or are allowed to contract for
the delivery of um of Medicaid
Services, CalAM, which some of
you may be familiar with, which
is kind of the granddaddy of all
this, uh, um, redesign the
Massachusetts Accountable Care
Organizations in the Texas
Regional Healthcare
Partnerships. Again, those are
just some examples of some that
were built and created. Um, I
would also emphasize that New
Mexico did participate.
in the disc rip but consistent
with the way that New Mexico has
approached Medicaid.
Um, it, it primarily used the
disk rip to um change some of
its funding mechanisms for its
Medicaid managed care program
and uh entered into some
additional enhancements, uh,
some tied to kind of the
emerging model around
value-based reimbursement.
If you go to the next slide.
Um, I would just like to point
out that um that uh that the,
the, these innovations didn't
really stop with the completion
of the disc program, which is no
longer um being funded um or the
SIM program, which are not no
longer being funded. New models
have emerged, uh, that many
other states continue to take
advantage of the Maryland model
which uh Donna just uh discussed
actually is being funded through
a new
program that has recently been
funded by CMS and that's called
the um a head model, which is,
uh, of course, in natural uh
CMS.
Uh, parlance, it has a very long
uh acronym Advancing Allpair
Health Equity Approaches and
Development. um, which is, um,
so it's, it's focus is heavily,
it, it is heavily focused on the
all pair model which Donna just
discussed, um, but includes, um,
in particular, the development
of some more rural focused
models, uh, and, um, uh, and has
been expanded from uh to, to
include
only Maryland but Vermont at one
point, uh, Pennsylvania was
thought to be participating in
no longer as participating
primarily because it's uh
continuing to focus on the
development of its rural health
networks without the global uh
payment mechanism attached to it
currently, but again, Donna can
Connecticut, Hawaii, and New
York in specific regions. So
that is a continuing model for
delivery innovation, um, that is
in place, the grant application
period has already expired, so
New Mexico hasn't um
Uh, uh, has missed the
opportunity to, to, um, to, to
bid to participate in that
program.
Um, but depending on what
happens with the incoming
administration, it may or may
not, uh, there may or may not be
future opportunities to
participate.
One of the other models which
actually New Mexico has some
participation in is what's
referred to as the HSA Rural
Hospital flexibility model or
flex, um, and, um, the flex
model provides supports
primarily because it's run
through her so it's primarily
supports provided to um to uh uh
critical access hospitals and
FQHCs and RHCs. Um, it's notable
that the flex model in addition
cooperative, which are both
rural focused models for
delivery transformation and the
design of new networks that can
participate in uh the Medicaid
program. Uh, and, um, other
states that have participated in
these programs and developed um
similar kinds of networks
include Alabama, Arkansas,
Hawaii, Idaho, Illinois, Nevada,
South Dakota, Virginia, and West
Virginia. Again, uh, it's not a
place where New Mexico is
actively designing.
An approach and participating,
but New Mexico does take
advantage of those funds and has
some participation.
Uh, I've mentioned all as well,
the Pennsylvania rural health
model. Um, you'll notice that
Connecticut is a new participant
in the, in the head model that I
mentioned previously.
Connecticut, uh, is one of those
states that has really jumped
out and has kind of taken a lead
in a new approaches to Medicaid
and delivery system
transformation. It actually uh
several years ago decided to do
away with.
managed care altogether and um
has disintermediated the
providers and instead it has
developed a provider focused
system with direct contracting
with the state for services. Um,
and I would also have to, uh,
it's important to mention that
there are, there are 8 primarily
rural states um that uh
currently do not use uh Medicaid
managed care. They use a model
that's been around for a long
time, which is the PC.
GCM model, the primary care case
management model, um, in the,
uh, uh, in their Medicaid
program, which allows them also
greater flexibility to work with
their rural providers, um, and,
and, uh, direct payments more
flexibly, uh, to, to those
providers. There are also a
number of states that uh use the
PCCM model.
Primarily for uh uh for their
rural communities. So again,
another place where New Mexico
is unique is that it uses the
Medicaid, uh, manage it uses
Medicaid managed care across the
state, although you still do
have a number of enrollees who
are uh in the FIFA service uh uh
program.
It you, New Mexico uses it
across the state, whereas most
states have opted to not use
Medicaid managed care in its
rural and frontier communities
for obvious reasons because it,
it just, it adds a level of
complexity that many rural
healthcare providers are not uh
able to, to, um,
Uh, to, to me. Um, so just real
quickly on the last slide, um,
kind of finishing up some
comments, um, New Mexico has
many of the elements to actually
do what these other states are
um are already doing. It has a,
a, you know, New Mexico rural
hospitals network. It's still,
New Mexico still retains um
special hospital districts. It
has an established primary care
association.
Uh, which is, uh, primarily
populated by the FQHCs and RHCs.
It does participate in some of
these programs, and it has made
active use of Medicaid, uh,
waiver programs. Um, I, I, I
would, um, I would
Have to, I, it's important to
emphasize that most of these
programs for delivery system
transformation and the creation
of these more, these new, more
robust networks that really
support and enhance providers,
uh, have been, uh, developed
through the Medicaid program. So
there are either 1115 or 1915 uh
uh uh 19.
Uh, 15 waivers or their state
plan amendments, so you do have
to go through that process, but
that uh provides a mechanism
even if cutbacks, if we see
cutbacks in the Medicaid program
because of uh of budget
neutrality requirements, you can
make an argument for redesigning
your delivery systems using
those waiver applications to um
uh to uh uh um develop the,
these new enhanced approaches to
strengthening your delivery
systems. Thank you.
Thank you. Um, I think next, uh,
I'm just guessing again, um,
doctor Lageson, is that, is she
who's next or OK. I believe so,
sorry, our agenda is not in
order, so, oh.
Yeah, um, I think we'll just
hold till the end. So hopefully,
I mean depending on how much
time we have left, people will
get a little longer time. So
we'll see how, cause if we do
questions now we, we may run out
of time for the rest of the
presentation.
Thank you.
Go ahead.
Hi, uh, this is Mary Logeson
from Columbia University. Um,
thank you, Chair Chairwoman, um,
Madam Chair, for the invitation
to speak today um with my
co-author, uh, Michael Guzmano,
who spoke before. I'm gonna move
to sort of part two of our
presentation and um Michael was
talking about the, the costs,
cost drivers in the system. We
did a report in 2022.
Um, where we analyzed the cost
drivers in New Mexico and made
recommendations, uh, next slide
please.
So
Everybody knows, I think, or a
lot of people, most people
realize the high cost of the US
healthcare system. I think one
of the less appreciated areas
of, of waste is administrative
costs and the complexity of the
system. So this slide shows that
around 8% of US healthcare
expenditure is spent on
administration.
Now, that's probably an
underestimate, and it's
certainly varies across
different sort of settings of
care, um, and different payers,
but it's a substantial amount
and it's way up from the OECD
average, which is 3%.
So,
uh, slide number cost driver
one.
So, as my colleague Michael
mentioned complexity is a big
factor in our system. And
What this can be understood as a
game of codes. And there's a lot
of effort in our healthcare
system towards gaming the
payment.
Methods, gaining the, the
reimbursement schemes to find
the most lucrative, uh, payments
through either through sight of
service through gaming the
health status of the enrollees
or by changing the service
provided towards more lucrative
ones.
And this happens at all levels,
uh, patients also sort of end up
being part of this in the sense
that they, you know, they also
need to be vigilant, and it's,
but it's a lot harder for them
to, to maximize the system, um,
given that they're not usually
experts in that, in that
endeavor. Next slide cost driver
number 2.
So
We learned a lot about the
burden in New Mexico on
providers when we talk to
stakeholders in 2022 and 2021.
And we were
We were surprised by some of
the, you know, some of the
things we heard, um, and we, we
outlined those in the report.
It seemed like there was so many
savings that could be made by
simply streamlining processes
and uh streamlining regulations
and, and procedures.
So one of the big takeaways of
our report was not only payment,
which is what we set out to
investigate, but also how we
could ease the burden on
providers and this really fed
into the discussion around
burnout that was very big then
and continues to be a really big
issue for providers.
So the idea is to make it easier
for providers and to rein in
some of the waste that occurs,
um, and healthcare systems in
general.
Last slide steps towards
simplification.
There is enormous scope to
understand in much more detail
how the issue of administrative
costs and administrative burden,
how that affects the healthcare
system.
What's really great in New
Mexico is the ability of
stakeholders to, to
You know, to consult each other
and talk to each other, um,
there's so many advantages in
New Mexico in terms of being
able to understand the
perspectives of different
stakeholders in the system.
So an important step to sort of
addressing this would be to map
those administrative burdens.
The second would be to look at
the standardization of
outpatient fees and what
Michael Guzmano referred to in
terms of that side of service
issue or what families USA calls
same service, same price, and
integrating that within global
payments and reducing gaming is
so important.
The idea would be to, if we
could address these
inefficiencies that it would
free up resources and reduce
professional burnout.
Finally,
In terms of New Mexico's future
healthcare system. It's so
important that those
stakeholders are part of the
conversation and
That policy proposals take into
account the needs of those
different players.
New Mexico really has an
opportunity to do something, um,
to really free up resources and
to create a sort of a model
which others
could really benefit from seeing
in action, and we certainly have
been very enthusiastic about
the, the possibility New Mexico
has to standardize its payments
more as a starting point in this
area. That's all I have um to
present today, just a really
brief overview of, of this issue
of simplification and
complexity. Thank you so much
for the opportunity to present.
Thank you so much for good
information. So are we going
back to Doctor Guzmano or OK.
Oh, no, I, I think that Miriam
has completed the second part of
our presentation, so I don't
have any more remarks at this
time, but I'll be happy to
address questions when the time
is correct. All right. Thank
you. So, I guess next we will go
to um
Doctor Gabriel R. Sanchez.
Um, who's a professor in the
political science department at
um UNM.
Hello folks. Hopefully you all
can hear me all right.
We hear you fine.
Uh thank you to the chair and
members of the committee for
allowing me uh to speak with you
on behalf of uh our full panel.
It's a great pleasure. Um, I'm
gonna be very brief, uh, with
just a handful of slides for you
this afternoon. Uh, by way of
introduction, because I know
some of you very well, but not
all of you. Um, in addition to
my role as a professor of
political science at the
university. Uh, this being my
20th year in the Department of
Political Science at UNM. Um, I
also have an endowed chair, uh,
funded by Robert Wood Johnson
Foundation to focus on
on health policy research
specifically here in New Mexico
and the broader region, and I
direct UNM Center for Social
Policy, uh, which many of you
know conducts applied policy
research across a number of
different policy issues
including healthcare. I mean our
main area of expertise is in the
collection of original survey
focus group and in-depth
interview data, uh, to always
make sure that New Mexicans'
voices are included in a lot of
important policy decisions,
including the conversation that
we're having today regarding
in costs and potential shifts at
the system level to reduce costs
of the overall system and
obviously by extension to the
individual New Mexicans. Um, I'm
just gonna share a handful of
slides with you today. Um, one,
to demonstrate some of the
impacts of costs on the consumer
or the residents of the state of
New Mexico. Um, and second, to
just utilize these as an example
of the type of research that our
center at UNM conducts that can
be helpful, um, as you consider,
um, healthcare cost reform
moving forward.
Uh, first slide please, on slide
number 2.
This data comes from an annual
survey. Our team at UNM conducts
for the state's Health Services
department, uh, that has a large
sample size just under 2000, uh,
New Mexican residents every
single year, um, and in this
survey, uh, we try to track what
the individual experiences are
of residents across the state
and what their needs are in
regards to healthcare. Uh, one
of the more obvious points to
make, uh, that I think is just
useful to have in front of you
as you start to think through
hospital level system reform is
how heavy
Um, unfortunately, the state's
residents rely on emergency
rooms and hospitals for care.
Um, you see on this slide, again
from a large sample of New
Mexican residents that was
conducted just this past year.
And when we asked folks, how do
you typically um utilize
healthcare. What do you usually
go? You see that just over 1 in
4 New Mexicans, 26% of the
overall sample indicates that
the rely on the emergency room
on regularly, uh, for their
care. So obviously, folks can
utilize the emergency room in
some instances, the doctor's
office.
And others, but the key to this
question is, where's their usual
place uh to receive healthcare,
and you see again, 26% is a very
high number, uh, that hopefully
puts into some context for you,
um, what the overall
conversation regarding um
reduction in hospital costs can
have at the uh individual level
uh for New Mexican consumers.
Next slide, please. Probably
more germane to our conversation
is how costs specifically at the
household level and experiences
individuals have um with their
individual medical cares, and
what impact uh the rising
medical costs are having at the
individual level for New
Mexicans. Um, see here in the
key is we frame the question to
specifically say, due to high
medical costs, have you or
someone in your household done
any of the following in the past
two years, and you see a wide
range of activities on
Unfortunately, um, leading many
New Mexicans to either
underutilize care or skip care
altogether, specifically because
of the cost. Whether that's
skipping dental care or checkups
at 25%, um relying on home
remedies or over the counter
drugs because they know they
can't afford prescriptions at
18% or some of the more um dire
or, or more problematic areas.
For example, uh, 9% of New
Mexicans indicating in 2023, uh,
that an emergency room or
doctor's bill was too expensive
for them.
to be able to afford, um, or,
uh, the fact that you see, um, a
high percentage of individuals
at 11% having problems getting
mental health care,
specifically, again, uh, due to
high medical costs. Uh, so this
overall conversation about the
need to reduce costs, obviously
at the systems level, trickles
down at the individual level and
hopefully will improve um
individual medical costs and
some of the, the circumstances
we see a lot of New Mexicans
facing specifically because of
high medical costs.
On the next slide, you see that
we've asked individuals
specifically over the past year,
have you delayed or avoided
getting any type of medical care
that you felt that you needed.
Uh, you see, 37% of all New
Mexicans in the sample
indicated, unfortunately, yes,
they have skipped or avoided
medical care that they felt that
they needed. And when we
followed up with that 37% and
asked them specifically what was
it that caused you, uh, to delay
getting medical care. You see
the moral category at 44% was
specifically worry about the
cost, right? So we saw in the
last slide, um health seeking
behavior is impacted,
unfortunately because of the
rising medical costs across the
state, and specifically on this
slide you see individuals are
foregoing care, um, at a very
high level, specifically because
of worries that they have about
cost. Uh, just to emphasize this
point, um, regarding healthcare
costs, many of you know I'm also
an action analyst. I do a lot of
election-oriented polling and
survey work and nationally and
here in New Mexico. And
When we asked voters nationally
and specifically here in New
Mexico. Um, what are the most
important issues you think
Congress and the President
should address. Everybody knows
inflation was number one, but
what a lot of folks did not
catch is in the top 4 for all
subgroups of voters nationally
and here in New Mexico,
Healthcare costs specifically
were identified as one of the
top issues for voters this
cycle, and I'll tell you over a
series of focus groups I
conducted over this election
cycle, even when we ask folks to
dig deeper into what were the
drivers.
to inflation for them, that was
obviously the top priority for
voters. Overwhelmingly heard the
number one issue uh that was
causing them the most concern of
all household goods, uh, that
were rising in terms of
inflation or healthcare costs.
So I think it just emphasizes
how important the conversation
to try to control costs are not
only at the system level, but
for individual level New
Mexicans.
And finally, uh, just to
emphasize, and again, hopefully
the, the few slides that I
presented today give you an
example of the type of research
our team at UNM is, is able and
willing to conduct to help uh
pursue this level of
conversation regarding health
care reform at the system level,
um, our team at UNM again
conducts a ton of statewide
surveys specific to healthcare,
and in the future, I think we
could design a survey similar to
what I've shared with you today,
that could be more focused.
On global budgets, potentially
asking a rural residents of the
state and individuals that work
within rural hospitals, what are
the essential services that they
need uh to provide the residents
and obviously asking consumers
within rural counties, what are
the essential services that they
need to rely on and are there
any gaps in the current model or
system to be able to achieve
those needs for them. Um,
furthermore, uh, we also conduct
a series of focus groups um
across a number of different
hard to reach targets in the
state.
of New Mexico. Uh, so thinking
about the potential of doing
focus group or individual
interviews with members of the
healthcare workforce,
specifically that oversee
billing to get a much more clear
sense of how much staffing time
goes into billing issues, what
challenges might impact these
frontline workers and what
attitudes they might have about
system level reform and what
that might do in terms of their
perception of improving overall
healthcare delivery. I'm here in
the state of New Mexico. Uh,
those are the types of things
our team at UNM can
conduct, uh, because we all
know, um, a lot of the
information that you hear from,
from out of state experts is
incredibly useful, but
oftentimes, um, it lacks that
New Mexico nuance. Um, so
hopefully our team can be
helpful moving forward to make
sure that we have original data
specific uh to the state of New
Mexico to help inform your
future decisions. Uh, thank you
very much. Hopefully this leaves
plenty of time for questions.
I'll stick around and make sure
I can answer anything that come
my way.
Thank you, Doctor Sanchez. Um,
so next, Susan Reagan and Kramer
Winningham.
Oh, someone's here in person
Surprise.
OK, whenever you're ready.
Thank you. I got to look at my
notes. I have no idea what I'm
gonna say.
You like that?
I just say join the club. There
we go. Um.
Madam Chairwoman, thank you for
uh having me speak today and I
appreciate you guys, um,
Listening to us and that you're
looking into health care costs.
My name is Susan Reagan. I work
at UNM Bureau of Business and
Economic Research and online is
my colleague with Arrowhead
Center with New Mexico State
University, Kramer Windheim.
Um, and we are currently engaged
in putting a report together for
your committee, uh, hopefully
we'll have something finalized
report for you in December or in
early January, looking at
Healthcare's cost or health care
expenditure databases as they
exist in other states, what are
their best practices, um, what
are the, the issues that they're
finding, what are their failures
that they find that they're
doing in other states, um,
And I think I'm gonna ask Kramer
if he has a minute. I think he's
got access to his notes faster
than I'm gonna be able to pull
him up here and read to sort of
summarize some of our early
findings, um, when we think
about what is a healthcare
expenditure database, I know
that um Department of Health
just put in all payers claims
database out. It just went live,
so I know they've been working
on it for a while, and I also
know that's usually when you
look at the healthcare
expenditure.
database system. That's the most
expensive part of setting up.
A total, total health care
costs, um,
Healthcare costs though are more
than just claims what they're
collecting right now are claims,
right?
Um, and so you need more than
just claims, uh,
That's where, and they're
calling anything and all payers
database at this point, and it,
I don't think it's mature enough
to give you all the answers that
you need, but it's also not ever
going to collect all the data
you need.
Um, and so what we really need
in New Mexico, because we do
have a unique state. We have a
state that's got a lot of rural
areas as well as urban, um, but
we also have a very diverse
population, and the costs that
we experience in New Mexico is
going to be different than we, I
think we see other states
because of these things. One is
transportation issues, I think
our rural counties, um, which
might not have local emergency
rooms.
I mean, if you look at Col
facts, I think they're closest
emergency room is down in Las
Vegas, right? So we have
transportation issues, and then
we look at our diverse
populations, we know that our
Native American Indians have
different issues, and I know a
lot of their funding comes from
BIA, but they also hit our
systems.
Outside of BIA, right? Um, we
also have a high Hispanic
population, um, all of these
things contribute to
expenditures that aren't
necessarily captured in just
looking at the all payer system,
and so what I like to say is
that we need to look
We need to be careful that the
data we're collecting accurately
reflects all the expenses that
our people see, you know,
including prescriptions, um, or
over the counter drugs as we saw
Gabe Sanchez out of that slights
that people went and did over
the counter instead of
prescriptions. So we need to
look at all those costs that
Those individuals are doing.
Um, Kramer, are you available to
maybe make a comment or two of
things I've missed.
Yeah, I'm, I'm here. Can you
hear me all right?
Could you speak up just a little
bit.
All right, um, hopefully you can
hear me now.
Um, mountain chair uh members of
the committee, uh, thanks for
having us. I think Susan covered
uh a lot of what we wanted to
talk about. I think I would just
add a couple of points on.
The rationale for a health
expenditure database in New
Mexico, um, generally, these are
used to
Uh, be a basis for implementing
costs growth benchmarks, uh,
with the goal of managing health
care costs that are growing at a
rate faster than incomes.
This is a trend that uh is
occurring in New Mexico. We
found a Commonwealth Fund study
that showed in 2010, premiums
and deductibles in New Mexico
had risen to be around 10 to 12%
of median income.
Which at the time was higher
than all but 40 states in the
country. And in 2020, um, the
trend continued and New Mexico
is now one of only 5 states in
the country with healthcare
premiums and deductibles,
greater than 15% of median
income.
And so typically when uh these
databases are implemented in
other states. It's to, to
understand those healthcare
costs, what are the drivers? Are
there specific locations or
providers or uh reasons why
those healthcare costs are, are
increasing. Um, some of the ways
that a health expenditure
database differs from an
all-payer claims database is
that it's aggregated data, and
it provides more data than an
all-payer claims database.
Um, it also builds on and
supplements the all pair claims
database. Um, so it's not
necessarily recreating all that,
it's, it's adding on a few
additional things. The all Fair
claims database, uh, is really
good for detailed analysis of
specific services, procedures,
diagnoses across providers, um,
because you have the individual
claims database or individual
level claims data.
And they also seem to be
implemented first in the states
that we've, we've studied.
Um, health expenditure
databases uh collect claim and
non-claim payments, including
prescription drug spending, less
rebates, also the net costs of
private health insurance. And so
what that is, is the difference
between premiums earned and
benefits incurred for for
insurance providers. Uh, the
payments of all claim and
non-claim payments are often
referred to as total medical
expenses.
And those are collected from
private payers and public
programs, so that includes
Medicare, Medicaid.
Commercial carriers and
self-insured employers.
Uh, to, to, to measure the
health expenditure levels, these
aggregate figures are then
divided by the population to get
a per capita.
Health expenditure. And then,
that's what you used for
For benchmarking, um, the
benchmarking can be done at the
state level.
Uh, specific insurance market,
so Medicare, Medicaid, or, or
commercial, um, payers,
individual pairs by market, um,
or by hospital primary care
practice or specialist. So you
get very good information on
what it is pushing health
expenditures up in certain areas
and maybe not so in in other
areas, and as Susan mentioned,
this is important for New Mexico
with the unique population and
some geographic characteristics,
uh, that would really be good to
understand what's going on in in
in different
areas
Um, we have, uh, conducted
general outreach on some of
these uh health expenditure
database and also uh put out a
survey and we received some
responses.
And so some initial findings is,
you know, some of the
discussions around budget, uh,
for example, New Hampshire, uh,
they spent a couple million to
set up their database in 2008,
uh, some databases get um rolled
into budgets for offices with
broader functions like the
Connecticut Office of Health
Strategy.
Uh, they consolidated several
existing state resources, um,
and they do the all pair claims
database, patient discharge
data, prescription drug costs,
um, total cost of care model,
uh, hospital financial reporting
and the healthcare benchmarking
and their budget in FY21 was 66
million. Um, and so that's
probably the most robust model
we've seen, um.
There's some choices on, you
know, are some of the functions
going to be managed in-house or
through vendors.
Um, also how the operational
funding, if that's state funded
or if it's paid by the reporting
entities, uh, so there's some
choices there.
Um, just the initial comments
we've got from, from some of the
survey respondents, data quality
and data validation can be a
challenge, uh, just given the
amount of data, you've got lots
of different.
Reporting entities, um.
Designing the database upfront
is, is very important because
changes to the database.
Requires retraining of all your
reporting agencies and if the
data you collect is not
consistent year to year, then
longer term statistical analysis
has uh some issues.
Um, but there are a lot of
existing state databases we can
use as uh database design, um.
Models, uh, basically, so we
hope to include that in the
report for, for some guidance.
Uh, some of the cost drivers of
a database like this is the, the
number of organizations required
to report type of uh data being
reported in the level of detail.
Uh, the number available, uh,
variables needed for collection.
Incomplete data collection can
be a problem.
Um
You know, if you're, if you're
not able to get a total
representative, uh,
A data set and um the, the whole
data set is generally less
useful from what we've heard.
Um, and I, I think that's
probably the, the main stuff I,
I'd wanna cover, uh, Susan, I, I
think has some uh initial
thoughts on maybe boss or or
some of the um implementation
strategies.
Uh, for a database like this.
So where I'm coming from is
looking at um if you
Work with a local company or a
local vendor or um I denote that
Texas worked with their
universities to do uh total
healthcare expenditure database,
um, and looking back and
thinking about that.
Because you've already spent the
big portion of the money to put
in on all payers claims
database, the supplemental of
those extra pieces that it's not
gonna capture, isn't going to
run as much, um, and so an
initial thought is about 230,000
or 250,000 for the first year to
design it, and then probably a
little less to maintain it.
With the caveat of um inflation
and salaries, about 200,000 a
year to maintain that piece that
you need to fill in the holes at
the all pairs claims base isn't
going to capture that you really
need to look at two major
healthcare costs drivers in New
Mexico.
So I'm, I'll be here for any
questions that you need, and
thank you for uh giving us time
to us to talk.
Thank you to all the presenters
and if there's anyone online or.
Or at the desk that has um final
comments, we'd welcome them now,
so kind of maybe raise your
hand, um, in Zoom so that we can
not have a jumble of folks. So
the, do you have anything, um,
any final words before we go to
committee questions.
No, I, I, uh, Madam Chair, I
think uh uh be open for
questions uh and uh you know, if
there are more questions on some
of the other states that.
Uh, Dorothy mentioned I
certainly be available to
answer. Thank you.
racist or anyone?
OK. OK, so with that, we'll go
to questions and um
I'm going to be very generous
because this is such a
complicated topic. You get 8
minutes.
Oh, yeah.
Don't waste, don't waste them.
But before I do that, um, I want
to, um, particularly thank
Representative Chavez. She, um,
She and I put our girl money
into these projects, so we have
contracted with a lot of these
people, um, and we'd welcome
other folks if we get grow money
to, although yesterday at our
LFC presentation, I asked them
for a million dollars to
continue this work, which, um,
you know, is a, is a drop in the
bucket in terms of what we can
save and uh maybe get more
providers if we, you know, if
the, the administrative burden.
So I'm gonna go to
Representative.
Chavez, this is not her question
time, but this is kind of her.
Tie things together and say
who's doing what. Uh, thank you,
Madam Chair. Yeah, um, so
basically just a few comments. I
mean, I think that, you know,
health care has been on
everyone's mind, and I know that
when I'm door knocking,
healthcare is one of the biggest
issues that people raise in
terms of cost and and and um
access, right? We've had a lot
of conversations in committee
also, um, not just during the
interim, but also during the
regular session around
healthcare, and I mean some of
the information that that was
provided here today is really
amazing.
like, you know, our outcomes are
getting worse, and we're
spending more, and we really
need to begin to, to really
change the paradigm, shift the
paradigm in terms of how we're
providing healthcare in New
Mexico. So with all of that in
mind, um, like Representative
Thomas Thompson said we, we put
together, we put some of our
grow money, um, to be able to
begin this process, um, and so
what we did is, um, we looked
at, you know, some of the issues
that were, that we had talked
about a lot and that were
important to people.
One of them being the cost of
pharmaceuticals.
Um, there's been a preliminary
report done on that by um
Dorothy Mueller, um, and she's
also going to be following up on
that report to provide some
additional recommendations and
solutions in terms of how do we
reduce pharmaceutical costs in
New Mexico. The other, um, the
other thing that we, we spent
some of our girl money on was
the health expenditure database,
um, that's being worked on by
New Mexico State and UNM, um,
and so we're really looking
forward to um what you
have, um, in terms of
recommendations, and I think
that's going to be really very
important because it will also
capture, you know, and give us a
really good picture in terms of
what we're spending, right? Um,
the other, um,
Some of the other work that that
we'd like to continue and, and
that's why we asked for the
money, um, at LFC yesterday was
to really follow up and look at
all of the cost drivers that
were presented here today. So
looking at, you know, how can we
put together global budget uh
for New Mexico, um, you know,
gathering additional um uh
hospital data and then really
one of the big ones is
simplifying a payment systems
and accountability, that's
really huge in turn.
of, of the amount of time and
money that's spent on processing
all of those um claims. So, um,
so yeah, I'm just really excited
about this and um yeah, yeah,
you know, if you need something
to give your dope uh grow money
too.
This is one of the projects, um,
really definitely important, and
I think that it will, will
improve, um, in the long run in
the short term also, um.
Health outcomes and how we spend
our healthcare dollars in New
Mexico.
Thank you, Representative
Chavez, and I, I can't remember
who said it, but creating a road
map, I think that's what we're
trying to do, you know, we've
been doing scatter shot, you
know, let's do a pharmacy board,
like, you know, uh,
affordability board and let's do
this and, but we haven't never
really had the whole picture
together about with a road map,
so that's our hope is that this
work will lead to a roadmap so
that we can do things that are
specifically targeted and not
just, oh, I heard from a
constituent to do this, and we
tried that.
and, and then LFC says, well, we
gave you money for this and
it's, it didn't work and so
we're trying to streamline our
processes so that we can invest
our money, um, efficiently. So
we'll start with a
Representative Martinez. No
questions. Woohoo. Um.
Um, Representative Jones.
I have 8 minutes, Madam Chair.
That's, that's, that's really
hard, um, because usually I get
to formulate my questions while
I'm listening to you guys, but,
um, I'm, I, I got to speak with
you a little bit, some of you
before, before the presentation
and already had a few thoughts
about this, I guess, um.
I guess my, my main question,
the main question in my mind is,
And I appreciate what you said
about streamlining, uh, you
know, the patchwork thing is not
working and throwing money at
this, that and the other, we all
are frustrated with that. So
yeah, I really appreciate what
you brought to us uh in an
effort to streamline and and do
a better job of providing care
efficiently.
Um
Mhm
Who would be
Um, I'm curious, who would be
opposed to this type of effort,
and have you had opposition and
uh people who've said no, this
doesn't work. Have you run into
that? And have you given this
presentation to other states,
for instance, I know you, with
your work in Maryland, have you
presented that?
Got to turn the mic on.
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative Jones, uh,
yes, I think the uh the question
that uh that is always comes to
the surface and actually uh New
Mexico has studied this issue or
or global payments in the past,
um, I think the, the um question
that comes to the surface is uh
one of the questions that comes
to the surface is, do we have
the infrastructure that we would
need.
To actually launch a program
like this, uh, successfully. Um,
and so that's, uh, and so that's
a very significant consideration
in terms of being able to uh
organize and get stakeholder
support and get something off
the ground and tools like an
expenditure database, so, um,
one of the things that that I
would say is uh if you want to
be a value.
base purchaser, you actually
have to know what you're
purchasing. And so, um, we have
to have expenditure databases
and and um uh the claims data,
uh, so that we actually know
that what we're buying and we
can, um, and we can look for
things that uh could create
value if we did them
differently. And we also have to
uh invest in transformation and
supporting small providers.
In the process, um, uh, it, if
we have a great big effort, but
the providers really don't have
the resource to absorb it and
actually implement it, um, then
it really won't uh reach its
potential. So there needs to be
a lot of support for primary
care physicians and um smaller
hospitals to make sure that all
of the providers in the system
can
can transform. And um I, I
think, uh, uh, uh, there are
other, uh, points of view about,
for example, um, New Mexico has
a very significant amount of
integrated delivery already. So
for example, um, with the, the
Presbyterian system has an
integrated delivery with its um
insurance product and um and so
some people could say, well,
some
Some of those incentives are
already in the system. Um, so,
uh, and uh last but not least,
in terms of a New Mexico
specific issue is a provider,
um, availability and access of
making sure if you're
implementing any kind of a
global payment system that you
know what you want to purchase
and make sure that you don't um
actually hurt access, so
You have to monitor for
potential negative consequences
of any changing model and making
sure that you're improving
access and not hurting access in
the process of implementing a
model. So it has a long runway
uh to uh get the system up and
running. I would say that the
infrastructure that you would
need for a global model would be
the infrastructure you would
need for any, um, uh.
Uh, road map that you're
building, um, so I, I think it's
uh important to build the
infrastructure and information
and uh uh uh information flow,
uh, does that answer your
question?
It, it does, yes, and it brought
up some other questions too, and
that was one of my um questions
as you were talking about
infrastructure that's
specifically technology or uh
communication systems would that
be mostly the infrastructure
you're referring to?
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative Jones, um, I, I'm
talking about um health
information exchange
infrastructure so that we can
get um uh information to
Uh, providers, I think uh
Dorothy Mueller talked about the
need for more provider
transformation, but get
information to providers at the
point of care and get
information to help providers,
uh, some of it collected from
claims data so that they can
provide better care, so getting
that part of the information
structure built, but also um the
data, uh, the data
infrastructure.
of collecting the data,
analyzing the data and using the
data in a uh in a, in a process
to implement and manage the
global budget. So it's
It's personnel or consultants
like uh the great universities
that we have here in New Mexico
helping with many of these uh
tasks, um, of getting the data
and using the data effectively
and helping with the
transformation. Um, even in a
place like Vermont where it's
data rich, the small hospitals
still had problems uh with the
transformation and so the state
is going back.
To help with transformation
resources, so it, the
infrastructure is transformation
resources, information exchange
data and the people to analyze
the data. Does that answer your
question, Representative Jones?
It does. Yes, thank you very
much. I have a better picture of
that, um, could you, you made me
think of another.
question about um you said
decreasing access of care. You
mentioned that. Can you expand
on that for me and, and talk
about ways you think that it's
possible that we could see a
decrease in access to care.
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative Jones, the, um,
I'll give you an example of a
concern that that I would have
is, and, and this gets to uh why
if we're uh including, so for
example, if we have rural
hospitals, and we wanna make
sure they're providing essential
services and we gave them a
fixed budget to provide
essential services, but what if
they lost
their obstetrician and they
weren't providing any
obstetrician services at all,
but we're still paying them for
it. So we need to have a system
that holds accountability to
make sure that the services that
we value and that we want to um
pay for are actually being
provided for under that global
budget and um that we're not
paying for something that's no
longer being provided. So I
think that's uh an example.
Of uh where we want to make sure
that we continue to get and even
expand on some of those types of
essential services.
Does that answer your question?
It does somewhat, yes, I,
I actually have another
question, but I guess my time's
up.
Thank you so much. Thank you.
They complain about 3. I give
them 8 and they still complain.
What's a man to do?
So, those folks, those
presenters who are online, um,
if you would like to weigh in on
the questions, please raise your
hand and Grace will be on the
lookout for that, um, and 8
minutes goes really fast when
we're talking about these heavy
subjects, so Representative
Cates.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for your presentation.
You're right, it is an
extraordinarily dense
information and um I know that
uh
Uh, back in the days for junior
money. I, I threw some money in
this. So how many years has this
project been funded?
Through junior money or grow
money.
So if you're talking about the
all claimspaer database.
Are we on?
Alright, Madam Chairwoman, thank
you. Representative Cates, uh,
if you're talking about the all
claims payer database that's
running at Department of Health
right now. I believe the initial
appropriation was in 2013.
Thank you, Madam Chair. No, I'm
talking about uh your, your,
the, the, what you're presenting
here.
This global budgeting process.
So that's all payers base is not
what the representatives funded
from their grow money.
So
The, the, uh, the, the, the
gathering of information about
global budgeting and where uh we
need to go in the state. How
long has that been funded?
I believe Miss Spellman we'll go
to Representative Chavez. Yeah,
so I can answer that question.
So basically the grow money, um,
this the uh from uh 2024 is two
years.
You know, I, I, I know.
I don't know, I think we don't
understand your question. I'm
sorry. I, I apologize, I, I will
jump in here and say discussion
of global budgeting has been
since I started here in 2013, a
lot of these all payers claims
data, the fact that we passed it
in 2013 and are getting it in.
2024 and OK, we'll leave that
alone. But so the parts of this
have been discussed for the
12 years that I've been here.
So
What are, what are you at? What
is your ask today?
Madame Cheron, representative
Kates, my ask is actually a
really small thing. I'm a data
person. I work with databases.
I've worked with databases.
With state government when I
used to work in state
government, um, now that I work
at UNM, I manage um the data
center.
At Bieber, and we work with the
US Census Bureau and and census
data. So what my ask is, is that
we'd be allowed to use our
skills and knowledge, along with
um Arrowhead Center to design
the piece that I happen to know,
having looked at the all claims.
Database that I know it's gonna
miss, and specifically those
data elements that I think are
really unique to New Mexico,
which is we have a very diverse
population. Um, we have a
population with high poverty.
Um, we have a rule state, but
also an urban state and.
I know that um in the data that
I have studied and I think Gabe
Sanchez had a wonderful
presentation on the stuff that
he asked, that some of our rural
community centers, health
centers out there have a hard
time maintaining doctors. Um,
and so
So sorry, my 8 minutes are gonna
be up. I, I'm terribly sorry,
and this is my this is my
frustration. All your data
gathering, I, it sounds like I
very much support it. I mean, it
very much sounds like.
Information and I believe in and
information I feel like people
smarter than I have gathered the
data and and data walks I've
been able to work on it.
What I'm not getting is I was
just handed a piece of paper
what to ask was, but I don't
think any of the other members
got this piece of paper.
OK, right, so
We, we hear about like why where
the need is and how we gather
data and stuff and and I, I
wanna hear either the the data
findings, data, not
Hey, we find uh a lot, I mean,
I'm, I'm all for reducing
billing codes and and
simplifying. I 100% can see the
benefit of that, but I just
Um, I just don't want to keep
asking for data. I need an ask.
We need an action. We are not
researchers up here. We are
policymakers and or funders, and
so that's what I needed. And so
thank you very much. Thank you.
Thank you. And, and just to
clarify,
The we're not expecting these
people to have an ask. We're
expecting these people to give
us data, so we could make the
ask. I think it would be a way
to um
To define that. So we'll go to
Representative Herndon.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I'd
actually like to go back to
something that was said by I'm
not sure if it's Dr. Miriam uh
Lungster, you see online?
Yes, I'm, I'm here. Thank you
one of the things that you
mentioned is that uh there were
a number of regulations or
procedures that cause um
problems in providing uh
services and that they needed to
be streamlined. I'd like to know
if you'd please just give a
couple of examples.
of what some of those
regulations or procedures look
like that needed to be
streamlined.
Right, um, um, thank you, um,
Madam Chair and Representative,
um, I
I think that we, we were
surprised to hear about the uh
Instant of things such as
clawbacks by private payers, so
that's, you know, more in the
private sector than the public
sector, but I sort of, it's all
part of the same of similar
problems. Um, so providers were,
you know, getting clawbacks like
after they'd actually sort of
been paid by the insurance
company, the insurance company
would then take the money out of
another reimbursement for
another different patient, um,
there were some that was quite
surprising. In terms of the
government side of it, and, and,
and I think that the private
side is probably um quite
significant in terms of the
government side of it, um,
issues such as, um, how you, how
you allow, can you allow, should
you allow every managed care
plan to have different sort of
procedures or different rules,
and is it possible
to write contracts to a
specified contracts that require
a degree of standardization. Um,
we did not go into a great level
of detail on these issues.
But there is huge scope for
understanding and coming up with
real solutions based on these
real
Problems.
Thank you very much and, and
Madam Chair and presenters, one
of the things that uh looking at
global
Budgeting that sometimes becomes
an issue is that you're looking
to standardize, I guess some of
the cost or make them set, but
in these areas where they're low
income or they are the
diversity, I guess, is huge. I
mean, I, I think the question
has been whether or not this,
this type of funding will
sometimes affect them adversely,
and can you please address that?
Um, I'm happy to address that,
um,
The madam, Madam Chair,
representative, um, the
Issue with socioeconomic or
other, any kind of disadvantage
amongst the population can be
adjusted and taken into account
in terms of budgets. Usually
what most systems do, and you
know, this wasn't what I
presented on, but um most
systems address that by, by
having some sort of index of
disadvantage or um
Vulnerability. So that's
definitely possible in a global
budget system. The question is,
How much
In the Medicare Advantage
program, for example, at the
federal level, with payers are
going to be incentivized to sort
of exaggerate or gain those
sorts of metrics. So you need to
make any kind of metric, um, not
something that is, that is so
Easy to um exaggerate such as
what happens with Medicare
Advantage. Thank you.
Go ahead.
Um, Madam Chair Representative
Herndon, um, in, in terms of
hospital global budgets and for
example, the Maryland rate
setting system, the rates were
standardized at each hospital,
but they were not standard
across all hospitals so that
hospitals that had um had
Patients that had uh severe
economic conditions that caused
their health costs to be higher.
Those were built into the local
rates, but the rates at that
hospital were paid by every
payer, so the complexity was
reduced, so it's not a
completely standard standardized
across an entire state of having
one set of rates in terms of the
primary care system that was uh
implemented.
with the care management fees in
Maryland, the fees were um uh
adjusted for, uh, were adjusted
for risk, uh, the risk of the
patient, but more recently have
been uh adjusted for, um, uh,
uh, the uh uh deprivation index,
so there's that that is being
addressed also in the primary
care, uh, arena in, in Maryland.
And um also, I
New Mexico was approved for a
primary care model and I think
that type of system would be uh
implemented in the uh New Mexico
where the uh the deprivation of
the patient is taken into
account in terms of the
resources that are given to the
physician in the primary care
field. Um,
Thank you. Does that answer your
question Representative Herndon.
Thank you. It it does address it
somewhat. I think that the
question had come, if there were
a hospital that were in a lower,
uh, uh, I guess in the lower
socioeconomic district, and then
there were these types of uh
medical concerns that that came
about most often that some of
those s some of those
individuals, for example, the
rate of mortality was higher
because the amount of time was
not put into those individuals
as if the hospital was
In a higher income bracket, and
the, and the um insurance and
funds available for taking care
of the patients at a higher
level. And so I don't know if
that's ever come about or been
watched it, but that had uh
watched rather, but that has
been a concern, and so I just
bring it to your attention.
Maybe we'll see it. Maybe your
data will show that it's true or
it's not true. I hope it's not,
but those have been some of the
concerns that have been raised.
That's it, uh, Madam Chair and
thank you.
I think you ripped Henton, uh,
Senator Stephanic, thank you,
Madam Chair, and I'd like to
thank all the presenters for
their
Information today, I think that
when we were talking about.
Adding anything to a um.
IT reporting system.
Or we're talking about extra
costs.
The smaller entities and the
rural entities are the ones who
are going to have the most
problems.
And oftentimes the state is not
equipped with personnel.
To
Guide people extensively. They
might say, here's an online
training. Watch this and then do
it.
So I really have
Concerns and maybe
Maybe life, maybe.
Everybody is moving ahead and
not having these problems, but I
still perceive it.
In the areas that I, uh, cover,
and I don't know if there's a
solution for that.
Um, Madam Chair, if you want to
comment, presenters at the
table, I'd be happy to hear it.
If not, it's just a general
comment.
Uh,
Madame Ter Senator Stefaniks,
um, in Maryland, uh, a great
deal of the infrastructure was
delivered through public private
partnerships where the private
uh sector, meaning the hospitals
actually, um, uh, control the
board of the Health Information
exchange and are actively
involved in helping to build the
infrastructure.
that's needed for both small and
large hospitals and independent
physician practices and, and I
can't speak to how New Mexico
should organize some of its
infrastructure, um, but, uh,
Maryland did, uh, I, I would
share your concern if Maryland
were trying to implement all of
the infrastructure without a
heavily heavy involvement from
the um from
Uh, um, uh health sector and the
private sector. So that was how
Maryland approached it. Um,
thank you, thank you. Yes, thank
you. And Madam Chair, um, you,
you just used the phrase that I
want to bring up is that we
still have a hidden in the
background health insurance
information exchange.
It was a public private
partnership.
I know that, but they're not at
the forefront.
And so I'm concerned that as we
plan and as we talk, all of
those people who have been
working for far longer than the
12 years.
Aren't at the table with this.
So thank you very much. That's
all.
And I'm just gonna jump in here,
um.
Synchronous
last fiscal year, I think,
finally got an influx of um
dollars from the state to and
synchronous is our state health
insurance exchange in all
honesty, I'm on their board.
So, I, I just, um,
I'm, I'm going to be sure that
they're included and, and just,
just, uh, a correction from
yesterday or
A clarification from yesterday.
Southwest gastroenterology
reported that they spend
$900,000 a year on their um
health information exchange. So
I checked in with the CEO at
Synchronous, and she said, I
wish they paid us 900. It's
$2400 for that big of a
practice.
So that's $200 a month. My guess
is there are people there who
have a $200 a month wine.
Budget item, so it's not as
expensive as, as it has been
portrayed, you know, they may
have something else internal,
but you know, the, the one
that's required essentially,
although we don't have everybody
on, it's, it's $200 a month for
a fairly significant practice,
so uh, you know, I don't know
what it would cost and I think
the state should and can help
folks who can't afford to, to
get buy into synchronous to be
able to buy into synchronous.
And I will make sure that they
are part of these discussions.
And, and, um, before we go on, I
think um doctor.
Guz Guzmano wanted to respond to
Representative Herndon's uh
question.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Yes, I
just wanted to say a couple of
things briefly in response to
Representative Hernan's
excellent question about the
adequacy of payment and I want
to say two things first to sort
of echo uh Don McKinzer, in
addition to the Maryland model
where they developed payments
that were specific to hospital
uniform for the hospital, but,
but, uh, in the tendon to its
needs, you see something very
similar in the country of
France, which I've studied
extensively where they have
different payment models for
both public
and private hospitals in part to
address the needs. The other
thing I just wanted to emphasize
is I think upfront if you were
to go down this path and develop
some kind of all pair system,
uh, with the global budget, um,
you would want to use the
excellent investment, I think
the state of New Mexico has made
in the all-payer database, both.
Upfront to look at the different
needs of different hospitals,
but also as part of the
monitoring and accountability,
uh, that, that Donna emphasized
in her presentation, in addition
to making sure that the
providers are delivering what
they've been contracted to
provide, I think it is a way of
making sure that the payments
are adequate and that you are
not causing problems, so I think
the state has done a good job,
uh, and I applauded in creating
the capacity.
to actually monitor this.
Thank you.
Oh, thank you very much.
Thank you, um, Senator Pope.
Thank you, ma'am. I'm sure I
don't know what I'm gonna do
with 8 minutes, that's a lot for
me,
but it'll go fast and I won't, I
won't use them all up, um, I
believe it was one of the
gentlemen online, it might have
been, uh, Doctor Guzmano, um.
There was a discussion about
facility fees.
Um, could you talk about that a
little bit and what those are,
are those fees that are actually
going to the facility or, I
mean, are they going um towards
healthcare. Are they going
towards
Um, overhead salaries.
Are these some type of
additional junk fees or
something that we're always
trying to
You know, um
Regulate and that we're really
concerned about that are going,
you know, being put out to
consumers.
Um
And um
And when did this start?
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative for
your question. Um, that these,
these fees's been around for
quite a while. Uh, it is a
combination of things within the
context of the emergency
department. They are, uh,
designed to compensate the
hospital for additional overhead
and personnel that are needed to
run an emergency department,
have it open 24/7. Obviously
because of the very nature of
the care that they are designed
to provide, they have to
provide.
additional equipment, they have
to have additional staffing with
additional training, uh, and so
it is more expensive. There is
no question that if you are
doing procedures within an
emergency department. The
overall costs are going to be
higher. I think the concern is
that over the last decade or so,
the rate of increase of these
costs has gone up exponentially,
far more than other components
of the emergency uh department
charges, and this is also, as I
mentioned in my early remarks
and
up with um the, the issue of
surprise billing because people
have been hit with and in some
cases, extraordinarily high
bills as a result of the
facility fees, so to sort of go
back to uh something that uh
Professor Sanchez was talking
about before that this really
does hit people um and in
particularly in a state like New
Mexico where with its heavy
reliance on emergency
departments, often for primary
preventive care because there
are no other options.
For some people, um, this can be
a real, this can be a real
issue, and I think we need to
investigate more of the
justification for these, because
I think there is real concern
that they are not justified and
certainly the recent increases
are not justified.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
um, I think we have a, a
response from the table.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator Pope,
um, in, in, in the handout that
I gave you, there's a page from
the med pack report, which is
the advisory committee to
Medicare, and if you just look
at that table, it'll give you an
idea of how facility fees are
happening, um, which is that,
um, practices that are being
billed as independent are being
then bought up
hospitals and build a hospital
rates instead of physician
rates, and that's doubling the
cost. So that's practices,
that's radiology, that's
surgery, that's physical
therapy, so that is what is
creating a big increase, um, and
I'm, I'm not going to, uh, uh,
say that that that that's that
the hospitals are all bad for
doing that. They're getting
rate increases that are below
inflation and one of their
responses is to code hire and,
and build, build these things as
facility fees, so, uh, that's
part of the response, but it's a
problem, and uh it, you know,
that's one of the problems that
needs to be solved cause it uh
really doubles the cost of
patients.
And then I think um Dorothy
Mueller also wanted to respond.
Madam Chair and uh Senator Pope,
just real quickly the um
additional item that I'd like to
add to what was just said is
that facility fees are actually
an outgrowth of the Medicare
system. Um, so they are part of
Medicare billing and as you
know, um, almost all, uh, both
Medicaid and commercial billing
are built on the back of the, of
the Medicare system, so
Excuse me, attacking the issue
of facility fees.
Uh, is, is something that's not
just done in isolation without
looking at what the, how the
Medicare system is structured
and, and how billing within the
Medicare system is uh
Uh, is, is designed.
Wanted to make sure there wasn't
anyone else, but I'm sure. Uh,
thank you for all the responses,
um, just wanted to understand
that and I know the situations
that many of these facilities
are in, but um I think we also
have to get a handle on this,
whether it's dealing with, with
Medicaid and Medicare and
everything else, right? To see
what we can do, because I know
folks get upset when they just
go to a restaurant here in Santa
Fe and you see a little
additional charge, but imagine
the shock when you have to go to
ER, you go to the hospital and
you're assuming it's gonna cost.
this and you, you see the bill,
so thank you, madam.
Thank you. Um, you didn't use
your 8 minutes.
So representative um Chavez,
thank you, Madam Chair. So I
just wanted to um respond a
little bit to Senator
Stepfanik's concern. I think
that one of the things that we
need to remember is that we're
like Representative Thomason
said we're building a road map,
right? So one of the things that
we need to do is look at who all
of the stakeholders are and
include all of them, um, in, you
know, as we hopefully, um, move
forward to do, um.
Um, global budgets and all of
the things that are associated
with it.
So one of the questions that I
have is in terms of global
budgets, and one of the things
that I wanted to know about is
um whether or not you talked
about um uh primary care.
In global budgets, and I, I
wanted to find out if if we have
that if global budgets helped
create more robust primary care
in terms of, um, especially in
terms of outcomes, um, for
patients, looking at the
Maryland model. Um, Madam Chair,
and Representative Chavez, um,
it, uh, having a uh uh a better
funded uh and more robust
primary care program is
essential to
the success of a global budget.
Um, the, it can't operate um by
itself. It needs to have the
other providers in the system
working together. So if we want
to avoid asthma admissions, we
need to address that in the
primary care setting. Um, if, if
we want to uh avoid uh
hospitalizations for pneumonia.
We have to address that in
primary care setting. If we want
to uh get.
Admissions for diabetes down, we
need to have better chronic
care and so um the model that
New Mexico uh was awarded by CMS
should help uh initiate that
process in New Mexico, assuming
it's launched successfully, um,
uh, and, uh, Vermont actually
started its journey with a
primary care model called the
blueprint for health and um they
launched a a a chronic care
program.
in a preventative program to
really help them uh in in their
journey and on their path, um,
and it needs to take into
account, um, uh, uh, uh, you
know, patient deprivation and um
mental conditions and other
things in terms of how the
primary care providers get
funded, but they go hand in
glove.
Uh,
uh, thank you. Does that answer
your question, it does, it does,
um, and so in terms of uh global
budgets is mental health,
behavioral health also included.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Chavez, uh, if it is provided by
a hospital, um, it is part of a
hospital global budget.
In terms of the Maryland Primary
care model, it, uh, part of the
model was to integrate um
behavioral health into the
primary care practices, um, to,
to the extent that it can be
performed in in a practice
setting.
Thank you, thank you. And then
the other question that I have
for whoever wants to answer it
or if everybody wants to answer
it is the whole question of
private equity. That's something
that we have been really facing
here in New Mexico, I think, um,
the data shows that New Mexico
has the highest rate of private
equity hospitals, um, in the
country, in your work, have you
seen, um, are there or are there
other states where um private
equity is not, is not as much of
a problem as it is here.
Anybody online?
Yeah, um, this is Mariam
Logeson, um, representative Cha,
um
be a chairwoman, um, I have done
a lot of work in this area and
it's
A little difficult to say which.
You know, what, why some states
have more or less, um, this, I'm
not sure that research has
really established that, um.
But
Definitely, it's, it's an issue
that I think, you know, could be
ripe for investigation, um, in
terms of how hospitals and
smaller providers can be
protected and what kinds of
limits there might be um to
forestall the kind of investment
that doesn't result in good
clinical care.
Thank you.
Do I have time for one more?
You have 3 minutes? All right,
um, so the other piece that uh
and I don't remember who who had
it on their slide, but it was
about uh Connecticut eliminating
MCOs. Um, do you know how long
they've um
How long that's been since they
did that and is there any data
in terms of again, outcomes, um,
by the fact that they were able
to eliminate their MCOs.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Chavez, um, yeah, I was the one
who spoke about that, um.
Connecticut has been doing, I
think, for 4 or 5 years already.
And yes, they do actually have
some outstanding data uh that
shows the, the effects of it.
Uh, one of the, one of the first
things that happened uh once
they implemented this model was
that it automatically increased
access for Medicaid.
Beneficiaries. Uh, the other
thing that it did is it, it um
reduced uh uh total cost of
care, uh, for the entire system.
Uh, I can actually, um, I can
pull some, some research that's
been done in some of the
reporting out of Connecticut and
make sure that it gets to, to
the members. I would also just
um respond on this issue of
private equity as well, uh, just
to kind of added an additional
item uh related to.
that, um,
Part of the
Let me just kind of step, step
back and talk about private
equity investment in some of
these hospitals from a business
perspective.
Part of the reason why these
hospitals are attractive in New
Mexico is that
Investors are looking for
markets and, and um
opportunities to invest where
there's limited competition, uh,
and where there are
organizations in, in, uh, for,
for whom investment by private
equity or any other private
investor uh is attractive.
Um, and so to the extent that uh
that these hospitals, and I know
this issue has been raised uh
before to the extent that these
hospitals don't have easy access
to capital for the investments
that uh that they need to make
and, and definitely would need
to make if you're going to
engage in any kind of delivery
system, uh, redesign or
enhancement.
Um, or even creation of global
budgets, which in addition to
all of the technology that was
talked about, um, it requires
investment in building care
management capabilities, um, and
other operational capabilities
for the management of
populations more generally, um,
to the extent that those
facilities don't have easy
access to capital.
The, the private equity investor
or any kind of private investor
becomes more attractive to them.
Um, and, and, um,
Uh, you know, they're already
very, very attractive targets to
those who are looking for
Uh, facilities or investments
where they can, where, where an
investor can pull up a disparate
number of facilities together,
uh, create an administrative
function instead of
administrative functions over
those facilities and um
Uh, and, uh, you know, gain some
fish operating efficiencies and,
and drive uh increased
profitability by doing it. It
makes it very attractive for
investors. Some of the ways that
other states have protected
against that is, and I believe
you guys have talked about this
previously is corporate practice
of medicine laws which don't
exist in New Mexico, but are in
place in many other states.
Texas has corporate practice of
medicine. California has always
had corporate practice of
medicine.
Tennessee and other states. I
think Tennessee may or may not
have abandoned it at this point.
Anytime you get rid of those
corporate practice of medicine
laws. Um, the, um, the, the
facilities become more
attractive from an investor
point of view. Um, the other,
the other um type of law that
protects many of these
facilities is robust and strong,
um, community hospital
regulations, you still have
local
Community hospital, um, uh,
organizations in your state, but
to the extent that you uh
support those um provide for
investment in them support
access to capital, whether that
be bond funding or other
mechanisms that also protects
them if you've got strong laws
in that area. Does, does that,
does that answer your questions?
Representative Chavez. Yes,
thank you so much.
And generally I'm not a big fan
of this, but um if you're not
here for the presentation, I
don't like to have you answer
questions, ask questions because
you may repeat what was already
stated, but, but, um, since we
have extra time, Representative
Chasey, do you have questions?
OK.
Representative Ferrari.
Do
Oh, you told me you had a
question.
Oh.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I do
have a question. I wasn't sure
how important it was, so, um, it
was mentioned, I think by
Gabriel Sanchez in his
presentation that um building
and the time uh that it takes,
um, cause I've heard that a lot
from doctors that sometimes
they'll go ahead and join a
group or a hospital group, um,
because they're tired of
hassling with billing and um.
How expensive that is to their
practice, um.
Could you expand on that a
little bit more.
Oh,
Gabriel, are you still on?
Maybe not, but that was, that
was just one of my there,
OK.
Go ahead, Doctor Guzmano, and
then we'll go back to um OK,
thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
representative for the question.
I, I thought I would just jump
in here because this does go
back to something that my
colleague Miriam Leveson talked
about as part of the study, we
did a couple of years ago in New
Mexico, and I do think that uh
one of the frustrations was not
only about the issue of
clawbacks, uh, but also the, uh,
sort of proliferation of
different types of utilization
review and.
Prior authorization, uh, they
found that quite burdensome, and
so I do think that regulation
that might standardize or
streamline prior authorization,
uh, utilization review would be
uh quite helpful. I also, if I
may very quickly wanted to jump
in. I, I actually did some work
for the Medicaid Medicare
Council in Connecticut when they
were launching their Medicaid
managed care program in the mid
1990s and, and indeed was ended
in 2012, and I think there were
a couple of reasons behind it.
Number one, there was some
frustration with the degree to
which the MCOs were actually
improving the quality and access
to primary care.
And I think there were some
substantial evidence that the
state was actually overpaying
the MCOs because they, the rates
were not sufficiently risk
adjusted, so I think moving away
from the MCO to a primary care,
uh, PCCM model has both improved
access and helped to lower costs
within the state.
Thank you very much.
Um
Doctor
Sanchez, are you on?
Hello, Madam Chair, I moved from
my office to my car to pick up
my daughter from school and
might have missed the question.
Uh, Madame T and uh Mr. Sanchez,
um, I love that you're, um.
Balancing uh professional and
family and um we do it all the
time. Uh, my question was about
billing and um how much time it
takes um for doctors in their
own practice and um how that's
very frustrating for them and
sometimes drives them to join a
group or even a hospital, um.
So that they don't have to deal
with that.
Yes, thank you, Representative.
It's been some time, maybe 10
years ago. Uh, we did a series
of focus groups specifically uh
with medical providers,
including docs and ask them how
much of their own time, uh, they
have to dedicate to billing
issues, and that was one of the
big findings is that
unfortunately, it impacts their
ability to serve clients and
patients directly, uh, because
it eats into their time having
to deal with those
administrative services. One of
the studies we would love to
conduct in the future, um, is a
focus.
group that is specific uh to
administrative staff that
oversees billing. Uh, so we can
really drill down to how much
time and energy, uh within the
system, uh goes to answering
billing questions.
Ah, that sounds great. Thank you
very much.
Senator Sail Lopez.
You don't have to.
OK. Thank you. You'll be happy
that I don't have any questions.
I think it's a really complex
issue, and it just makes me
frustrated and say, why don't we
have Medicare for all? I'll just
leave it at that.
Thank you.
Representative Jones, did you
have a follow up? Yes, thank you
very much. Remember this
pardon me, remember how nice I
was,
OK, right, yes, I do have
another question. When you were
talking about, and I don't
remember who it was now, about
um, you know, the global payment
and standardizing protocols.
I'm just wondering, it makes me
wonder if that would further if
in any way that could further
take away physician autonomy or
his uh his or her ability to to
uh provide.
Kind of care they think an
individual needs. This does that
make sense?
I, um, representative Jones,
Madam Chairwoman, um, I'm gonna
take this question cause I think
I focused a lot on, on
standardization. I think that
it's really important to
distinguish between billing and
um rules around sort of the
administrative side of
healthcare and the clinical
side, and
While there is some overlap, um,
I should think that.
The best approach is to give
clinicians a degree of autonomy,
um, and, and not, you know,
prescribe the kind of care that
they're providing, um, thank
you.
OK, thank you very much. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
OK, I have a few questions. Um,
first, uh, I, I, I think it was
Representative Herndon, but I
can't remember because that was
more than a minute ago. Um, who
talked about, you know, being
concerned that we don't have New
Mexicans working on this. We
have national experts, a lot of
which have heavy ties to New
Mexico and then we have arrow
and Bieber, so and so we're,
we're using national experts,
but we're not forgetting that
New Mexico is like a whole other
country.
So, um, please rest assured
that, that we are not, you know,
we don't think we're gonna
become Maryland because we're
not going to become Maryland.
So, um, I, and I can't remember
who said what, but when there
was talk of the DSRIP and that
that are um
Healthcare, but not our
healthcare authority who
Medicaid folks participated but
didn't make any of the changes
or didn't, you know, adopt the
program. I'm wondering whoever
uh talked about that. Have, have
you seen any information or data
that what they learned there,
maybe they use without
undertaking the whole program.
Madam Chairwoman, uh, it was,
uh, me who talked about the disc
rip. So, um, I, I haven't looked
at that specifically, but the
pro, what I do know is that the
program that was implemented in
New Mexico was, was fairly
limited.
Um, it dealt primarily with some
changes to payment mechanisms
and um
Uh, God, I'm, I'm, I'm drawing a
blank on, on which specific
payment mechanisms that they uh
that they used, but um in, in,
uh, in the, the uh the
mechanisms that were used by New
Mexico or or kind of generally
described as dislike
as opposed to true disrupt
because the disrupt programs
were intended to be
collaborative provider.
driven. They were expected to
have a high involvement of
primary care and other providers
as well. Uh, and we're supposed
to be focused on actual
transformation of the delivery
system. That's why you saw a lot
of uh ACOs and um
Uh, and, uh, you know, the other
kinds of collaborative
organizations built out of
these. So, um, I would have to
pull that and take a look at uh
you know, anything that came out
of New Mexico's uh program, but
it was extremely limited.
Does that answer your question?
Just out of curiosity, when,
when was that? When did this?
Get, become a thing.
Madam, uh, chairwoman, uh, the
program was actually um part of
the AC, the original part of the
ACA, so it, uh, the law, as
everybody knows, was passed in
2010. These programs started,
uh, getting launched in 2013,
2014. So it's very much like all
of the other um programs like
this is very much like the the
current uh head program which I
mentioned, um where the states
need
to uh apply for grants. So there
were initial um uh kind of uh
problem solving and um
exploration grants and then
there were, that was followed by
grants for further development
of the programs and then
additional grants. I believe
there were 3 wives of, of
Grant's um for the some of the
implementation of the, of the
program, so I think that the,
the, um, the overall
Program ended.
God, you can tell I've been
doing this for a long time.
Um.
What's, what's that, Michael? It
was in, it ended in 2020. Yeah,
so it was a while ago.
Thank you. And I, I understand
Doctor Guzmano, you have um
something to add.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I just
wanted to add very quickly if
you would like, I'd be happy to
send you a, a paper that I wrote
with uh uh Doctor Frank Thompson
where we did a review of
different programs around the
country, uh, as, as Dorothy Mall
uh indicated there were a range
of options, some of the states
that received district waivers
had a quite limited approach
looking, for example, at
Implementing some value-based
payments to hospitals and others
really used it for kind of
broader Medicaid system
transformation, so I'd be happy
to share that with you if you'd
like to see it.
Thank you, I would, and, and I,
I'm gonna ask that any of you
who are sending in more
information, send it to Xander
cause it will get lost in the
black hole of my.
Inbox. So, um, just a statement,
you know, we have been asking
for single credentialing for
MCOs and been promised year
after year after year, so it's
not like we don't know it's an
issue and it's not, it's
something we want to do. We just
haven't been able to, so you, if
other folks want to start
nagging the MCOs and uh the
Medicaid folks about doing that,
it would free up a lot of time
and get more providers.
available for different um
insurers. Um, and then just in
terms of of the slowness of
payment. Some of you probably
have heard this maybe from um
Representative Harmi herself,
where she ran an organization in
mostly in Socorro County. She's
the largest employer in Socorro
County, and she ran an agency
that provided um physical
therapy, occupational therapy,
speech and language, and at one
point, the state owed her 2.
$5 million.
And she had to mortgage her home
to pay um her staff.
So it's an issue that we, we
can't ignore, um, and we know
what's happening, so it, we
gotta figure out how to deal
with that. Um, and then just, of
course, the
Emergency department, emergency
room is the most expensive place
to get care. And we've got 1 out
of 4 New Mexicans getting their
care there. So we're, we're
spending a lot of money that we
wouldn't need to spend if we had
primary care and, and clinics
and things like that. So on, on
page 4 of um of Doctor Sanchez,
um,
When you, when you talk about
your focus groups, were they a
variety of of pairs. I mean, did
you have Medicare, Medicaid,
uninsured private pay or what
did your, what did your focus
groups, what do your, did your
focus groups look like?
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. Uh, to clarify
the, the last slide of my report
is projecting what our team
would like to do with additional
focus groups, uh, that has not
already been conducted. Uh, so
in the context of focus groups,
what we would design is a series
of focus groups to cover all of
those different subgroups of
providers, as well as region,
uh, with an over sample and
focus of rural providers. Uh, so
to clarify, we haven't done that
research yet. Uh, hopefully, it
could be part of an ongoing
research agenda focused on this
topic.
Thank you so much. And I think
with that, um, I'm not seeing
any other. Thank you so much.
Thank you, Mary, for helping us
put this together in all your
hard work and thank you
presenters. This was uh an eye
opener and uh if, if you have
questions, um,
talk to Representative Chavez.
She's, she's the brains in this
outfit. So thank you, thank you
all so much, and thank you for
participating on Zoom and we um
are scheduled for our next
presentation at 4, but I believe
we may have one presenter here.
One
And one's on Zoom, and I, I told
them to be ready by 3:30, but if
they're ready now, um, we can go
ahead and um
Oh, sure. Sure, sure.
So hopefully we'll get out of
here a little early.
Yeah, these, these days are
draining.
It
Grace is Alexandria on? Yes. OK.
OK. All right. Soon as we get
the folks up here, we're good to
go.
So while we're waiting, um, we
have Roman Varela, um, who's the
administrator of the prison rape
Elimination Act in um Brio
County Metropolitan Detention
Center in Alexandria Taylor will
be on Zoom, and she's the
executive director of uh New
Mexico Coalition of sexual
assault Programs and in the room
we have um Senator Pope and
retiring, sadly retiring.
Representative Gail Chasey, so
whenever you're ready.
Happily retiring.
So, um, thank you very much for
scheduling this time, um,
Senator Pope and I actually have
this memorial twice because the
first interim, we didn't get
enough, get we didn't get going
soon enough, and it turns out
that we had quite a bit of work
to do, but if you don't know
what Priya is, it is a federal
law prison rape Elimination Act
that was passed.
When George W. Bush was
president, and um what I, I told
the um CCG, uh,
Meeting last week is there
nobody's against Pria. It was a
very bipartisan effort, um, both
bodies of Congress, both sides
of the aisle, plus public
members.
And um they set up the prison
rape Elimination Act and um this
task force was designed to look
at how we could better support,
um, particularly our county
facilities in the um
implementation.
The successful implementation of
the prison rape Elimination Act.
And so, um, we've worked really
hard this interim, and one of
our key um task force members is
Ramon Varela, right here, who is
the administrator at the, at MDC
in Albuquerque and then um
Alexandria Taylor, who is on
Zoom and she's executive
director of New Mexico Coalition
of Sexual Assault Programs. And
I, I do want to say to the tra
the task force recommendation.
For this legislative session is
one that is embraced.
by every single county facility.
In New Mexico, and they want
more help and more direction.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I don't
have much more to add, but just
to say that, um, you know, this
task force took a little longer
because we, we started later,
but, um, we really included all
the stakeholders and got the buy
in and really listened and and
just to have folks come together
on this issue.
Um, that's so important, um, I'm
just happy with the work that's
been done on this committee and
we'll
Talk to you a little bit about
it. Thank you.
Um, thank you for the time, uh,
to present today.
Uh, my name is Roman Varilla.
I'll start with my introduction
and then Miss. Taylor will
introduce herself. We'll go over
some background and then we'll
go over the history and our what
we're um
Recommending. Uh, so my name is
Roman Verilla. I am the
pre-Administrator for Borneo
County, MDC. I've been in
corrections for the last 14
years, and for the um
were 5 of those for the last 5
I've been the overseeing the PRA
unit for MDC.
Um, where I've done, uh,
extensive work for Pier for PR
implementation at this facility
and brought us up to fully
compliance with this standard.
Um, Ms. Taylor, if you'd like to
introduce yourself.
Sure. Thank you, Mr. Varela.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, good afternoon. Uh,
my name is Alexandria Taylor,
the executive director of the
New Mexico Coalition of Sexual
Assault Programs, which leads
the state's efforts in
preventing and intervening in
sexual violence in New Mexico. I
want to thank leader Chasey and
Senator Pope for their
leadership and commitment to
this issue. Part of the reason
why we needed a 2nd year of this
memorial and to
convene the task force is
because prison rape and the
elimination of prison rape is
something that we don't talk
about in our society. Um, it is
something that goes unseen until
it results in a major lawsuit
that either the state or one of
the counties is needing to pay
out. And so our work has been
slow. It's been intentional, um,
but because we've brought a very
diverse group of professionals
together to, um, really create
meaningful recommendations and
study.
this issue in New Mexico. I just
want to share the NMC SAP and
our sexual assault service
providers have been working with
the New Mexico Corrections
Department and individual county
jails since 2012 to implement
PRA, and our partnership with
Mr. Varela and others around the
state is critical to ensuring
that those who are incarcerated,
who have experienced sexual
violence, have access to the
same
support and healing services, as
those who are in our community
every day. Um, and so this work
really touches our heart. It's
close to us, but it does take
extra time, care, and
consideration. And just for the
community's knowledge, um,
people who are incarcerated who
have experienced sexual assault,
have a right to access the same
services such as confidential
advocacy services, counseling
services, sexual
salt nurse examiner, um,
services as well as ongoing
support and care. And so our
partnership with Mr. Varela and
the other county facilities, um,
in the New Mexico Corrections
Department has been critical in
ensuring that we have access to
provide those services in
facilities across New Mexico.
Um, and so with that, I'll pause
and Mr. and, and give it back to
Mr. Varela.
give a brief history of pre-op.
Thank you. Thank you. So to go
over the background of Priya,
um, Priya is the prison rape
Elimination Act.
Like we've mentioned, it's a
federal law mandated by the
Department of Justice.
Um, it was signed into law in
September 4th in 2003, where
President George W. Bush.
It's one of the very few laws
that we see out there that had
unanimous support from both the
Republicans and the Democrats.
Both in the House and the
Senate, it was unanimously voted
in. Um,
I think really it comes down to
the data that was provided. The
stories that were provided in
the committees and the physical
impact that it affects all the
facilities, not just county,
state, and federal prisons. Uh,
it's a huge impact.
Some of the early data showed
that roughly or the estimate was
that 200,000 inmates are
sexually abused behind bars in
the United States.
Which is a huge number. I'm
hoping when we have our new new
data coming out soon that that
number will be heavily decreased
because of all the great
implementation that's occurring
throughout our country.
Also another stat is that 1 in
10 formerly incarcerated adults
say that there were sexually
abused while they were in
detention, so 10% of our
population that is released,
they were sexually abused.
This standards were finalized in
2012.
Um, so this is, this has just
been implemented for the last 12
years.
This applies to all facilities,
all confinement facilities
within the United States, not
just jails and prisons, but
juvenile facilities, um, halfway
houses, community confinement
facilities and lockups.
Um, it
This law does not affect ice,
ice actually has its own set of
Prius standards, very similar.
They almost marry each other
with some slight differences.
Um, the main purpose of Priya is
to prevent detect and respond to
any sexual abuse and sexual
harassment that happens within a
climate setting.
The standards are broken down
into 45 standards, but once you
start getting deep into those
standards, you realize it's a
massive piece of work that needs
to be done to fulfill these
requirements.
Um, some of the things that came
out of this law is civil rights.
Um, to the main rights that came
out of this law is that inmates
have the right to be free from
sexual abuse and sexual
harassment while in the
confinement setting seems kind
of outrageous that we have to
actually say that, but it was
needed to say that they have
that right and that the inmates
have the right to be free from
retaliation for reporting such
incidents. There's several other
rights that came out in this
law. Some of them involve
inmate, right, um, inmate right
to privacy, it did give some
right to privacy while inmates
are in confined in facilities.
Also, medical care, Avocacy and
some other things were also
included to ensure that inmates
have um protection, but also um
the resources they needed to
heal from any incidents of
sexual abuse or harassment.
That kind of sums up the
background of Priya. I'll be
passing it over to Miss Taylor
to kind of go over um all the
information and history and our
recommendations for the, from
the task force.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. So the purpose
of the task force was to make
recommendations for policy and
legislative changes to improve
local county, state, and federal
jails and detention and
correctional facilities clients
with the federal prison rate
Elimination Act. um, in 2024
this year, the Priya task force
met 8 times, and I just want to
underscore the diversity of
participants um that
we had on the task force,
um, majority leader Chasey and
Senator Pope, uh, were a part of
the task force, um, as well as
Alicia Lauer, who is leader
Chasey's chief of staff, um, our
staff here at the coalition, Mr.
Varela from the Metropolitan
Detention Center. We had
representation from the New
Mexico Corrections Department,
the New Mexico Association of
Counties, Lee County Detention
Center.
The ACLU of New Mexico, the New
Mexico sentencing commission,
the Interfaith worker justice
and the New Mexico Crime Victim
reparations commission. So we
really ought to create a task
force that had um people who had
experience in administering rea
or responding to Priya issues
from all different spectrums
with different lenses on the
issue. I mean, I think that that
really shows in the
recommendations. It was also
really important to
to have urban and rural
representation, especially from
the detention facilities,
because the amount of resources
that Mr. Varela and um the folks
at MDC have available to them.
It's vastly different than many
of our um much small smaller
rural counties and facilities.
Um, and so we wanted to ensure
that all of those perspectives
were represented, represented.
We also conducted a survey to
state and county facility
wardens in prea coordinators,
and also to individuals who are
currently incarcerated to assess
the facility and individual
knowledge of Priya, and if folks
know, um, what they're supposed
to be able to have access to,
um, should they have experienced
sexual violence. And so with
this work and the convening of
the task force, we have 3
priority recommend
ations that we are making to
this committee and to the
legislature.
The first is to properly support
county detention and correction
facilities through the creation
of a centralized statewide Priya
County compliance office. And so
at the state level through the
New Mexico Corrections
Department. Although you have
facilities all over the state,
the New Mexico Corrections
Department headquartered in
Santa Fe has Pria compliance
officer, an inspector general
and general counsel.
are all responsible and
responsive to Priya issues in
any facility across the state.
At the county level, if there is
an issue with anyone facility,
you have to go county by county.
So our sexual assault service
providers have to work with each
individual warden to enter into
a memorandum of understanding to
provide services when things
arise and there needs to be um
compliance and uh discussions
about problem solving and
finding a solution. There is no
centralized place to go for the
counties. Uh, you have to, you
have to work at each individual
uh county facility to gain
access and
The task force through um our
own experience, uh, working with
Within these systems and working
towards prea compliance. We have
the experience that that creates
challenges and barriers to
getting those who are detained
in county facilities, um, the
support and services that they
need and are entitled to. And so
we're proposing to create a
two-year pilot project in
southeastern New Mexico in the
counties of Quey, Debaca, Otero,
Curry, Roosevelt, and Chavis.
Counties. And as leader Chasey,
um, shared, we know that all of
our facilities across the state
and the wardens want to be in
compliance with PRA. It is one
of the questions we asked on the
survey is what supports um would
help them and if an office like
this would be helpful. And we
know that people are wanting to
be in compliance with Priya. It,
it, it is really a resource
issue. Um, many of our
facilities do
not have the resources to fully
staff and support this work. So
that is our, our first
recommendation.
The second recommendation is to
increase funding, staffing and
training from the state
legislature to promote PRA
compliance at all facilities
across the state. We know that
this is an unseen issue and
without shining a light on it
and, and also resourcing it, um,
it continues to go under
resourced, understaffed, and
underattended to. And so the
success of our proposals here
are contingent upon um having
enough financial resources for
Pria compliance in New Mexico,
um, to be carried out because it
cost money um to meet these
mandates and, and to resource
these facilities in order to
have enough staffing, um, enough
training and uh enough of the
resources to address the
physical accommodation needs of
the facilities and other needs.
And then our last and final uh
uh recommendation right now is
to move beyond compliance on
paper. And so what that looks
like is not only having policies
in place and not only going
through the audit processes, but
also ensuring that the practices
reflect what Priya seeks to
achieve. And so this again takes
resources because we want to
review all facility policies for
clarity and compliance in
practice. We want to make
sure that it is clear in
practice, um, what is and what
is not an inappropriate
relationship with staff, um, how
incidents of false reporting are
happening. If there is access to
outside investigations, really
clarifying when they're a
conflict of interest, um, may
exist incentivizing um outside
reviews and um
Addressing more directed efforts
toward youth facilities. So we
are really seeking to create a
more robust compliance and
support, um, of complete of
compliance with Prius statewide,
no matter what level the
facility is, so whether it's a
state agency or a local county
facility. We want to ensure a
robust compliance um in
preventing prison rape. Thank
you.
That's our presentation. Uh, we
stand for any questions.
Thank you so much. Um, so we'll
start with Representative
Herndon this time. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and thank you
presenters. Uh, my question is,
this is great to have this
program to prevent
Prison rate, but what happens
and what kind of support is
there for those inmates that do
get raped and how are we helping
them?
Uh, Mo chair and Representative
Herndon, that's actually beyond
the scope of this because we're
going at at that, um, compliance
with the federal law, and, but
that's the job, and I think um
probably Miss Taylor should
address that because she's the
director of the program that
provides services for those
individuals.
Absolutely, Madam Chair,
Representative Herndon, thank
you for your question and later
Tracy, you're right. So really
the New Mexico coalition of
sexual assault programs are
investment and involvement in
prea compliance since 2012 is
exactly that reason, um, I wanna
be clear, the federal law is a
mandate on the correction
facilities. The federal law is a
mandate to the detention and
correction facilities, um, to
follow that federal statute in
New Mexico, um, this should be
nationwide, but in New Mexico we
hold a deep value that
regardless of whether you were
assaulted in the community or in
a a facility of incarceration,
survivors deserve access to care
and support and healing
services. And so that we have
been providing those services in
partnership with our facilities,
um, since 2012.
Prea mandates that facilities
provide access to confidential
victim services. And so our
sexual assault service providers
are not where someone would call
to make an official report of an
assault. If they are wanting to
make an official report of this
an assault, the facilities
provide a different number,
whether it's to the New Mexico
State Police or an outside
reporting agency, but we as
Some service providers provide
confidential advocacy services
to people who have experienced
sexual violence within
facilities, whether they
experience that sexual violence
prior to becoming incarcerated
or since being incarcerated. And
so what that looks like is each
facility has access to our
hotline, someone who's in the
state Department of Corrections
can dial 9999 and that
walls are statewide hotline, or
they can reach out to their
local rape crisis center or
sexual assault nurse examiner.
We enter into memorandum of
understandings with each
facility, so that their local
rape crisis center has access to
provide care and support either
in person through letter
writing, or through telephone.
Since COVID, we've been working
on video access as well, but we
are here to support all
survivors in New Mexico.
Including those who are
currently incarcerated.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Miss uh Alexander.
Taylor, one of the things I just
want to make sure, I mean,
there's a bigger picture of the
Priya act and its enforcement,
uh, it should be, I'm concerned
and do want to know that those
who are going to incarceration
that they know about this
telephone number. They know
about your services. I just, uh,
if indeed they do need your
assistance. So I think it's
great to have the 4, the act and
I totally support it, but I also
want to make sure that we are
supporting the victims in the
way in which they will have
knowledge of what to do if
something happens to them, and
it sounds like you have a, a
plan in, in mind. I just want to
make sure that that plan is
given to those who are being
incarcerated.
Madam Chair, Representative
Herndon, Mr. Varela, I don't
know if you want to speak about,
uh, the onboarding and materials
that um people get when they're
coming into facilities and
Representative Herndon, um, I
believe it's been a couple of
years since, uh, the pandemic
since I've been into a New
Mexico corrections department
facility, but when we set this
up, every facility in New Mexico
has um our resources painted on
their wall.
Um, in numerous places
throughout the facility. Um, and
so a part of their audit
standards and coming into
pre-compliance is exactly what
you've expressed as a concern.
Um, is, and so our work now and
what this task force
recommendations are, are to make
sure that that is true in every
facility, whether it's a county
facility or a state facility
across New Mexico and to
continue monitoring that. Thank
you.
Thank you, Mr. Borrell. Is that
correct?
Um, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative, yes, so I'll,
I'll speak to what we do at MDC.
So we actually educate our the
inmates twice on pre-education.
First, when they first come in
within the 1st 72 hours, we
provide um some education
material. There's a video they
can watch, um.
When they get classified, there
is also brought up about
pre-education, um, where the
information is available. We
have posters on our wall that
state.
What hotlines are available, not
just to report, but how to get
uh advocacy services and support
at our facility, um, like the
state is 99 at our facility, it
is one star 797 and that line
goes directly um.
To the rape crisis center.
free of charge, not monitored,
and inmates do not have to
provide any kind of uh ident
identification markings, so it
is completely um confidential.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Mr. Burrell.
Representative Chase, um Chasey.
It's a long day, Chavez. Well, I
missed the presentation. I'm
sounds like it was a good
presentation. I don't have any
questions. Actually, I do, but
I won't ask him.
Representative Ferrari. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Um, I just
have uh a question about the
attorney general wanted to um
increase the DNA testing.
And um
Being able to be uh available
with this also going to.
Um, the prevention of further
sexual assaults in the prisons.
I can. That's it.
I'm sorry.
Yeah, Madam Chair,
representative Ferrari, you're
discussing the, the forensic
testing of DNA.
Is that correct? Yes, but I'm
sorry, it should have been that
I was asking about the rape kits
and the availability in the
testing results.
Yes, Madam Chair Representative
Ferrari, thank you for that
question. So our sexual assault
nurse examiner programs, um,
which conduct the sexual exo
exam kits, uh, also known as
rape kits, also respond to um
survivors who have experienced
sexual assault within a facility
of incarceration. And so, um,
the, they provide exams actually
in many instances, not only for
the person
who has been victimized, but
also potentially for the person
who, um, for the perpetrator of
such harm. And so those kits are
processed just like someone
who's currently living in the
community accessing a sane exam
has access to, and there are
protocols for accessing medical
exams and having the forensic
exam done. Um, there are times
where our same nurses may
actually dispatch to a facility
to
Complete the same exam or
someone will be transported to
one of our scene units to
complete those exams, and then
if they are wanting that, um,
They if they are wanting to
report to law enforcement, those
kids go through the regular
process of being sent to the
labs for testing.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Representative Jones, are you
sitting back cause you don't
want me to notice you.
No
And thank you for the
presentation, but I don't have
any questions. Thank you.
Senator Cedillo Lopez, um, Madam
Chair, thank you for the
presentation. I heard this in
courts and corrections last week
and um got my questions answered
there. I think it's a really
important thing to do, um, and
I'm really, I just want to thank
the presenters for pushing this
forward and the, and the experts
for all of this work.
Thank you, Representative Kates.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you again for your presentation
and um and, and thank you to my
colleagues for their questions,
uh, just for clarification,
this, uh
Task Force recommendation, this
will put us in compliance with
federal laws, is that correct?
Madam Chair, uh, Kate,
The goal is to uh assist these
facilities to um um get over
that finish line and become
fully compliant. There's some
wonderful work already
occurring, um, this will help us
get us to that finish line and
showing that these facilities
are meeting all requirements and
becoming fully compliant with
being audited by a certified DOJ
auditor.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
Representative Chasey, did you
want to add I was just going to
say, Madam Chair, representative
cases, I, I think the thing that
was the most heartening for me
was to learn that the
administrator of every single
one of the county, uh, detention
centers is on board here,
although we're proposing a, a
pilot to begin with, but, um,
there wasn't anybody who didn't
want the um assistance.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have, so
how long have, how, how long has
been the journey towards
compliance. So the standards
came out in 2012.
Um, the first audits, I believe,
started in 2013.
Um, so that's when the sounds
were implemented, um, it varies
on facility to facility on when
they started work on the
implementation, um, I can speak
with MDC. MDC started right
away, and we were able to get a
grant and get off our work
started off in 2013, uh, similar
to what the state did.
Thank you, madam chair and thank
you very much for your
presentation.
Representative Chavis.
I do have a question. So once an
inmate reports.
Um, you said it's confidential.
But
Is there's a possibility is that
is that inmate removed from the
facility.
So that they won't experience
um.
Reap again from whoever is um
Whoever, whoever is doing it,
and
Are they also in a position for
retaliation.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
there is a standard.
Um, that directly affects us,
it's um retaliation standard.
Um, it outlines what the
expectation of the facility is
to protect that individual. Um.
It all depends on the facility
to facility, how they handle it.
When it comes to protection, um,
for MDC we always want to move
that potential aggressor or
alleged aggressor away from that
individual to ensure their
safety. Then we also, um, which
was required by the standard is
to have to have somebody in
charge of retaliation
monitoring.
So they'll do um checks on that
individual on specific time
frames to ensure that individual
is safe.
receiving the services they need
and checking into their file for
potential unnecessary
discipline.
Unnecessary, um.
Unnecessary movement of their
housing unnecessary um denials
of privileges or services.
is all reviewed um.
that retaliation monitoring.
Thank, thank you, thank you so
much for your presentation. It's
disappointing to hear there was
2003 that this was passed
betterly, were there any
timelines in the federal
I mean, I, I have a feeling they
didn't expect us to be like
really getting it started in New
Mexico in 2024. I know that MDC
has done a great job, but, but I
mean the fact that we haven't
totally done it yet is
Disappointing. Madam Chair, I
don't, I think New Mexico's been
working on it all along. It's
just, um, it's not like we went,
oops, we better.
And
21 years since the law passed
and so now we're going to work
on it, uh, it's just a matter of
realizing that
Systems are imperfect and
And people need a lot more
training and they need safe
methods to report safe methods
to
Um, be investigated.
And uh not.
Not have um interferences with
Politics or personalities.
So you know, I mean, I think the
state um probably has its, it's,
um,
Procedures.
And
Engraved in stone at this point,
but I don't know, honestly, if
it couldn't use some
improvement, I just don't know
that part. But thank you for
that. And uh I will say that I'm
disappointed that, I mean, thank
you MDC for kind of taking the
lead on this, and, but I'm
disappointed. I haven't heard
that corrections is all on board
with this, are they?
Um, from the, um, Madam Chair,
um, from uh the clay corn, the
representative from the
Associated counties that was
part of this task force.
Has, uh, informed us that
all the facilities are on board
on this, are willing to um
accept the assistance and
excited about the existence that
this project could provide them
to help them.
Um, reach that fully compliance
rating.
With the Prius standards.
And I appreciate that, but
that's counties. I'm wondering
about our, our state.
Prison system. How, how,
how involved are they Ms. Taylor
can't speak to that.
Yeah, Madam Chair, thank you for
that question. So, Rebecca
Hatch, the Inspector General for
the New Mexico Corrections
Department actually participated
on our task force. Um, I think
the really important thing to
note about the corrections
department and our county
facilities is that um you know,
it is, it is an imperfect system
and so this unlike the um
Like other legislation that
looks at the corrections
department. What we're proposing
here and the work of the task
force and the importance of
having everybody involved is
that we're talking about how to
improve the systems working
within the system, um, and so as
far as the recommendations of
this task force, the New Mexico
Corrections Department was um
directly involved in the
formation of these
recommendations, um, and
supportive of them did not
express any
opposition. I think it's
critical to representative
Henon's question. It's critical
for all of us to work together
in this specific area in order
to get people's services, and so
with the New Mexico Corrections
Department, if we're not able to
access someone at one of their
facilities, it is the
administrative offices in Santa
Fe that we are then calling to
help us navigate access to
support someone, um, with that
warden, and so it's these.
partnerships are critical, um,
to ensure compliance with this
federal statute. Um, thank you
for that answer, and I think
that's all I have so thank you
so much for your presentation,
um, and then just for the
committee members, we are
scheduled again to start at
8:45.
And the carrot is, the sooner we
start, the sooner we finish. So,
if you don't get here till 9:30
and we can't start, you may get
out uh 45 minutes later, so do
your best to be here on time,
and with that we stand in
recess.
You
