chance to get ahead. We
By that.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair.
And members of the committee.
Um, my name is Juli Meade. I'm
general counsel for the New
Mexico Department of Justice.
Um, and I'm here to give you an
overview of the opioid
settlements.
The handout that you have gives
a very brief background and
Mainly discusses um the
settlements.
As you can see from the handout,
uh, the state of New Mexico.
Filed many actions and settled.
Both, uh, what we're calling
independent settlements, meaning
those actions that we filed
directly against the entity and
national settlements, which are
those that we filed, uh, similar
to a multi-state settlement.
Um, and we have provided many of
the settlements are payments are
over a period of years, and
those are uh demarked on the
handout that you have.
It also distinguishes between
Which entities we settled
directly with and which were
part of the national
settlements, um,
And so that provides a bigger
overview of the actual
settlements.
A few comments the
National settlements.
With Melanrot is managed and
handled by
A settlement administrator Brown
Greer.
The, and those are generally the
distributor settlements, the
other national settlements are
managed by an advisory committee
that is made up of bipartisan um
state AGs offices, uh, and I
would say that all the
settlements.
Have general terms around what
the settlement monies can be
used for.
Mostly it's referred to as
abatement, sometimes referred to
as remediation, um, and I
thought I would highlight a few.
Uh
What they call core strategies
in these settlements and
approved uses. So some of the
core strategies for the
remediation funds are naloxone
and other FDA approved drugs to
reverse overdoses.
Medication-assisted treatment,
expanding treatment for neonatal
abstinence syndrome.
Expanding, uh, the warm handoff
program recovery services,
treatment for incarcerated
population, prevention programs,
expanding syringe service
programs, and evidence-based
data collection and research
analyzing the the effectiveness
of the abatement strategies with
the state.
They also had some sort of
delineated approved uses uh to
treat opioid use disorder,
support people in treatment and
recovery.
Connect people who need those
services to those services.
Address the needs of criminal
justice needs.
Adress needs of pregnant and
parenting women.
Prevent overprescribing and
ensure appropriate prescribing
and dispensing of opioids.
Prevent misuse, prevent overdose
deaths.
Um, there were a few others that
were highlighted in uh most of
these settlements, and that is
supporting first responders.
Leadership planning and quarter
coordination, training, um, I
would say,
Um
So
you have direct settlements or
independent settlements and
national settlements.
Then subsequent, uh, a
subsequent agreement that was
entered is called the New Mexico
opioid allocation agreement.
That was an agreement entered
into by the state and all the
local governments.
Um, by which the local
governments would receive 55% of
the settlement funds and the
state is to receive 45%.
Some of the highlights of that
agreement, um, it requires local
governments and the state to
create a separate fund for the
abatement funds that are
received from these settlements.
It, uh, requires that the funds
they receive be expended for the
opioid-related expenditures as I
just previously outlined.
And it provides that those funds
are to be annually audited.
Um, under the New Mexico state
audit.
So as far as the settlement
agreements, the New Mexico
Department of Justice's role.
is to enforce the actual
settlement agreements, um,
By making sure the
manufacturers, the distributors,
and those chain pharmacies that
were the defendants in these
cases are actually complying
with the terms of the settlement
agreements, because in addition
to the money, which is the
majority of what I spelled out
for you. There's plenty of
injunctive measures and
injunctive relief.
In those settlements. Some of
the settlements do, as opposed
to money, give the option for
receiving product.
Um, and so the Department of
Justice's job.
is to ensure that the defendants
are complying with those.
Uh
Settlement agreements and with
that, I will stand for question.
OK, I think how we're gonna do
this is do all the presentations
and then take questions at the
end.
So, um, I will ask the Santa Fe
County folks to come forward.
And Julie, if you could just
stick around somewhere close and
Good afternoon.
My name is Derrick Williams. I'm
the warden for Sano County. Is
the mic on. Yeah, can you hear
me? Yeah, yeah, just making
sure. Yeah, so my name is
Derrick Williams and I'm the
warden for Santa Fe County and
with me is Rebecca Granger.
She's a psychiatrist, nurse
practitioner.
Um, so you, you will have
A copy of the presentation. So
on the first page there, it's
just basically a breakdown of
our population here in Sanofi
County.
Um, our population is fairly low
compared to like Borno County,
but you can see our male
population averages between 237,
245, and our female much
significantly lower, stays
usually in the 30s and 40s.
Length of stay in Santa Fe
County like other jails around
the state, uh, the average is
between 2 days, uh, about 45%.
The rest of the population are
folks who are dealing with
competency questions of
competency and, and uh going to
trial on different and more
complicated cases.
Moving on to the next slide in
your presentation.
In Santa Fe County, we started
trying to collect urinalysis,
drug screenings on individuals
coming into our custody to allow
us to have a better idea of um
the the amount of people that
are impaired when they're coming
into custody. What types of
things they are impaired with,
uh, this helps us establish the
type of programming and services
we need to take care of them
while they're in our custody,
and looking at the
You can see in the first
quarter, we tested 8,532
individuals coming into our
custody. 87% of that population
tested positive for at least one
drug.
Um, and 67% of the population
tested positive for 2 or more
substances.
And then when you break that
down a little more alcohol?
No. OK, thank you.
And then when you break that
down a little more and you look
at that, uh, 7,0455 that tested
positive, uh, 40% of those
tested positive for fentanyl.
And I put emphasis on fentanyl
being this, you know, the study
is about opioid addiction.
Yeah, you have marijuana in
here. It's, yeah, I'm sorry.
Yeah, cause we're the reason
alcohol is off the marijuana is
because we're looking at drugs
that uh wouldn't combined, have
an altered uh an amplified
effect.
On the individual
Um, but then you look at the
Methamphetamines and
amphetamines, as you can see
they're commonly used with
fentanyl for those individuals.
So this just really tells us
something that we already know
in northern New Mexico, we have
a high addiction, uh, concerned
with our, within our community
and definitely those individuals
coming into custody.
I go to the next slide. This is
just a very brief breakdown of
some of the money.
Um, awarded through revenues
through the um
The fund in 2023.
Uh, we got a little over 765,000
at that point in time, we
started the planning phases of
how we're going to use those
funds.
The following year we got an
additional 201,000.
We started the expanding, uh,
process of how we're going to
expand the programs that we
already have, and I'll talk
about that in just in the next
slide.
And then, uh, in 2000 this year,
we used 275,000 of those funds,
and next year we are projected
to spend about 438,000 of those
funds.
And when you go to the next
slide, I'll start explaining
kind of where that's going to go
to.
So utilized in expansion so
programming and support of
opioid use disorder treatment.
Uh, we've already had a matrix
program. This is uh
sobriety-based substance abuse
program that we have licensed
behavioral health therapists
that uh facilitate this program.
It's roughly about 5 weeks of
intensive programming.
And
We've had great success with
that program.
Who was the percent we.
63%.
Uh, the population that goes
through and graduates from a
program do not reoffend. They
have not been back in custody.
We've been keeping, uh, really,
really good data and stats on
that moving forward.
We've also had a re-entry
program. This was individuals
that we saw going through and
graduating through the Matrix
program. We really didn't want
to break up the unity that they
built and the momentum that they
were having as far as trying to
achieve sobriety and uh show
some ambition towards having a
more successful life outside of
custody. So we started a reentry
program to, that would be the
next phase after they graduated
from the Matrix program, and in
that they, they start to get all
the same program, and they were
getting when
They were in the Matrix, but
also we slowly implemented some
life skills and other courses
that they're gonna need.
Uh, a lot of that has to do with
anger management, uh, trauma
informed care, parenting
classes, and of course, AAA and
Narcotics Anonymous.
The re-entry services, uh,
mostly we dealt with partners
like LifeLink.
Santa Fe Health or otherwise
known as Santa Fe Albuquerque
Healthcare. It's a clinic that
we partner with New Mexico
rantry. They are a nonprofit
organization, uh, they've been
great. They help individuals
with anything from homelessness
to uh getting access to their
medications or scripts. They
give people uh transportation at
times when they need it, they
help them find employment.
And they even have a.
Some partnerships with the local
car dealership in Albuquerque,
where they help individuals get
a vehicle.
Uh, when they're coming out of
custody. So they're really a
great partner.
Uh, PMS, Presbyterian Medical
Services, and I'll talk a little
bit more about them moving
forward and then Sam the medica
medications and support of MOUD,
uh, of course, subsol is an
induction for withdrawal, the
supplicate.
Then they'rexone Vivitrol.
And of course, we've dedicated
recently a LPN license pro uh.
Licensed nurse prac practitioner
nurse.
Uh, who is dedicated
specifically to our MAT Medicaid
assistance treatment program in
the jail, so.
That's primarily what she does.
In regards to uh partnerships,
we also have the New Mexico
Treatment Services for
individuals, uh, focused on
methadone.
My next slide there leveraged
initiatives taken.
So back in 2023, uh, we had a
Bureau of Justice Assistance
grants uh for MOUD services.
This was awarded through the
Building Bridges Program.
Uh, future planning included uh
enhanced re-entry services and
which links individuals to
post-release services.
The results, this results in us
becoming a pure support facility
for other facilities around the
state and around the country.
Health partnership, we've had
partnership with uh PMS
Presbyterian Medical, as I
mentioned earlier, that was
through the HSA grant.
Uh, that are community services
department helped us, um,
Received, it helps establish
medical services for individuals
prior to release from custody
and helps ensure that they are
continued on medical, dental,
and behavioral healthcare.
PMS also in accordance to that
grant they facilitate two
full-time employees, they're
both peer support, uh, workers.
They are at the facility 5 days
a week. They're in, they're, we
actually provide space for them
in our booking department and as
individuals are coming into
custody, they help educate them
on what kind of services they
can get when they get out of
custody.
Uh, recovery housing, we have a
contract with the local
nonprofit which supports the
rise House, which is a recovery
residence for graduates of the
Matrix program. This helps
promote, uh, of course, more
successful reentry into the
community.
And then as far as employment
pathways, innovate and educate
as a partner with community
services.
That is intended to help provide
enhanced job opportunities for
those folks attending the
graduate, the matrix graduation
and uh we even offer or starting
to offer some county employment
opportunities for individuals
who are trying to seek steady
stability with employment.
Which is good because they
actually can get benefits in a
lot of these individuals
definitely need the benefits on
top of the income.
The 2nd page to
Some leveraged initiatives,
talks about a reentry fair, so.
We've
Known that through the years,
you know, there's a lot of
people in the community that are
always talking about trying to
help uh partner with the gel. We
took it a little step further,
uh, this last year, and we
actually with the assistance of
the community services
department.
We invited all of the partners
that we knew of, uh, to come
into the jail, we, uh, we called
it a re-entry fair. Basically,
it's like a job for all the
people who graduate from our
Matrix program.
We bring them all in. We have
all the outside providers, uh,
we give them a booth, they sit
down, and every inmate that had
graduated, they go table to
table, they talk about if they
have homeless issues, if they
have substance, if they have
substance abuse issues, if they
need counseling, if they need
insurance.
Whatever their needs are, we try
to identify it with all the
partners being there together.
And then, um,
Once we're finished with that,
then we're start, we bring that
group back and we do follow up
with them and we do all this
while they're in custody instead
of waiting for them to get out
and then hoping that they're
gonna link up with a partner
we're trying to accomplish all
that while they're in custody.
So we've had two of those retry
fairs for our male graduates,
and we're getting ready to
schedule our first female
reentry, uh.
Events uh for females that are
going through our reentry
program, so we're really excited
about that, as is the inmates.
Uh, these services help, uh,
well, I think I mentioned all
that healthcare, um, and all the
homelessness, all those other
issues that come up.
Uh, regional collaboration, so
we're in partnership with the
community in Rio Reba to share
strategies and coordinate opioid
settlement fund priorities.
And in regards to public
awareness in 2024, that we
probably co-sponsored the
fentanyl summit hosted by Bruno
County.
Uh, this was our accounting
manager actually delivered some
opening remarks in that.
And then in regards to crisis
and detox services, the county
continues to support La Salle
crisis triage center, which
provides detox crisis,
stabilization of behavioral
health support.
And I'm my last page.
Just talking about some uh
future strategies that are on
the table, of course, expansion
of internal programs, so all the
programs that I've already
mentioned, we're hoping to
continue to expand those.
Um, including a reentry
personnel. Right now we have 4
dedicated re-entry specialist.
So we have one of those, um,
staffed in every housing unit of
the facility.
Expansion of detox facilities to
Santa Fe County is, uh,
Actively in the planning process
of having an expansion of the
detention facility, part of this
expansion will include
A wing specific to helping uh
for reentry, so it'll have uh.
Areas for uh people for reentry
and so and PMS and some of these
other services to make sure
we're focusing on re-entry
services as people are coming
out, uh, similar to what Burnley
County does, uh, with their
reentry center.
And development of partnerships,
I think that's self-explanatory.
We're going to continue to build
because we know.
Uh, the more partnerships we
have with folks in the
community, uh, the more enhanced
opportunity we have to make a
difference in these people's
lives.
Then the expansion of re-entry
services, um, I foresee a
reentry.
Uh, or FTEs or full-time
employees have foresee that
expanding and growing as as time
evolves cause that is kind of
the, the new department within
the jails today that
Seems to carry the most impact,
making a difference in these
people's lives.
And other than that, I'll stand
for any questions.
Thank you, and we will finally
bring up um
Joshua
Um, from, from DOH.
And then, as I said, we'll bring
all of you back up and folks can
ask questions.
Uh, good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. Uh
apologies, I don't have a formal
presentation today because um
the initial plan was for us to
sort of be here to help answer
questions and support the
county, but since we have some
time, I could probably expand a
little bit on some of the things
that we've done. Uh, so, as some
of you may know, we receive
about $3.5 million annually in
opioid settlement funds.
These funds are directed towards
expansion of MOUD and public
health offices and the
programming that surrounds it.
Um, $1 million of the funds are
also directed at our tribal
partners. Uh, we contract
directly with some tribal
partners for them to expand MOUD
uh in their own communities. Um,
so that money is used as
technical assistance to hire
clinicians, social workers,
however they need uh to
However they deem necessary to
expand their ability to provide
medications for opioid use
disorder in their own
communities.
As far as the public health
offices go. Currently, as of
today, we have 37 public health
offices that have MOUD treatment
available. Um, and, you know,
we're, we're, we're open and we
would like to have you all help
us get out the word of we want
people to come in for treatment.
We've integrated into our
clinical practice, uh, here in
our offices and we, we want more
folks to come in as necessary.
We're working with uh
corrections, um, as, you know,
folks are released. I know that
was a concern previously. Uh, so
we're able to provide that,
particularly in the very very
rural communities. If someone
needs medications for opioid use
disorder, they're able to come
into our health office, um, see
a doctor, usually, um, you know,
through telehealth, you know,
our doc our doctors are based
throughout the state, but we
utilize telehealth to expand
that prescribing, um, ability to
even the most rural areas where
our health offices are.
Anyone in the state, if they're
looking for an appointment, can
call our 1-833 Southwest nurse
hotline, and they can give them
their address and they'll be
able to uh direct them to the
health office and help them make
an appointment.
But not just with our health
office, because, you know, our
health office, we're only able
to provide those prescriptions
for MOUD. We don't have some of
those wraparound counseling
services, but we want to work to
make sure that we're referring
folks to those wraparound
counseling services as well. Um,
so that hotline can do that. Our
staff can help do that. Um, you
know, refer folks to it.
Oftentimes, some people, they
don't need those wrapper right
counseling services. Uh, they,
they can uh take treatment and
see improvement, uh,
immediately, um, with the, the
medications for opioid use
disorder. And oftentimes, you
know, we act as a force to to
stabilize folks, um, you know,
get those initial treatment,
get, get that initial treatment,
get that initial, uh,
buprenorphine, so, you know,
they can get a little bit more
stabilized and then, you know,
determine where, you know, if
they need further care, then
help um.
Again, we're also working with
uh detention centers if
detention centers are having
MOUD we're pretty easy referral
source, uh, to make sure that we
have continuation of medication
in the community. Uh, again,
really important in the rural
areas, um, and some of the more
urban areas, we have more
options, um.
And that's, that's, um,
How we operate. It's really
making sure that we're offering
as that safety net.
We also have the ability uh to
uh take care of folks who are
categorically ineligible for
insurance. Uh, so if someone
can't get buprenorphine or, you
know, any of their, their
medications that we're
prescribing, because they just
don't have the ability to get
insurance at that time. We have
the ability to pay for
medications, and we pay for this
uh opioid settlement dollars,
uh, for those individuals. Uh,
so they basically can uh go to
the pharmacy and the Department
of Health can cover the cost of
um
So that's, that's the big
picture of the, the $3.5 million
and I think I'll
Stand up here for questions.
All right, thank you so much for
that. So if um if you can stay
there and someone from the AG's
office and someone from Santa
Fe, if you could just come up
and join cause my guess is the
questions will be um
For all of you.
And so, um, who has questions?
OK, so we'll start with uh
signature Stephanic and go to
Representative Chavez.
And then go from there.
Oh, OK. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, thank you all for the
presentation.
So we have um
Created uh structure through
Senate Bill 12, and 3.
For behavioral health with the
trust fund with planning around
the state for through the AOC
but it's for to encompass the
entire state and counties, it's
to cover mental health,
substance abuse, addictions,
everything.
So
Do you know yet from all of your
three entities.
Um, how you're going to
participate in that effort.
And do I have a time limit? Um,
we'll see how it's going.
We're, we're down a little and
we have some time, so don't,
don't, don't go crazy.
Madam Chair, Senator from New
Mexico uh Department of Justice
standpoint, we wouldn't really
be involved in that. Our again,
our involvement at this point.
Is making sure the state and
local governments are getting
the money from the settlements
from the National Trusts and to
enforce. So on that point, Madam
Chair, you would have no
Um
Responsibility.
In ensuring that those entities
receiving funds are involved in
the state coordinated effort.
Madam Chair, Senator, I don't
think so. Our sort of
enforcement responsibilities are
around enforcing against the
defendants and making sure
they're complying with the
settlement.
As far as the responsibilities
for ensuring that the state and
local governments are spending
these funds, as was agreed to in
the agreements that would come
through the state auditor
through the annual a you Madam
Chair, and what about the county
and the health department of
Health.
Oh, sure, uh, thank you, Madam
Chair, Senator. Yeah,
absolutely. We're gonna be
involved in the behavioral
health plan. Uh, we're, we're a
natural partner. I think in the
bill we're specifically written
as a stakeholder, so, you know,
we'll definitely be part of
those, those conversations in,
you know, the, the
The, the regions, the behavioral
health regions, uh, involved in
those, especially since we have
that such big footprint and, you
know, those, you know, substance
use, harm reduction, no oxone
distribution. We have that
footprint, so we'll be in this,
you know.
In those meetings as well, and
I'm sure we'll be, you know, at
the agency level communicating
with healthcare authority and
AOC who are taking leads on this
on a regular basis.
So, um, Madam Chair, Senator,
thank you so much for the
opportunity, and Ryan, the
Community Services Director for
Santa Fe County, um, Madam
Chair, Senator Stephanics in
this room, uh, earlier this week
as you're probably aware,
convened the very first meeting
of the executive committee
established under Senate Bill 3.
We heard from, we heard from
them this week, yes, excellent.
So, um, Santa, they also voted
on
those regions which will be done
via judicial district, um, and
so Los Alamos County, Rio Reba
County and Santa Fe County with
that first phase being the Sims
mapping Rio Reba completed
theirs in the fall, Santa Fe
County completed hours in
January and Los Alamos is
scheduled to do theirs in June,
Santa Fe County has a well
established behavioral health.
leadership council with 15
members appointed by the Board
of County commissioners that
includes um all of the local
providers. So we see ourselves
as well poised to participate in
a regional application, um, and
we look forward to participating
in the next meeting that I think
is August 5th.
So, um, Madam Chair and um
specifically for Santa Fe
County, uh,
In the funding that we did at
the state level.
Uh, it's not just money for
services. It's also money for
infrastructure.
And I see that you're looking
at, or you mentioned detox
facilities, expansion of detox
facilities. So the reason I'm
bringing this up is
This package is pretty
comprehensive.
And so I've encouraged every
entity, whether it's a city, a
town, a county.
A nonprofit, etc. to be at the
table so that they can put
forward their needs.
For the future, because there
might be funding for it.
That's my point. But thank you
very much, Madam Cheryl stuff.
Thank you. So I have
Representative Chavez,
Representative Garcia, but there
Thank you. So I have
Representative Chavez,
Representative Garcia,
and, OK, OK, so we'll, we'll go,
yeah,
everybody, OK, we'll, we'll go
to the front row and then we'll
come back in.
Go ahead, Representative Garcia.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you presenters.
Uh, for your presentations.
Um
The settlement
Moneys
Um
Are not subject to
anti-donation.
Is that correct?
Man Representative, um,
I guess I'm not clear on the uh
the actual question.
Do you mean receiving the
settlement monies is not.
I mean,
let me try and respond this way.
Receiving the settlement monies
does not violate the
anti-Donation Clause.
No, I guess, Madam Chair, I
guess more specific.
The settlement monies are not
Entirely to benefit.
Public sector.
Because some moneys are not
subject to the anti-donation.
So that is saying, Madam Chair,
that settlement monies.
Following the philosophy of the
distribution.
For treatment, abatement,
prevention, recovery.
Uh, is not subject to just
the public sector.
And we can initiate.
uh
Individuals, entities, manager
in the private sector.
Can also solicit these funds.
Or programming based on the
philosophy of the.
Settlement, which is treatment,
abatement.
Recovery
Um
And um prevention.
That's what I'm asking.
Madam Cha representative, that's
correct. So for the money that
goes the 45% that gets
appropriated or received by the
state is subject to the
legislative appropriation
process or the
topics and approved uses of the
agreement, it does not delineate
between public and private.
OK.
Uh
You know, I've been toying
around man with this concept.
Uh, when it comes to employment.
And actually, we know that
there's a stigma, and I'm sure
attached to individuals.
That have had a substance of um
Abuse disorder.
They were incarcerated, came
out.
There's also this stigma of
client management chair to
individuals that
Uh
Have a substance.
Abuse disorder.
And are in treatment.
And my question
To the different providers that
are tapping into the
So the monies.
is because of this job scenario.
Kind of maybe
Facing this population.
What is not what?
It
one possible solution.
In terms of stabilizing the
lives of these substance users.
is to provide like a job
training and center program.
Using
Settlement monies.
For these targeted individuals.
And I know, Madam I'm sure that
there's.
Uh, many businesses.
Um
In New Mexico.
That have a heart.
For these individuals that hit
rock bottom.
Because of a substance use
disorder.
And, uh, but are trying to kind
of
Uh
Be ahead of the curve in terms
of
Changing their past and
providing a
Productive future for themselves
and their families.
And nobody's doing this.
Nobody's using
Settlement monies
In terms of providing the
program.
Similar to what we have now in
the books.
With the workforce solutions,
which is a job training and
center program.
Where
The entity
In the state
Uh, the
private sector
Can provide these training
programs, because basically,
under job training center
program.
Um
The
The entity
Provides
A wage up to a certain amount of
certain time in terms of months.
That that individual is hired
based on
That company, that business,
receiving.
wages.
Money to pay for the wages of
that individual.
And once that training program
ends, then the company, the
business, picks up the
individual.
All time.
Out of their own
Revenues.
You know
And, and manager, this is an
idea that I know nobody's
tackling, but I think it
It bears
Kind of um more insight.
And there's a possibly starting
a pilot.
Somewhere in the state.
Where we kind of undertake that
process.
But if we don't even
Lay the groundwork as to how we
undertake that, then you'll
never get done, that sure. And
um so I just wanted to throw
that out there.
Another thing I'm sure that I
have been trying to
established since 2016.
Um
is
Creating in New Mexico, an
injectable opioid treatment
program.
We have none.
Uh, there is none in the United
States.
7 countries have such a program.
I
Uh, it's proven very effective
in those seven countries.
We attempted to do that.
Um
And uh there is a core group out
of UNM Health Sciences Center.
Uh, in their, uh, substance use
disorder unit.
They're nationally recognized.
These guys are and gals are
almost every program up and down
the state.
They have ties to almost every
program, that little core group
out of UNM our sciences center.
And um
And we try to kind of uh create
a model out of UNM.
Um
There's a um
Um, substance use disorder
clinic on Yale Avenue before you
get to Gibson.
That's uh operated by UNM.
Uh, very effective in terms of
their treatment program.
But we've never tried this
injectable opioid treatment
program.
And that little core group out
of Yan and, um.
Uh, came up here, we lobbied for
funding.
Back then, the the opioid
settlement.
fund hadn't been created in the
legislature.
But there were still settlement
monies coming in.
And um
And
We were trying again.
to
Create some funding for this
demonstration project out of
UNM.
And lo and behold, the CEO Ya
Mas got involved and put the
brakes on this mainly because
she doesn't have the capacity,
the knowledge and the
understanding of what this
program is all about.
He just saw the politics.
And the hysteria.
Of injectable opiate treatment
program. But keep in mind, madam
chair, this program, the way
that it
Unfolds
is a clinical setting. It's a
clinical setting.
For the substant user goes in
there.
I injected
An opioid hydromorphone.
Buy a licensed physician.
But it doesn't end there.
There's wraparound services with
this program.
That looks at the housing of
that.
Person participating in this
program.
That looks at other social needs
and issues.
And uh so it's, I think it's
some of you that are out in the
field, we need to lobby hard for
this type of treatment program.
Because the only voice that you
and him is hearing is mine.
And, and, and my boys.
That the brakes put on it.
By the CEO of UNM Hospital
manager.
could you, I'm wrapping it up,
OK.
So what happened manager is that
this really ingenious.
core group at UNM.
That have been pushing this
concept all these years, up
here.
Under my leadership in terms of
the caring legislation.
to step back.
They just totally dropped the
concept because of this
political
pack, and the CEO.
Unim Hospital, stepping in and
saying, no, we're not gonna do
this, period.
So
You know, uh, again,
These are the type of creative
initiative, Madam chair that we
really need to explore and
pursue.
And
Give them wings, because they
make a big difference.
For substance users for
communities, for their families.
Thank you man.
Thank you for that. And I, I am
going to put a time limit on
now, and we're, we're gonna do 4
minutes. So we will
I'm sure. Can I make a quick
response just to the first part
of what you were talking about,
um, representative is in, in
regards to employment for those
individuals coming out of
custody. Uh, I didn't elaborate
earlier but I briefly mentioned
innovate and educate, that is a
uh contractor partner through
community services at Santa Fe
County. Part of that.
program is because our
accounting manager did, we did
find identify jobs within the
county that, uh, we believe
these individuals can meet the
criteria for we the the and
educate, uh, part of that is
them coming into the facility,
sitting down with their mates,
helping them fill out
applications,
helping them learn how to fill
out resumes, and actually we
want to get to the point where
they're applying for jobs and
having interviews in custody.
So for individuals that of
course, we have a projected
release date for them going back
out, um, so I just want to make
a comment to that that we are
proactively looking at ways to
help some of the individuals, at
least in Santa Fe County, um,
seek employment, steady
employment before they get out
of custody. I just want to make
that point.
Thank you. And so representative
Chandler, do you have questions?
OK, Senator Scott.
Represented night.
Representative Cates. Thank you
very much. Uh thank you for your
response, um, uh, regarding
employment, this is something
that's very important to me,
I've I've experienced and
providing uh job training and
placement for individuals coming
who are incarcerated both male
and female, um, and have gone
into the systems for job fairs
and uh and like so, so I do
agree with my colleague
Representative Garcia.
Um, I hope that there is RFPs at
least a process so that opiate
funding can be reached out for
individuals who are subject
expert in this kind of
employment training for
individuals with disabilities,
we already have that system in
place, the nonprofits should be
glad to be able to help.
Um, be able to, they, they've
already had the training and
being able to um find and
implement that right.
I would also ask, you know, I
looked at your, um your, your,
I'm not, I'm not really sure I
understand your um response to
the opiate settlement. Um, you
have marijuana in it. It's not
an opiate. You don't have
alcohol, it's a substance abuse.
So I would like to have all the
substances and then you roll out
the opiates and we can talk
about it as it retain, you know.
Um, applies to the opiate
settlement, but I think it is an
interesting statistic to see
such the high percentage of
individuals once in custody have
tested for uh some kind of
substance abuse, but.
Um, I understand that alcohol
burns out quickly, but um I
would, if, if, and if there's a
funding issue for um gathering
that data, I'd like to know, but
I do think that that data is.
Ingos, did you have questions?
OK. We'll go to Representative
Roel Caballero.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
leave my question is gonna be
directed to Santa Fe County,
adult detention, because in your
um
Slides on the page where you
talk about utilized and
expansion of, I notice that you
do have on there and the
medications and support, uh,
supplicate, I believe I'm
pronouncing it correctly. Yes,
ma'am. And um I understand uh
from recent studies that it is
administered once a month, and
that it has had um
Substantial success in weaning
from subs sub.
OK
um and so it's much harder to,
which is much harder to wean
from. So my question is,
do you use this obviously you
do, and then how frequently do
you use it and how have you
found the results to be in terms
of the outcomes for your whom
you are administering to.
I'm gonna have Miss Granger.
She's our nurse practitioner.
Absolutely, thank you. Thank you
for having us, Madam Chair. Our
focus of um the services that
we're delivering in regards to
MET is trying to be considerate
of our rural populations that
don't have the benefits of daily
dosing. Sometimes it's even a
struggle to obtain the resources
to commute, um, for monthly
visits, so on and so forth. And
so long acting injectables as it
applies to both um seriously
mentally ill individuals as well
as individuals that are
suffering.
with OUD, um, that was our
primary intent of doing this.
We have kept uh statistics, but
of course, in regards to the
discharge statistics, it's
fairly new and so we don't get
the return and we're hoping that
with our partnership with CSD
that we're gonna be able to see
that our partnership with PMS
Presbytery Medical Services and
continuing the subliate upon
release, um, we're hoping to
gather more substantial
statistics in that. Our program
is fairly new. The medication is
fairly new.
Um, and we are participating in
a um corrections, um, uh, sample
program. So we are getting some
um help with that as well for
the, the cost of that
medication, which is
$2000 in injection.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for your response. However,
you know, the initial findings,
and thank you for that, have
indicated that it does have a
high success rate. It is um once
a month, so that makes it very
attractive in terms of being
cost effective, and then, of
course, successful outcomes thus
far, those findings, and I think
it's important at this point to
really focus on the successes of
what we're doing, so that they
have long term, long-lasting
effect, so that
we can then create the necessary
programs so that our adult
detention, um,
Individuals can go back into uh
workforce, um, and successfully
complete whatever drug testing
they continues given.
Their work environment, but more
importantly that they can then
um have
Uh, successful living, you know,
of, of being able to be
completely weaned from um their,
their addictions or their
substance, um, disorders, I
would say.
Thank you for recognizing that,
Madam Chair, and that is
extremely important. We do take
advantage of the opportunity of
having them in in an incarceral
setting using that time to um
help with behavioral therapy as
well. And so that once a monthly
dosing.
has been helpful for us in
individuals that are established
in daily dosing of Suboxone or
buprenorphine or methadone. They
have um they have, um, it is
appealing and attractive to them
that they are not dependent on
having to have that daily
commitment of dosing. So, um,
we're seeing the early um onset
of that interest and how they
find it.
The freedom in the monthly
dosing. So
yeah, we're here and I
appreciate you continuing to
monitor that. Thank you. Thank
you. Representative Chavez, and
sorry about that, I forgot to
turn my mic off. It woke me up
too.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, my
questions are also for um the
county folks.
Um, you're the, I'm looking at
the um
slide that has your data
collection in terms of who's
coming in with what.
Um, substance. So can you tell
me what percentage of the
population is testing positive.
Um
Or substance.
Um, no.
Yeah, so you're
Let me make sure I'm
understanding that right. So,
We have the total that we're
tested and this was just the
first quarter granted, but the
87%, that's the percent of those
of that number that was tested,
that tested positive for
substance abuse. I'm sorry, I
kind of missed that.
Um, OK, and then the other
question that I have is, um,
along the lines of sort of what
Representative Garcia also asked
in terms of use of opioid
settlement money, but it's along
the lines of education.
So can it is any of that money
um used or can any of that money
be used, like for example,
someone wants to uh go learn a
trade or maybe go to college or
do some um you know, uh, GED so
that they can go to college, I
can any of that money be used to
to say, give them a uh living
stipend so they can focus on
their studies or pay for horses,
um,
Um, that need to be paid for any
kinds of those things.
Madam Representative uh Chad is
out.
I, I don't know. I think that's
something that, uh, in
partnership with the Community
Services director, we, I mean,
it's certainly something, yeah,
if you want to jump in.
Madam, Representative, um,
presently the funds are
exclusively applied towards um
treatment at the jail, and I,
we, we would need to defer with
um our finance director if
There is use eligibility for
that specific purpose. If there
is a tie in getting back to your
point, if we know 87%, for
example, um, and we could have
that tie, and I think that that
could be justified. But right
now, they're exclusively
dedicated to treatment services
at the jail.
OK. Well, Madam Chair, so then,
as I understand it, so then once
they get out,
Then
The, they no longer eligible for
any kind of.
I guess services, is that what
you're saying?
Um, education services.
So they certainly could be
eligible for all of those
services, um, my only point is
that the opioid settlement funds
that come to the county are
applied for treatment services
at the jail.
Um, but that doesn't mean that
the reentry team at the jail and
um staff within the community
services department don't create
those linkages, but it's just
not tapping those particular
funds. Got it. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, uh, Senator Cedillo
Lopez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. This is
actually just a follow up on, on
Senator Stefanik's questions.
Um, is there a timeline for the
cities and the counties to use
this money.
No
Madam Chair Senator, there is no
restrictions on timeline.
Um, built into the settlements
themselves, nor into the
allocation agreement and the
allocations they were just
people, the cities and counties
just signed up, and they got a
piece of it and then 45% goes to
the state.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, that's
correct. OK. So, um, and, and
this is where I think the, the
connection needs to happen.
Senator Stefaniks pointed out,
we are, um, starting this
behavioral health fund, and it's
gonna be very important to have
this integrated with the
planning so that these funds run
out, maybe some of the, the gaps
can be filled in with that
because it is frustrating to
start a program that only has a
limited shelf life.
Um, and so this is a real
crucial, um, crucial.
time to make sure that these
programs are connected with,
with potential long-term
funding.
Um, was the only point I wanted
to make, appreciate all of the
work for this. It's very, very
important and uh thank you for
the work and getting these funds
and allocating them. Thank you.
Thank you. So I do have a few
questions. So I, I'm thinking
back, I heard of a a news story
um about the Santa Fe County
jail and within the past year
where there was a smuggling.
Drug smuggling and it broke my
heart when I heard that one of
the drugs being smuggled in was
um
Um
One of the treatment drugs, um,
not naloxone, but naltrexone.
and, and that broke my heart
that someone was, and maybe,
maybe I'm wrong, but that
someone was so desperate to be
treated in jail, but they were
willing to smuggle in, so, so my
question is, anyone who comes to
the Santa Fe County jail. Are
they immediately eligible for
medication assisted treatment
regardless of how long they're
gonna be there, what their crime
is, etc. etc.
Madam Chair, absolutely. Um,
we've started different phases
of our MOUD MAT program. So
anyone who enters will
automatically receive the Zubsol
which is um underneath your
tongue, a rapid dissolving um to
help, um, it's buprenorphine,
and so that's 48% of our
population are, they're released
within 48 hours. So we're very
mindful of that in trying to be
conservative and also make sure
that they, more importantly,
have the
resources that they need that
are sustainable upon release.
The um added narrative that's
super important about um
smuggling or diversion of
Suboxone in gels is that there's
a misuse in where they are
tearing pieces of it and
Um, placing them in their eye,
um, they're, um, diluting it and
injecting it into their arms.
And so it's for the opiate
effect.
So, um, in a correctional
setting, um, I spoke to our
major and we do on a regular
basis to see how that's
impacting our population, one
strip can vary from 400 to $500
in the setting because they can
cut it down to 16 of a strip.
So, um, it's, it's, there's
definitely that consideration
that is absolutely helpful.
Individuals sobriety is
extremely personal, and it's
getting, we take the opportunity
to find out when we have them
for an extended period of time.
Why is this treatment not
working and how can we make it
work better?
So, um, the 48, 48 individuals,
our goal is to get them what
they need in the community to
support that and to facilitate
re-establishing that care when
they understand and, and use it
appropriately. So there's, it
just um we've used a sublicate
to kind of um the individuals
that come in on methadone or
Suboxone strips. Um, they are
very eager and have been happy
to transition to that
long-acting injectable.
And it's worked well. OK. So
just to follow up on that, and
so you test them immediately
when they get there and, and you
are able to get the results.
Yes, ma'am it's a urine drug
screen and the nurses read them
immediately and unless they
refuse, um, it's, um an
expectation that 100% of
individuals will be offered in.
OK. All right. And then in terms
of um the Matrix program, that
sounds really um.
Interesting, but for the short
termers, is that a possibility
for them or they kind do you
have to be there to be to
participate in the program. Yes,
uh.
So we condense that program. It
came from the Betty Ford
Foundation. It's evidence-based
curriculum we use, but we had to
condense that program in order
to fit realistically the
population we have. When you
look at my slides earlier, you
saw almost 50% of our
populations out within a couple
of days, so, uh, to, to be able
to just get the best we can out
of it. We, we had to condense
that program to a 5-week.
So, yeah, I mean, it's to get
anyone.
Uh, that's, that's out of
custody sooner than that would,
it just wouldn't be realistic to
get the result that we're
looking for and then um for DOH,
um, I like that, that, that the,
the county offices, etc. etc.
are available. My guess is
they're available kind of 9 to 5
Monday through Friday, correct.
Uh, that's right, madam chair.
And then is there any um any
work towards, and this is kind
of a bugaboo of mine.
988 and 911 are not talking to
each other, essentially, so, you
know, if you call 911 and it's a
substance use thing, it would be
great if they could transfer you
over or, you know, if it was a
one single operator, but is
there any other the county um
health offices, are they in any
way involved with 988, you know,
someone calls up and and has a
substance, you know, has a
crisis substance use, um, are,
are they playing a role or
that more a role for, for like
the 24 hour of which many
counties don't have any other
options.
Yeah, I think, um, certainly
Madam chair, that, you know, 988
can definitely refer to us, um,
if, if they so choose. I'm not
sure what the actual, you know,
um, collaboration looks like,
specifically on this program in
988, uh, so I wouldn't be able
to answer that for you, but I
do, I do know our programs have
promoted 988 before, and we're
also actively promoting our
Southwesterners.
You know, line, uh, for folks to
get into us specifically, uh but
since 98 is more, you know.
Yeah, yeah, it's uh, we, we need
all of our systems to talk to
each other and to take advantage
of each other, I mean, in the,
in the most positive way, as
opposed to, oh, you know, only
these people know about rehab
Center A and Roswell and, you
know, it's a big secret, don't
share cause then other people
won't want to go, so, so I wanna
thank you all for your
presentation, particularly, and
I will say um this meeting was
put together on fairly short
notice our staff did a wonderful
job, um,
So thank you for being available
on such short notice and for
your info and and that's to all
the presenters, so thank you and
uh.
We will
Let's see if, if my friend Nancy
Rodriguez is here yet.
OK, she should be here shortly.
And just for those of you who
might be new, this is not
Senator Nancy Rodriguez. This is
the other Nancy Rodriguez.
That I finally had to put in my
phone as school-based Health
Center Nancy and Senator Nancy
because I kept sending the wrong
one, the text, so thank you all
and if you'll just hang with us
for a minute, um.
We will get the presentation as
soon as they get here.
So welcome whenever you're
ready.
Good afternoon. Oh, that's loud.
Is that too loud? No, I think
it's OK. OK. Um, I'm
Kristinareskovich. I'm the
clinical operations manager for
the New Mexico Department of
Health school-based health
center program. Thank you for
having us today. It's great to
be here to be able to talk about
some of the, um, progress we've
made in school-based health
centers over the last few years.
Um, if you look at the first
page of the slide that's got the
maps. That's a really good, uh,
Indication of how much we've
grown in fiscal year 2018, we
had 47 brick and mortar
school-based health centers
across the state that received
funding from the Department of
Health.
Uh, in FY 25, um, as of this
year, we have 100 school-based
health centers, um, or one of
that 100 are telehealth, um,
have in spoke models or mobile
health. So we've expanded quite
a bit in the last or since 2018,
and by the end of 20
Um
26, we're hopeful we're gonna
have an another level of
expansion, um, and we'll all be
on track to have about 65 brick
and mortar clinics and an
additional 50 schools with
access to telehealth or or
services mobilely. Um, so,
We have doubled access, more
than doubled access in the last
7 years, um, across the state.
On the next slide, I want to
touch base just really uh
quickly cause a lot of times
folks get um don't really
understand how school-based
health centers differ from
school nurses. Um, and why we
need both of them, but the
reality is they're both really
important services and really
important to support kids,
educational, um, health and
success. So school-based centers
can never replace school nurses
or counselors.
Um, school nurses do IEP related
services, which are federally
mandated services, um, that
school that kids are eligible
for in
In schools, um, they do vision
and hearing screening, uh,
Immunization compliance,
communicable disease
surveillance, all in schools. So
those are things that that
school baseball centers can't
replace.
School-based health centers are
true medical clinics on a school
campus, so it's like going to
the doctor's office except for
its conveniently located for the
students and their families. Um,
they provide sick visits, uh,
well visit sports physicals, um,
Injury, take care of, take care
of injuries, um, provide
behavioral health and counseling
services as well.
And so just keeping that in mind
is, you know, as you think about
school-based health centers and
and the different roles that
those folks. On the next page,
have a little bit of our data,
um, you know, I've presented to
several of you before and you
know, that we usually have lots
of data slides. I like, I like
data, I like the numbers. Um,
And
You can see over the FY 23, FY
24, and then through the 3rd
quarter of FY 25 because FY 25
is just ending this month and we
still haven't had, we haven't
compiled all of that data yet.
Um, there's been this trend
upward in both visits, um, and
patients utilizing the
school-based health centers.
If I look at the 3rd quarter
numbers for FY 23 and FY 24 and
compare them to where we are
right now and that 3rd quarter
column, we're on track to have
around 60,000 visits this year,
so that means that we will have,
you know, about 20,000 visits
more than we had 2 years ago in
school-based health centers, um,
because of the increased access
that we have.
80 to 90% of those primary care
visits are illness, injury.
Um, we'll visits in sports
physicals, 5 to 10 is like
managing, management of chronic
conditions, asthma, diabetes,
those kinds of things. Um,
And so we're really and that,
that breakdown of the, the
percentage of primary care and
behavioral health is
consistently for years, for 10
years, it's been about the same,
about 60 or so of primary care
and 35 so
We're still operating kind of in
the same on the same trajectory
percentage wise, but we're
seeing a lot more, uh, a lot
more.
Uh, on the next slide, you have
a peek at some of the really
exciting work we're doing with
PED, um, right before the
pandemic started, we started
talking about being able to
match educational data to uh
medical to healthcare data and
school-based health center
utilization in particular. Um,
and so we
Had this 5 year chunk, um, it
was 2014 through 2019, so that's
the data that you're seeing
here, and we found that
That students who utilize the
school-based health center where
47% less likely to be
chronically absent for school.
Um, and they
Also were um likely to be more
on track to graduate on time.
And so that is really exciting
news. We're going to take this
next chunk of data from 2020 to
25 and repeat that study with um
the data matching with PED and
so that will be really an
interesting project to take on.
Um,
And it'll be kind of convenient
that COVID is right in the
middle, so we'll get kind of a
pre-COVID COVID and and post
COVID for a few years. So when
we come to see you again in a
couple of years, we should have
to, to share with you all.
Um, on the next page is a little
bit more of this data, um,
And we talked about students who
use school-based health centers
are more likely to graduate on
time. Um,
And they utilize primary care
about 3 times, um, or more, or
if they use primary care visits,
uh, primary care services 3
times or more they're more
likely to graduate on time, um,
and for behavioral health, 2
times, um, or more utilization
are more likely to graduate on
time compared to other students.
So these are exciting findings.
I can't say that all of these
positive things are because of
work happening in the
school-based health center.
Um, but there is an association,
so we can't say because the
school baseball center was here,
these students were more
successful. Um, it could be that
the students who are utilizing
the school-based health centers
are
And their families are more
motivated to find extra help and
extra supports. Um, it could be
that the schools who want to
have school-based lessons also
provide a variety of, of other
opportunities for the students
to succeed in class.
So we will start this work, um,
again and and see what the next
batch of 5 years looks like. I
want to talk a little bit about
uh positive childhood
experiences. This is, uh, my,
one of my favorite things, um.
About 3 or 4 years ago, there
was a study published in the in
the Journal of Pediatrics that
looked at over 7000 people, um,
and what they found was that the
students who had more supportive
relationships and environments
had
Um
had better health outcomes
overall as adults, and
It doesn't
Negate aces one for one, but
young, but people seem to be
less impacted by the ACEs in
their life, which everybody's
talked about aces for a really
long time. Um, if there are
pieces, if there are these
positive influences and these
positive experiences, because it
helps young people build
resilience and help them
overcome the negative
experiences that they have.
And the pieces that were studied
were the ability to talk to an
adult about their feelings.
Um, having a, an adult who's
supportive for the student
during difficult times,
participation in community
traditions.
a sense of belonging in high
school.
supported by friends, having to
at least 2 non-parent adults who
genuinely cared about this, the
young person's well-being and
filling safe and protected by an
adult in the home. So they don't
have to have all of those to
have those positive effects, but
just the presence of some of
those, um, seems to negate some
of the negative, the negative
things.
Um
School-based health centers can
serve as pas for students. Um,
They provide safe, supportive
environments where students
build trust with their
providers, um, and even the
front desk staff at school
Baseball centers, they know
everybody and and seek people
out, um, they ensure that the
student is both physically and
mentally healthy and, and they
have overall well-being, so
school baseball centers can play
into that, that phenomenon that
is coming out um in the
pediatric journal.
On the next page, we want to
talk a little bit about how
we're going to continue to
expand.
Um, and we're looking at a
funnel model. Uh, we have a lot
of, uh, school-based health
centers that are in high school,
the high school model was really
a predominant in New Mexico for
a long time. And I think mostly
because the people who were most
involved with the program were
adolescent.
Healthcare providers. Um, and so
we've
We haven't, we don't have the
same number of school-based
health center access in the
younger grades as we do in the
older grades. So what we want to
do is look at a funnel, um, and
start
Connecting kids, uh, who are in
the feeder schools, so feeder
elementary schools, feeder
middle schools, so they get
services via telehealth or
mobile, um, or by the providers
coming to them and doing
physicals a few times a year.
Um, so by the time they get to
high school, they're already
familiar with the, with
School-based health centers or
family is familiar with
school-based health centers.
They're getting, um, they've
been seen by the same folks
since they were really young,
um, we also want to get
is so far so we can get into the
pre-K and and grads programs. We
have about 10, uh, high schools
that have grads programs, so we
even want to get those little
babies who are, you know, there
with their moms in the grads
programs or where we have uh
Hearts or preschools that are
associated with an elementary
school.
Uh, so then we can get, we can
continue to follow the same kids
for
The whole academic career. This
model is already being used in
uh by Sunrise Medical Center in
the in the
Northeast, uh, part of the state
and also by uh La Clinica deamia
down in Las Cruces. Um, and
they've had a lot of being able
to support those kids through
throughout their education
career.
Uh, also in 26, we wanna look
at.
Um, APS.
But
Third of all students in
Albuquerque in New Mexico are in
Albuquerque, and so we really
want to see how we can expand in
in APS and provide more services
there.
Uh, we've had conversations with
the um the health staff, uh, at
the, at the district and they're
fully on board with this, um,
and have they've actually
partnered already with a mobile
health unit, which they're happy
to work with us to um try to
expand that mobile health work.
The capital building process and
APS is really cumbersome. So
that's partly why they're using
this this mobile model. We think
there are a few opportunities to
have some brick and mortar
clinics in additional brick and
mortar school-based health
centers in Albuquerque too. And
so, um, as those come up, we
will be working with APS to make
that happen. We have two new
school-based health centers that
are opening and opening in
Albuquerque this fall, one new
futures where there is a school
for um
Pregnant and parenting teams, so
they'll be taking care of both
the moms and parents and the
babies, and also one at uh West
Mesa, which is, which is on the
west side of town and has been
really in need of a school-based
health center for a long time
and they're super excited about
it. So we're excited about those
two openings. We get to Nancy
and I get to go to two grand
opening parties this fall,
um, and you're you're invited if
you want to come along,
um.
So we'll, we'll do that, um, and
then keep working with APS. The
other thing in APS that we want
to focus or partner with is the
crossroads Program, um, the
Crossroads program is the
substance use prevention program
that APS uses. They have
counselors and um they do
education and and different
activities, um, through APS.
Worked with them for the last 2
years on a substance use
prevention, um,
Events, and we've partnered.
It was APS us, uh, the city, the
county, and the DEA and we had
the first year last summer we
had it at the uh.
Hispanic Cultural Center in
Albuquerque, and we had it for
our first event ever. We had
about 400 people come and there
was live music and uh um
National Guard comes and they
brought their horses and kids
and families love the horses,
and we had dancers and it was,
it was a great event, um, but
there's also lots of education,
um, that happens throughout the,
throughout the evening in
addition to that.
The event for this year was just
last month, and it doubled in
size. It was 800 people that
came, uh, and it was
It was a blast. It was wild, um,
and we had all the same, the
horses and the National Guard
also has a mobile, uh, trailer
that they call it in plain sight
if you've not heard of it, and
it's, it's set up like a, like a
bedroom and they have all these
places where and this
paraphernalia where you, that
you can use to hide.
drugs and so they only invite
parents in. They don't like kids
who come to the, the, uh, event
in there, um, but you can walk
through and it's like
In Coke bottles and books and um
and tampons that are, I mean,
it's just all kinds of, you
know, things that you can buy
online and so they walk through
all of these things and talk to
parents about prevention of, um,
and prevention of substance use
and, and supporting their
students, and it's it's really
fun. Um, there are lived
experience panels, so people who
have had uh substance use issues
who are there, you know, putting
on
shops and talking to families
and to kids. There's Narcan
training, um, that our, our
folks at DOH do and Narcan
distribution. It's, it's a
blaster flamenco dancers again.
It was, you know, it's a really
fun event. So, um, we want to
continue to work with Crossroads
and do some of those help
support some of their work again
because they are referral
sources to that are working in
those programs. And the school
Baal centers refer back to them,
um.
So it's been, it's been a fun
partnership.
Still in FY 26, we're going to
have 4 more school baseball
centers opening in Las Cruces,
um, the school baseball centers
that used to be operated by Ben
Archer are now going to be
operated by LCDF who is a
longtime partner of ours in the
south part of the state, um, and
they will eventually get that
funnel model going at an Archer
sites too right now they're just
working on getting those sites
ready to reopen in the fall.
Uh, I've been working with the
UNM College of Nursing and uh
the Highlands, um,
Highlands University College of
Nursing and Mental Health to
talk about workforce. How do we
get more students who are coming
through school-based health
centers to do clinical
experience and having that
experience. I fell in love with
school-based health centers.
25 years ago when I was in
nursing school at the University
of Colorado, and they ran
school-based health centers. And
so everybody in the nursing
school had opportunities to do
clinical and volunteer and pro
different projects in
school-based health centers. And
I think we have an opportunity
for development of workforce who
want to be employed by a
school-based health center, um,
in
Having these opportunities
available and met with 3 medical
or who will be medical students,
they're graduating from
Highlands, um, next year and are
applying to medical school. I
met with them Tuesday and we had
virtual coffee and um they're
super excited about the
opportunity and find a spot in a
school-based health center where
they can, they can start seeing
patients as students.
What else? Oh, we're also
developing um CHW's, um, you
know, keeping on the workforce
theme, uh, CHW's are invaluable
in our state, so we are
developing a, um, school-based
health center specialty and a
behavioral health specialty for
CHWs. So we're working with UNM
to do that. Uh, we have CHWs
that are throughout the state
working in school-based health
centers. So if we can get them a
little bit of extra, um, extra.
Information and expertise, um,
it's a real opportunity. It's
also a huge opportunity because
all of their services are
billable.
And so it's a financial
opportunity for our school-based
health centers to be sustainable
when there's this other
opportunity for generation of
revenue because of the CHWs that
are that are there and
supporting students and doing um
education and
Oh, also this year gonna be
working with uh PED again on
looking at a multi-component
digital behavioral health
platform. So both of our
organizations, both Department
of Health and PED are looking to
make this happen. So we're going
to partner and figure out how,
how we can make that happen and
get that out, uh, broadly to
our our school communities.
And that's all in 2026.
It seems like a lot.
Um,
so for FY 27 and 28 will be, you
know, obviously supporting and
continuing to bring those things
that are that we started in 206,
bring those along and, and make
sure that they come to fruition,
um, and we're gonna be working
with the grads programs and Head
Start programs to pull them into
the loop, that's gonna be a
focus of 27 and 28 is
solidifying that relationship.
Um,
And I think by the end of 20.
7:28. We will be at
About 150 access points, so we
will have gone in 10 years from
47 access points to 10 and
15.
Sorry,
maybe more, um, so we're, uh.
So there's a lot, there's a lot
of work that we're intending and
it'll be fun and exciting, and
we are certainly appreciative
of um of this committee's
ongoing and continual support
for the work we do.
Hello, everybody, if you want to
move on to your second
PowerPoint, which hopefully um
you have in front of you.
Looks like this. What's new and
next for school-based health
centers from our perspective at
the New Mexico Alliance for
school-based Healthcare. I'm
Nancy Rodriguez. I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico Alliance, and I know many
of you as, uh, um, Kristen said
we owe a debt of gratitude to
many of you because this
committee has been supportive.
Many of you have sponsored bills
for school-based health and
we're really appreciative of
that, but I know we have a
couple of new committee members
and, and possibly folks walking
at home, so I'll try to zip
through some base.
about what our organization is,
who our organization is, and
then we're happy to answer
questions. Um, and before I
launch too deeply into the
alliance, um, our acronym is
NAMASEC, which is not trip
lightly off the tongue, so a lot
of people here, a lot of people
call us the alliance, and I've
answered to far worse things
than that. So remember it
however, it helps you, but I
want to acknowledge some of our
community partners who are here
and will be helping us with the
questions and answers that you
all may have. So Ruth Center is
here from President
Varian Medical Services. She's
the administrator. Do you want a
waiver? Um, Ruth is the
administrator um at the Santa Fe
and Capitol High School
school-based health centers, and
she is joined by her colleagues
from Santa Fe Public Schools,
Myrna Barber Barber Lee and um
Sue O'Neill from Santa Fe Public
Schools. Myrt is the lead nurse
for the district and Sue O'Neil
is the, um, director of
wellness, and we appreciate
O'Brien, that you
and I'm a quarter Irish. I
should be ashamed of myself. Um,
thank you guys.
For being here and, and some of
our presentation today is going
to talk a little bit about the
trends and the clinical needs
we're hearing from schools and
students and families, and these
guys are in the field and they
really are intimately
knowledgeable about that. So we
wanted to invite them here so
that if you have questions,
They're obviously different
needs and different communities
across the state and Kristen and
I both hear from the
school-based health centers all
across the state, but there's a
lot of similarity too. So we
thought, um Santa Fe would be a
good um example of a community
that's served by school-based
Health Center, but where there's
room for growth and expansion as
well, um, and, and we also
wanted to point out that in
Kristen mentioned this earlier
that school-based health centers
and school nurses work hand in
hand where there are both, um,
and we as an organization,
often hear from school nurses if
they don't have a school-based
health center if they feel that
they need one, if they have a
lot of students who have higher
level clinical needs. So we're
always proud to work with the,
the state school nurses
Association. And we are an
association but not a membership
organization. The alliance is a
51C3 standalone nonprofit, but
we are the school-based health
training and technical assistant
contractor for Department of
Health, uh, Department of Health
is our largest funder and, and
our biggest partner to support
the field. So
We're always excited to come
together and uh Kristen and I
staged in each other's back
pockets trying to support the,
the expansion and growth, but I
will say this is, I think my
13th year in this role, and it's
exciting to come to you guys
and, and share with you about
growth and expansion rather than
come with my begging bowl and
asking for money because for
about the 1st 6 or 7 years of my
tenure when we ran a recession,
that was, that was my job is, is
to beg you all.
provide um funds, and I feel
like we're in a good position
with funding and we're so
grateful to you for your
support, uh, and sponsorship of
bills to provide that funding
through the Department of
Health. Um, so now we just have
to figure out how to do it in a,
in a state that is uh um
healthcare shortage, healthcare
provider shortage area, that's
our challenge and we have lots
of innovative ways that we're
trying to do that, which I'll
share a little bit about today
and also we'll share a little
bit about what the communities
are dealing with.
So the first slide tells you a
little bit about our
organization and you've heard
from Kristen about what the
model of school-based health
looks like when school-based
health centers first started,
you know, in, in New Mexico,
that's almost 30 years ago that
the first school-based health
center opened at Rio Grande High
School in Albuquerque, um,
school-based health centers were
one of the only clinic types
that had integrated behavioral
health and primary care. And now
that's become the, the best
practice and lots of folks are
moving in that direction and
We do our very best to support
operators to implement that
integrated healthcare model.
And our organization, um, is one
of 25 such organizations across
the country. We are a state
affiliate of a national
organization called the
School-based Health Alliance,
and that organization is working
to promote this model of
integrated healthcare in schools
across the country. I've been
proud to be the chair of the
board of that organization for
the last several years, and
Monday will be my last day in
that role, um, and we are very
lucky. I can tell you from that
national perspective to have so
much support for the school.
health model, not every state is
so lucky, um, but the, the
wisdom of the legislators in our
state has been to understand
that this model can support the
needs of um New Mexican
families. So we're really
thrilled about that and thrilled
to be in this new um time of
growth and planning. So your
next slide talks a little bit
about some of the things Kristen
went over in terms of that
growth. Our organization
represents and supports all of
the state's school-based health
centers, whether they have a
Department of Health contract or
not, so.
you know, in years where maybe
there were 54 school-based
health centers that had DOH
contracts, but maybe there were
73 operating, we support all of
those, not all of those provide
data about the kind of um
services they're providing, but
we know they're out there and
try to support them with
training and technical
assistance support. Um, so that
number has grown and grown and
grown, and at the beginning of
this next school year as best we
can tell, not only with the
growth of brick and mortar
school-based health centers, but
mobile and telehealth hub and
spoke model, we think we'll
114, um, and so then we should
have over 115 in the next 3
years, um, the, uh, provider
shortage certainly is a barrier
to that. So, um, if you'd asked
either Kristen and I are 20
years ago, if we were gonna be
helping the state fix the
healthcare provider shortage, we
would probably have said that
was a ban above our pay grade,
but um we are certainly willing
partners um with the legislature
to think through that for the
school health field, um, because
poaching from different
types of healthcare delivery
does not work. It just moves
around the problem, so, um, as
an organization, we work with
the primary care association,
the hospital association, um,
and other entities who are, you
know, challenged by the same
provider shortage and we're
trying to get creative to
support and grow that field. The
one thing that school-based
health centers have going for
them, um, to try to tackle that
issue is we hear anecdotally and
we haven't done a study on this,
but we hear from young people
all the time that the intimate
contact.
that they have with their
providers in their school-based
health centers, oftentimes
encourages them to go into a
healthcare field, and we hear
from providers that work in
school-based health centers that
they field those questions all
the time, you know, oh, you're
referring me to a physical
therapist. Well, what is that?
And how do I, like, what do,
what kind of school do they go
to and for many New Mexico young
people, um,
You know, even if they first go
to a school-based health center
at the high school level, that
may be the last, the first time
they've had direct care since
they were babies and were
delivered. So it's an important
way for them to meet people in
the healthcare industry to
potentially think about going
into that field. So that's a, a
sort of a intended semi
unintended uh potential benefit
of growth of the school-based
health model is building a
number of young people who want
to stay and live in our state
and be a healthcare providers.
So this growth in these three
models, um, we have some, some
detail here about how um that
has been working and we provided
you guys during the legislative
session, some more specific data
about where we've grown with
mobile and where we've grown
with, um,
The telehealth model, I think
we're going to see more and more
of that, not just in New Mexico,
but nationwide. I'm really proud
that New Mexico seems to be on
the frontier of that. We get
calls all the time at our
organization from other states
who are trying to figure out how
to do more mobile and telehealth
and school-based health, um, and
part of how we're supporting
schools and medical entities and
thinking through how they can be
involved in school-based health
through those new innovative
models is on your next slide.
Um,
We have funding from the
Department of Health and we have
just entered our 2nd year of
providing planning grants. So
this is something for your
individual districts. We did a
little research and I think with
the exception of maybe 4 of this
committee's advisory members,
most of you have a school-based
health center in your district.
Um, if you've never been to a
school-based health center, let
me invite you not only to the
grand opening of West Mesa and
New Futures, but Santa Fe Public
schools has been incredibly
generous to allow us to
bring legislators and state
policymakers into their
school-based health centers. So
if you're in town in Santa Fe,
we can set that up. But if you'd
like to see a school-based
health center in your district,
please take us up on an
invitation or if you wanna have
us help you hold a meeting in a
school that doesn't have one
that you think that needs one,
we would be happy to do that
because education experts bless
their hearts are asked to be
experts in everything, but
asking them to be experts in
healthcare also is, you know, in
some
case is a bridge too far and we
can play matchmaker and
hopefully bring medical entities
to be partners with the school,
so they don't have to, you know,
be all things to all people in
their community, and these
planning grants are part of
that. If you see the image down
on the bottom, you can see we've
committed as an organization and
DOH is committed to us to fund
this planning grant process for
multiple years, so that if
schools and communities are
really just starting to explore
and think about how to expand
health care for kids in a school
setting.
They can start the planning
process years before Department
of Health's um request for
applications comes out with this
funding and, and we also provide
technical assistance support.
The other thing that this
planning grant process does is
if there's an existing
school-based health center, but
they want to expand services.
Let's say they're only open two
days a week, but they want to
see if they can be open 3 days a
week, or they're not providing
vision care services, but
they're hearing from their
school nurse that they have lots
of kids who can't see.
the chalkboard.
I'm dating myself. Nobody has a
chalkboard anymore. A
whiteboard, you know, uh,
interactive board, it's kind of
hard to do well in school if you
can't even see what the um
teacher is instructing on. So
some of these grantees and, and
you see the list of who is
actually getting a check from me
next week. These are this coming
year, fiscal year, school years,
grantees and First Nations who's
first on the list of QHC in
Albuquerque, uh, vision is what
they got this planning grant for
to try to expand their services
to
provide vision care services at
the school-based health centers
that they already have,
including the new one, new
futures that they have just
received funding to do, uh,
brick and mortar at. Some of the
other um entities you see here
listed like Hidalgo Medical
Services. They run the
school-based health centers and
Silver City, Baird, and
Lordsburg, and they have um
received requests from Cliff and
Hela and lots of really small
rural communities in that
service area that are.
Seeing that um students unmet
healthcare needs are interfering
with their ability to be
academically successful. So this
planning grant for HMS is to
find ways through mobile
services to reach out and visit
those communities and schools in
smaller parts of, um, of their
county service area. So this is
gonna be a great bridge to
Department of Health's, um,
planning and process to get
folks ready to open, uh, or, uh,
expand with school-based health.
listeners. And when we get to
the Q and A, if you have
questions about what any of
these grantees are doing, I'm
happy to answer that.
The next page talks a little bit
about and gives you some
examples of what's already
helping, uh, happening in
telehealth and mobile, um, and
who some of the pioneers are in
school-based health, telehealth,
um, sunrise, as Kristen
mentioned in El Centro Family
Health have, have already been
doing a ton and are growing
their telehealth programs for
mobile Debaca Family Health
Services in the region, REC 9
out of Rudoso, um, and then the
Bernalillo County.
are, are the um pioneers for
mobile school-based health and
as, and then HMS coming along. I
did just want to acknowledge the
investment that Bernalo County.
Has made this Health Equity
Alliance is a contractor with
the county. Those of you who
live in Burnley County will know
the behavioral health initiative
that has tax funds for the
behavioral health initiative is
who is funding that at present,
they're not a DOH contractor,
they may very well come on board
as one, but right now, that's
fully funded by a combination of
billing of insurance and the
county behavioral health tax
levy. Um, and that's also been,
um, a collaboration.
uh, with the support of
Albuquerque Public schools and,
and the city of Albuquerque to
support that, and then lastly, I
will say um part of the funding
that the county has was received
through uh an appropriation
through Congresswoman Melanie
Stansbury, um, a couple of years
ago gave the county $400,000 to
expand mobile school-based
health center services in Burton
County.
And then lastly, and I think um
the funnel model that DOH is
looking um at is uh part of
greater conversation that
Kristen and our and I and our
organizations and teams have
been having about early
childhood. The investment that
you guys have made as
legislators in early childhood.
I mean, we're on the front of
national papers and, and, and
it's just so exciting to see the
impact on families of the
state's investment in early
childhood and what we
have been hearing is that
sometimes healthcare is the
missing puzzle piece to support
families. There's investment in
childcare and, and other support
services through ECECD, but we
want to be part of the solution
and support healthcare needs.
That certainly looks different
in the early childhood
population, um, some of the
operators that DOH contracts
with are looking at everything
from three-way telehealth when
the parent, the child, and, and
the operator are in 3 different
locations to trying to sort
through, um,
What's appropriate, urgent care,
um, if a, if a child is brought
to a childcare center sick and
the typical practice would be
just to send them home, but that
means the, the, the parent is
missing work. How could we help
support them without
Providing contagion for all the
other little ones at the, at the
pre-K, so we're gonna be helping
sort um some of those challenges
out with some of these operators
to try to be part of that, um,
missing puzzle piece.
So now I'm gonna pivot and I
will try to zip through this,
but you have the PowerPoint as a
resource and you're welcome to
reach out to us if you ever have
questions about this. We have
some initiatives that are
focused on particular either
social determinants of health
that we're hearing from school
nurses and school-based health
centers that are a high need or
that we're seeing in the data
that school-based health centers
um provide to OSA or that it
just our phones are ringing off
the hook about. The first one is
obviously behavioral health. We
know that since the pandemic, we
haven't
adolescent behavioral health
crisis nationwide and New Mexico
is not um immune to that, and we
are hearing that loud and clear
from folks. And that
Uh, is often one of the top,
certainly top 4 diagnoses we
hear from school-based health
centers is depression and
anxiety, um, when they complete
screenings with young people.
And that often leads to um
substance use disorder. So you
guys have probably had
presentations on Spert. We, our
field is quite the alphabet
soup. We have a lot of acronyms,
so my apologies for all these
acronyms. Espert stands for
screening Brief Intervention,
referral, and treatment. And in
some parts of the country that's
used for really
behavioral health, but it is
really um come to mean in
treatment, um, well,
intervention, screening and
brief intervention and treatment
for substance use. So we, we
have a couple of data points
that we've shared with you guys
here about substance use, um,
in, um, New Mexico from the last
YRRS, um, that was done in the,
in the state of New Mexico, but
we're also, uh, we've also been
hearing this prior to this data
coming out. So we have been
advocating
as an organization with
HSD now HCA to expand Medicaid
billing to adolescent expert. It
has been true up to the last
legislative session that you can
bill for additional Medicaid
funds if you're providing the
expert model for adults, but you
have not been able to bill for
that in the same way for
adolescents. Um, HCA has shifted
that and we now have regulations
and um a provision to allow for
that. So we've been partnered
with UNM.
division of adolescent medicine
to create the training and that
training is now online and you
have some stats about how many
providers, um, we have 29
school-based health center
providers that have been trained
35 school nurses that have
received training and that
training means that they're
certified and can now bill for
SA. Some of them were doing
Spart with adolescents anyway,
but now they can get that bump
that makes that more financially
sustainable for them to provide
that for young people. So we're
really excited about that. We're
going to continue working.
on that project, HCA has funded
um UNM to continue that for the
foreseeable future, and UNM also
had one year SAMSA funding, um,
to set up and create training.
We've done most of that training
in person or via Zoom and we're
um working on an asynchronous
training. So if a provider is
only free at midnight, they
could go take that training and
become certified at midnight.
Um, because that's, that's the
kind of people who work in
school-based health, people who
don't want to take off and miss
clinic time with young people to
get training.
So we're really excited about
that and excited about the
additional collaboration with
DOH to support behavioral health
needs.
Um, the next page talks about
something that you wouldn't
think, but definitely is related
to behavioral health needs for
probably the last 10 years, I, I
would say to, to varying
degrees. We've heard from
school-based health centers and
school nurses that the need for
food and hygiene products is
overwhelming. And, and we've
done a number of grant funded
projects over the years where we
have tried to supplement what
school-based health centers and
school nurses are doing because
what, what they were doing is
spending
money out of their own pockets,
just like teachers buy school
supplies for kids, school nurses
and school-based health centers
providers buy food and
toothpaste and, and every other
thing you can think of for young
people. So we have um now try,
we're gonna be trying to look a
little bit more um in a more
concentrated way, uh, uh,
particularly at food insecurity.
We started partnership
conversations with Presbyterian
who does a lot of health equity,
equity and um community work on
hunger, we're partnering with um
Roadrunner Foodbank.
and some other community
partners to try to provide a
resource kit um to all
school-based health centers by
the school health conference
this next fall, and we're, um,
also, um, trying to put together
a funding initiative to provide
shelf stable food to every
school-based health centers for
this school year, so that when a
young person comes in and says,
Miss, Miss, I, I don't, I'm
gonna pass out if you do that
blood test on me cause I haven't
eaten anything today so that
they can provide something to
those young people, um, to
support.
Their healthcare and academic
success. We've also talked with
Ossa about this so that the next
time, um, the requester
applications comes out for
school-based health centers. Osa
is going to be allowing for
folks to put a little bit of
budget in for their school-based
health centers to provide some
of that food.
And I provided you with, um, I
know you guys are supporting the
whole state, but you have your
districts to be concerned about.
So, um, Feeding America data is
on the right side of your slide
there if you want to look at
your counties that you serve to
see what the levels of food
insecurity are, um,
And I also, we will be trying to
support funding of hygiene
products, but I also want to say
thank you to the legislature
because feminine hygiene
products, menstrual hygiene
products is something that this
body has invested in in the last
3 or 4 years, and it used to be
that no one was, was supporting
that and that has really been a
boon for school nurses and
school-based health centers. So
thank you for supporting that.
So we'll probably be looking
more at things like, um, body
wash and toothpaste and
toothbrushes.
and that sort of thing.
The next slide, I am sure is
something you guys have heard a
lot about, which is vaping.
Vaping, you could consider part
of substance use treatment, um,
but schools are overwhelmed
right now with dealing with just
vaping nicotine, and the
Department of Health's new PAC
program is very um intent on
educating our state about the
fact that early use of nicotine
creates a brain pathway for
addiction to other substances
later, and we're taking that
very
seriously at our organization
and we have been thrilled that
the um all four managed care
organizations have been willing
to talk with us about what they
can do to help us help schools
address vaping because it is, I
mean, I, I am, you know, I'm not
the CDC so I can't declare that
it's a pandemic, um, but
If, if the number of emails I
get from schools about vaping is
any indicator. It's, it's a real
problem. And as Kristen
mentioned the, you know, ways
that our young people are
geniuses. Not only can they hide
fentanyl and, and, um, you know,
in, in, in a Coke bottle or a
book, they can hide vapes
everywhere. We've heard from
school nurses who have found
sweatshirts where the the string
in the sweatshirts of vape and
the kids picked the string up
and vape through the string.
We've heard from school.
nurses who have said kids have
the new six old hoka sneakers
that have a cutout in the soul,
and that's where they hide their
vape. If we could redirect that
intellect to their curriculum,
what we could not achieve in the
state of New Mexico, I tell you.
So, um, we want to do whatever
we can with partners like the
MCOs to provide education and
also to support schools, not
just to mandate healthcare or to
use uh disciplinary procedure.
but to look at what is causing
students to, to use the product
and are there ways to provide
healthcare supports or positive
youth development supports so
that they can either stop or
never start vaping. So that's a
big initiative.
And then the last one, and I
know this is um is something the
Department of Health and PED are
both spending an inordinate
amount of time on, but is, um,
we just had the school state
nurses conference, and we heard
and, and I know you would hear
this from
From our community partners who
are here today that immunization
is so critical. Um, DOH and PED
are spending so much time
working on um trying to halt the
spread of measles right now, and
it's definitely, um, a drain on
resources. So if we can just
work to um provide families with
access to places where they can
get the immunizations that are
required for school attendance
or that are recommended by their
healthcare providers, that would
be great. Um, you have here, uh,
some s
recent statistics about, um,
measles, MMR coverage which we
had seen a downturn in which has
continued. I will say though,
there's a, there's another slide
on the DOH measles website that
actually shows that DOH's
efforts around that have really
made a big impact. The numbers
have just gone through the roof,
so congratulations to Department
of Health for that. And then
Department of Health, UNM and
all the um all of the managed
care organizations are partnered
on the Got Shots campaign.
this summer, so if you're
speaking with people in your
constituency, um, please feel
free to send them to this
website, use this QR code, and
there are hundreds of events
across the state where folks can
get their, um, immunizations. So
we want to make sure you knew
that, and we are going to try to
be um partnering to support um
any misinformation that may be
out and causing fear in the
community that may be.
Um, the last thing I just wanted
to say to acknowledge my, my
school nurse partners that are
here today. We share a lobbyist,
the Alliance for School-based
Healthcare, and the um state
school nurse Association, and I
know they have been coming to
you guys year after year and
this committee has often
endorsed, um, bills to require.
We're one of, I think only 8
states in the country right now
that don't at least require
every district to have a school
nurse. So we're definitely in
the minority in the country, um,
and
I think there's always been a
chicken and egg argument at the
legislature, well, we have a
nurse shortage, so if we mandate
this, then where are we going to
get all these nurses that we
need, but then because we don't
mandate it, we don't drive up
the, you know, the, the need for
nurses and the number of jobs.
So we're trying to talk with,
um, and support the state school
nurses Association and those
efforts, and we want to say
thank you to the legislature for
supporting the bill in this last
session that tied the tears of
salary, um, 4.
nurses to the teachers, that's
gonna help school nurses recruit
school nurses, um, and then I
think we will get to the place
where we can pass a bill to have
a mandated school nurse.
Honestly, my son should win an
award for most visits to the
school nurse in one year, uh,
because I have the, the cell
phone records to prove it. I
don't know what I would do if my
kiddo did not have access to a
school nurse, and, and it gives
me gray hairs that I pay to get
covered up to think that there
is a school that does not have a
school nurse. And so, uh, you
know, we love every school to
have a school-based health
center. Obviously, that's our
primary um focus, but school
nurses are critical to the
health of our children and
families. So thank you for
investing in that, um, in that
new salary structure, we think
it's really gonna help kiddos,
um, going forward.
So I have and I I apologize out
of my nerves and lightness,
screwing up Sue's name, but I
have Sue and Myrna and Ruth's
names and titles on the last
slide there, so that you guys
can include them um in the
question and answer period and
my contact information is on the
final slide as well as our
website. We're happy to take
questions, set up visits, um,
and support you as, as you move,
move forward with the rest of
your into um interim and, and
look at how you can support New
Mexico uh family. So thank you,
madam.
chair for inviting us. We really
appreciate it and thanks for
listening today.
Thank you. Um, and we are short
of time, so we will have 2
minutes.
For questions and I just saw a
bullet in that fight people who
are incarcerated at Luna County
Detention Center have measles.
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah, they said um.
400 incarcerated people there in
100 staff, so.
Yikes.
OK, so, um it does everybody
have questions?
OK. If you have questions, let
me, so Kate's.
Naya, like the house, the house
has questions today.
Um, Chavez.
Um, you don't have to.
I'm just, I'm just used to
writing these people's names
down during session.
So Pinto, do you have questions?
I, I could go to you first and
make sure she does it, so I'll
put you down and then Senator
Sailia Lopez and then uh Senator
Stephanic.
They don't play basketball.
So we'll start with
Representative Kate and sorry,
it's 2 minutes and we're gonna
be strict cause we're running
late.
OK, thank you very much, Madam
Chair, um, on this presentation
here.
First slide, you have 4 counties
and then 3 counties. I don't
understand social vulnerability
index. What is it saying is that
it has the least amount of of uh
school-based health centers.
What is it saying?
Social vulnerability index is a
national, uh, rating, uh, where
that those are communities that
don't have a lot of resources,
so we used it a lot during COVID
because
It made
Having lack of having a high
level of social vulnerability
makes it more difficult for
communities to recover from
disasters or pandemics.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So, um,
just to recap, uh, you're having
planning grants that for the
next several years, you get
$50,000 to do your planning,
then there's a year in 2028 for
$30,000 and then it goes back up
to 50. So get it now, don't wait
cause it's gonna drop.
$20,000. That's what this is
telling me, is that right?
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, and if you, if
you want to be taken on by the
alliances or marketing lead,
please feel free to call her a
cheerleader, yeah, head
cheerleader, head advocate. We
will take it all. Um, that is
true within certain parameters
when people sometimes people
don't apply for the full amount,
so you can apply for more than
the amount and then if somebody
asks for less, we will entertain
for hiring.
vicious and I got to get to my
question, so, um, I will tell
you that I um, I, I'm a big, big
lover of this. It, it's raising
my my graduation rate, it's
providing vaccinization when I,
we're working family and you're
lucky enough to have a working
family, which is still rare as
it is, um, you don't have time
to take the kids to the
hospital. So you're addressing
the nursing shortage by having
these telehealth, you have
bricks and mortar, you also have
chairs that do.
uh statistics. I don't
understand why the 2nd largest
public school district in this
state, Rear Rancho Public
Schools does not have a single
school-based health system. I am
upset by this and I will use
every opportunity we bring the
subject up to understand why the
school board does not allow
access, especially when we see
we are one of the top.
We are the largest, fastest
growing city, 2nd largest city,
and we are the 3rd most
vulnerable county in our state.
It is shameful, shame on you,
rear Rancho Public Schools.
Thank you.
Oh she's
Madam Chair Representative, if I
may just add, I'm a resident of
the city of Rio Rancho, and I
stand willing and ready to work
with Rear Rancho Public schools
and, and, um, Ruth Center, who's
here from PMS. PMS has a
presence in Rio Rancho, and we
have talked to them and brought
them to the table, and they are
willing, as is Sandoval Regional
Medical Center to consider being
providers should rearancho
public schools be willing
and interested. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Yeah, I will get with you
afterwards to find out how do we
find it, how do we show them the
path of financial support to get
this open. Thank you.
Representative Anaya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you to the presenters. Quick
clarifying question, are
school-based healthcare centers
FQHCs, and if not, like what's
the nexus between them?
So most of our school-based
health centers are part of an
FQHC organization, um, they also
are part of hospital systems,
um, and some of them are
independently owned, but the
major independently operated by
private practitioners. Um, so,
The majority are part of an FQHC
system.
I like those. Um, Representative
Chapa.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, so I
do want to take you up on your
invitation to um the ribbon
cutting for West Mesa, um, a lot
of kids in my, it doesn't sit in
my district goes right up to my
district goes right up to the
school, um, my kids went to West
Mesa.
Um, and so, can you tell me if
Who
If the school-based health
centers include um health
centers that are operated or
staffed by, for example, UNMH,
um, the, the school, um, based
health center at the school is
the one that I'm thinking about.
And then also, um,
First choice also has a, where
they're at a Rio Grande. So are
those also considered in the um
in the calculations that you
have for the numbers of
school-based health centers.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative Chavez, um, yes
and no, so they are not
incorporated into the OSA
numbers because neither of those
operators are contracted with
Department of Health, but
they're included in our numbers
because we do provide support to
them. UNMH runs the Trisco
Heritage High School Schoolies
Health Center, but it's unique
in that it is sort of half-time
community clinic, halftime
school-based health center and
so it's, it's always been a
little bit up and down and
sometimes people feel like, oh,
I saw my 80 year old grandfather
there.
that really school-based health
center? Well, there's plenty of
school-based health centers in
rural communities that serve the
entire community, but they do it
by setting aside hours. So it's
not a full-time school-based
health center is how I would
characterize a Trisco heritage.
And then Rio Grande High School
has been a school-based health
center forever, but they have a
high turnover in their school
administration, and I'm sure
you're aware of some of the
turmoil at First Choice. So they
are not um operating at at full
bore, I would say right now at
Rio Grande, but Kristen
team and my team have both met
with them this year to try to
expand, um, the number of hours
they can see students and Rio
Grande High School is a
community school, so they have
also a community school
coordinator who can riffle OK,
thank you, ma'am. Thank you,
Senator Pinto. Thank you, madam
Chair. Thank you for what you
do. How do we know with the
feminine hygiene products as far
as enforcement and anything as
we move forward to making sure
that the schools are abiding by
this because there are some
instances.
where certain things are not
posted. I have been to some
schools there were not any um
Or even a restroom set aside too
in that sense, do we, how do we?
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator. I, that is an excellent
question for which I do not have
an answer. I will say I have
heard the same thing and I have
put that question to PED, but
since PED is not not always in
an accountability position. I
think they feel a bit hamstrung
sometimes to try to um get get
data on that, but we would be
happy to partner with you to, to
try to pose that question a
little more assertively with the
department or with, you know,
particular LEAs where you're,
where you're hearing.
that there's a challenge because
even with the investment, we
definitely have heard from
school nurses and school-based
health centers who are still
buying products. Um, so I, I
think it is something to still
spend time looking at.
Madam Chair, um, you know, the
other thing too, when funding or
any kind of grant too is put
forward, it seems like it
doesn't get where it needs to be
or its award it didn't then
taken back or some weird
scenario happens, um, this is
not happening in your case.
Madam Chair, Senator Pinto, I, I
have not heard that, um, in
terms of the, the money that
flows through PED for feminine
hygiene, but I, I have what I
have heard and has concerned me
is that sometimes, uh, products
sit on a pallet in a warehouse,
and, and they're not, there's
not like a logistical system to
get them into the schools
because the funding was there in
the products came, but there
wasn't a process designed for
how that's going to get out into
the schools. Some schools
districts have decided they're
gonna just put the products in
bathrooms and then there are
other districts who've worried
that, you know, particularly at
the middle school level, people
are going to play with them and
waste them and so they have to
maybe go to their school nurse
to get access. So it's a, it's
not universal across all
districts a little bit bumpy
across the whole state, I would
say.
And just, just kind of an aside,
the bills explicitly says you
don't have to go ask for them.
That was part of the bill, so
once again, uh, what, what we do
and what happens with what we
do, don't, don't always match
it.
So, um, senator Sidil Lopez of
Senator Pinto didn't steal your
questions.
um, but I'm going to ask
something for uh Senator
Stefaniks, um, when she wanted
to make sure that uh you know
that she's an avid supporter.
And she wanted to specifically
ask if there's anything that you
need, let her know because she's
such an avid supporter.
And so
I'll just share that. Um, and
then my question has to do with
um
Uh,
how would I put, uh, falsehoods,
I guess I'll say that are often
stated about schools that I
think it's important to just on
the record, correct, um, last
year I was hearing this false
rumors that um these schools
provided abortion care that
these schools the school
healthcare provided birth
control and I'd like you to just
On the record state um what is,
what you guys do and don't do
with regard to reproductive
services.
Thank you, Senator Cedil Lopez,
and members of the committee.
Um, school-based health centers
do not provide abortions. Um,
that's a, that's considered a
Specialty, um, service, um, so
that would not help happen in a
school-based health center.
Um, they do, what was, I'm
sorry, what was the second part?
I just wanted to know what you
do and, and don't do
reprotective. It varies, it
varies by school school district
school districts have say in
that, um, some school-based
health centers have uh Title 10,
and they can do a full range of
of services. Some provide um
school, uh, reproductive health
services at all. They refer
out, um, when we look at the
data, reproductive health
services for the whole entire uh
DOH funded program is about 2 to
4% of the visits, um, statewide.
So it's really a tiny
percentage, and that can include
A variety of things, including,
um, counseling and education may
for the prescription, you know,
questions and they're coming in
and um or or maybe they have
started administrating for the
first time and they like that.
So it's really overall and and
none of it is proportions. Yeah,
absolutely. Thank you. I
remember when my school nurses
back, back in the day had a bowl
with condoms in it. That's they
were just.
Oh
And that was the reproductive
services. um, thank you, Madam
Chair. OK, thank you so much for
your presentations. I'm a big
fan too, you know that, um,
actually, Senator Stefanikson
and I were awardees of, of an
honor by you a few years ago. My
husband still talks about the
food at that event.
Well, if anyone, if I can end by
um extending an invitation this
year's um Department of Health
and, and Public Education
department school health
conference is November 4th, 5th,
and 6th at the convention center
in Albuquerque, and we would
welcome any of you if you wanted
to come, and we have an awards
luncheon and any of you would be
more than welcome. Um, and if
you can get excited about
convention Center food, then I
think this year it's gonna be
even better, so if, if any of
you are interested, please let
us know. You'd be welcome. thank
you. And we
have our final presentation,
Healthcare Affordability fund
evaluation, Matt Goodlaw for a
program evaluator from LFC, Alex
Castele Smith, deputy secretary,
Healthcare Authority.
And Colinbao Director Healthcare
coverage innovations at the
Healthcare Authority.
And if you could please take
your conversations outside so we
can uh
try and stay on schedule.
I know that the uh my members
say that I'm vicious. I, I work
proudly.
Whenever you're ready.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair.
Members of the committee. Uh, my
name is Matthew Goodlaw, and I'm
a program evaluator with the LFC
Committee.
To my side is Deputy Secretary
Alex Castillo Smith.
With the healthcare authority
and Columbao, the division
director in charge of health
care coverage innovations.
Thank you for your partnership
and transparency, as it has
related to this program
evaluation. Today, I'll present
the program evaluation report.
Not sure which tab it is with
you, but
Looks like this.
Passed out. We're not fancy
enough for tabs. We just get
them handed to us.
Well, so this report is a
legislatively required program
evaluation of laws 2021, chapter
136. Senate Bill 317.
SB 317 passed in 2021, and on
the one hand, enabled the state
to study no-cost behavioral
healthcare, and on the other
hand, uh, aim to make health
insurance more affordable, uh,
for New Mexicans for qualified
New Mexicans, uh, by generating
a revenue stream, um, known as
the health insurance premium
surtax. Madam Chair, you and
your colleagues required that as
part of the law, the LFC.
a program evaluation.
Uh, to study the impacts of the
change in the surtax.
With respect to affordability
outcomes.
Namely, what is the impact?
Of providing health insurance
subsidies to 3 specific groups.
Small businesses.
Low to moderate income New
Mexicans who otherwise don't
have access to healthcare that's
affordable.
And to a group referred to as uh
the uninsured residents.
In addition to the program
evaluation, the law requires the
healthcare authority to work
with stakeholders and partner
organizations, the Department of
Finance and Administration and
the LFC to develop performance
measures and to submit an annual
report.
Which, among other things tracks
insurance rates, uh, with these
qualified groups in New
Mexicans.
Taking these provisions into
consideration, as well as the
evaluability of the program.
Given its implementation
timeline.
The data availability, the LFC
evaluation team, uh, evaluated
roughly the extent to which
program demand has matched
appropriations.
For the program subsidies.
It was found that appropriations
exceeded demand, and that this
is likely due to inadequate
performance measures. Therefore,
the report suggests that the
legislature explicitly require
HCA to set and monitor
five-year.
Uninsurance rates.
Uh, performance targets to
monitor performance towards
those targets.
Uh, for those that qualify for
the subsidy programs.
Madam Chair, the report exhorts
HCA to work with executive
agencies and partner
organizations, LFC and DFA to
develop comprehensive
performance measures that show
the breath and depth of the
work.
And then link the share of the
surtax.
That's distributed to the HA.
To the performance targets.
So to briefly describe to you,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. What you bought with
this legislative action. Turn
with me to page 6 of the report.
So figure one here on page 6.
It summarizes the program logic
or causal theories of change.
Policy inputs lead to productive
outputs which produce gains in
outcomes. The surtex, the surtax
funding uh which provides
funding to the ACA.
Uh
As you may know, several
legislative actions followed SB
317, including that which
increase, which, which created
the healthcare authority.
The Office of Superintendent of
Insurance and HCA's division of
Healthcare Coverage Innovation,
developed and implemented 3
subsidy programs.
Small business premium relief
program.
It is pretty straightforward,
let me describe it.
Suppose Antoinette's towing
services with 8 full-time
equivalent.
Employees
As a total gross monthly premium
of $5,624.
The company would then charge
Antiett's towing Company, $5,062
they'd receive a 10% subsidy.
And HCA would then be billed for
that 10% subsidy.
And then, uh, pay the insurance
company.
Out of the HA.
The program for uninsured
residents is called the coverage
expansion program and is a
flexible program that HCA uses
to develop safety nets when gaps
emerge for New Mexican residents
that find themselves without
affordable coverage.
The marketplace affordability
programs are set of subsidies to
reduce premiums and out of
pocket costs for qualified New
Mexicans.
Collectively, madam Chair, the
implementation of these subsidy
programs are designed to
increase the affordable options
for New Mexicans, reduced cost
barriers and increasingly uh the
enrollment of qualified
applicants.
If the subsidy programs are able
to accomplish these things.
Then participating New Mexicans
will experience improved
financial safety net increased
health equity.
And reduced on insurance rates.
The the logic model can serve as
a basis for revised performance
and expanded performance
measures.
For example, Madam Chair, the
missing policy input is HCA's
marketing and communications or
outreach for this framework.
Uh, turn with me to page 8,
Madam Chair.
Um, the report describes
The mechanics of the health
insurance premium.
Surtax.
And how that gets distributed to
the HA.
So figure 2 is a breakdown of
$100.
In qualified monthly premiums.
Off the top, the state collects
$6.76.
75 cents, sorry, for every $100.
About $3 is, is due to the
premium tax and $3.75
is the premium surtax. When the
share of the surtax is set to
55%.
Then $2.06.
Goes to the HA in $1.69 goes to
the general fund.
Uh, immediately on the next
page, uh, chart 4.
Um, displays the share of the
surtax that has been and how
much has been distributed to the
HA.
So the, the line of that graph.
Shows the share of the surtax
that gets distributed to the age
gap.
And then the bar graph component
shows how much money has been
distributed.
Uh, between FY 25 and FY 29.
Those are estimates uh from the
Craig. Madam Chair, members of
the committee quickly turn with
me to page 10.
The report shows how the New
Mexican, New Mexico premium
assistance program works.
People in the bottom region of
page 10 is an important set of
income thresholds that are
defined by one, the federal
government, and then, uh, and
then by New Mexico's HCA
department.
The Federal ACA policy is that,
for example, a consumer who
earns between 200 and 250% of
the federal poverty level can
afford insurance premiums up to
7.33% of their income.
Then the federal government
enacted those enhanced
subsidies.
Which further reduces that limit
to 4% of their income.
And New Mexico further reduces
this to up to 2% of their
income.
Chart 5 shows this breakdown for
a 40 year old.
That earns $3100 per month.
And has a $560 unsubsidized.
Monthly premium.
After the ACA and the enhanced
ACA tax credits.
And the New Mexico premium
assistance subsidy which the HAP
funds.
The individual ends up paying
$60.62 dollars per month.
For their policy.
Pay attention to that section
that's the enhanced subsidy.
Because that's set to expire at
the end of this calendar year.
So, Madam Chair, members of the
committee on page 12, the first
finding.
is in bold text.
Uh, HA revenue from the premium
surtax is far exceeded the
insurance subsidy needs.
HCA has developed and
implemented and administers a
relatively complex set of
subsidies to combine tens of
thousands of New Mexican
beneficiaries. However, the
appropriations have far exceeded
the demand.
Take 3, for example, which is a
visualization of the flows of
funds in FY 24.
The fund had the beginning
balance of roughly 300 or so
million dollars, and of those
300 or so million, 192 million
or around 64% was carried over
at the end of FY 24.
Even with uh
The potential for um
Changes to the federal
landscape.
Uh,
the HA is pretty well funded.
Table 10 on page 14 shows that
the HAF has unspent reserves in
all budget categories. Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
table 11 on page 15.
Provides a rough accounting of
how you and your colleagues have
used the HAP for other
health-related expenses that
weren't originally part of the,
part of the, the bill.
Finally, Madam Chair, table 12
on page 15, shows the evolution
of revenues and expenses faced
by the HA.
The top line shows the
carryover. The second line shows
the new funds.
And the third line then shows
the beginning balance each year,
which is both new funds and
carryover.
And the third line, or sorry,
the next line shows the
expenses.
And the uh final line shows the
percentage of carryover.
On page 15, Madam Chair and
members of the committee,
potential changes in federal
health insurance policies may
increase cost to the HA.
The federal government has
signaled strongly that the
enhanced federal subsidies will
expire.
At the end of this year, which
provides substantial savings for
consumers.
Here in New Mexico.
This could increase the monthly
per member per month cost.
Of these marketplaces
marketplace affordability
program subsidies from on
average $45 to up to $130 per
month on Federal Medicaid work
requirements also may save the
state between 44 to $70 million
in Medicaid costs?
It may also cost the state
between 44 and 109 million
without the enhanced subsidies,
or between 27 and 63 million if
those enhanced services.
These carried forward.
The report presents policy
levers to control the costs on
page 16 that I won't read
through, uh,
At this point, um, just know
that the coverage expansion
program has yet to launch.
Under the current design
specifications HCA plans to
provide state subsidized health
insurance options for
undocumented residents. The
plans are still in motion though
prior to April 2025, estimates
and estimated annual cost
between $23 to 72 million for
this program.
Table 16 on page 18, Madam
Chair, and members of the
committee shows the annual
estimate estimated.
Estimates reported by the actual
actuarial firm hired by HCA to
carry out the simulations.
In the first year for roughly
6700 enrollees, the HC expects
to spend $23 million if Medicaid
rates are used at 32 million if
commercial rates prevail.
The next finding, Madam Chair,
on page 19 is HCA could refine
and expand their performance
measures.
The current AGA performance
measures are insufficient for
HCA to demonstrate the impact.
Of their subsidy programs.
The sidebar there reports LFC's
elements for good performance
measures and HCA should work
with their stakeholders, LFC and
DFA.
Analysts to ensure that their
performance measures meet these
criteria.
The report also lists, Madam
Chair, considerations for HCA
when defining the scope of their
performance framework.
Thank you for the opportunity to
present this program evaluation
report to your committee today.
And I'm gonna turn it over to
Deputy Secretary Castillo Smith
to read uh to read that through
their, um, remarks. Thank you,
Matt, and hello, madam Chair and
members of the committee. Uh,
it's a pleasure to be back here.
This is my first time being back
since then the legislative
session, and it's a, a treat to
be here. Uh, thank you all for
your service to New Mexicans on
behalf of secretary.
Carramio and myself and the
team, um, we just wanna thank
you for your support for the
healthcare authority, including
our 848,000 customers throughout
New Mexico, including the
110,000 New Mexicans that are
served by the program supported
by the Healthcare Affordability
Fund.
I will keep my remarks very
brief, um, but I did just want
to give uh an acknowledgement to
Matt, uh, he, I shared this
yesterday, um, in towns for the
LFC hearing, but his analysis is
very thoughtful and analytical
in the healthcare authority
agrees with the vast majority of
his recommendations.
So if you go to um you should
have a, a very brief slide deck,
um, you go to the, the slide
immediately after the title
slide. This is the mission
vision and goals of the
healthcare authority we'll be
celebrating our one year
anniversary and just a matter of
days, very excited, uh, and as
part of that reorganization, the
healthcare affordability fund
programs, as Matt mentioned,
moved from the office of the
Superintendent of Insurance.
Uh, to the healthcare authority.
And I think, you know, the
administration's um vision and
rationale for this was really to
help the healthcare
affordability team and the
customers that are served by the
programs to, you know, benefit
from the infrastructure, the
knowledge, the expertise, and
the purchasing power that we
have as the largest payer of
healthcare in the state with the
Medicaid program. And we also
administered state health
benefits program, so sort of
bringing together
number of these um health
coverage programs and um is an
attempt to meet this, the vision
of the department to provide
access to affordable health care
coverage to New Mexicans.
Um, I will skip the slide number
3. It just, it has calms and and
my contact information name and
what we're going to talk about,
um, and so if you go to um slide
4.
Um, you know, the 2021 statute
that established the healthcare
affordability fund as Matt, um,
sad, um had uh sort of uh a
couple of primary purposes.
Lowering premiums and cost
sharing for families to get
coverage on the exchange.
Lowering premiums and cost
sharing for small businesses
that provide coverage to their
employees on the exchange, and
then the statute also called on
the state, the healthcare
authority in this case to
provide resources to facilitate
healthcare coverage for
uninsured Mexicans.
Um, in the work that Collins's
team has done at OSI, you know,
when the bill was immediately
passed and the work that we
continue to do with the
healthcare authority, this
affordability fund program and
the fund itself has really
proven to be a national leader
in healthcare coverage,
affordability, and you can see
on the slide here some of the um
evidence to demonstrate that. We
have record enrollment in the in
B well, New Mexico. That's the
state's health insurance
exchange.
Um, record enrollment year over
year, 84% since the healthcare
affordabilities program launched
in 2023. You also have record
enrollment among Native
Americans in Be well New and be
well New Mexico, um, those
eligible Native Americans are
eligible for um can qualify for
additional premium assistance as
well. And so we're really
excited about the record
enrollment.
For Native Americans as well
into the exchange, um, and we
have more than 36,000 employees
of small businesses across the
state benefiting from premium
assistance.
Um, on slide 5,
You know, one of the other main
principles that we, you know,
um, strive for the healthcare
authority is being a, uh, the
best fiscal steward of state
money. And that means we really
try to leverage every possible
federal dollar that we can.
And so what this means in terms
of the health care affordability
fund is that the when when the
legislature, when you all passed
this law in 2021, you have the
foresight to create a fund that
would revolve to um the federal
coverage landscape, and that,
that the federal healthcare
insurance coverage landscape has
evolved significantly since that
fund was created in 2021.
When you think about at the
time, there were federal
policies that created gaps in
coverage. We had about 100,000
New Mexicans at the time that
were uninsured for a variety of
reasons. They, they couldn't get
into Medicaid where they were
unable to get um coverage on
BWell. Uh, the federal
government in the years
immediately after the
affordability funds that you
passed closed many of those
gaps. Um, so we were able to
save state money.
affordability fund dollars and
leverage additional federal
dollars, whether it is through
additional people maintaining
coverage on Medicaid or
enrolling in Medicaid during the
COVID pandemic or folks who are
able to enroll in um
Some marketplace coverage and
and for that, Matt alluded to
the um enhanced federal
subsidies that also passed, and
then we didn't need as much
affordability fund money in
those years. Um, he also shared
that's gonna end at the end
expire likely at the end of the
calendar year and so we're
watching that and if that does,
and if we want to maintain the
levels of affordability that we
have currently.
need additional support from the
Affordability fund.
Um, so, just as gaps in coverage
closed. We are also
We, we will also likely to
experience a federal policy
landscape where we may see gaps
in healthcare coverage widen.
Um, we are watching really
closely, um,
The the discussions going on in
Washington DC regarding the
reconciliation budget bill, um,
and it's, it's really, there
were changes this morning. It's,
it's, um,
It's changing quite uh in
lifetime, but there are versions
of that bill where if it were to
pass, um, we anticipate that,
uh, more people will
rely on the affordability fund
for support covers will get more
expensive, and I'll allude to
that in just a moment.
So if you go to page 6.
Um
I think the the graphic on the
right hand side of the the page
sums up the primary message. We
think that
Yeah
If virgins.
If the Federal reconciliation
bill were to pass in ways that
it's been presented, and as I
mentioned, it's evolving really
in in real time. It's, it's hard
to anticipate what might happen,
what might ultimately pass.
But in some analysis that we've
done, we've estimated that um a
little over 16,000 New Mexicans
will lose coverage on Bel New
Mexico.
And for those that remain,
they'll see a premium increase
of about $1900 per person.
Um, there will be substantial
impacts to the state as well
financially.
Um, especially if we want to
help those New Mexicans, um,
maintain that coverage
affordability that they have
today on the fund. There's also
versions of the, the
reconciliation bill, um,
That if we were to implement the
coverage expansion program that
Matt alluded to with the
broadest levels of eligibility,
it could risk losing some
hundreds of millions of dollars
for the Medicaid program.
So
We're watching closely.
Um, and then on slide 7, you
know, so
This fund has had the foresight
to be flexible in responding to,
you know, um,
To, to gaps in coverage as they
open and close as they brought
in and in narrow, um, but for as
we are putting together our FY
27, um budget requests.
Uh, the program needs align with
the revenue projections, and so
we're at a point now where
Um, you know, we intend to
expand all the revenue that um
We intend to get through the the
fund, so.
That is the extent of my
remarks, and I just want to
thank you again for the time
today. Happy to answer any
questions.
So Colin, are you, uh, you have
a presentation? Are you here for
a good for my looks, OK,
we think alike.
I would tell them the story
about the the kid thinking you
were rich till he saw his hair,
and he decided he wasn't rich.
Not sure what that meant, but
um so questions from the
committee.
OK, so.
OK, we'll start with um
Representative Luon. Sadi Lopez.
Chandler
And then we'll go from there.
So a representative of
I, I, I will not put a time
limit on yet, but if we go
crazy, I will, so answers here.
OK, thank you, um, thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you for the
presentation. We've heard this
presentation in LFC yesterday
actually, um, and for time
purposes with the following the
uh presentations uh we didn't
have any questions at this time,
but I did have one or two, so
when we're looking at the um.
The distribution of uh the
return from unused fun.
I'm sorry, I did the wrong
thing. Uh, the section, I
believe it's page 1 and.
12.
Um, where are those, those funds
going cause it, it says here
that on page 12 that they're
they're HCAF is being used for
other needs. Can you describe or
tell us about those other needs
or where they're going. Thank
you, man. Yeah, thank you, Madam
Chair and Representative Lujan,
thanks for the question. Uh, so
as this flow diagram shows of um
192 carried over.
Uh, 19 million went to
marketplace subsidies.
33 million went to the small
business subsidies, so those
were the, the subsidy programs,
and it looks like about a
million dollars went to
behavioral health.
20 million went to rural
healthcare.
And 21.3 million was allocated
for the Medicaid expansion.
Thank you. And then also through
the, through your report, we're
looking at.
I'd like to see a growth, right,
a 10% growth and.
With what's at large, I guess,
um, or uncertainties that we
have and I guess this morning
they they uh as of as of today,
the work requirements for
Medicaid, the Senate version
requires parents of children
aged 15 or older to comply with
work requirements, so, and then
there's some other things, but
that's what's reported in here
as something that we're possibly
looking at. So that language
there would then change some of
um what we're reporting or
potentially could see of what.
This report uh demonstrates,
Madam Chair, so I'm wondering.
Um
And those costs were were seen
like those potential reversions
or they're not quite your
versions have been used for
other things. What, um?
If you're gonna give us an
update on that or if you've
looked at that at all today and
what that might look like, man.
Um, Madam Chair, Representative
Lujan, to make sure I understand
the question. So the work
requirements, we did, we did
walk through a couple of
scenarios and what that could
cost and what that could save
the state, uh.
I haven't updated it given the
latest um
Given the latest tweaks to the
To the work requirement.
Policy, but I'm sure what it
seems to me is that that would
limit, if it's, if it's, if it's
shrinking the number of folks
that would have to abide by the
work requirements because it's
saying that those that have
children over 15.
Um, then it would probably, um,
I don't know the distribution of
We'd have to run, we'd have to
filter through that, but OK make
some assumptions and walk
through so
trying to link this together, so
on page 13 we're saying if
Medicaid consumers switch to um
subs subsidized meow insurance,
then those the, the cost would
be well will go up. Is that, is
that how can you clarify that?
Yeah, so. It's Madam Chair,
members of the committee, uh,
Representative Lujan, uh, the
As folks drop off of Medicaid
due to the work requirement.
They're savings that occurs to
the Medicaid program.
Then if those individuals
qualify for the marketplace
affordability program.
Then they would then then then
that would cost the, the HA.
To subsidize that individual,
taking up coverage on the
We exchange. Thank you, Madam
Chair. There's just, there's a
lot of unknowns, I guess is what
we're looking at right now and
and I just want to say thank you
for all the work and I know
you're gonna run this through.
You know, the latest version
through what through the um.
The see the the reports that
you're doing, I want to thank
you for that, but um.
I guess my bigger, bigger
picture question and then I'm
done with with my questions
managers.
What is and have we run any kind
of um.
Research information, um, AI.
module on what it would.
Cost us if we just had universal
healthcare in New Mexico versus
all these subsidies and all
these things and all the, all
these sort of things that are
going on, man.
I mean if there are cost
savings. I mean, we're
subsidizing a lot and then, you
know, there's other uh other
things that we're doing with our
higher education with subsidies
there, and we're doing subsidies
and a lot of the costs, the
majority were costs for a state
is because of the medical needs
and healthcare needs and the
benefits that we, we need. I'm
not against any of this at all.
I think this is, we are a model,
but have we even looked at any
of that, I'm sure.
Madam Chair Representative
Wuhan. This reports about the
Healthcare Affordability fund
and I really had to scope it in,
um, I'll turn over the question
to the HCA if they choose to.
Respond.
No
response not
the remarks.
If they have any remarks, I'm
just saying, I mean this is
cost. I mean, we need to that
this is something that's been in
place or asked of the state for.
Representing Chavez over 25
years.
So I'm wondering where the cost
benefits really are and where
they lie, especially under this
uh federal administration.
That's all I have, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
Thank you. Next I have um
Yeah. So Lopez, I can't even
figure out where I've written
things like too much. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and ditto to that
point. I mean, sometimes it's
just, if we were just, um, I
mean the overhead for Medicare
is uh 5% where the overhead for
private insurance is 16%. So
when you start looking at that,
I mean, I know it's a huge ask
to, to calculate, but you start
thinking about where we could
see savings. Um,
And ensure that people are not
uh turn out, turn out not to be
very expensive users of our
system because they get care
when they need it. So, um, I'm
totally with
Um, representative, um, on, on,
on that, um, but my question is
how sustainable? I mean the
foresight in creating this fund
in 21 was really good and really
useful because we're going to be
able to deal with
Um
This changing federal landscape.
So that, you know, I just think
it was really great. Um, but my
question is how sustainable is
it? Like we're gonna be able to
deal with next year, uh, from
when I read this, but
Um, I guess it's impossible
because you don't know you've
got this training thing, but
that's one thing we need to,
this report doesn't deal with
this, and you weren't asked to,
I'm not, I'm not, I'm not
criticizing the import. It's an
excellent, excellent report. I'm
just saying we've got to start
thinking about the future.
And whether this tax, um, I
mean, whether the tax is
sustainable, whether it's going
to be adequate to deal with the
gaps, um, and, and how we're
gonna figure all of that out. Do
you have any thought preliminary
thoughts on that?
Me too.
Um, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Silvio Lopez. If
you look on page, I guess it's
8.
E
Uh, table 6.
Shows how various uh shares of
the surtax.
Uh, impact the distribution from
to the age cap.
And so as it currently stands,
roughly 55% or 55%.
Uh, is of that surtaxes
distributed, it can go up or
down depending on the needs. So
I think um there was some uh
foresight in 2024 HB7 where they
increased the share of the
surtax, and I think that uh
there, that's a policy lover,
the US the legislature have. So
uh yes and then that is another,
another important to uh.
I to think about is how to use
those levers and, and move this
up and down, um, it was just,
just a question. um, also where
it talks about the legislature
allocated the HFAAFHCAF balances
for other health-related needs,
and you explain to to represent
uh Lujan, um, how it was
expended for behavioral health
and, and the other needs, um,
what would happen, so with the
with the state government
need to cover those needs.
Um, how would the, I guess from
other general funds if they
don't dip dip into these fun
into this pool of money.
Is that correct? I just want to
be clear about that.
Cause it was just a one-time
expenditure.
Yeah, that's the way that I
understood that those other
health-related needs, expenses
that they were one time
uh not a permanent ones, yeah.
OK. And so with that, um, I
guess I'm so used to so many of
the trust funds doing well, um,
that we have.
Is it time to think about a
trust fund to support this?
Um, and, and, you know,
So in other words, just now it's
based on attacks, but could it
be supplemented with a trust
fund.
You know, like we have so many
other things.
It's, I'm just throwing out an
idea.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Silvio Lopez, that this one, it
is recurring, so it's
replenished, uh, you know, let's
say monthly or quarterly with
qualified premiums.
Uh, the report doesn't cover um
the idea that you suggested. No,
I, I, I recognize that and my
thought, my question is, do you
think that might be an idea for
the future.
Um, you know, as we have these
Well, and we'll see. I mean,
because I, I, I don't know what
it's going to cost us to deal
with all of the federal cuts,
um, but if, if there was
Yeah, this is a way to stabilize
um this, this thing and not, not
put in an additional tax burden,
um.
And uh, you know, of this text
and just throwing out ideas for
for dealing with this in the
future beyond, um, you know, as
you point out, the lever we have
is to raise and lower the tax.
Are there other levers, other
potential policy solutions.
Uh to be real clear, Madam
chair, it's the, the lever that
I'm suggesting is that you can
raise and lower the share of the
surtax that's distributed so not
to lower or raise the tax on the
On the um taxpayer, but just to
adjust the share of the surtax
that is distributed.
So there's, there's room up or
down, uh, depending on the
performance measures, depending
on the performance measures and
like how much.
The state will need to exert to
reach goals.
That share of the surtax can be
adjusted, uh, to meet those
goals. And right now, as I
understand the chart on page 8,
the, the legislative share is
6.7.
Yeah, it's 6.753 3.75 goes to
the the
The fund, um, and then, and then
the other.
The other is the premium tax
that goes to the general fund,
as I understand it, and then the
health insurance premium surtax
is split, uh, 55% goes to the HA
and 40, 45% goes to the general
fund. So we could take that
money that goes to the general
fund that's lit right now and
move that, and that's the lever
you were talking about. Got it.
Thank you. I was thinking that
it that it was the higher.
That the lever was higher up on
this chart, OK.
I appreciate, I appreciate the
clarification. Well, I, I think
that, like I said, I really
admire the, the force why should
admire. I'm so glad we did it
because I was part of the
legislature we voted for a
positive, I voted for it all.
2021. I'm pretty sure I voted
for it. Um, but I, I'm very, um,
very happy that we did it and we
just need to also get to
thinking about the future, and I
appreciate all of the work that
is done, that you've done to
inform us about it and also to
make this happen.
To make the
The subsidies happen. Thank you,
Madam Chair. We will go to
Representative Chavez, but I do
wanna
most of you probably weren't
there.
Um, but this was, this was a
this bill was a masterful piece
of legislation, and I believe
Colin had a big hand in it. It
was a former representative
Debbie Armstrong, who did some
magic on the floor of the house
and it was uh.
Now I remember. Thank you,
Representative Armstrong, is
what I will say. So Chap
Representative Chavis, did you
have questions? No, I just have
a comment, Madam Chair. I, yeah,
I wasn't here when, when the
bill was passed, and I'm sure a
lot of work went into it and.
It was at that moment, um, you
know, something really huge in
terms of dealing with the um
healthcare piece, but I, I, I'm
gonna agree with uh
representative Duhan in terms of
we've got to do something
different because to me it feels
like we're continuing, I mean,
healthcare is one of the biggest
costs to the state, no.
And I think, you know, we're
just we're continuing to drop
money and that's never gonna
stop and we need to just figure
out a different.
So I support the the idea and
always have.
Of creating a universal health
care for citizens. Thank you.
So I have, do have a, a few
questions. So uh and I could be
totally um hallucinating this,
but has there been some talk
with the
Federal bill of doing away with
this being able to do this kind
of tax or am I confusing things,
Madam Chair, good question. Um,
there, there is quite a bit of
discussion about uh what are
called provider taxes, um, and
typically, um, this
Uh, what the federal government
sets limits on is how much can
be raised and then put back into
Medicaid, um, to draw an
additional federal funding. Um,
so there is a lot of discussion
around that because these
dollars uh don't get put back
into Medicaid, um, that, that
type of impact uh would not be
as substantial. And then, um, I
was gonna say Madam Chair, um.
It's, do we have funds that
would fall under that, that we
are provider taxes that we are
plowing back into Medicaid.
That would, um, that might be um
on the chopping block.
Yes, ma'am chair, um, most
recently, the legislature
created the healthcare delivery
Access Act, um, which provided
over a billion dollars to rural
hospitals in the state of New
Mexico. Um, the first set of
payments to hospitals went out
last year.
Um, the secretary is going to
give a presentation to the
federal funding stabilization
Committee next week, and she'll
talk a little bit more detail
about it, but the state of New
Mexico has, um, several
provider.
tax, um, the nursing home.
Um
Uh, quality surcharge program is
another one where the nursing
homes pay at the state of New
Mexico in exchange, we get
federal funding in return that
the nursing homes use to improve
quality of care.
So, so those measures are being
talked about in part of the
The bill that's being discussed,
I won't use that phrase, but
Madam Chair, yes. OK.
OK.
So in other words, we don't know
anything.
Pretty much. I mean,
everything's up in the air. So,
so, OK, um.
Did you have something? OK,
Representative Anaya. Final
comment, Madam Chair, um, I just
feel like the strongly worded
letters just looking better and
better every day.
Again, we don't have a quorum.
It's, that's a tough, that's.
A tough thing on this committee
is uh
We'll see and we, we maybe could
get other people appointed if
need be.
Um could I just make a point?
Sure, um.
So, you know, we've been talking
a lot about what's been going on
in the federal level, the
federal government is um
suggesting to people in the
public and so on and so forth
that they're providing a cost
savings to them, right? Yeah,
right, yeah, they're saving
money, but really what they're
just doing is transferring it to
the states to pick up, so we'll
be, we'll be picking it up. And
Missouri will be picking it up.
And Texas will be picking it up.
So really citizens are not
really benefiting in any way.
It's just a shell game where
victory can be claimed at the
federal level, and it will all
trickle down to the states. They
have to resolve some of these
things, so.
I've been thinking about that
today because I was talking to
another constituency on these
points, and I think we should be
talking more about that, that
really it's a false premise that
we are helping people with their
taxes or whatever on the federal
level because it's all gonna
come back down to us.
And there are states in this
country that can't afford a lot
of this stuff, so it's gonna be
a huge hardship for for a lot of
states, not just New Mexico.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I would agree, and we have done
a lot of, you know, those
permanent funds, etc. etc. but
when you look at how much we
spend in healthcare in the state
in a year, it's upwards of 12
million, 12 billion when you add
in the federal match, etc. etc.
So the billion dollar fund that
seems so extravagant when we're
talking about $12 billion
annually, it doesn't seem so
extravagant anymore. Yes, the
big beautiful bill is gonna have
not so beautiful.
impacts on states across the
country. Agreed.
Yeah, that might be the quote of
the day. Um, so I think with
that, I want to thank you all
for this. Um, it's, it's heavy
duty stuff and um I look forward
to hearing from the secretary
when we get a chance to hear and
who knows, maybe by then things
will be a little more settled or
perhaps they won't, but just a
reminder to the committee that
we will start tomorrow at 9:15,
um.
And hopefully we won't have any
technical difficulties, and
we'll get started on time. Thank
you to folks who care enough to
sit through this and listen to
it and we'll, we'll see you all
tomorrow morning.
We are in recess.
