Good morning everybody walking
to the second day of LESC I
sorry I missed yesterday I heard
there were great conversations
particularly around the a I
portion of things that was were
very helpful but it's nice to be
here it is so amazingly green
over on the side of the the
state it's like wow
that's wonderful um
with that I think i'm the only
new person or
senator ramos were you here
yesterday it would you like to
introduce yourself please
you have to turn your mike on
sir.
Can you hear me
i've gave a ramals I represent a
luna grand county and you know
this my first year back after
two year stands and i've learned
a lot less session and I I hear
two really learn
cause I know this where we make
a a lot of good decisions and
start really start looking for
the new session and willing to
to learn as much as I can to
help out as much as they can be
part of the education team so
thank you so much
thank you and ranking member of
the senate education committee
and i'm bill soul state senator
from lost christmas
very pleased to be here will
many of you know I flog get the
fly in today was a gorgeous
flight up though my your plan
got a nice will wash going over
the monzano mountains there was
a little bit of some rainstorms
there but no problems at all but
it's very nice to be here with
that let's jump right in the
public education reform fund
update if you take it away
please great thank you mister
chair members of elicit a we are
behind tab six in your binders
and we are giving you a short
little update this morning on
the public education reform fund
so i'll take you back to you uh
with february march of this year
you are past senate bill two or
one uh senate bill two or one
change the purpose of the public
education reform fund uh this
used to be a fund where any
unspent funds for for
appropriations that you gave to
PED would revert to the public
education reform fund and you
used to freely appropriate from
the public education reform find
uh towards education initiatives
uhm the purpose be to a one
change the purpose of the
perf to be a three year
revolving fund uh that is very
focused on evaluation of the uh
uh investments that you are make
from that fund so you are in in
addition to passing us me to a
one made five appropriations
from the perf that are subject
to evaluation requirements
behind tap six in your binder.
Your c a page a few pages from
our quick guide that came out
earlier this year I just
reminding you about one and then
those those appropriations
themselves so as you'll recall
set of bill two or one requires
the public education department
to submit evaluation plans for
all of those per funded
initiatives and it requires a
less lfc and the department of
finance administration to
collaborate on feedback to those
plans so we are published
instructions to ped earlier this
year and p-d met the deadline
and statute to provide us those
instructions or those evaluation
plans for those per funded
programs so the next step in
this process and the step that
we're we're currently embarking
on is a uh a really strong and
collaborative effort where we
are working together to give
them feedback on those plans
before september first where
ideally uh september first the
public education apartment hits
the ground running with the
implementation of these plans
on the second page of of your
little packet uh you'll see a
reminder of those things that
you funded through perth so
beginning with the support for a
tenants for success so that was
an eighteen point six million
dollar appropriation and once
again and these are three year
appropriations so that equates
to roughly six point two million
dollars per year for attendant
success initiatives fifteen
point six million for secondary
educator literacy or about five
point two million per year.
Thirteen point five million for
math achievement are about four
point five million per year
on the next page seven point
eight million for innovative
staffing strategies
about two point six million per
year and then finally six point
three million for supports for
students who are on house or two
point six million per year so
the structure of our
presentation i'm not going to go
to a depth into one of those who
will be funding I think the
public education apartment is
going to cover that but I would
like to turn it over now to my
colleagues dincers from lfc who
is going to walk you through a
little bit of uh the the
evaluation plan the pd has been
submitting for each of these
appropriations
thanks so much time you'll see
the evaluation plan guidelines
they look like this they should
be under that there should be
the next page i'm not the same
tab and before we can get
started going over these I want
to also mention that we're we
really enjoy the collaboration
we've had with dfa and less see
we think it's been really strong
and that we've worked through a
lot of the questions and
concerns that we've had uh in
this working group and can hope
that it continues as a as it has
so far I also want to say that
as to mention the goal of these
perfect appropriations is to be
able to look back on a program
and have all parties agree as to
whether that program is leading
to the expected effects that we
all want to see for a state
overall knowing whether program
works can allow for increased
funding on much larger scale
so to meet the goal of knowing
whether a program works lfc LESC
n d if they have met to create
these guidelines for the perfect
valuation plans eh and so we're
going to walk through each page
you'll see on the first page it
has a summary of what senate
bill two or one did and then
also has a broad timeline of uh
when different components are
expected so pd met the july
first guideline with the initial
evaluation plans were currently
working to provide detailed
feedback to the public education
department and then hope to get
there a revision plan if
necessary do you on september
first.
Then we'll have yearly updates
do november first letting
the department of financial
administration less and lfc now
where those plans are as well as
including data on outputs and
outcome so are we getting what
we expect to be getting do we
know yet uh and so this will
help with a funding in questions
as we move forward
turning to the next page
you'll see basically a summary
of different components of what
these appropriations are for
this gives this information on
what the program is that our
problem statements and our goals
these goals are really useful in
determining work potential
variables we want to measure
what outcomes we want to track
going forward it also includes a
de- information about whether
this program has a research base
or not understanding what the
assumptions are with the
research faces of a program
helps determine what type of
evaluation may be needed for
that program is it an evaluation
looking at the way that new
mexico is structuring a program
that has been shown to work in
other states or is it a state
taking on something that's new
and hasn't been studied before
depending upon what type of
evaluation or what type of
research is out there it changes
how we're going to need to
evaluate that program
moving to the next page you'll
see a logic model and what logic
models do is they help determine
what the mechanism of action or
the way uh a plan is going to
leave to the expected results
and so they have actors which
are the people doing the thing
activities which are what is it
going to be being done outputs
which are measures of what has
happened so number of students
who have completed something
measures like that and then
outcomes this is where we'd see
uh impacts on things like
attendance or proficiency rates
or graduation rate.
And then moving to our last page
this is the page where we talk
about the evaluation plan itself
er this indicates
what what the excuse me turn to
the wrong page and it's great I
already talked with others one
the turn to the last page it
looks at the evaluation plan and
description of the methods so
who are is the
intervention supposed to be
targeting is this a specific
grade a specific school and
specific pop a demographic
population how the evaluation
will occur so looking at whether
there is going to be a
comparison group whether it's
it's gonna be a comparison and
experimental group whether it's
going to be a pre post what and
how rigorous that evaluation
plan is then we talk about data
collection so is how is this
information being collected is
it going to be collected out of
school levels it because
collected at the elia level and
what information are you hoping
to get from these groups then we
have information about the
timeline so when do we expect to
get what information laid out by
each year and lastly we have our
contact so that we can reach out
to the public education
department or partners over
there and say hey what's
happening with this how does
this look what's going on and
having that uh the communication
is key so that's a brief summary
of the evaluation guidelines and
al turned over to our colleague
can astow at pede to give some
more specific information mister
chairman and distinguished
members of the committee I want
to thank you for grandma
opportunity to address you today
my name is kind of still on the
director of strategic
initiatives this title is a
couple titles old here
um that's just a fancy way to
say that i'm a good switchboard
operator between big systems
programs and people
so what we're going to go
through is just own overview of
our work behind creating these
evaluation plans for these per
funded projects so on this next
slide here we kind of detail PE
d's development process and do I
need to be advancing slides on
this.
So I just want to be clear from
the get go every dollar per
funding is back by the most
rigorous evaluation standards
available we didn't simply just
create programs and hope for the
best but we built a culture of
continuous improvement and so
what does that actually mean
right we leverage our agency
wide culture of evaluation p d
as of well established program
evaluation process throughout
the agency SB two a one really
ramped up that process for us
and and really dug in on the
cross program the valuation
multilateral engagement
collaborative work between PED
leadership programs staff are
expert analysts are partners at
the leoc and LFC uh iterative
feedback loops just simply
saying like we've had a lot of
conversations about how we can
make these the best that they
can be and then rigorous review
standards I want to make it very
clear we sought out some of the
best of valuators that we could
possibly find through western
and we have certified what works
clearing house reviewers on our
team to help us make sure that
we're getting to the most
rigorous standards possible but
also balancing that with
administrative burden around
reporting for our schools.
So our first program we're going
to start with is one of my
favorite subjects as a former
middle school reading teacher
that secondary literacy i'm not
going to go over the funding and
everything but just a highlight
again the urgency around this
work only nineteen percent again
one nine percent of our students
are are profision in eighth
grade literacy right so
this program really provides
targeted support to strengthen
disappointing literacy across
secondary educators are
evaluation methods mean that
practice we do teacher practice
analysis using disciplinary
literacy walk through so we're
getting in the classroom we're
seeing what's happening and
we're seeing if we're actually
able to see those evidence based
practices being implemented
short term outcomes of course we
want improved instructional
practices amongst educators and
accelerated literacy growth with
our students long term we're
looking at increased literacy
proficiency rates among students
and accelerated are student
growth amongst our participation
scores.
Going on next line you might be
going to happen guy what does
this actually mean was this will
look like in our schools right
so disciplinary literacy
coaching provides that on sight
instructional coaching support
that's right there in the
classroom
financial support for
participating disciplinary
literacy schools with greater
amounts of uh greater amounts
for higher numbers of teachers
participating and then there's
some required programs such as
reading apprentice ships are
mirror reading intervention
which is an a I powered uh
reading intervention program
okay let me check my time here
because I know where a little
short mathematics is going to be
our next program that we're
talking about this will be
provides support to strengthen
mathematics instruction at both
the elementary and the secondary
levels.
Ah it's no mystery to this
committee that mathematics
proficiency is stagnant with
only three quarters of our
students are with three quarters
of our students not proficient
and math so you got a classroom
at twenty kids fifteen of those
kids are not proficient and math
so we're attacking this
challenge on multiple fronts and
going on here detailing the
three programs that are part of
this initiative focus on algebra
that's the secondary part right
we know that student success in
algorithm really leads to
success and their other
secondary course work as well as
college career in life on
numerous c
numerous right you can kind of
think of that as the structured
literacy for mathematics we're
trying to build that early
numerously with our students and
then hqin implementation we know
that districts are behind high
quality instructional materials
but we also know that the
implementation in use of those
high quality and structural
materials can be better and so
this is really supporting
teachers with leveraging the
materials that they have that
are backed by high quality
evidence so we can make sure
that students have access to you
great level stamps.
Chronic absentees and and
attendance improvement again no
surprise that pandemic revealed
exacerbated crisis that demands
our urgent attention chronic
absent rates search to forty
point seven three percent we've
made some progress and twenty
twenty three we got that down to
twenty nine point seven seven
still a lot of work to do
in this slide you'll be able to
see those evaluation methods
interrupted time series design
if we want to dig into what that
actually means I can get some
smarter minds on here
and uh some short term outcomes
increased student engagement and
attendance of course we want
kids in the classroom so they
can engage in the successful
long term increased student
academic achievement and
graduation rates decreased
student drop out rates and other
related student outcomes this
next slide here you see a little
graph we we kind of show the up
tick that we saw in chronic
absenteeism during the pandemic
and then this you know slow but
steady slide that we're making
back down still a lot of work to
do so what is this what does
this look like this looks like
personalized family engagement
this looks like relational home
visits train staff members going
directly to families building
relationships understanding
barriers to get kids in their
seats daily relationship
building activities so when kids
show up they feel welcome they
want to be there and then
mentoring with checking connect
right so really making sure that
each student has someone that's
going to be checking in with
them at the at the school when
they do show up to make sure
that they feel welcome and have
the support they need to be
successful.
All right I know i'm kind of
speeding along here but I hope
i'm doing okay on time housing
and security amongst our most
vulnerable students are those
experiencing housing and
securities in twenty three
twenty four there were nine
thousand five hundred and sixty
seven students who were unhoused
in new mexico
almost ten thousand students
that's a lot of students as a
former foster youth at
experienced balts of housing and
security and homelessness during
high school I can say with
personal experience that these
students face barriers that
fundamentally undermine their
engagement attendance and
graduation prospects so what
does that look like we're
looking at short term outcomes
of increased attendance
engagement course completion
course performance amongst
students experiencing
homelessness for a long term
outcomes we want to see decrease
and drop out rates increase in
graduation rates we want to make
sure that these students have
everything they need to be
successful all through their
high school career graduate and
be ready for their next journey
and life
next slide here a little bit
detail about what this looks
like we're talking about
conditional cash transfers five
hundred dollar monthly stapen
that doesn't just come for free
right students have to
demonstrate that they're meeting
with their teacher one a weekly
basis that they're receiving
tutoring on a weekly basis that
they are turning in course work
and assignments and that they
are meeting gpa goals and some
academic support weekly tutoring
as I mention but non academic
support is weekly checkings with
guidance counselors so that they
are getting in school support
that they need to be a
successful and then last but
it's certainly not at least
discussing innovative staffy
okay this project aims to
address teacher shortages by
redesigning and structuring the
and leadership roles such as
implementing teendashbased
teaching models
that short turn out comes as
increased educator satisfaction.
Decree staff vacancy rates
increased engagement long term
outcomes increased educator
retention rate increased student
proficiency and graduation right
simply the theory behind this is
that if we can keep teachers in
their classrooms and create that
consistency students will be
more successful.
Okay what this looks like
there's a few different models
and programs that will be found
to be successful throughout the
state but knowing that this is
going to be an r f a there might
be other vendors and programs
that pop up that we might want
to explore but the bare bones of
what we're trying to do here is
teachers with records of high
growth learning high growth and
student learning lead smaller
teacher teams typically for the
six teachers in the same greater
subject we want to make sure
that those teachers that are
demonstrating success are able
to coach up their mentor they're
their colleagues on what they're
doing different to ensure
student success there are co
plan called teaching models
model instruction things like
that
implementation includes intense
of job embedded professional
development rights so it's not
just all about the mentoring
right mentors need support to as
well as our teachers getting
that job invetted professional
development
and so uh I apologize for that
very quick stream there but I
just want to think you mister
chair and members of this
distinguished committee I want
to think are secretary for her
leadership on this work our
program directors for carrying
out this work and our partners
at least cliff c n DFA ford
their support through this
process.
And I stand for any question i'd
just want more thing i'd like to
add mister chair
as you all know that was a very
very quick summary of of a lot
of technical information uh the
part of the reason we wanted to
give you an update today that
was short in in nature is a two
to remind you that that this is
still an ongoing process that uh
lcdfa and LFC are still working
on providing feedback on on what
you have in front of you today
providing that back to the
department and we anticipate
that we'll be able to do a much
deeper dive on those specific
programs with you at a later day
but if there are any other
questions that came up are based
on this I I believe we have
about ten minutes to go through
those so thank you mister chair
thank you to him up and if
people have questions please get
my attention I do want to remind
you this is not debate about the
particular programs it's the
process that uh the public ed
department the LESC on how do it
going to evaluate in determine
the programs not what we're not
debating the particular bills or
the issues or things of that
sort but questions from
representative gear
thank you mister care thank you
so much I I think it was
inspiring thing is to see the
three of you working together
and that last year's included
and thank you mr mentioned your
personal experience because
personal experience I think all
of us are here as legislators
and we take these rules just one
question as as is goes on will
you be reviewing the assessment
tools and for example a mirror
is now something that's approved
we found out kids were being
referred to
remediation because the system
is done online and and the
system doesn't always hear like
I miss pronounced words that
therefore I would be referred to
remediation so that be
considered it's it's getting in
the weeds but it affects the
outcomes that we're looking at.
Mr chair and representative
garrett most definitely
what we want to make sure is
that students are not being over
referred for services that they
don't need so as we implement
these programs and as we do our
evaluations throughout the year
we're going to be keeping our
close eagle eye on those equity
concerns to make sure that
students are getting the help
that they need but it's not also
being impacted by you know
negative impact such as over
referrals to special education
services intervention things
like that thank you and then.
See my my other question and
this is a concern as we look at
literacy
and I road long term literacy
reading writing teacher writing
because some of the testing I
know we used I ready at my
middle school but there's
nothing about writing and
writing brings together content
it's a lot so it's just a
concern that I want to mention
why
chairman and representative
garrett most definitely when we
talk about secondary literacy
we're talking about how we can
push literacy practices that's
reading and writing it's not
just reading but when we talk
about secondary literacy we're
talking about implementing those
evidence based literacy
practices a cross content areas
right so most definitely we
would expect some sort of
writing components to be to be
part of that process thank you.
Represent a robot cabinet.
Thank you mister chair and think
you are for your presentation I
am but going to focus for a
quick on a question around the
arm literacy but it actually has
it's across the board question
app applied so i'm interested
annoying it's real important for
me that we have the
the mine said in the approaches
in place to avoid major issues
down the road so the question is
to the not just the process but
to those do those that are
evaluating um
have z by lingual multicultural
capacity to review to analyze to
evaluate and make the
recommendations
so that we are looking at it
from the perspective of what
we've been trying to do in torn
terms of transferring education
for the last I don't know how
many years now and as the apply
mister chair to all the acts the
indian education at the spanish
education there black education
act from that perspective do do
you have that capacity in this
process thank you mister chair
mister chair and representative
coverage
yes the short answer is yes so
what I want to emphasize here is
that we are taking a very
coherent stance to this work
this cross program stance to
this work we do have our eyes on
our education acts we do have
our eyes on some of our most
struggling and at risk students
but I do also want to assure you
as I stated that we have some of
the most rigorous evaluation
uh team that we could possibly
have we are partnering with west
and then through western we have
partnership with.
Ah certified what works clearing
house reviewers this is the gold
standard for what is uh evidence
based so
yes I appreciate the uh the
highlight there but yes most
definitely we're going to be
keeping an eye out for that
throughout this year.
Thank you will have to delve
into more detail as the process
and falls to get a better answer
to that question thank you more
clarified thank you and I please
ask that my last name be
referred to appropriately as way
bad cabinet you did so and they
just want to make sure for the
record thank you.
Thank you yes because I thought
I did some okay thank you
represent the area senator
figured out my speed better and
sorry
thanks mr chair no problem I
have a timeline question so on
this document that's labeled
page one of four the last thing
in the timeline says september
first twenty twenty seven final
evaluation
the
paid for four indicates year one
two and three which was my
understanding of the proper
projects there three year
projects
so that's twenty twenty seven
twenty twenty eight how can we
have a final report before the
third year's done and how can we
possibly get good data like
twenty twenty seven in september
first
schools just don't move that
vest
thank you mister chair center
figure out you're you're
highlighting something that came
up for us as we were analyzing
the bill as well it is a very
strange timeline in the build
that that we might need to think
about and do some work on their
there is as the result of the
timeline set up in that bill you
will have to make a
determination about year for a
funding without the final asset
without the final evaluation
results so we're hoping that
that having a year one and a
year to evaluation sort of in
the middle there will allow us
enough information to make a
recommendation to you whether to
continue to a year for a funding
for a program or two end it at
your three the plus of that is
that there is that that
guaranteed thirty year funding
which which does help school
districts sort of buy into the
program a lot of times we've
heard that when it's one year of
funding school districts don't
want to participate in a program
because they don't know if it'll
exist next year so
that they're there's pros and
cons but I think it's it's
definitely consideration we've
been thinking about as well
thank you mr chair and thank you
to him that's exactly my concern
the.
Three years of funding give them
incentive to buy in but the
evaluation time first year's
implementation is always rocky
second year it's full full speed
ahead but we won't have the data
from the second year in time so
I think we do have to reconsider
it's legislators maybe
rebuilding that timeline thank
you mister chair thank you
senator representatives on
younger thank you mr chairman
thank you for the presentations
couple things
as a former mouth each
four of my last eight years or
so or nine we kept saying they'd
have a math adoption and they
never did so a lot of our our
books are falling apart it so it
went to unless we went to online
but the parents were adamant
about having a book today when
the kids came home we could help
them so do we have books in
every clap is that something
we're looking at because that's
critical I think to having
everyone having a book they can
take all
you know I think that's big on
that.
Mr chair representative of
saraniana I can get back to you
with that specific data I don't
want to you know miss speaker
but I can get back to you with
that specific data presentative
mister represents any I I think
part of the the question might
also be
since school districts to
receive their instruction on
materials funding through the
state equalization guarantee is
discretionary so every local
district is making decisions
about whether to buy a a book
for every kid or a book and an
online license or just on
license it probably varies
across the state
and in mister chairman the the
problem with that is when we
went online the book was online
but it answers were online so
you know it just didn't make
sense in the tests for online so
it's like ok so how do you
evaluate them next
absenteeism so we know kids are
chronically absolutely third of
them
but how are you helping the
teachers when those kids do come
back because you know they'll
start coming back every day of
the week and then it'll drop to
four days and then math it's
critical that they're there and
then three days in two days but
the teacher still has to teach
him so how are you helping them
because as a teacher I feel like
the kids were being left behind
or the ones who come every day
and and and they're that's where
are I think if we want it raise
our scores we have to help the
work we have to keep up with the
ones who are there every day
still have to want to come
when they come but but we have
to look at the ones who come
every day
mr chair representative sarniana
I I yes you know we do want to
make sure that we're taking care
of those students that are
showing up every day
we do when I keep an eye out for
making sure that the skills that
were doing such as building
relation you know relational
building activities things like
that not only benefit or
struggling students but but our
students.
And I think mister chirma you
have to remember a teacher
attitude to everyone so as a
teacher you pulled out to help
you you're working with the
winds who aren't there a lot of
times it's just as much as
you're working with the ones
were there every day so it's
it's as a teacher you know
you're not doing which you
should be you not where you
should be you're not moving as
quickly as you should because
you have so many kids who don't
come to school so thank you.
Thank you representatives send
it a result.
Thank you mister chairman I
couple questions that I have
have to go back to put in our
books right now I have done the
p
the public education reform
phone it comes to sixty one
point eight million dollars if
my mouth edition is correct and
I think it is is that on top of
everything else that we are
contributing to education
yeah mister chair center is also
the the public education reform
funded the perf as it's often
called is a separate fund that
sixty one million dollars you're
talking about is on top of the
funding for the seg some top of
the funding this commonly called
categorical and below the line
funding so this is sort of a new
avenue of funding that is
specifically for those three
year programs.
Okay there might be a concern
there in my opinion how can we
sustain the spending like we are
doing it right now especially
whenever I don't know there is a
first to do away with them with
the industries that do support
education everything else in our
state so I do have a concern
there as far as this hand out mr
can you tell me on the housing
and security part of them.
Can you tell me on this little
map right here how these.
Numbers came to be the housing
insecure students by student
district school district
because I
disagree with them and senator I
I looked at that also and can
make no sense out of the shading
and the numbers that are next to
it makes no sense I think i'm
understanding what
each like in cherish county
there's one two three four
school districts in terms county
and I think I have the straight
net and then you have down here
and eddie county but then you've
also got the boot deal over for
chervis county
and i'm kind of curious how you
came up with those numbers
mr chair senator is I can get
back to you on this specific
mattrix and and data that was
used to populate this but
essentially you see here housing
and secure on the right that is
count of total students with the
shading and then through the
mapper can definitely get back
to you on how those numbers were
were generated and how that was
and mr chair senator and I get I
don't want to speak for the pd
and how they got to these
specific numbers generally we we
look at
housing and security or soons
are on house based on federal uh
mckinney then do requirements so
there's a list of questions i'm
sorry I didn't catch that it's
mechanie vento act it's a
federal act that already
provides some federal funding to
school districts that serve
homeless students.
And so there's a specific
there's a list of questions that
students can answer that qualify
them as as being on house
essentially and so that doesn't
necessarily mean they're living
on the street for instance it
could be that you are doubled up
in a home you're living with
someone that's not your parents
there's a number of questions
that if you if you answer them
and in particular away qualify
as you
to receive this kind of support
okay will I guess my concern
there is i'm looking right above
chevs counting that shown really
dark when.
Uh which is debate a county I do
believe and it's shown a fifteen
hundred thousand three thousand
dollars following that color
code right there and I don't
think there is that many
students in the back county
senator
wilf will follow up with the
actual data but I just wanted to
clarify that there's there are
some metrics for identifying
them but we'll get you some
information about this where
these numbers come from okay and
along their same lines under the
same housing and security as is
conditional care to transfer
five hundred dollars monthly
stipend receipt is tied the
academic metrics
who makes that determination and
where is that money going to be
put and who writes the check for
it and how are we going to make
sure that that is going to help
with what we're trying to get
accomplished here
and send it if I might and send
it or you know that we're not
going to beat the bills and i'm
happy this is more just the
evaluation portion of it that
i'm kind of curious who makes
that determination
mr chair senator is all I can
get back to you on the specific
information on who makes that
determination but please be
assured that this is a program
that we have implemented here in
new mexico in district such as
west last biggest right here
where fifty three high school
students facing housing and
instability over eighty percent
of those students remained in
the program participated and had
increased motivation increased
engagement increased attendance
rates at their scores so um
these are conditional cash
payments they have to meet many
metrics in order to get that
five hundred dollars a month
it's not an easy process for
these students but I can get
back to you on information on
who exactly makes that
determination okay well I guess
I was kind of.
Concern their so the five
hundred dollars a month right
now in with in the last vaguers
area is going to the students
it's going to the families of
the students and those stipends
uh families use utilize its cash
payments for central needs such
as food utilities and
transportation directly
addressing the barriers at the
student's face mr chair senator
just wanted to follow up this is
this idea was based on a pilot
that was run as as mister stoh
said in a few districts where
the presentation to the
committee last interim and
that's why it was part of the
our budget proposal or your old
budget proposal familiar c
for last session so we can also
follow up with that presentation
in additional details how that
program was around at the time
although the pds now over seeing
this pilot version okay i'm
gonna let drop for now but I
will have for the questions
thank you
thank you senator represent put
us but ask us
thank you mister chair and thank
you for pronouncing my name
correctly
umm I I want to start by looking
at the
the question about attendance
and all the work that secretary
will be secretary guster and her
crew have been doing at the
Spin addressing absenteeism and
they're doing it exactly as your
had described in terms of um
they're doing phenomenal work in
terms of addressing each case
individually looking at what's
happening with the family doing
III wrote the list of things
that you mentioned our check and
cannot daily building
relationship building activities
relational home visits they
understand that human connection
and they understand that it's
interaction or it's not just a
set of data on a chart or a map
and I
in my profession having been um
a professor in the college of ad
in teaching research I relate
that to what I call action
research because you have an
issue you look at all the
factors that are contributing to
the data the baseline down that
you're seeing and and I want to
relate that concept
to the achievement that you're
going to be collecting the
evaluation of programs and I
think it's very important
because of the martin is
yesterday remedies that are
going to be developed this
summer
I think it's important because.
What we might call struggling
students often it's not the
students but the mismatch of
methods to the needs of the
student as we sign arizona with
the ethnic studies program where
once students were in the
program failing students
graduated at a rate of like
ninety eight percent and that
achievement gap where they are
at the bottom they flipped it
which is why it became such a
threat to some of the lawmakers
in arizona
they had provided the methods
that those students needed in
order not only two succeed but
to excel and so as we look at
these remedies I would like for
us to keep those two things in
mind what are the remedies that
are students need and how do we
measure that and when we are
looking at the evaluation data
we're looking at points of
evaluation so I would like to be
sure
and it sounds like you will be
doing some of this but I would
like to be assured that you're
going to take it a stop back and
look at not only what was talk
to those students and how but
what resources were provided to
the teacher
in order to understand how to
use those materials and I know
we've got a lot of money going
into professional development is
it going into and I think this
is
part of what you're doing with
us is it going into the
strategies that our students
need and how can you do the
research around a round out and
then my other question mister
chair has to do with special
education because special
education is one of the at risk
categories or one of the
plaintive categories and
martinez and when we're looking
at special education we town to
evaluate students on the very
same test that everybody else is
uses when our students and with
disabilities have ips.
And they have assessment reports
that that point out that help us
understand where they're
disability areas are in those
disabilities are called
disabilities because they are
there for life you can't you
can't undo a disability you can
teach a child to use their
strength you can teach a child
to compensate you can modify
instruction
and so my question there is how
are we going to really look to
make sure that we're honoring
those disabilities and we are
honoring those abilities because
i've seen some prerty phenomenal
students with disabilities
really accel
how are we going to do that in
collecting this data as well how
are we going to make sure
that the ips reflect the
assessment report and that the
ips are being followed and at
the best strategies are being
used for those students that's
that's the challenge I see and
i'm i'm not sure that that is in
the report so if you can help me
understand that I would greatly
appreciate it
mr chair
mr chair representative torres
balasca's
I can say whole heartedly that
the PED agrees with you on that
uh the importance of community
based programming when we're
talking about attendance and
making sure that it's meeting
those local needs and
additionally making sure that
it's meeting the needs of our
students with disabilities and
other at risk student groups so
um
just want to say that we
completely agree with that and
we will make sure that we have a
a close eye on that as these
programs move forward
wonderful and thank you mister
chair thank you any other
questions
if not thank you and you did not
do a bad job rushing it was
sometimes we wish you had more
chris presentations like that to
get right to the point of things
so thank you.
Thank you committee for keeping
your questions very relevant
such and real move on
our next presentation to get
back over to the agenda here on
high impact tutoring and connor
I think you're of the lead on
this one.
So counter whenever you're
ready.
Already thank you mister
chairman members of the
committee good morning everybody
as a reminder i'm connor l hicks
policy analysts for the LESC
covering education support
services and today we're gonna
be talking about a promising
intervention to support student
learning or which is known as
high impact tutoring and so as
new mexico and other states have
grappled with how low
proficiency rates in both
reading and mathematics they've
turned a high impact tutoring as
a promising way to boost student
achievement and improve academic
outcomes.
So today's panel presentation
will include a review of what
high impact tutoring is and
national evidence for its
effectiveness how the
legislature has supported this
initiative in recent years how
are FY twenty five PED grant
funding was used to stand up
high impact tutoring programs
across new mexico and finally a
discussion of a program
evaluation conducted for the
department by soar at new mexico
state.
So joining me today on this
panel are duly branding senior
manager for the public education
department's community schools
and extended learning bureau
drperiod america strange deputy
director of p d student support
services division and doctor
rachel borin director of the
southwest outreach academic
research evaluation and policy
center at new mexico state
university
so i'll kick things off and if
you'll turn your attention
behind tab seven to the lec
brief entitled high impact
tutoring intervention for
success i'd like to start off by
reminding all of us what exactly
we mean when we use the term
high impact tutoring.
So high and back tutoring is
broadly defined as a learning
model consisting of multiple
sessions per week where a
trained instructor offers
academic construction neither a
one on one format or to a group
of no more than four students
and well high impact tutoring
tan take place after school I
want to be very clear that this
academic intervention is
distinct from out of school time
programs.
So launching into a history of
state funding and support for
this intervention fiscal year
two thousand twenty five mark
the most significant legislative
investment and high impact
tutoring to date but it is
important to note that FY twenty
five was just the latest attempt
by the state to launch a high
impact tutoring program so
starting on pages one and
continuing to page two they'll
see a brief recounting of
previous attempts by the
department to establish a high
impact tutoring initiative in
new mexico and in contrast to
the FY twenty five grant program
which distributed funding to
support staff hiring and program
implementation directly to
allianz the earlier efforts
we've seen took a more
centralised approach in which
the state identified
instructors.
Various challenges I including
rollout timing and contracting
issues and tutoring sessions
scheduling limited the
effectness of these rollout
efforts.
So an fy twenty five you all has
legislators appropriated eight
point five million of a total
fifteen million dollar budget
appropriation in compassing both
high impact tutoring and out of
school time to specifically
support high impact tutoring
programs across the state
leaving six and a half million
for out of school time
initiatives now six point eight
million of the total eight point
five was awarded to twenty three
school districts and charter
schools and on paid seven of the
brief you'll find appendix a
which includes the full list of
awardies for FY twenty five
their respect of allocations and
the counties in which those
awardies are located.
So ped used this funding to
support a high impact tutoring
grant program to distribute
state dollars to local education
agencies and to select
recipients of FY twenty five
high impact tutoring grant
towards pd prioritized f by
twenty four out of school time
awardies and according to
department this was done in
response to as discussed
previously the change in the
available out of school time
funding where now with eight
point five million being
specific of that fifteen million
being specifically earmarked for
high impact tutoring only six
and a half with left for out of
school time
and so of the twenty seven lia's
awarded funding in f by twenty
four for out of school time
twenty three of them offered in
to receive high impact tutoring
funding at FY twenty five and
stand up those tutoring programs
now in FY twenty six our current
fiscal year the general
appropriation act again
designated fifteen million
dollars for the out of school
time and tutoring line item.
However in this case fourteen
million was a year marked for
out of school time specifically
with just one million being
directed toward tutoring for at
risk students in stam and
literacy.
On page two you'll see a red box
outlining the grant program
criteria used by the department
for that one million dollar
allocation in FY twenty six for
all schools indicating and
intent to apply and you'll
notice the criteria for the FY
twenty six distribution
difference from FY twenty five
with multiple layers of
prioritization outlined and
assurance is related to data
collection budgeting and
planning site visits and check
in meetings and training
requirements being conditions
for funding receipt.
I want to take a moment to zoom
out from new mexico to the
national context and so at
research for action which is a
joint initiative between brown
university and providence for an
island uh their amendment
institutes and nonprofit date of
firm results for america
outlines ten design principles
to support high impact tutoring
programs on pages two to three
you'll find summaries of each of
these ten design principles as
well as a red box outlining the
design principles included in
peds and attempt to apply
information for least for aflic
twenty six.
As he review these less you'll
not a great deal of alignment
between the ped guidance and the
national best practices with the
only major differences being
the department's focus on
developing culturally and
linguistically responsive
supports for students and a
minimum program length of at
least fourteen weeks up from at
least ten weeks for the national
best practices
well aware these are required to
provide an assurance they
understand the design principles
of high impact tutoring it is
unclear what mechanisms exist
beyond pda requested sight
visits and mid program check in
meetings to ensure compliance
with these design principles.
And so before as I wrap things
up will talk about a little bit
about again staying at more
national contacts talking about
the evidence that we've seen
across the country for high
impact tutoring and why it could
be a promising intervention.
So before providing these
considerations are the quickly
point you to pay just foreign
five which will find a round up
of research into the
effectiveness of high impact
tutoring a two thousand twenty
review of and matter analysis of
ninety six randomized
evaluations found tutoring lead
to substantial growth quantified
as an overall effect size of
point three seven standard
deviations for students
receiving the intervention now
the vast majorities of the
included studies focused on
elementary school and only seven
percent of them focused on
tutoring for metal and high
school students and an evidence
review from the abdul achieved
shamil poverty action lab or
jaypal research center in
cambridge massachusetts
expressed these findings as
rough percentile changes which I
find to be a lot more accessible
than just talking about standard
deviations so i'm table one you
will fight you'll see the rough
percentile changes those
standard deviations correspond
to.
Uh so the most significant
improvement from ut came from
teacher lead tutoring programs
we saw growth from roughly
corresponding from the fiftieth
percentile to the seventieth
percent but researchers also
observed positive outcomes of
varying effect sizes for
programs lead by other types of
instructors.
And broadly speaking the
evaluations included in that two
thousand twenty matter analysis
indicate the following one
tutoring that occurred during
the school day had almost
doubled the effect size of after
school tutoring though it is
important to note that only
eighteen percent of the included
studies did evaluate after
school programs.
Literacy programs were shown to
have large benefits for students
and preschool and kindergarten
with an observed decline in
effectiveness as students
progressed through the
elementary grades.
But you are still seeing an
effect size roughly equivalent
to growth from the fiftieth of
fifty eight percent tile even in
first through fifth grade.
Math tutoring's effectiveness
and contrast increases along
with great level in the
elementary years.
One of the things that I think
people are think is really
exciting about high impact
tutoring and one of the things
we often struggle with we try to
make policy is that scalability
is also is always a major
question as we're trying to make
statewide policy and there is
evidence that high impact
tutoring can still be effective
even at larger scales so fifteen
of the studies included in this
matter analysis had student
sample size between four hundred
and seven thousand students and
yet still produced average
effects sizes of uh two of
twenty point two five standard
deviations
I do wanna note that research
into the effectiveness of
tutoring for higher grade levels
is relatively limited but
specific programs around the
country and here in new mexico
have shown promising results
particularly from math so you'll
find two examples in my brief
one from new mexico and one from
chicago illinois on page five
and PED and their presentation
will speak further on the new
mexico example that I reference
there.
So with this refresher complete
I know that's a lot i'd like to
offer just a few closing
considerations for the
legislature for ped and four
school districts and charter
schools around the state.
So national research indicates
that high impact tutoring if
implemented effectively can
produce meaningful learning
gains for students across k
twelve grade levels.
So as the legislature considers
whether to continue investing in
high impact tutoring particular
attention should be paid.
To the mechanism used to ensure
that high impact tutoring
programs supported by state
funds are at hearing to
nationally recognize best
practices.
As he review these policy
considerations that all i'm
about to go over you may see
some overlap between them and
the intent of ped both in FY
twenty six as well as in the
years to come.
So in conclusion the legislature
should consider whether to
include high impact tutoring as
a multi year initiative of the
public education reform fund
with program components and
metrics established prior to
implementation.
Let's say should also consider
funding out of school time and
high impact tutoring a separate
line items in the general
appropriation act as we saw in
um FY twenty five you thought
there was that kind of tention
between those two initiatives
where uh high impact tutoring
sign increase in funding but at
the expense of out of school
time so that may be a
consideration that lawmakers
will have to chew on as this as
we enter the next legislative
session
the public education department
should develop a framework of
required design principles of
high impact tutoring as a
condition of receipt of state
grant funding conduct mid and
end of year inspections of grant
funded programs to ensure
compliance with these required
design principles and require
regular reporting by a wordies
of student performance and
engagement as a condition of
grant receipt.
And finally school districts and
charter schools should ensure
that high impact programming
aligns with departmental
guidance and best practices that
we've seen nationwide institute
a rolling data collection
process to continually assess
and track student growth and
adjust instructional methods and
finally provide student level
data reports two ped at the
beginning mid point and
conclusion of tutoring to allow
for a valuation of of program
effectiveness.
And so with that are having just
set a lot of words i'm going to
pass it off to duly branding
from ped for pd's discussion of
the grant program
mr chair honorable members of
the committee thank you so much
for this opportunity to be here
i'm humbled and honoured to be
serving you i'm thank you to
connor for his words on national
best practice and the approach
of the state legislature
I am the director of the
community schools and extended
learning bureau we oversee
community schools out of school
time the twenty first century
federal out of school time
programming and high impact
tutoring
um I just want to say that I
have had the opportunity to be
in albuquerque community schools
and work one on one with
students and community scores
and the importance of those
relationships and of those
mentorships
personally have been able to do
this work and so i'm grateful
for the opportunity to talk to
you more about it today so we're
gonna dive right into our
agenda.
The.
First of all we're gonna talk
about what is totally and connor
did go over that and i'm gonna
talk a little bit more about
that we're gonna talk about the
history in context of tutoring
here in new mexico briefly we're
going to talk about current ped
tutoring initiatives data and
evaluation results which is so
important and then of course
we'll talk we'll take some
questions from you.
So what is tutoring in new
mexico and how do we approach it
so these are some of the best
practices and their evidence
based on based on any ace
national best practice
recommendations and
recommendations that connor just
point it out nationally so first
of course we use h q I m high
quality and structural materials
we have well trained and
structures culturally and
linguistically responsive
particularly here in new mexico
consistent student tutor
assignments and relationship
based tutoring four to one
student to tutor ratio is the
max so hopefully under that
ninety minutes per week for
fourteen weeks.
Ongoing assessments and cohesion
with students core instructional
environments.
This.
Okay let's die bin to some of
the history of tutoring here at
new mexico meet some of you may
have heard of these terms or not
and that's totally okay the main
point I want you to get across
is that we have a history of
tutoring here in mexico so hit
middle math since two thousand
and twenty twenty two partnering
with saga education and the
personalized learning initiative
pla for a trial schools
throughout new mexico and that
was done virtually i'm in many
rural areas across new mexico
near peer tutoring launch also
in twenty twenty two did paid
work based learning
opportunities for high school
students interested in careers
and education.
The tutoring for younger
elementary middle school
students within their schools or
districts and then we get to
high impact tutoring so sy
twenty four twenty five as
connor pointed out received
eight point five million funding
and was known as high design
shouldering twenty say twenty
five twenty sixth received just
this year only one million for
tutoring programs so that's just
a brief contact of where we're
out with tutoring let's dive in
a little bit more on some of
these initiatives and so hit
middle math was virtual tutoring
for remote and rural middle
school students and there was an
evaluation by animals you saw
doctor richard born who was here
and there was an increase in
academic proficiency we will get
more into that in the moment the
asway twenty five twenty sixth
funding as zero for near pure
tutoring it was high school
students who tutored theirs
younger piers pli new chicago
did have preliminary research
study results which were very
positive and I will be
presenting those today and the
funding for that for us why
twenty five twenty six is zero
now let's get in the high impact
tutoring i'm seventy three new
mexico sites across er for this
year for this last year and m s
u sword at a baseline data
report and there is significant
proficiency results that i'm
very excited to present to you
today that will become public
today
um four s way twenty five twenty
sixth we only have one million
in that tutoring funding.
Alright let's stay into some of
our data and results i'm a
research person that's my
background so i'm excited to
talk to you a little bit about
this today let's look at that
out of school time math tutoring
seventy three percent of first
graders sixty six percent of
second graders and thirty one
percent of third graders achieve
for efficiency and mouth by mid
year twenty three twenty four
eighty two percent of teachers
reported high student enjoyment
the kids love it and it works if
you look on your rate you can
see some of the data uhm so we
have like blue which is well
below proficiency and below
basic basic and proficient and
you'll see the
overtime how that increased over
time on that.
Uhm
if you have questions more about
that we can totally dive in and
I can give you the report and
everything but you'll see that
those proficiency rates increase
and that was out of school time
math tutoring.
Let's now talk about hit middle
math
students from receive this
tutoring learned forty three
percent more in one year than
similar students who did not
receive it that's an equivalent
of three point five months of
extra learning for those
students and you can kind of see
on the graph there those extra
extra estimated effect from that
tutoring so even virtual
tutoring in rural areas are
seeing a positive effect.
Okay now let's talk about near
pure tutoring this is the high
school students i'm helping with
younger peers what does that
look like.
There were significant ela gains
with a mass score improvements
and significant across great so
let's dive into the table right
there you'll see that orange are
those who did not get tutoring
you'll see blue are those who
did get tutoring you'll see all
students tutoring had had a
higher proficiency rate across
fifth grade
across sixth grade and eighth
grade you saw those gains.
Okay now i'm in a the next slide
is the most important slide of
my presentation this is the high
impact tutoring results that
just came out last week that i'm
excited to present to you today
on the eight point five million
from HB two.
So if you don't hear anything
else for me today this is the
only thing you really need to
hear.
From twenty twenty three to
twenty twenty five tutored
students have improved in math
and language arts at almost
twice the rate of non tutored
students I want to impress upon
you that this kind of finding an
education is rare to find this
kind of data
we were thrilled and excited
there was some dancing going on
in the office when we heard
about these rates.
Um the excitement was probable
um that these are the results of
that eight point five million
this is significant for our
students what we have found is
that sustained tutoring over
time saw these results twenty
twenty three to twenty twenty
five so please make that note
that it's sustained tutoring of
these students that saw that
almost twice the rate of non
tutor students proficiency
okay now i'm going to i'm gonna
pass it over to our wonderful
friends at nmsu doctor rachel
born he's going to give us a
little bit more information
about high impact tutoring
and keep this you have to like
customer okay can everyone hear
me
ok
okay
mr chair members of the
committee I i'm rachel boring
i'm the director of the store
valuation and policy center at
animals you very happy to be
here and just to give everyone
an idea of engagement what
you're seeing on the side we'd
over two thousand students who
participated in hit last year
with seventy three individual
sites across the state and in
terms of tutoring sessions there
were about fourteen and a half
thousand sessions total
providing academic support
support in reading math or both
subjects and then next slide.
So looking at demographics for
students who had that data
available in the azi martin is
categories we saw that almost
all qualified for a free reduced
price lunch about a fifth were
students with disabilities and
about a third were english
learners or el.
Five percent were also native
american and to look at the
portion who are hispanic as well
you'll see that a strong
majority
or a hispanic
and the next night
and then that we ended with some
other highlights of the program
we had eleven side to indicated
there was a social emotional
learning or as the al component
to their program lacks of sites
offer support in both reading
and math eight also offer a
summer program and in terms of
logistics the most common
schedule just to give people who
idea was monday through friday a
few each offered their program
at different schedules during
the week and then there were
almost four hundred staff
supporting these programs
and then i'll turn it over to
duly term bring it out thank you
so much so moving forward I want
to talk about the strategic plan
at ped as we move forward with
tutoring
can everyone hear me
mr chair members of the
committee thank you to turn off
a microphone
so what are we what's our plans
moving forward for right now we
only have the one million but.
As director I am committed to
student level data I am
committed to higher valuation I
am committed that we have
technical assistance and
professional development for
this program and i'm committed
that it scaled across the state
as much as we possibly can um
you know as as director
as a two weeks ago on the new
director
these are my priorities that we
track each student that we
understand what's happening with
each of them that we have that
student level data that we do
uhm a thorough evaluation moving
forward and that we scale this
program and the recommendations
are and i'm gonna stay at again
tutoring it works and kids love
it that's our tag lane this is
one of the most effective
strategies we have for
increasing proficiencies and the
corner stone one of the
cornerstone strategies at PED.
Um so we are request is that we
have sufficient funding
recurring funding for tutoring
from you off and thank you so
much for this opportunity and
thank you all for your
partnership with the lesc with
doctor and restrangio here at
the student support services
division and doctor rachel born
and we now are open to
questions.
Counter anything else
mister share know that is it we
are we stand ready for questions
thank you and and I want to come
in couple of weeks ago I was at
the education commission the
states and the presentation by
the saga group on this that was
the early data was very exciting
about it out my couple of
questions of them in concerns is
how do we do it at scale that
was two thousand students where
in that age group we've got
twenty thousand students how do
we move to scale and what's up
it is the stapping of the
wonderful or that's a whole lot
of people that up skill and
train on how to do that that was
all the virtual one but very
interesting and exciting but
also want to make sure this is
not the only strategy that we
move forward this is part of
that good method education and
teaching and things of that it's
not the fixed that we can all go
okay did that done move away now
and and keep going so i'm sorry
who
center is all
mister chairman thank you very
much connor you did a great job
but nor this together but I do
have some questions on it in
your hand out that in in the
work i'm page two.
Uh says that pd dispersed six
point eight two million dollars
to twenty three wards
it is there are list anywhere
for
the
it's it's one in the back in
that correct mister chair
senator if you look at on page
seven appendix a will list all
of the aurities and new mexico
okay and out of all those
awardies tin of mit to bernaly
accounting
and i'm not seeing anything for
the south eastern corner of the
state and that upsets me greatly
there was one done for eastern
new mexico university and in
redo so and the ridiculous does
some units possible those are
considered metal.
South eastern and mexico funds
this
means that we've got going on in
our state
none of that money was spent
there I want to know why.
Mister chair and home i'm in
silence i'll see what i'd want
my name taken off I don't want
to ask you for the questions
thank you very much okay.
Thank you
thank you mister chairman
perceived it thank you guys very
good presentation a lot of
really good data so thank you
couple questions just for
clarification i'm looking at
your graph and I think it looks
great right uh the improvements
on page I forget it doesn't have
a page as data and evaluation
high impact tutoring.
And i'm just wondering what the
under the access on the left on
the side what is that is it a
percentage is it how do her we
measuring that.
Yeah the x access yes my my
teacher friend here is reminding
me of my of my education I
forgot I was educated here but I
thought it was pretty good so
yes so mr chair representative
block was okay and I think we're
on the same the one with the
line graph on it is that the one
we're okay yes so on the access
its proficiency level which I
believe or one two three and
four
okay great thank you so much mr
chairman thank you doctor borin
how by pronounced your name
right.
Uhm
yes thank you okay so that that
clear that up for me and then
i'm just wondering when it comes
to dollar amounts how much per
student per year does this cost.
For each student.
Mr chair reps in the block so it
it can vary but what I typically
best practices are put paid at
it about a thousand dollars per
student for the duration of the
program.
Great thank you so much connor
thank you mister chairman and
then i'm wondering because I
know we do have a crisis when it
comes to getting new teachers in
the pipeline to do this work how
are we recruiting more people to
be educators when it comes to
tutoring and where are we
getting these folks in this
pilot process that we're going
through now with this high
impact tutoring where we're
getting these folks to do that.
Representative locked think you
so much
mister chair representative
block thank you so much for that
question
um you know I I cover community
school so my perspective is
looking at the whole community
not just teachers so I love near
peer tutoring and i'd love to
continue that model I love the
idea of getting high school
students who want to be teachers
involved I love that I also love
the idea of some out of school
time with fantastic other school
time partners being involved and
also teachers so I think this
needs to be a multi pronged
approach
where we are of course having
those teachers there is mentors
and working but they are also
tired and exhausted as we know
so we also need to rely on other
sources and other folks to help
us with this high impact
tutoring.
It and if I may I attended the
thing at ecs that talked about
this and so and I don't have the
right in front of me so you're
getting what I recall of the
talked about but the middle
school saga program that showed
very very good results the
tutors were online with the same
kids and the tutors were college
students that had been trained
in how to tutor math and so it
was not them just doing whatever
they want but very specific
program that they were trained
for one of my questions there
because they had trained two
hundred of them or something in
order to do this is that's
wonderful how do we train three
thousand of them and where are
three thousand college students
going to come from I think many
of them were engineering
students and others that new
mexico state that were paid and
it seems like they were getting
paid twenty five to thirty
dollars an hour to do this so
fairly significant wages but
where are you going to get ten
to fifteen times that many new
mexico state can't manage that
the response from the presenter
was it doesn't have to be a new
mexico they could be out of
harvard they could be anywhere
in the country going through
this program so I hope that
answers your question
thank you so much mr chair and
that actually brings up another
question i'm i'm gonna be trade
to be as brief as possible
because I know and one of the
slides were talking about
culturally and linguistically
relevant some wondering how we
titles individuals when it comes
to someone at harvard university
or brown or somewhere to be
tailored to new mexico's
standards
mr chair representative block my
preference would be have new
mexico tutors and that's my
preference
and my plan would be to start
small
and then grow as we go along the
years I don't think that
throwing
everybody on onto the bus all at
once as the right approach and I
think it needs to be skilled up.
And our team is ready to do this
scaling i'm college students and
high school students community
partners
we can even train volunteers
parents who want to do this
programming we're creative in
our approach but I believe
culturally and linguistically
responsive is absolutely
critical to everything that we
do and I personally and as a
director would prefer that we
keep this home grown in our
districts and regions across the
state if possible thank you
thank you director appreciate
that okay so that's good to hear
and over prioritising new mexico
folks and I think that's good I
i'd love someone who is a
highlands university or eastern
or western or northern or all
the different directions we have
for universities so mister last
question i'm going to go back to
the high impact tutoring data
graph and I was just reading it
really quickly because it said
almost twice the rate that these
children are these students
improved and i'm just looking at
both the data points it says two
point four five one linguish
arts for non high impact
tutoring and then it's a two
point five eight and i'm just
wondering how we got to that
almost twice the rate figure and
i'm just looking at language but
it's also math i'm just not
quite sure how we arrived at
that so can you clear that up
for me mr chair representative
block what i'm going to do is
i'm gonna read you the analysis
that I have and then I will get
back to you with more like in
depth information about this but
i'm just going to reach you what
I have
the new grass of the average
rate of change per student
this is a growth curve analysis
looking at change over time
between her high impact tutoring
and non high impact tutoring
students while the charts may
not seem amazing please remember
that moving standardized test
scores can be rare analysis was
a late and growth curve analysis
on mssa test scores grade three
through eight rate of math
change for hit students is point
zero five four whereas point
zero one eight for non hit
students.
From twenty three to twenty five
rate of language arts changes
for his students is too point
two four one whereas point one
five for non hit students from
twenty three to twenty five this
is individual performance level
and then we can if you know get
get it get a hold of us and we
can give you more in death
information about that analysis.
Okay thank you so much mister
chair thank you that that
cleared it up for I did see the
numbers that it makes sense now
so
sorry I guess i'm just waking up
I have my second couple coffees
bear with me thank you mister
chair that's all I got thank you
thank you representative block
garage sonyana.
Thank you mister chairman and
would think for the presentation
this is always exciting for math
couple questions virtual no
computer based virtual we're
just talking people to people
tutoring right
mr chair representatives
saranyana
there was actually a process
there for those students live in
person assisting so there was
still someone there assisting
the students but yes the hit
middle math was virtual but the
high impact tutoring which is
the eight point five million was
in person
in mister chair representative
and if I may yes to clarify that
even when it was virtual
tutoring it was a it was a human
being on the other end it was
not just a computer program
perfect okay thank you um next
question was chairman during
school day.
During school day so how much of
it was during school day.
Mr chair and representative
sergeant imminent invite deputy
secretary mandate devel up to am
also answer some of these
questions.
This is a joint effort with
instruction and curriculum and
this division so I just want to
let you know that this is a
collaboration at peter.
Um so it represented a set in
yeah and
chairman saws for that number of
school day students right now
that that data we don't have
with us here today
but we do know that a majority
of the eight point five million
dollars that went out to school
districts who applied for it was
during the school day and the
saga math tutoring that has been
happening over the last couple
of years was actually done the
same combination some of the out
of school time providers were
doing it out of school after
school and then but what we
asked for was that again that
teachers were embedding it into
the school day so as teachers
were planning rotations that one
of the rotations was actually
four kids three kids and one of
the saga tutors
on the other side of the screen
and that one was solely a
virtual.
And my mister chairman I think I
think what I worry about is the
ones who can't go because they
can't stay after school to do it
and um just
when I was teaching math my most
successful years or when it was
a combination mast strategies in
alterer I had the other time
every everyday because not only
did they learn the math they
look they got confidence in the
mouth and that's the I think the
biggest challenges can I do this
and the confidence so I think
there's a great program but I
don't want to make I won't make
sure we don't miss the kids who
can't come after school and that
we are giving them the same
amount the during the score day
as we would after school yeah
that we we totally agree
representative of saturday and
in terms of source
thank you
vice terra metal.
Thank you miss chairman.
Connor on your appendix
there was reference earlier.
Do we have a breakdown from the
school districts as to who was
awarded white so which school
sites particularly got the
funding
mister chair vice ramaro I don't
have that on me currently but I
can work with p d and we can try
to find that information
and so mister chairman p d folks
you all have a breakdown of what
the school what schools received
white from the
chairman schools and
representative remember what we
will need to do is contact what
we did was that district applied
for the dollars and then
they worked with their
individual schools so we will
have to work with their
districts for that reporting
mechanism to report back to you.
Yeah mister chairman I think
that would be really helpful
because then we get a better
idea of what community is what
students what schools have the
capacity to run these programs
and who was served things like
that thank you mister.
Thank you based chair
representative colon thank you
mister chair
um so this is going back to this
of hindex
a with the breakdown of the
award amounts because I was kind
of surprised at how different
some of these award amounts are
for some school districts and
some charter schools so I am
showing that the central
consolidated schools received
one point nine two five and then
but we have our cricket school
said that two hundred thousand
and then I mean that santa be
hundred and twenty thousand and
so i'm in some of the smaller
charter schools received in the
three hundred thousand so i'm
not understanding kind of like
aps has a considerable amount
more students than some of these
other districts so i'm trying to
understand why.
Save last last leaders which we
love last thing is but that they
received such a large amount
compared to some of the other
districts and looking at a
district versus the charter
schools yes chairman tolls end
up representative calling and
the uhm the way that the
application went out to school
districts was that they there
was an applied up to an amount
and so districts applied for
what they thought they could get
two schools and ah to their
tutors because much of the this
money was actually used to pay
tutors and so the up to amount
was two million dollars
okay well thank you miss chair
is just a little concerning when
they see that the huge
difference in some of these when
you have a smaller school
district like what well
when school has eight hundred
eight hundred since total versus
when i'm looking at these some
of these bigger districts so
thank you
thank you represent represent
good.
Thank you mister good morning
and it was nice to see also
doctor stranger here and the
table and so happy you have to
work with the now
mister share my question is
following with a rep setting and
I was just talking about I agree
that the best impact that I saw
on the students was when it's
trying to use and I could regret
where it was combined just I
sort of the students and given
them an extra time during class
and missing their electives
very successful I always hear.
I'm not a good matter by myself
and I stay there because of my
they stay there because coral
mariachi sports everything else
right so that's what we want.
But I also understand that this
is a holistic approach so does
my question basically do in
bunda miss homes to do the well
online and I guess that's why
not they're not the but most of
us don't did it.
And I also had see how a
beautiful after program at the
time program will completely
drop to zero one one six or have
a transportation com so we can
have in our funding as separate
amount for transportation but if
we don't tied it to this am I
think is going to be really
difficult.
Uhm and as students I agree is
love it and and when we had to
sustain after school for
whatever reason we already know
anybody who is not actually
north street has higher
priorities to succeed in school.
How can we approach this and
really asking for your input
here
mister chair representative girl
I do just really want to quickly
clarify that while high impact
can take place after school best
practices do recommend that it
takes place during the school
day um as opposed the challenge
often we hear is that you know
scheduling as a recurring
challenge for for schools but
best practices do recommend that
it take place during the school
day though it still can't have
positive outcomes after school
but it is distinct from after
school programming
thank you mister at again and
that would imply that the stores
are going to be some more there
other parts in school and and
and that
I don't know it seems something
is a punishment for kids.
When is not something that they
go on there and so I I that's
i'm looking at my own experience
maybe somebody else can share
their own but this is where I
have seen thank you mister shirt
thank you and I think most of
the research indicates that it's
most effective when it's
embedded as part of the regular
school day not an extra program
where you're not doing well a
math you have to stay after
school to do other map that's
not as effective as when it's
embedded as part of the the
regular day our representative
right by cabinet.
Thank you mister chair and thank
you to representatives are
setting in angry because I
wanted to comment on that page
seven of your
report it is.
I'm also I also get excited with
date and research because that's
my uh background I also was a
former special ad teacher and
saw the value and saw the
results positive results in
tutoring on site during the
school day and so
last bullet where you put
equivalent of three point five
months of extra learning.
Really supports even further um
study of
students staying longer
in school anna in a school day
and um at the school location.
Always ends up showing better
results I mean that's been with
forty years of research and
study and data compilation
mister chair it's not just it's
not a recent
result it's been on the books
for a very long time and for
whatever reason we can we don't
need to go into all the reasons
why we've gone through.
The various discussions and
implementations of school these
and long jeopardy and all of
that but I just wanted to
comment on that because data
does support that and it's been
supporting that for a very long
time and so that this is
something to build upon for us
later to take into consideration
also
in what represent of saturday
none a mentioned about providing
alternative or alternative sites
for the tutoring is also an
opportunity to include a or
involve what i'm gonna get to on
my next point and that was the
recommendation as it relates to
um
mr report on page.
Um four which at the very bottom
on cable one is talks about the
most significant improvements
came from teacher lead tutoring.
And growth from fiftieth to the
seventieth that's also an
incredible
bear result and what that does
is it.
Forces us to log out innovative
and creative ways to provide the
tutoring and by home so someone
mentioned I can't remember maybe
it was arm.
Julie i'm not quite sure whoever
mentioned it that
we we are going to recruit from
local communities that's one of
the objectives and that you're
committed to doing that local
communities meaning high school
students college tracks students
are but also we need to look at
our retired teachers educators
retired educators in that full
spectrum and local are retired
social service providers retired
social workers retired
counselors and the list does one
the retirement community in
this.
Arena
are critical.
In this cross generational
approach to helping our public
education schools and vance are
students in the manner in which
we.
Have to advance them for their
future and for their successes
so it really behoves us to think
outside that box and be really
creative so I just wanted to of
there is not a real question but
build upon what you were already
targeting in terms of your
approaches so that we can then
further increase because the
results the results that you
have already cited are are just
incredible data in terms of I
all of your report into it
showing really positive results
in what we're doing and we need
to build a fund that and also I
hear from retired from those
retired sectors of their
eagerness to
volunteer their you know they're
retired but they still have
valuable time and would like to
give it in some way and i'd like
to refer them to our effort in
in the public education are you
not thank you mister chair.
Thank you representative center
pick it up.
Thank you mister chair I think I
have three questions and they're
going to start on h nine of this
hand out and comparing it to
page five I want to make sure I
understand this as downing data
and see how we can build on it
does this include all three of
the tutoring programs that are
on page five of the same hand
out or just the third.
Mr chair senator figure it is
just near pure tutoring.
On page nine.
Does the page nine sorry i'm
making sure on the same page
literally does nine dollars
correspond to page five hit
middle math near peer tutoring
or
tutoring.
Line of the chart and i'm
looking at this page five.
Which of these three categories
correspond.
To the growth rate so you're
referring to the growth rate of
high impact tutoring
okay thank you that's what the
title says but i'm not sure
whether it could respond to hit
middle math near peer or the
tutoring that happened at
seventy three six it was the
tutoring that happened at
seventy three sites with the
eight point five million thank
you yep thank you thank you for
clarifying that then my second
question is do we know.
For the data on page nine.
What age groups is this all
combined age groups grade two to
five what age groups are in here
because the less report page
five in our binder that connor
summarized indicated that math
tutoring high impact tutoring
seems to be more effective at
great two through five whereas
the literacy tutoring seems to
be more effective earlier and
that's if I understood connor
correctly so on this chart where
we're measuring the improvement
rate is it all great levels and
ages combined or do we know can
we get a break out of what grade
levels saw the most growth in
what area yes i'll feel that
when so mister chair senator
figure out with the sister
grades three through eight and I
think if our n is big enough
we'd have to double check on the
breakdown by grade for
meaningful break down analysis
by great level but i'm we should
have that data.
Thank you I think that might
affect targeting tutoring which
kind of what area.
Because it might shell very
different results and i'd be
interested to see it.
Mister chair the other.
References to page five of the
less report the legislative
recommendations.
The recommendation to term this
kind of tutoring into a perf.
Sustained over time project
seems to be essential because
these results that we are
excited about on page nine our
sustained over two year period
so if we think about trying to
expand this kind of program or
continue funding for it we have
to think about it in terms of
more than one year funding.
My last question is on h one.
Of the earlier sea report will
where we talked about.
Fifteen million we put in our
budget.
Mister out of school time and
high impact tutoring we combined
those things together and only
specified one for a hey impact
but can the out of school time
fourteen million.
Be directed toward high impact
to ring if if we still choose
who chooses that districts or
paired
it can we do that so that those
programs mentioned near parent
tutoring middle math.
Could be funded
yes a chairman soles and
representative you get a the
idea behind part of the out of
school time any is that
community based organizations we
call them cbo's frequently for a
short do you have the
opportunity to apply for the
dollars also and then run after
school tutoring as part of their
after school tutoring program
and what we have seen across the
state is that those folks who
apply for and districts apply
for that out of school time
funding as well that they
usually do some combination of
tutoring and then enrichment or
you know fun after school
activities to help keep kids
engaged until their parents pick
them up from work.
Mr chair and doctor belt that
something we've talked about
already today that in school
tutoring is more effective and
we've got good data here on some
in school mostly in squall
programs during the day and I
don't want to see those things
lose funding I would also like
to see equivalent data for the
out of school programs that show
any growth in proficiency
so that we can compare because
we're allocating funding and we
need to do it based on the
results that were seeing was
students do we have similar data
have we collected it for the out
of school programs.
Mr chair senator figure over yes
we do
twenty first centuries a federal
program that's out of school
time but they also provide
homework help and tutoring and
the results are fantastic for
academic proficiency I can get
those to you I don't have a rate
in front of my but we also cover
that program in my bureau and
yes there is data to support
that out of school time tutoring
is also effective mister terran
doctor branning it.
There's branding one to be clear
I support both of these things
and I think we as a legislature
need to continue supporting both
of these things but how we we
seem to be in the last couple of
years sorting the funds and if
we're going to do that we need
to sort it based on data not how
we feel about it.
And out of school programming
service of purpose network
lossing over which is child care
keeping students safe until
their parents can pick them up
that is ballot and necessary
concern but it's not the same as
changing proficiency rates I
would like to see if possible
mister chair these two things
lined up side by side in the
presentation in terms of what we
offer in our state and the kind
of results it's getting
something is clear as this
presentation was.
Covering all of our out of
school programs if it's possible
and makes sense thanks mister
chair that's it
mister share senator figure out
we will be doing I well I will
be doing a presentation on out
of school time later this
interim so
thank you center thorton.
And thank you mister chair this
is just a fall until sender
figure out where she was headed
with a and I think mine it's
just more of a direct question
to the director
if you had a magic lawn and
basically could start the
program starting now to scratch
and would say face it in over
the next three years how much
money would we need to allocate
to reach every student that
needs tutoring over the next
three years
because that's really what
you're asking this legislature
to do and i'm just curious
and think to include also out of
school programs because I think
that's another consideration
that also needs to be partisan
but if you were to create a
program in face it in over three
year period what would you need
in terms of dollar amount
mr chair center authorities I
like your question it's a lot of
fun
um I will say that last year we
did request eight million for
high impact tutoring and
received one and that that's
that's about accurate of where
we'd like to begin with this
programming um
based on the research we've done
on the success of twenty first
century out of school time we're
looking at about a thousand two
thousand dollars per student as
a best practice does that answer
your question
about what partly now if you can
tell me how many students need
tutoring then I can do the
numbers.
You know that mister chair and
senator thornton uhm you know
the district does the analysis
and then they decide how that
funding is given but i'm hearing
about sixty percent of our
students at least need this high
impact to ring thank you.
And thank you for that mister
that that was really the only
question I really had I just
want to understand what we're
looking at from from a financial
point of view and if we're going
to take this seriously given the
results that seem to be positive
we need to understand what
that's going to be in but what
that financial commitment is
would be for the state and it's
a continual financial and that's
the issue yeah mis- mister chair
if I just had one more thing and
I think it it may be speaks to a
little bit about who applies for
these funds even currently is
how many students need tutoring
is is one metric to look at the
other is local capacity to
provide that tutoring and so you
know when we're talking about
having enough teachers just to
staff regular classrooms in
addition to some of these are
additional efforts we've talked
about instructional coaches and
you'll hear from from just a
kind of minute about instruction
of coaches both in in math today
I think that's probably guiding
some of that local decision
making about whether or not to
apply for these grants in the
first place and so even though
all students who need tutoring
should get it districts are
making decisions about whether
or not they have the capacity to
manage the grant and they have
human capacity to actually
provide the tutoring so the the
number of students is going to
be very important as well as
working with the department and
local districts about the
capacity at the local level of
to actually provide the tutoring
we don't want to just give them
more money than they can handle
if they don't have the people to
do the work.
Any other questions I i've got a
couple of their questions but
certainly some comments uh get
it the education commission are
the states conference in salt
lake city I went to many of the
mouth ones up and the program
the saga middle school high
impact tutoring one.
Was very exciting new mexico got
held up as an example of great
things that we're doing in mouth
with that particular program.
I always impatient that we know
here's something that works.
And yet we're going to do
another pilot in new mexico
instead of moving rapidly to
scale one of the questions I
asked was you know how much is
it going to cost to do that
program for every middle school
or in new mexico and it's about
sixty million dollars here
but with fantastic results but
it comes with most of that is
paying the tutors and the
problem with scaling is where do
you get all of the tutors all of
the supervisors of the tutors
yeah there's a whole lot of
other pieces that go in to
scaling it I get frustrated with
when we regularly talk about
doing another pilot or even
doing this through the perf
which is designed to be pilot
we've got that data we know
what's going to work we don't
need to do through perfect and
other pilot we need to start
rapidly moving to scale.
That we say that in the LESC
regularly we don't control the
persons and so trying to get the
finance committee to fully buy
in to do this and I realize we
probably can't do everyone right
away but I don't want to do this
scaling up over ten years we
need to scale up in two to three
years to where it's available
for every student if we truly
are committed to making a
difference in in math
achievement and also that this
is not the only thing we need to
be doing I mean we should lose
sight that this shiny object
which is wonderful but this
doesn't solve all of the
problems we need to improve the
preparation of teachers in their
own mass skills so there are
fewer students who need the
tutoring we need to change
community attitudes where you
people stop saying i'm not good
at math either in everybody care
smiles and chuckles where nobody
would ever say I can't read in
every vehicle yeah yeah readings
way too hard for most people yet
you know that's the the society
comments about math regularly
and so you know certainly they
won't like to comment but let's
not do another pilot let's start
rapidly moving to scale if we
really care we our kids can't
wait for us to get our action
order they're getting older
every day and not having the
maskings to perform well so
anyone would like to comment
well terminal so they were just
like to add that to things so
with saga math we are going to
keep our original cohort of
students so that we can continue
some bonditude no data study on
them and so those are the
students that we heard about in
the report and then we have been
looking under the pillow
questions to find additional
dollars so that we can add an
additional cohort but we
wholeheartedly see where with
the middle school math program
and when their teachers are
committing three to four days
per week of in the school day
during their math class time so
not taking them out of their
electives or their specials.
That the teachers have found
that they can in fact do it that
there is time in their day um
and so we will be adding a new
cohorts of students that will
write in a stretch of dollars as
far as we possibly can and one
of the nice things about doing
saga during the school day is
that we can um piggyback off of
if a school has for example a
math coach to sort of be the
sight supervisor so we don't
have to pay that percent so
things like that we are looking
at being creative but what we
see is that that the impact
really comes from three to four
days per week
about thirty to forty minutes
percession and then and
hopefully we'll see another five
or six hundred students this
year
wonderful yeah I think the
research that they presented was
needs to be at least ninety
minutes a week in each session
needs to be at least thirty
minutes there are some kind of
ramp up and ramp down time and
if you try to do it in fifteen
minute intervals you don't
actually get to do in the math
all of the tutors are highly
trained and well paid for doing
it so that you don't worry about
they're going off the vacation
and somebody else substituting
in the they very much see it as
a job but anyway yeah certainly
and I I think is I look around
the room if i'm reading
everybody I see lots of heads
nodding that this committee
wants to to work towards trying
to get more of that money into
the base budget to do these
programs not do it as just a
pilot for a few students but how
rapidly can we ramp things up to
to really move forward in don't
give me head shakes if i'm not
reading the room correctly
people are ok
thank you all very much and I I
it's very exciting and you know
again lots of the rest of the
country is watching what we are
doing and in math because these
kinds of programs we are at
least at this point other states
are looking at us is the leaders
for how to turn around the low
mascors
sorry mister chair to come
around again but on that.
Point if we're going to do this
the the data we have.
From ms you sore it says at the
top up for two hundred and forty
four students where the other
nineteen hundred and we really
do need that data as well for
the students who are being
tutored so as we talk about
ramping this up and spreading it
around we need that data to make
sure we're collecting it and
it's part of future discussions
thanks mister chair
thank you any other comments
animal committee
if not think you so much for
being here really very much
appreciate thank you mister
chair that the presentation.
And team I think we're doing
fairly well we're just about one
schedule.
If we are supposed to be done at
ten forty five and ten fifty.
So improving that policy in
practice just a goes up next
while we're their transition in
great time for people go take a
bathroom break in a cup of
coffee a snack
keep your brain alert.
Whenever you're ready.
Good morning mr chairman members
of the committee has checking my
watch to make sure it's still
morning feels like afternoon to
me for some reason.
Um we are going to move on to
math I know this is a long
awaited conversation and you'll
see that I joined today by
shafing children director of the
mouth and science bureau at the
public education department as
well as doctor christie tyson
was the director of key through
twelve education programs out
the list almost national
laboratory foundation but she's
also here in her capacity as a
member of the state's mouth and
science advisory council that
you all has a legislature
actually created and state la
many many years ago to help
advise the department on what we
should do about math and science
it's grown a little bit to
include all the other things
that fall kind of into that
steam category so i'll be
presenting first from a policy
brief and that you'll find
behind tab eight in your binders
then i'll pass it to
mr children and then to doctor
taste in right after that you'll
have to bear with me this is
this is a bag of brief because
what we're trying to do today is
actually treat this kind of like
a capstone for the mouth work
that you've been hearing about
for the last couple of years and
working through
before I start i'd also like to
quickly think wesley guyer who's
our summer teacher on special
assignments he's been
contributing to a larger
educator preparation projects
with evans of us on our team but
we pulled out some of his mouth
work for this so just a quick
things and then to time as well
both of them helped contribute
to this brief ten keeps all of
our data in amazing shape so
we're able to pull together
really great graphics for you
also very quick things publicly
to them so that you know that
they also contributed.
So we started the top of your
brief this is really our core
challenge one in four students
and new mexico is profession
enough.
That's what we're trying to self
and if you look at figure one
and what we have here for you
are those statewide assessment
scores across the three main
subjects reading math and
science.
A mouth is that bottom line and
right there and you'll see that
where stagnants kind of in that
rate we often say one in four
but it's actually a little bit
lower it's about twenty three
percent.
Uhm new mexico is not alone and
it's declining math outcomes
which will see on the bottom of
page one here actually situates
the entire united states and a
global context there is an exam
for example called pisa the
program for international
student assessments that finds
that the united states is
actually falling behind on math.
Everywhere across the entire
country
so we score twenty sixth out of
eighty one countries who
participate in that and for a
bench mark we score at six then
reading and tenth and science
and so mouth really is a pin
point for everybody turning to
page two.
What I wanted to hear is
breakdown what that kind of
twenty five percent one and
force to test means that's an
average but it's not the same
for all students right and so we
included a couple of graphs here
for you to see some important
points figure to is going to
show you math achievement gaps
for certain groups the the ones
that we pulled here include all
of their students to her names
in the martinez yazi lawsuits
that includes economically
disadvantaged students native
english speakers or i'm sorry
native english speakers in
english learners students with a
disabilities and native american
students but we also port hand
data by gender here because
there is a gap between meland
female students as well.
And so the way that you'll read
this figure to hear as the
bottom line is going to be where
students and any of those groups
are included and then the line
above or any students who are
outside of that and you can see
those are percentage point gaps
in the middle box there so for
example between students
disabilities and students
with out disabilities there is a
nineteen point percentage gap
and you can see that the
profession see read for school
year twenty four for students to
stabilities and math is actually
more around seven to eight
percent so that twenty five
percent doesn't help the whole
story who wanted to include that
for you.
Figure three shows similar
information but by grade level
and so you'll see we've talked
about this as a committee before
but math provision see peaks and
fifth grade in new mexico where
we see a thirty two percent
proficiency rate but you also
see this line drop right after
that point and so by the end of
middle school and eighth grade
we see a nineteen percent
proficiency rate across all
student groups and by eleventh
grade we see a twelve percent
proficiency rate across all
student groups.
So these two help you have a
little bit more of the
understanding of who's impacted
whenever we say one in forts on
an equal one in form.
Moving to the top of page three
this is just a quick review for
those of you who might be newer
to the committee's mouth work of
what we've been doing over the
last few years so you'll see
this work actually started in
november twenty twenty two we
did our staff presentation on
math outcomes with many of us
across the team the reason we
started that is because that's
whenever we actually started to
get assessment results following
the head as an assessments that
occurred during the pandemic due
to federal waivers so that work
really helped to ground us and
clarify the dapth of the math
problem within our new
assessments that lead you while
the twenty twenty three and trum
to direct us a staff to actually
begin a formal study of math by
including it in our research
agenda so in the summer of
twenty twenty three we presented
to you a couple of times on this
one on elementary math another
one secondary math.
If you follow along with the red
arrow but i've done there is
include actions from the
legislature in response to that
so that work in the twenty
twenty three summer fled to the
twenty four session a couple of
things happened one is that high
school graduation requirements
were modernized and included
some recommendations around math
included and them one I should
have put on here was actually
you all also directed us to
study metal squam as a result of
the work in the twenty twenty
three interim given the drop
that happens there.
That let us then in two july
twenty twenty form.
Where we presented to you again
really around kind of the
professional learning systems in
what might happen to support
math there that let us into the
twenty twenty five session and
there's actually quite a bit
that happened in the twenty
twenty five session and so you
all have been focusing on math
pretty and in pretty targeted
ways and what we're going to do
today is bring out all together
but to summary some of the
things that happened is one
there is a math bell introduced
that took a look at what a
possible state framework could
look like
you all reinstated and science
technology engineering arts and
math funding and within that
below the line appropriation to
schools that actually wasn't
included in the twenty twenty
four session but you all did
included in your budget for this
last session for fiscal year
twenty six are you all increased
to seg funding for metal and
high school students and
particular in part and
recognition of the the supports
that those students might need.
Ah you heard about it this
morning but you all haven't
changed the the purpose and the
stipulations around the public
education reform funds and
included math as one of those
items that you really want to
see evidence on.
And you all also appropriated
funding to create a stem network
so there actually was quite a
bit in this last session to kind
of move some action forward math
and that leads us to today where
what i'm hoping is how we
actually end with some pretty
actionable recommendations for
what you all can do next on this
I want to talk about too much on
the rest of item of page three
adjust includes a little bit of
kind of the national kind of
math research and policy to sum
it up briefly what's complicated
some of these state math
approaches is that there's not
this clean off the shelf kind of
science of math in the same way
there is for science of reading
and what we mean by that is
there are actually trainings for
example like letters that you
can go and actually know that
they align with all of the
components math what we're
seeing is that states are
actually having to create those
training programs so that's what
we mean whenever say there's not
like a clean science of math.
That being sad one part I do
want to pull out is that there
is a very very substantial body
of research about effective math
instruction that can and form
policy you'll hear about that
from our experts today and so I
don't want that to be confused
with this idea of like we don't
know what to do exactly to teach
math we actually have a lot of
good research out there about
what works for brain science and
what works to move students
forward and bringing it together
inter state policy is our
current challenge in terms of
having a science of math
okay moving in to have pages for
in five.
The next thing we're gonna talk
about is how much state action
there has been across the entire
country on math and so this is
actually not all the bills but
if you look at the middle of
page for in the last few years
we've seen a ton of bills
introduced nationwide to try to
think about how we bring
together all of these ideas in
twenty twenty five alone for
national conference of state
legislatures are reported there
were a hundred and forty six
bills related to math introduced
across sixteen states.
Of those thirty one bills were
adopted or enacted not
exhaustive again but i'm gonna
talk about just three kind of
key ones and if you want to know
a little bit more about what a
bunch of states are doing what
i've done is pulled bills over
the last kind of three to four
years that have been passed
they're just listed
automatically for the first of
mine I talk about is actually
the first one listed which is
alabama earn and twenty twenty
two they created a numerously
act they were one of the first
states to do that and what they
did is kind of create a post
secondary math task force to
develop guidelines for early
children and math um early
childhood and elementary math
instruction excuse me and they
also required schools that were
identified as low performing to
participate in professional
learning that they are unstate
department of education created
so that was one of the first
states actually to do something
on this.
For the next fundamental
actually go to the top of page
five I think this one's
interesting indiana in twenty
twenty four they passed a bill
addressing both early and middle
school math actually their
unique in that regard so they
actually and their math attempts
the mandated placement of middle
school students who meet
proficiency bunch marks into
advanced mouth courses
recognizing that middle school
math is actually like a big
indicator of what happens to
your students next while also
doing a lot of the things that
we're seeing in other states
which includes numerous
screening for their catherine
two students and review of their
teacher preparation programs.
The next one i'll highlight only
three is io this is actually the
longest summary because it's the
most comprehensive bill that
i've seen and it was just passed
this legislative session and
they made comprehensive changes
across their entire education
system so some of the things
that I have put into there
state law around this now is
that there are developing and
distributing family centered
resources to support mouth
knowledge at home they are
providing teachers with evidence
based professional development
related to high quality math
instruction.
They're actually requiring their
state department of education to
develop and distribute a
comprehensive state mathematics
plan to kind of hold the
visioning for all of this
they're also requiring their
department to develop and
publish a list of valid in
reliable mathematics screeners.
And then they're also tackling
teacher prop by looking at math
methods and requiring math
methods in their teacher
preparation programs as a
requirement for teacher
candidates to actually get their
license we'll talk a little bit
about how that connects to new
mexico soon and then of course
they're doing some of that
screening as well.
If you turn to page sex for
those of you who don't want to
read through all of the
difference items and think about
those things the other thing
we've done here is take a look
at all of those bills that we
were able to identify and these
are the primary seven themes
that were seeing and those
bills.
So the first is universal
screening and early
identification this does kind of
borrow from what we're doing and
literacy across the country
where your screening kids pretty
early on to understand where
they're out and math and
thinking about idean them early
so that you can provide those
supports proactively a second is
to provide tiered inventions
interventions excuse me an
individualized support plans
potentially for those students
who are actually identified a
third is that there is an
emphasis on high quality
instructional materials and
evidence based programs showing
up and that shows up in actions
like colorado requiring its
department to the maintain
approved less of math curriculum
for example.
The fourth is support for
educator prepare a professional
development and preparation
those I groups together but
they're actually very distinct
because one is targeting the
development of who becomes
teachers themselves and the
other is that ongoing
maintenance of skills across
your entire career so they are
can connected deeply but also
require some different
approaches.
The theft is really interesting
to me and actually or seeing
some emerging evidence is one of
the highest impact strategies
which is the use that's these
math coaches specialists are
interventionists yesterday
during our superintendent panel
you heard almost all of those
superintendents mentioned
experience with math coaches at
some point and how video that is
to helping to up skill their
teachers and make sure that
there are supports in the actual
score saves.
The sex as parents engagement
and notification requirements so
actually particularly for the
youngest students that family
engagement around math talk
about this in a few minutes too
is is pretty vital for them
getting math contents not just a
school but in their everyday
life similar to how we encourage
families to read to their
children for example and then
the seventh is integration with
broader school improvements and
accountability systems in this
kind of gets of that systems
level planning so that these are
not one off initiatives but are
really breeded into an approach
that brings everybody's efforts
together.
Together all of these
transactions that states are
moving beyond just kind of these
generalized calls for math
improvement toward structure to
system level approaches that
combine that early
identification the targeted
support building educator
capacity and turning all of that
into a system where we have that
broad curricular alignments and
a vision.
I do want to note and that
despite this momentum we don't
have long term comprehensive
evaluations these are new
efforts so a lot of these state
legislative efforts have
happened just in the last hand
full of years and so we know
that it may take a little bit of
time to understand exactly which
parts for example if it's the
screening if it's the parent
engagements like how all of that
is to scrutiny impacting but
there's still that emerging
evidence behind each of those
actions and if lessons from
structured literacy
implementation alongside
everything we know about
learning science are any
indicator we expect that it will
take about seven to ten years to
really show that measurable
impact on student outcomes but
staying the course is why some
states are noticing is starting
to show emerging outcomes even
though again one of the most
recent bills was twenty twenty
two and an implementation dates
as you all know when you create
laws can also mean that we're
just starting to see action.
Moving to have h saving have
very quickly I summarized all of
this in what i'm calling new
mexico's levers toward action
and these based on our contacts
national research and what's
happening in our state already
are kind of the four areas that
we think you could create the
most action and one is that
visioning and governance two as
that professional learning and
educator preparation three as
that system and continue of core
instruction and support and then
forth is family engagement and
supports and all of that kind of
flends up into that cookie serve
state math policy.
If you'll turn off being a page
eight.
There's a long section on each
of these so i'm going to pull
out some of the key ideas but
please feel free of one of those
and peaks your interest more
than others to read through all
of it.
But as mentioned here the first
one is visioning in governments
governance and really that is
about ensuring alignment across
the entire system from the
legislature to pd to distract
send schools but also for other
entities that work around math
for example the math and science
advisory council or the newly
funded step network and the idea
here and one of the things that
I actually pulled from and some
mr charger will talk about
theirs very soon is that we
actually have a very newly just
last week released new mexico
math framework two point
developed by the public
education department which calls
for those system leaders to
cultivate coherence across
policy is an instructional
practices so we actually do have
some visioning and governance
already
but legislative governments
letters can help levers can help
support that for example by
funding that sustained
professional learning that the
framework calls for clarifying
expectations for mouth and
structure that we expect of our
teachers or our future teachers
requiring state right reporting
on progress for example i'm all
of that can make sure that that
vision actually becomes real.
Cap the next one is professional
learning and educator
preparation on page nine of your
brief.
And we know that teacher
preparation and ongoing learning
remain those really really
critical levers the framework
also calls and emphasises for
effective math instruction
requiring that deep content
knowledge culturally in
linguistically responsive
practices within that knowledge
and the ability to support
mathematical discourse and
consumption or conceptual
reasoning these skills though
really require a very high
quality teacher work force we
have to have strong folks who
have both content knowledge and
math and peter gog which is just
the way that you teach that you
know how to teach what you know
two other people and both have
to be there you'll see on table
one even though we're calling
for that that deep developments
because we offer a couple of
license your types in new mexico
traditional license those are
the folks that were you
generally think of as maybe a
fresh and a college getting a
four year degree in education as
well as alternative license your
programs which might i'm help
people who really have like
maybe a maybe bringing from
yesterday a senator thirteen
year point around maybe someone
who's a physics person wants to
become a teacher how does that
work and that's for alternative
licenser comes in in one of the
things that might be getting in
the way is that the requirements
for those two programs are not
the same so your folks and those
traditional licenser programs
are getting some of that mouth
content and pedego g in a way
the alternative license or folks
are not required to
some moving to page ten for
those of you who really want to
dig into the educator side of it
you can see we pauled the
requirements specifically for
those two different pathways
here for you to look at but the
bottom line is that math methods
which you're going to hear
doctor taste and talk a lot talk
about in just a few moments
might be one of the keys to
bring some parallelism to those
two pathways.
And moving to the very bottom of
page eleven and into page twelve
the third potential policy lover
is a system and continue of
corro instruction.
So here are new mexico like many
states and we have what we call
our multilayered systems of
supports that's a term that
those of you who are teachers
here all the time you know very
well
but I will describe it briefly
it's this concept that we
actually have if you think of
concentric circles kind of
expanding out in the middle you
have kind of your tier one or
layer on instruction those are
your practices that apply to all
students that's where we need to
actually see improvement we have
to improve just the core
instruction that we're doing to
all students before we than
expect that here too which is
where you start to see
intervention work or tear three
even more intense of
interventions actually take
route and if we connect this to
our hydro such tutoring
conversation tutoring absolutely
works and can can work but to
direct your son as earlier point
the more we improve that tier
one the last we need those to
hear two and two three
interventions and so we need to
do all of that rather than just
investing in interventions.
Table to what I did here is pull
from just tom six of the state
examples because part of what's
happening in all of these state
laws is that we're seeing these
states actually begin to put in
statue what they want those
interventions to be that
obviously is built on the
assumption that tier one
instruction is working but this
came up whenever we talked about
literacy and roswell in terms of
for what are those specific
interventions and so I wanted to
pull these here on the digital
version all of these will link
there's a state name actually
links to those so for those of
you who really want to do again
and see what they've put into
those just some sampling kind of
tier to interventions that were
seeing sampling tier three and
then also starting supports in
these states because all of that
instructional conversation also
means we have to support the
teachers who are actually doing
all of that work and one i'll
call out for example it's
alabama which is actually not
just offering math coaches but
requiring the use of math
coaches state wide to make sure
that school sites have someone
who teachers can go to to help
them improve practice at any
point they're always there at
some better than to their entire
day rather than it being or
maybe the mouth cultural be here
today or maybe my school has one
that's pretty unique actually
but if we parallel this again
with literacy that's one of the
items we've seen make a huge
difference is having that
embedded experts in your school
environment.
Ok and then the last lover is
family engagement and this one
i'm very excited about and also
to reference the education
commission of the state's
national policy forum and we
happened to go to a really great
panel about early mouse and
engaging families and caregivers
as partners and math learning is
actually a really vital but
often under utilized strategy
for supporting students success
particularly for your youngest
students and so this is that
kind of cultural shift that
we're thinking about where you
get folks who might say one not
a math person and I don't know
how to help my kid with it where
I was again to reference my
earlier point a lot of parents
do know it's important to read
to their kids but there are very
concrete things that people can
do with their young children too
that don't require them to be a
physics expert but are actually
really vital
funds stories on fact about me
is that I briefly in my career
top three and four year olds and
so whenever we went to this
panel we actually up it was like
going back in time because they
were describing things that we
would deal for example teaching
families that you can do things
like shape walks which just
means like when you're out on a
walk you're somewhere you can
point and say well look at that
window what shaped is that look
like is that a rectangle that
square what is that or this cut
does this look the same as that
shape these are actually really
vital activities for families to
do with their students outside
of the school environment that
are important in creating that
conceptual thinking i'm cooking
is actually a very big math
activity if you think about it
let's do accounting project at
one scoop at two scoops if you
serve a snack they can group
they can count and so there's a
lot of ways in which family
engagement is really vital in
this and is often overlooked and
so what that means practically
is that in some states are
actually whenever they do that
early screening they want to
actually bring families into
that planning process for them
to be involved in the math of
their math with their students
in the same way again we know
that reading is important so
there are some times.
Initiatives to mailbox to homes
so family engagement vital in
this.
That takes me too legislative
recommendations we've also got
some other ones and i'll spend
the most time on the legislative
ones and then just kind of
cruise through the other ones
but we've got a few for you the
first they're on page thirteen
is that the legislature could
consider a clarifying
expectations for math
instruction early identification
and intervention while also
bolstering state efforts to
create those support and
intervention systems.
Um this could exam for example
include those things like the
universal screeners family
notifications support plans and
professional learning cycles
aligned to the state's math
framework but the second part I
bolded there is that for these
to be effective schools have to
have the capacity to support
students we've still got address
that kind of tier one layer one
instruction and make sure that
for example if a student is
screamed that they actually have
teachers have a really good
sense of what to do next because
if not that really does
potentially hold the risk of
stigmatizing that students as
not being good at math rather
than truly supporting their math
outcomes
and the second is that you all
could consider requiring math
methods course work for all
teacher license or candidates
some including those an
alternative programs structure
tyson's gonna talk about that
one that actually comes from the
math and science advisory
council so I won't go on too
much more about it.
You could create statutory
authority for statewide math
coaching or intervention as
models.
Um other states again like
alabama has codified rules for
mouth coaches and
interventioners and new mexico
could follow suits but
leveraging what we already have
one potentials that you could
think about blending that newly
funded stem network to create
that as a system of training
those cultures across the entire
states because they are going to
be those regional hubs and every
single corner of the state and
so this is where applying our
contacts to the ideas really
important
you all could consider requiring
public reporting on district
curriculum adoption and
intervention delivery so our
department already provides a
recommended list of high quality
math curriculum but districts
are not required to report what
they use and so potentially
reporting could enhance that
transparency and create more
instructional coherence across
the states
this one we've tracked about a
little bit but continuing to
monitor the math initiatives
funded through perth that'll be
really vital so that we scale
what works to make sure to stop
what doesn't.
And you are could also continue
that standalone steam funding
that you re and stated that's
last legislative session so that
the department has actual
resources to do the mouth work
that's a priority for them.
On the back of page fourteen
we've got a few things for ped
at prep programs school
districts and charter schools as
well so ped aren't kind of in
the same spirit could provide a
slice and share requirements for
teachers to reflect that ongoing
engagement with math content so
for example we've seen another
states that could include things
like periodic renewal or
microcredential requirements to
ensure that educators continue
that professional learning and
they could formalize pathways
for math endorsement and
specialist rules whenever we
talked about a year ago about
mass and we heard about this
really promising athendorsement
program at n s u it's a to your
program in the idea is very
strong and very sounds and at
the same time how can every
teacher access that if there
were more formalised pathways
for us to consistently train
those folks that could
potentially create more scalable
options that are also more cost
effective.
You are could develop or i'm
sorry the department could
develop and publish
implementation metrics aligned
with its very newly released
mouth framework so that we know
if others recommendations which
are really rich in that document
to actually happening
at prepare again could require
that dedicated math methods
course work they could align
program curricular with the
actual effective math teaching
practices that research shows
works.
And school districts and charter
schools have a role to play till
so they can identify an
investment staff who can serve
as those mouth coaches are
interventionists so find they're
really good teachers and put
them on that pathway to actually
playing a different role in
their school and they can align
their mlsas again that's our
kind of tiered system with
concentric circles are with them
off framework they can of course
engage families as partners and
math learning really vital for
example if you're having parent
teacher conferences and walking
through some of those quick
activities I talked about like
shape walks or counting on their
snacks and sorting those are
really low cost no cost maybe
even strategy is that families
can deal and then of course they
can assess patterns in their own
data so for example we know in
new mexico that the state why
trend is the mouth peaks and
fifth grade and then drops
districts should definitely be
doing their own analysis to see
what grades need the most
supports in their own location
and see if that matches their
state why transfer.
Thanks for bearing with me we
wanted this to again bring
together your work from the last
few years and leave you with
some really really actionable
ideas are not pattern to
director charter yeah good
morning and thank you so much
for the invitation back to
present to you while as the
committee and thank you for the
staff as well i'm here to talk
to day about current mathematics
initiatives from the public
education department as well as
future initiatives mr chair
sorry we're gonna which is the
second I think we're going to
get handouts
that should be appreciated.
The.
The.
Thank you so much will continue
with slide number three on your
handouts.
While the legislative session
elevated the mouth conversation
and allowed for productive mouth
mouth questions and
conversations to happen.
Um from the thirty thousand foot
view we're seeing that there are
pockets of success.
Across the state however
consistent high quality mouth
and structure state wide is
lacking.
All the initiatives that the pdu
are moving forward with a line
to our strategic plan.
And specifically gold number two
that you see on the slight it's
important to note that this
these strategies.
Are nationally recognized as a
set of system of a systematic
approach to mathematics
instruction.
These strategies have been
utilized in other states as we
direct or half the way talked
about as well as recognized by
national organization such as
the council for chief state
school officers excellent ad in
the national council of teacher
quality.
Um as being.
Bottles that other states showed
utilize to support math
achievement.
Moving on to slide for the work
of mathematics in new mexico
continues to realize that new
mexico mouth framework we
recently updated this to version
two point.
Thanks to community efforts.
This provides a roadmap and
foundation for a systematic
approach to improving
mathematics teaching and
learning providing students
where the well rounded high
quality map instruction day to
day.
This person the nation developed
mouth framework will insure that
students are powerful users that
father
we have seen how much people
care about literacy we want to
see people care about
mathematics as well.
Moving on to slide number five
while last fiscal year did c as
your ing out of pd stam and
mouth allocations we have been
hearted work.
Relaunching initiatives that
will improve mathematics
achievement.
These initiatives are under
taken as a part of a systematic
approach to build capacity for
school leaders bill capacity and
teachers built confidence in
teachers.
To support high quality math
teaching and learning and
support struggling students.
So I mean I take you next.
Onto a journey and looking at
water we doing in.
All of the repairs starting with
one bantry one slide number
seven.
So looking at elementary we are
we've been partnering with the
mexican state university for the
past several years in our
numerous program this.
Initiative is to help up skill
elementary teachers with
confidence in teaching my
practice providing them.
But understanding deep down of
the math ideas and how they
interconnect with one another.
Towards them strategies to
support high quality teaching
and learning a mathematics.
And help students to think
through matt problems and be
confident
you can see on the graphic on
the right hand side.
Depending on a great level that
the teacher is teaching.
Numerous
have to just go through a
specific pathway.
Talking through different topics
this sixteen dollars this sixty
hour.
Long professional learning
series has teachers working with
other teachers in the comport
model we work with a strong
facility they learn you content
then they go back into their
classrooms they are applying
what they learn with their
students they're then collecting
student work samples student
learning artifacts and then
bringing it back and they talk
but there teachers there are
correct of futures that they're
with are there facilitator to
see how well are there students
doing.
With the new contact that
they've been complete.
This approach is the fact that
because it's job embedded it's
done.
At the same time that it was a
teaching.
They're working with other
teachers so they're learning
their pure morning with others.
It's about that actual content
over there going to be teaching
a moral.
And they're going to get quick
feedback from their peers on how
did I implement this oh it
didn't go to wealth here's why
or did you think about this so
it's that continuous
improvements.
Doing our pilot year one of the
facilities shared with me a
story about a teacher that they
were working this teacher was
level three teacher.
Has been in that classroom for
many many years national port
certified and when you were
starting this the teacher calls
up there the solidarity in a
panic inside the solitary.
I don't know if I can commit to
this sixty hours worth of
learning this year I just gave
my interest in my students have
all have significant gaps from
their boy assessments I don't
know if I can I need to help my
students persons information I
don't know if I can participate
in this pilot with you.
Facilitators that come down on
them okay
i'm an encourage you to
participate in this.
I think this is going to help
you it's gonna help your
students
stop fast forward to the end of
the year yes what that same
teacher called their facilities
as hassle all of my students
have in story all of my students
showed gains almost upgrade
level that year.
That is the impact of numerous.
When even experienced teachers
are still
taking a way of learning and
still are impacting st.
Along with
continuing to scale up numerous
disear mean to support eight
hundred and twenty educators
this year and then each year
scaling up to target two
thousand five hundred teachers.
With an allocation and the seg
similar to what we have seen for
professional arning aligned to
structure literacy.
Alongside the development of
up scaling up of numerous we're
also working with our partners
that mets you to develop a start
of parent facing resources so
that not only are teachers
helping students but also
families can then help students
learning at home.
Bees no cost major offer be
available to families
manipulatives between the many
of the days which will include
supports for families both in
english and spanish so that the
continual of learning the start
just does not stop in the
classroom it can also continue.
The.
Yeah moving on our journey we're
going to shift from elementary
to middle embedded school by
similar approach of this on
alger this is a multi initiative
that we've been working and
partnering with the charles
eighteen the center out of the
university of texas at auster to
develop this one hundred and
thirty hour professional
learning series works not only
with.
Costume teachers but also
construction coaches.
Answer administrators.
That focus on our diversities
helps the teachers understand
the dap and brap of middle
school standards.
That will be students to success
in alder one we know out of her
one is a get weight course from
many students focus on our
brother is to help equipment.
Students.
I'm sorry help to equip teachers
in understanding the adapter of.
Had a best teacher the standards
in metal score so that students
are prepared for how to provide
in addition another layer
is that support for instructions
and school leaders.
When school leaders can have the
same conversations as teachers
in continuous improvement that
builds a capacity for educator
for teachers and also build the
capacity for coaches and leaders
so that the instructional leader
is beat that school
administrator is the instruction
they are supporting they are the
expert and it can support their
teachers.
Yeah.
Our first court completed.
The focus on outer brought in
the summer of.
Twenty twenty eight.
I heard from school leaders of
that rfk charter
and or tales and the feedback
from the school leaders was
wonderful.
This series help down to have
those cohesive vertical
conversations with their
teachers this help them
implement.
Structured professional earning
conversations in their schools
so that they can be the
instructional leader.
Surveys we've done with our with
our first cohort of teachers and
leaders showed that they were
coming out of the series very
confident.
They have implemented this into
their teaching and learning on
ideally basis score leaders
school leaders let me tell you
school point to attend every
session even the sessions that
were optional for them why
because this was powerful for
that it was powerful for them to
sit and here what teachers are
hearing for that they can go
back again and be the leaders
like th.
The.
Moving on to slight number nine
nominative for middle school to
high school.
I was reviewing my notes last
night and it was funny it was
about a year ago did the day
that you all invited me and we
talked about the reinvision the
high school math athletes last
time I reported to you you all
that well working group made
above new mexico map community
members had just completed
eighteen months of work in
developing recommendations for
new high school mouth halfways
in new courses that's been these
recommendations were reviewed by
people staff and we begun
implementing it these new
courses and our point two the
courses that are highlighted in
the orange box on your hand out
these new courses that.
Our community members recommend
it and are now going to be
available setting this upcoming
school.
One of the new courses that
community members that the mark
community members recommend it
was a modernized geometry course
which we are now calling g of
stats in astons it identified
the working group identified or
the standards that students need
to know.
Incharacter
and identify those the central
concepts and then they are they
identified relevance statistics
probability standards and
incorporated that into this
generatory to this geostat's
course.
The other set of recommendations
from the working group was a
modernized outer or two course
in that stuff set of courses
that you see in the second
orange box on the bottom of the
on the bottom of your hand
out
so the modernized alterpation is
made up of e once semester
algebra to course that again is
still down to what are the
standards that students need and
on the second semester course
totally left up to just units
give that flexibility they
developed three new courses
quantity to reasoning which is
how students making sense of how
numbers and mathematics can help
explain we all real world
problems and make smart
decisions based off
the second course is a dealers
are high school data science
course
this is where this will be
working with lots of data steers
to find patterns and make sense
of the world and then the
thorough course is advanced out
of our course.
That would help students as well
if they're on the path to
calculate.
Again I guess that these courses
are going to be available this
upcoming school year and will be
rolling out professional
learning to school is that
wanting to begin utilizing these
courses in school you're twenty
eight twenty nine.
These courses will be replacing
the traditional geometry and
traditional alternative.
The.
So next five will call them into
art yes next slide.
Now support strategy sorry so
we've gone through focus on
elementary middle high school
now we're gonna take a step
back.
Recently I got to visit two
schools are several schools and
two districts will be a run from
service.
What was unique about the scores
as they were taking time to
implement high quality
instructional math materials.
These materials support evidence
best ways evidence based ways of
learning and teaching bathrooms
especially for the students it
named in the marching is yells a
consolidated last.
The schools were providing these
materials providing ongoing
training for both teachers and
learners and the results they
were seeing are outstanding me
seven so their math proficiency
goes go from zero percent to
sixteen percent.
Real rancher has seen student
growth from their boy.
Interest from their beginning of
your intermasters to the end of
your interest interim assessment
this is the power of.
Equipment.
Schools utilizing high quality
materials.
Where standards on the floor and
then supporting instruction and
ongoing learning.
This.
I can
I can tell another story.
So I was at a a few elementary
schools of your ranch held this
past year to look at and learn
from their math lapse
because we have finding to
provide an arm scale of mouth
lapse most fascinating perceive
students twenty five thirty
students in the classroom
talking with each other planning
with math manipulatives.
Found.
And they're all being overseen
by a confident teacher and
mathematics a confident teacher
mathematics.
Math labs can help support
students in the elementary
space.
Where everyone can get somewhat
can get additional supports
I also got to talk to a few
parents and it is funny what one
of the moms told me that their
should instead why do we have
math lobs before this is so fun
i'm actually learning math and
any make sense to me because
what we're learning about flab
is also what my regular teacher
is teaching as well.
So we're providing grants for
both.
Implementation of high quality
materials and math like so we
can replicate this success steep
wide.
Next slide will be discussing or
won't be rounding out and
talking about future math so
slide twelve
all of these initiatives that
the pd that i've talked about
today
support a small group of
educators but in order to reach
more educators and see these
types of impact with students
we need to see comprehensive
support seat wide
legislation should be
comprehensive and encompass
squares in building capacity for
both teachers and leaders that's
by building confidence.
Providing ongoing training for
teachers and leaders and center
on high quality materials and
also providing wrap around
supports for students you're
lighting towards such as early
numerous screeners can help up
and help teachers identify
students that need support early
on
but also the same time shookies
accelerate that mathematics that
students are already indeed
and I like those
struggles and
achievements with parents that's
by opening a conversation having
to wait dialog with where
parents and families are.
Seen as partners and more.
Funding for coaches and high
needs areas to support school
leaders and teachers it's also.
Coaches can provide unfight
training they can be in
plastrooms providing ongoing
continuous improvement and
support they can model breath
practices and they can coach
each with futures they can be
seen as a support for leaders.
Teacher preparation that
includes rigorous standards is
also key teacher candidates that
are coming out of our educator
preparation programs are not
adequately imprepared to teach
our students
districts are having to utilize
their resources to them
immediate.
Recently the national council of
tutor quality highlighted to
maxical for having rigorous
content standards that teacher
preparation programs online
programs to.
But ding does i'd not telling
them how do we have to teach
students.
They also recommended that we
support districts and requiring
them to adopt and the implement
I quality materials
lastly.
For far too long many students
who should be accessing advanced
math courses in middle school
i'm not being given access to
those courses their encountering
barriers like additional
meetings additional tasting
additional paperwork
and automatic enrollment policy
that insures students have
access to the mathematics when
they are ready that will enhance
and challenge that
is appropriate.
And I will and here and i'm
going to.
I'll see the speaker and I will
pass it on to doctor christie
tyson are incoming culture for
the math and science advice.
Thank you mr chair thank you
let's see members it's an honor
to be here today and also just
really exciting to see how far
this committee has come in
thinking about the work around
mathematics in the state um it's
there is a tunnel build on and.
I I am so encouraged by the
conversation and the alignment.
So i'm here representing the
work that the math and science
advisory council has done over
the last year to really think
about it what what
recommendations can we do so
first just a
wouldn't be a good mouth
conversation if I didn't start
off with sort of my basic court
assumptions about bath same
understand where I come from and
I bring this to probably every
conversation they have about
math.
Which is unside to
that all children all children
are capable of doing math.
Every single child can thrive
an experience enjoy learning
mathematics and the work is when
we see when we see that
proficiency rates when I see the
charts that we thought that
today I don't think about our
students capabilities I think
about the opportunities that
those children have had to learn
mathematics and I think that
that is the great shift is that
this is an adult problem it's
not a kid problem and so it
prohibits us to really think
about like how do we picture
every kid has access to
incredible joyful.
Rigorous struggle like support
them to have productive struggle
opportunities to learn math.
And then just as
hardly just cut just
talked about is that there are
evidence based practices we know
we're good now teaching looks
like.
And then and those good the
trick though is is that those
good mouths teaching practices
often times look really
different from the math that a
lot of us learned.
And it's a site is mixed
you go from the teacher being at
the front of the room telling
kids how to solve problems to
being the teacher who is the
listener and the facilitator of
children's learning it's a big
shift.
And that's the work that's the
deep work but it is beautiful
work and it's exciting work and
you have incredibly
talented people in the state who
are up for doing the work
so the mouth and science
advisory council was created by
the legislature in two thousand
and seven this is the next
slide.
And we were created to make
recommendations around statewide
strategic planning around math
and science to advise the bureau
and the public education
department.
And then to really work with
communities to identify what are
the needs around
great mouth and science
the scope of the mountains
answered by their council has
grown a little bit over the
years it's not just not then
science anymore we have are so
computer science that we try to
keep an eye on as well as the
outdoor learning.
On the next slide you can see
the current members of the mouth
and science academy and feel it
carefully what you will see are
that there are teachers on this
on the map and sign answered by
the council both math and
science teachers
we have community members and
then we also have
representatives from higher
education so are conversations
are very rich and very layered
because people bring multiple
perspectives till work.
The.
That brings me and today we're
just talking about math if you
wanted to talk about the science
recommendations computer science
knocked or learning we're happy
to come and have that
conversation
but we basically came up with
three recommendations for this
year.
And i'm going to go over the
three recommendations but then a
minute i've I created some
graphics to try to help you see
the conversations we've been
having an unsack and the vision
that we're trying to work
towards and we see these
recommendations as first steps
but I think also what you've
heard from jason shafe is that
there's just a ton of work
around a lining this and I think
we can even push these further.
So I first recommendation and
this is a bandwagon that i've
been on a long time which is how
do we just make sure that every
single teacher who gets all
license in the state has access
to mount methods.
The majority of teachers that we
are preparing right now come out
of alternative of license your
programs and some of those
alternative lacenter programs
offer a mouth methods course and
some doubt.
Everybody is doing the best they
can with what they have but I
think that that is a start
mouth methods is one piece of
the picture
most many places actually
require that there me for an
elementary school license for
example that there'll be nine
hours of mouth content that's
focused on the math that
teachers are required to teach
so that you learn not just the
math content that's not just
learning like one plus two week
was three actually learning the
developmental process that
children go through to learn
what is going on and kids brains
and how do we support them to
really develop a deep conceptual
understanding of one plastic
equals three which
there if you want to see some
beautiful conversations come
into an early number talk and
just kids thinking well blowing
away on that.
So that's the beginning the
second piece and and I think
that there's some good
conversations to have around
this one but really
teacher preparation helps
teachers build their foundation.
But.
Then you have you know hopefully
i'm very long career in
education in our states.
And there's no requirement to
continue your learning other
than what you're district
decides or if it happens to have
a good program that you can
join.
If you look at almost any other
professional license there's
ongoing requirements to make
sure that your maintaining and
understanding of like how the
knowledge is developing in your
field from being a doctor to
being a herodresser to being a
mechanic and we don't have that
in the state and so I think like
one of the things for a really
helping us to improve.
Learning opportunities for
children is how do we put the
structures in to really build up
our profession so that teachers
have access to that ongoing
learning or at least they are
inspired to do because they want
to renew their license or that
required to take a micro
credential or something like
that to make sure that that
learning is ongoing I I don't
mean license to teach a new
mexico in the last century
and
you know i've gotten through
i've been often learned a whole
bunch of about math teaching and
learning
but if I and state it as a
teacher there would have been
nothing that really required me
to consider learning and perhaps
I would have just been teaching
the way that I was tired back
and you know back and eighteen
ninety five and we've the fields
of mouth education has
transformed in that time and so
how do we help teachers to
engage in that conversation and
even contribute to that I
believe that new mexico teachers
and because of the rich cultures
and languages and commitments to
community that this state has
like we could be contributing to
the national knowledge base
around but driving learning
looks like for
and that happens because there's
a commitment to ongoing
learning.
And then the last one is teacher
leadership
which is really how do we grow
the coaches so that teachers
have access to someone who's
coming in and helping to do that
ongoing job and bended learning
that I I think just an appeakers
spoken to that one.
So how did we get to these three
recommendations if you go to the
next slide
these are our sacks observations
and conversations meet have is
that we have a disconnected
system.
So as somebody has tied map
methods for twenty some years in
the state.
I would say that.
And and it changes depending on
the year but usually ninety
percent of my students.
Are not in classes during their
field experience that online
with the methods i'm teaching
and that all the sentence sets
up you know our students
conflict right so you you're
over here in the university
space and they're learning all
these incredible methods and
then they go over into you
that's school that they're
learning how to become a teacher
and and the their master teacher
is saying like oh yeah yeah no
we do it this way here so do it
this way and not that way and
even
some students some teachers are
like yes bring it on this like
having a student teacher in my
classroom is that chance for me
to learn new methods and those
are the most exciting spaces
because then you've got the
cooperating teachers actually
learning from the student
teachers and there's beautiful
dialog and happening back and
forth but then there's other
cooperating teachers who are
like I don't do it that way and
I don't want you to do it in
this classroom because it's
going to mix my kids at.
And I get that like it's coming
from the space but how do we
start to build it so that there
is this alignment between the
two so that what you're learning
in the university space onlines
with what's in the district
space and I also want to add
like this is the back and forth
right like universities don't
have all the answers so what can
we learn from districts to go
back into
the
into the colleges of education
and say like well this is how we
do it and this is why we do it
and this is why we need some
alignment with you as we're
partnering to prepare teachers
and our community.
The next one is the teaching
profession which is we've
already talked a lot about like
having consistent access to
ongoing learning
and then they get their piece is
teacher later so i'm really
thinking about how to be I i'm
thinking like how do we create
the deep bunch of teachers who
were excited to support their
peers to improve math
instruction and other kinds of
learning as well.
And then also the alignment with
administrators said that when
administrators are going through
doing teacher evaluations were
all looking through the same
thing and I think you can see
and what aren't she featured
that they're just already
programs that are helping to
build that work so we should
lean into them.
So if you go to the next slide.
Um
is really talked about like what
are the things we can do to
create and the lines system.
And you'll see the errors are
really sort of trying to help us
start to think about how old if
this helps are really strong
teaching profession.
I then think thinking about john
how is findings and visible
learning and one of the top
findings that is just really
sort of sat with me recently is
that teacher collective teacher
learning is like the top factor
for making an impact for kids.
And that means that teachers in
a school are working together
towards the scene vision and
that comes from having
administrators who are able to
articulate really work on that
instructional vision.
And you have folks working
together and I think that that's
the system that we need to start
working towards you know how do
we do this comprehensively and
there's great work that's that's
happening and I think especially
if we can really think about the
supports for coaching and for
ongoing learning for teachers
that we won't really start to
make incredible strides.
So with that I can stand for
questions
just get anything else.
Okay
representative.
Thank you mister charity
expecting the first
one I think you offer your
presentation i'm really excited
about the vision for math
education because that's
something that I that I work
with work with all of you all
and just really excited about
the path
and you have some questions that
make some of the thoughts that
you brought up I mean in all of
the presentations when was the
talk about math tutors math
coaches math helper whatever
whatever the language was
in saying that like how do we
build up that capacity you
talked about I can tell just
from experience professional
experience we try to offer
professional developments
specifically in math because
knowing that there's the lack
and there is a lack of
professional guidance
specifically cards to math out
of any mess you
have some great programs
sometimes they retain locally
how do we get that spread out
and also the capacity of one or
two programs you know supporting
and so maybe just for why didn't
and I know the idea of the step
network is very exciting and
possibly getting spreading the
the love in the professional
mouth across the state but maybe
my first question if you can
make the answer that thank you
mister chair.
Yes mister chairman
representative I think that's a
great question
you know building capacity.
Four mouth coaches is something
that states are working on and
struggling up and one of the
states that have to director how
though he talked about was
alabama
there couple of years in and
their goal was to have
a math coach and every
elementary school and they are
still three years in four years
and they are still working on
that they think it's
one one thing to think about is
how do we deep in the bench
without still without taking
those high quality teachers out
of the classroom to fill the
role of coaches.
A few things
giving identifying those teacher
leaders first and foremost in
giving them those skills is as
key and we have some programs
available we have the elementary
mouth specialist in door spend
there are two proproved programs
in new mexico one at mse one
here highlights and so when one
way is to have the
other institutions
work on having that type of
program at there at their site
or at their school so that they
can begin to identify those
candidates I think the other
component is
legislative of funding the
legislative components of that
in alabama again the state
legislature they've allocated a
hundred million each year for
all of the math and issues and
so I think similar type of
investment would be needed in
order to build that capacity.
Mr chair
representative
thank you for the question i'm
this this legislative body has
created the opportunity to
create a stem network.
And I think there is potential
in that and I think the way that
it is unfolding this year with
intergovernmental agreement
having just been signed by the
secretary and her ask was that
we try to focus on math and
that's them network.
And so then what you have and I
think alabama has done this a
little bit is like they didn't
just say let's put coaches and
all of our elementary schools
they created regional hubs.
And then you have leaders in
those regional hubs who are
working with the schools in
their region
and the coaches and that region
so that there's some of mine
around the work that's
happening.
And I think the stam innovation
network like that's that's the
work it's designed to do there's
a principle hub that holds a
strong vision for stem education
and then you can honey and have
a strong vision for mathematics
education very much aligned to
what the public education
department is you can think of
like the stem network in the
public education apartments are
blocking arms and wagging in the
same direction and I think
that's starting to happen
and then you have regional acts
like somebody in the region
that's keeping an eye on what's
happening in all the schools and
identifying like whatever the
needs and then working towards
getting those needs not
something that's going to happen
overnight.
We are not going to be able to
you know how coach and every
elementary school by next year
but we are starting to set up
the dissemination system to make
that happen and that's what this
term innovation network can do I
think math is a beautiful place
for it to start yes i'm a
hundred percent biased in that
but but
but I think that that's the work
I think one of the examples that
I that I can give that you know
i've i've advocated for we'll
see what happens but this this
body also passed funding from
the mountain work right and so
now there are school districts
that are applying for the math
lab initiative.
So then what are we doing to
support the folks that are
implementing the mouth labs.
And so the stamination network
can create and an offinity group
if you will that brings has a
facilitator that brings the
folks that are implementing a
mouth lab to talk about what's
working what's not working
sharing best practices and
nuances across so then you have
a community of practice that's
all focused on trying to really
support the folks that are doing
the math at work and building
out that copies of business
across the state but always with
an ability for the local
adaptation
and that's the power of having
the regional hubs so that you
can adopt locally but also mine
for but with the state and then
you know build out the capacity
for all of our educators to
maintain a national standard of
practice
mr chair panel is thank you for
your responses
I just have maybe more of a
comment as a mom step
professional loss of the mom of
a fourteen year old he's just
when from eighth grade to ninth
grade my span is typical in the
state of here he had a joy a lot
for math strong mass skills and
they can tell you he is now in
the sixteen percent profession
and even with help at home with
supports at home with
instruction and he was the one
that was forced into elderly one
and so I can tell you there is
some support at that middle
school level that I would really
highly encourage to support the
granted his cohort is also the
covered kids learning some some
skills missed you know on that
fourth grade but you guys I
believe in the power of the
maf's mouth circles of an
engagement but I do think a lot
of that stops once they get to
middle school of a fan of math
the joya math everything talked
about is really highlighted
elementary you talked about
reinvisioning math classes at
the high school which I think is
fabulous but just also wanting
to keep them about drop happens
right at middle school just to
ensure that that same joy of
math and that interactive math
especially if you're tightened
but I think it's possibly a good
you know going into eighth grade
elger rate.
A need though same skills as
they are going to be successful
in algebra want to set them up
for high school math so that's
my last comment thank you mister
thank you representative I do
have six people on the list
please try and keep your
questions tied and answer thank
you
represent me about my
thank you mister chair thank you
panel and she figures nice in
you again I haven't seen you
since opened silent several
years ago or so so it's it's
it's nice to hear from you but I
have
a couple of questions on your
reinvisioning high school math
the integrated math the one two
and three water what is that
until like what does I know I
mean i'm familiar with them with
that with within the science
room but not with them with them
yet great question mister chair
and representative so integrated
mouth one two m three is another
way of bundling common core
mouth standards and each time in
a more integrated way we would
have like starts or
charming tree or alter all kind
of interwopen together over the
course of three years this was
one of the pathways that has
been available into mexico sense
be adopted common core back in
the early point happen.
Thank you so so it's a mister
chair so it sucks something
similar to how we do the the
integrated sciences is taking
certain concepts and scaffeled
through the and and deeper
concepts throughout the years
mister chairman representative
that is accurate thank you so
may see now my question okay so
I am on
high school physics teacher so
so I deal with a lot of math of
night get them as juniors and
they are not and and many of
them still can't do those basic
manipulating a variables
within within our equisions so
like so are all these still
going to be able to prepare them
for their eleventh grade physics
because because right now
they're there there's body
but is is are they still going
to be able to be prepared to be
able to take the physics so
those higher level
mr chair representative one of
the pot for things but working
group it was be mindful of water
the math course what are the
mouth.
Requirements for courses that
students could be taking it
though same grade levels as well
as ensuring that no matter what
halfway a student could take
that they would still be
prepared to take sat in great
eleven.
Thank you thank you mister
chairman now my last question is
kind of.
Again the lens of other we're
we're preparing which we should
definitely should the math
teachers further those methods
and stuff like that because I
definitely believe in what our
superintendent said yesterday as
far as you can no math but being
able to teach math is a
different
concept and so my lens is are
there any kind of.
Visions in the works of let's
see non math teachers like
someone like myself like a
chemistry or a physics teacher
that I can help because I do get
these students that are
struggling with the math medical
concepts of physics to be able
to teach them the same way that
there math teachers are teaching
them because I don't get that
because I don't do the math the
trainings so so if it's a non
math type of a nine math
teachers training that we would
be able to go through so that I
can been help those math
teachers and and and scaff of
them to for what they need in my
class is there any any kind of
that in the works.
Mister chair representative at a
great beautiful wonderful
question as part of the
envisioning rollout training for
I teach her training and leader
training for the new ice corps
halfways that's something we've
also been working on we'll be
working on as well as how we
support teachers that are not
not better not teaching i'm out
of course but how to help
support their mouth counterparts
in accessing the map so that's
something we are working on as
part of the ongoing professional
learning rollout for this for
their finish
thank you because mr chair and
in should think I think it would
be a great because we could help
them and I know and I don't
since I don't get that type of
education because mine is mostly
focused on the concepts of
physics and stuff like that but
we do a lot of believe me my
students complain I thought this
was upside as class not a math
class and a night laugh with
them and tell them I don't you
know those two are married
so
but so I don't get the latest
innovations in the late latest
ways to be able to help them and
I don't want to do something to
undermine what what a math
teacher is doing I would rather
partner them and and still be
able to get those within my
context of of
the the science type of realm so
it would definitely would help I
mean I know me i'm always ready
to learn other stuff now my
other more better teachers
probably won't want to but who
knows depends on the teacher
mr chairman representative not
on my I would just like to come
greatly attach this to your page
parts you have your brief one of
our considerations for you ought
to think about is related to
actually thinking about more
formal requirements and this one
actually goes to the public
education department to but is
there thinking about kind of
formalising what that ongoing
license component looks like
those are mechanisms that could
access to just wanted to elevate
that that there are structures
that could be leveraged to make
sure that everyone's getting
that panel.
Ongoing training i'm so that
it's not just the folks who
wanted to seek.
Thank you my last question is I
know some of the comments that
we had yesterday from the
superintendence was
that it's very hard to keep in
fill math positions and I
normally see that at our at our
school if I and in the same
science if there's going to be a
vacancy it's almost sixty
percent of the time going to be
a math or in science so that's a
lot of these scores when they're
up in the high school level that
are being basically stuck in the
class with the with a long term
sub and that barely can
understand the concept
themselves and and that's why
they're they're taking these
depths any initiatives in here
to be able to attract more math
teachers so that way we don't
have those vacancies as much
mr chairman representative in a
bump I am this is definitely
attached to everything outside
of math rate so this is attached
to all of your work in the last
few years to really bring up the
tiered salary increases that
we've been seeing for example
and I would say this says i'm
related to our broader kind of
recruitment and retention issue
and education broadly and so
specifically I think that the
mechanisms that were looking at
are all of the was really
convenient to actually
think about what we pay teachers
think about how we continually
evaluate that kind of wage
within the context of what's
happening around it and do that
economic analysis and that's
really one that is attached to
like our broader education
profession in terms of the
recruitment and retention of
passed it to my colleagues here
who might know a little bit more
about if we're able to attract
people who could be really great
math teachers more directly I
would say it's an area that we
need a lot of work and I don't
think we have a really strong
approach to keeping those folks
in my classroom but they may
have other ideas that i'm not
thinking of
mister chair representative I
think within our nations that
have talked about it such as
number of focus on the automated
because those are helping to
support teachers and build.
They're content knowledge that
paragraph g and building their
confidence somewhere.
You have your colleagues come
together and you're having these
conversations together you're
learning together you're
learning
the teaching it built that come
round built at we're in this
take out anything that's a huge
part of teacher retention is
that they're filling supported
at the end of the year and
they're going to stay with that
team because they know they're
going to be supported or as if
the transfer somewhere else
they may not they think that
collaborative does having those
collaborative conversations in
the school where teachers and
leaders are at the same page
helps to contribute to teacher
retention
over that one quick thing which
is also shorting up the
alternative license or
requirements when teachers are
more prepared they're more
successful and then they want to
stay at a job where they're
successful and it the supports
the
one hundred percent agree with
that thank you mister
thank you and we do still have
six people on the list so please
questions answers short
represent
thank you mister chair maslab
pull out once a week situation
in elementary school
mr chair representative
the model is not a pull out
model it is where every student
will engage in the math lab and
would be part of the electives
schedule so every student would
go to it at least once a week or
more depending upon how the
school structures thank you
message to period
please have them written by
december so we're not getting
pulled points we've gone out
with special literacy and math
if we can really have robust
discussion I think everybody on
this committee would really
appreciate it just a note my
second question is we also need
to mister chairman make sure our
educational assistance gets some
of this training.
This kind of assistance
i'm I would shoot my scott two
hundred
because of sputnik I was in the
first concorded students that
had new math I learned based ten
and based two base four base
eight foundation for technology
and i'm still excited about the
master state so we have to make
sure that we're excited about
math and that's why I think we
have to mandate increased math
education and
strategies for our teachers I
have one crappy math preparation
classes in elementary in my
residency it was useless and
it's only by the I went to
calculates I finished calculated
programs from high school if I
hadn't had that I would have
nothing so we really like the
math concept we need at least
six minute dated
units and one of them is where
we put our teachers in math libs
and make them experience the
excitement because we know that
so many elementary teachers
become elementary teachers
because enough confidence and
math so we we just have to do it
and then my last thing is
in teacher prep
mr chair
processing people should have a
major and education I think you
should be a minor I think they
should major in math geography
other topics so that they have a
deep base
in these things that it's not
and it's not just education as
their major personal opinion and
the final thing is in high
school
you know
somebody was informed a design
games and so we have to teach
them and element.
Entry school in middle school
this is what you do with math
these exciting career paths ways
so their motivated and see the
conduction
two mouth
I still remember missus up in my
seventh grade teacher was a
dodger fan she gave me a problem
to see how many square feet of
grass do we need for the infield
of dodger stadium I still
remember her name and the
problem because it was relevant
to my life so that's all thank
you
thank you representative and
already the map bills are being
started to drop that's gonna be
some of what i'm gonna be
talking about at lunch today
with some of the pet staff
represent robot compatible.
Thank you mr chair and thank you
all this is the arm
great topic I spent my high
schools
high school summers repeating
math classes so I could get a
passing great because I had this
mental block and it wasn't until
I went for my certification in
my profession as a housing and
economic developer that I
understood the relevancy between
the math classes I was taking
and the practical applications
of my day to day work so when my
son of showed all this joint
excitement when we had a
business our jewelry business
when he was helping with a
counting sales that really
illuminated and reinforced the
fact that we have to show the
practical applications of what
we're learning in the classroom
so going back to the real world
that was referenced not just
them in the brief but also in
each one of your presentations
and engaging not just high
school students but at the
middle school I would say bring
it back down to the or up to the
the middle of schools because it
was an elementary school
actually that our son began
helping us with our business and
there again it was pure
happiness employee when he could
see the relationship so I I say
that because these are my lived
experiences that apply very much
to what your presenting so I
have a question for designer
actually in the reference to
this and that is had do we have
any data or
studies that we can point to
that show the correlation
between project based education
or even
the approaches and how would I
say that practical applications.
Um that I just referred to a
from my experiences but also
reference to what was applied
and discussed with us yesterday
in terms of project based on how
similar to intendence and others
discussed that you have you
found anything and it and this I
was referring specifically to
your pages for and six where you
talked about
four in terms of available that
direct question and then six
when you talked about parent
engagement and how important
that was also in your findings
mister chairman representative
right back about yet all there
are lots of studies out there
actually connecting different
formats of learning to different
student outcomes for students
and so a project based earning
we'd be happy to actually call
some of those explicit ones as
a short answer is yes there are
many I can actually pull some of
the specific math ones out we
also know that different
methodologies work for different
great levels so for example
middle school when we did our
middle school study this last
interim they really do thrive
and that kind of smaller group
project be slown in structure
for a variety of academic
subjects.
Thank you mister chairman I
think that would be very
important for us to matter
because as we're looking at new
or updating our approaches and
applications we need to
correlate what is working why
it's working and then how much
addresses in the classroom but
all some more important me in
the teacher preparation aspect
of it at all so I kind of just
comprehensively and collectively
comes together and we can then
evaluate the best practices that
we need to begin instituting at
our public education level
if you'd like to interest that
if it's up cables thank you
mr terra representative right
well cover you
so part of what motivated needs
really get engagement at this
term innovation no work is
because that is the mechanism
that many states are using to do
this transformative work if you
look at michigan their network
is based on a pete three
strategy which is how do you
engage place based project based
problem based learning
throughout schools and and then
also if you look at
louisiana if you look
oh and if you look at tennessee
all of them are developing
frameworks that can support
schools to start to become stem
designated schools which really
help set the vision and then ask
the supports teachers and
developing the strategies they
need to do exactly what you
talked about and what
representative garrett talked
about.
Thank you mister chair that that
all is very helpful and I look
forward to more information
thank you thank you
representative senator is out.
This determined thank you in
reading over everything that was
free today I do have some
questions and if it takes a
magic
bar that wanted
just in your presentation on
page thirteen of your hand out
at the very top of the page his
family engagement them on the
very next page says engage
families as partners
and i've i'm not sure if i'm
pronouncing your name right
okay I said it right and you
also take the same thing a
couple of times in your hand
out.
How is that kind of ebay
possible because to me it's a
students that need to have the
attention made on them but
getting family and above both
men you've heard me say the
course of how many years now
family involvement is important
for child success how are we
going to implement that.
Thank you mr german senator is I
wasn't expecting the sound so
that was joy
pretend this is the magic one
minute so one of the most
concrete things were seeing in
the policy around this is
actually just that simple
notifications who let them at
least know how their students
are doing in math that is
actually a form of engagement
that then can prompt for example
a school calling into family and
saying we've noticed this about
your students we'd like to
actually put them on maybe a
plan whether formal are more
informal and giving families
actual strategies for what they
can do at home to help that
while also notifying them we've
found and research that a lot of
families tend to not actually
know how their students are
doing in school and told a
little too late to intervene
they might find out at the end
of the year for example so
policy wise what we've seen as
that parental notification for
example based on screening or
based on the actual outcomes
that teachers are seeing in the
classroom and then the other
mechanisms require a little bit
more school district practice
and kind of that local decision
making around bringing in for
example you could have family
engagement nights where you
actually provide some
manipulatives and have families
learn how to do simple maps with
their students at home so a
variety of mechanisms
and mister chairman and just go
that sounds wonderful it really
sounds wonderful but get the job
done this next impossible we we
have family out there that are
not in sync with what they're
child charles needs our right
now and that's a shame it really
is but i'm not going to get into
that mister chardry thank you
for your explanation there but
mister chardry on your hand out
on page five it's under the
framework of systemic support.
You're talking about targeted
students support i'd like to
know how people determine this.
Mr chair and senator so targeted
school supports though those
turkey supports for student
again comes down to
the u staff read it valid to
walls
to identify the students.
Earning that need that
additional support so there are
I will talk to you
share a little bit about early
numerous screeners which are
being used in other states they
are twenty minutes towards that
teacher users face to face one
on one with a child they ask
questions they have students do
some casks and then based on
that
identify where some area the
students may be struggling again
whether it is composing the
composing numbers within ten or
composing decomposing numbers
within twenty okay where i'm
going with this is
whenever there is
just what you like out right
there I am assuming that these
results were sending to maybe
the principle of the score may
be the separate ten maybe
those results didn't seem into
PED and is PED the one that
ultimately makes the decision on
but path we need to go down to
help these students
mr chair and senator at this
time we
don't mandate the use of
screeners and therefore that
data collection does not happen
at this point.
Interesting.
Mister also are now
at its slight twelve of your
presentations starts out mad
legislation
about the fourth bullet right
down as his letter each month
coaches in high needs area which
goes back to my prior quest how
was that determination made.
Mr chairman and senator the
determinations would be made by
staff of variety of factors
including number of students
that are being served that are
identified in the
martin is consolidated large
suit as well as other factors
will mister chairman I do
understand the yazi martinez
last suit I get that but
whenever I look at who all is
being helped in certain areas of
the state and the whole eastern
side of the state has been
disregarded there's a free can
problem there okay jessica there
is a problem there
we have students that might need
some help as well
and tell you look at the state
as a whole instead of
segregating certain students
i'm not going to get said i'm
not going to walk out i'm going
to continue with my line of
thought.
And it's not just children of
course it's all of our children
better in need of some help at
one time or another and whenever
they're overlooked I get very
upset about it and I hope I hope
you'll set up and pay attention
all of the off
and
doctor thy son on your hand down
on the second page of it monday
for your
nineteen math and science
advisory council can you tell me
who a points are nominated these
members
sell annually there's an
application process that is
posted on the public education
and department website and the
science and mouth bureaus
website specifically then those
applications my understanding or
look up by the science and mouth
bureau and appointments are made
by the secretary of education.
As so i'm assuming that these
applications go out statewider
is it just to the northern part
of the state because that looks
like what right here at the then
one with new mexico
and the membership that is
currently made up of the math
and science advisory council
so since it's people applying to
become member like and there
needs to be a point and it's
like who is applying and as so
as an incoming chair of misi
i've noticed this discrepancy
and someone other things that we
are gonna talk about at our next
meeting is really a couple weeks
reach out to to apply
to the map and science advisory
council so if you have people in
your region that you think would
be good
let's let's talk well mister
chairman I guess that brings up
the point i'm going to make
right now whenever we have
donors and benefactors in the
south eastern corner of the
state that have gone in on their
own to I don't know over twelve
charter and public schools and
put in steam and steam labs it
seems like they might need some
recognition to that all I have
mister chairman
thank you
for people on the list
mr chair alternatively really
quickly
so there is a couple of things
that I had
inserted just talked about that
it may have the science advisory
council I would recommend
you have such a sort of is
reaching out to the school of
medicine and you and them
because we are you know I would
like to see an empty on here
that can give input on what our
students really are needing for
math and science to go into
medical
since the extra shape.
Shortly to this so that's just a
recommendation but I get the
question mr chair is you know I
think you dropped percent for
getting the list I had that
doing research is that
massachusetts is pretty much the
top and
I scoring and it has been for
years and so he just gave me the
list of the top five states
within their so my question is
is you know we're always really
inventing the railway been with
it mischildren with the
education you know for myself
since like two thousand and
thirteen but it was a moment air
with my kids growing up in very
involved with their
education kind of a helicopter
mom so my question is is why do
we keep reimbursing the will I
mean if we know
the top five states
and why are we not because we're
looking at.
Well we don't even really really
have data yet within alabama and
florida is the type too but
i'm within the scorings but some
of these other states looking at
the chat five and implementing
what they're doing.
Mister chairman representative
calling from a policy front that
absolutely you're you're picking
up on an important trend which
is that we're not seeing
legislation out of states that
are already seen the upcomes
that they want and so we could
definitely do some retroactive
analysis to take a look at what
those states are already doing
but in terms of policy change
your right it's coming out of
states that actually want to see
change because they have
historical patterns of not
seeing the math outcomes that
they want
so I would have to go do that
research but i'm happy to to
help you with that and look at
their specific mouth practices
and if there's anything that
they're doing that maybe is
already being better than policy
or if there really is just maybe
states are starting to clarify
things that they're already
doing as natural practice so
i'll leave it there for now
thanks mister chair and
you know because it over been
seen just constantly since two
thousand and thirteen we get a
new administration we get a new
secretary everything changes is
just cars that change and we
need to look at long javity in
the state because we cannot have
a change of outcomes within one
to two years and that is what
we're seeing with that their
states is they're looking at
five ten fifteen years but the
change so when we do make the.
That's what we got a look at we
can't look at we're gonna have a
new administration next year and
so what is that going to mean
and not we're going to try to
change things they would try to
change that we ask slc and as an
education we need to make sure
that we are focused on long term
change versus because but
consistently see the changes and
as you know going back to your
point of prental involvement and
I think that is a key within the
states like a set of helicopter
mom not only through school but
also became the president of the
parent association at you and am
so I didn't leave them alone
with
school but you continue on which
me sound crazy but.
Or some parents but for me you
are able you know to be involved
which continuously involved so
it's not just keep through
twelve at through whatever it's
a clear technical or you know
whatever they're doing outside
the point you are you or so we
need to figure out how to
emphasize.
Representatives that are rumous
chair and thank you very much
for this great information i'll
be quick
we implement science reading and
I know there's a lot of studies
behind that before that was
actually thought of what are we
doing now is there a program out
there for a science of math I
know there is a question on the
top five schools but there's
gotta be something that's
working out there for these
states that are being successful
looking at one of the hand outs
it looks like there's only six
hours of math required for our
teaching certificates now I know
why my son made my mate his
second grade teacher cry because
he figured out how to work to
take care of problems
differently than what she was
teaching and she got so
frustrated but you know that
that definitely I feel really
need to change
also we have many schools that
they we have thirteen schools
putting out either teachers
licenses are licensees
through either traditional
pathways or alternative pathways
have we checked to see if some
of these schools that don't
offer the traditional life
insurer program have we is there
a method to see if they're
putting out as good of teachers
since they're only offering the
alternative license to burst is
the traditional because we have
five hundred and thirteen
schools offer
lack of your program throughout
the state that are not actually
putting out traditional so that
might be one of our problems
it has has anyone when ever
looked at that are done any of
the science behind that to see
where what we are following with
those are institutions
so I just want to see what you
figured out with the traditional
versus the alternative i'll
license and end are we putting
out those quality teachers when
it comes to.
The alternative program that
we've got to state
short mr chairman said it around
us a lot of really rich
questions and there so let me
start from the beginning in
terms of the kind of off the
shelf science of math training
for teachers that is not
something that exists nationwide
and what the department has been
doing is working on what it's
called numerous microcredential
pilots make a credentials are
very common in the teaching
profession now in what they are
courses that can be accessed so
they developed a series of those
alliance the best math practices
in little actually having
something that is already kind
of out there if that's what a
lot of states are doing as
they're developing courses that
should be implemented in those
states actually and at that
professional learning and so
that one is what I wanted to
mention there in terms of the
teacher preparation the
recommendation here is that
there are pretty big differences
between that preparation so
including a math methods course
for all of those different
programs is something that we
want to consider our team this
entrance
have used back there and as well
as any armed college they're
actually doing a very divided
into our educator preparation
programs including calling the
course requirements seller by
looking at the actual
information being given to
students the idea being long
term we do want to wait it
couldn't act the actual program
that students are in with the
effect of nest of them as
teachers down the road coupled
with supports of course for them
I think there's more questions
about it in all of it you asked
at a doctor types also might
have a response at anything.
Mister terror senator almost I
remembered
just say that i'm sack is
interested in the same similar
questions around who's teaching
straight and so if we think
about
tescorter connected to the
opportunity it's kids have who
whose teaching map classes and
what what license are programmed
and then go through and so we
put in our request for that data
and hope to have a chance to
look at it animal is it.
Mr chair and senator ramas one
thing I just want to bring back
up to the forefront name I know
it was included presentation in
the policy brief but we in new
mexico how for a bus evidence of
research of what can work in
math programs and that's all
developed in our mouth framework
until other programs that we are
providing a light back to that
research of how to teachers had
a student starting how to
teachers help support students
and how to leaders help support
student teachers in implementing
strong now teaching and learning
in their classrooms
thank you mister chair
representatives but last year's.
Thank you mister chair
what wonderful presentation and
I have to let you know that I
was on the hiring community that
higher doctor when she was hired
as a mouth
education professor you went out
and we even try many years
together I am very very relieved
doctor tyson to see that the
numerous program and the things
that we're doing in math
education alignment your values
because we've had many
discussions about how to teach
mouth and that to me is like i'm
really glad that you are helping
to take us to them that's level
one very proud of you as well
i'm also very bad to see that
last point on page two teaching
a soliciting profession at ties
into your dissertation and i'm
glad to see i'm i'm glad to see
that work continue in new mexico
because that's a very important
part of math education and
so
I
have a couple of questions one
is an
only to take the time to answer
now that
I couldn't find the new mexico
mouth framework to point out
that's hyperlinked here in the
reports if you could send us
that link i'd really appreciate
it I am wanting to see how our
mouth is aligned with nctm
standards in the current work of
nct that national council for
teachers of mathematics
and with other states as well
and
that would be very helpful
in terms of the question of
faculty I do have some questions
and doctor testing we can have a
discussion later about how do we
recruit faculty because we have
had positions we had a position
for elementary we have a
position for secondary in terms
of teaching math but it was imp.
Possible to hire find someone to
hire to bring in after people
who really had such high
expertise move to another state
to different role
so i'd like for us to look at
that because basically if we're
going to be requiring mouth
education at all of the
institutions that offer teacher
preparation we're going to lead
to look at who's going to teach
that math education because one
mouth educator is not the same
as another math educator and we
want to make sure that it'll
lighten support we're doing here
in the state what we can talk
about that later
last thing I think so that I fit
into that five minutes which I
hope I didn't pass yeah
okay
so when I was in the special
department I taught a mouth
classroom special students that
I really hope it's not the
plastic doctor to get it I mean
that representative took
but in that class
in that class one of the things
that I really like doing was to
take my teacher preparation
students special ad teachers
because they're already teaching
and they were getting the the
license or course work on an
intern waver
like to take them to work
directly with students under
mice provision and the
supervision of other mouth
experts that I would bring in to
really help shape looking
helping them look at how
children's cognitive development
happens around math and also
about the language piece that
you know is some important
doctor tyson and years later I
still have those students come
up and say that was one of the
most important things they ever
did and so you talked about
mouth labs or students i'm
wondering if you have considered
mouth labs for teachers to wear
they are working with the
students and they have the
guidance of their instructor.
Or leaders from the stem network
and one thing that we did that
they also felt was really
helpful
with brought in the families and
so the parents could then learn
to teach the concepts and see
the concepts in the world around
them if they didn't got ready
and we used this kid called
family math it's a lot of fun
they found a very relevant and
the feedback we got from the
families was really strong that
they got to go their children
better and they got to learn
some things that they could then
continue to to teach so I am I
can talk to you about that later
but i'm really hoping that we
can look at a way to make it
kind of inter generational but
in terms of academic family
and that's it mister chair thank
you very much thank you finally
center third.
My time begins now mister chair
thank you very much
i'm really really frustrated by
what i'm hearing and not from
any of the speakers up here it's
just right and I see the results
of our education and that one
out of four proficient by time
their eleventh grade were twelve
grade.
It's just totally disturbing to
me and felt so my questions are
i'm a big math is hard
and I think somehow people have
to interpret it back to be
difficult to really isn't
difficult if we teach them in a
way that's shows that it's not
so i'm going to legislature and
I i'm i'm still i'm struggling
with what can you do differently
representative cohen actually
asks the question I was first
going to ask you that is why are
we reimburing the wheel
we know massachusetts has been
number one four years in years
in years so I went back and just
got a quick while was listening
to all the conversation at what
what what they do with the use
what's called the singapore math
curriculum
and I have to anyone is with
that I wasn't my with it at all
actually but it seemed very
straightforward to me they say
they use things called concrete
victorial abstract which is the
cpa approach
that's the corner stone of the
math where we're students first
one concept using fiscal objects
that's the concrete then move to
drawings and diagrams at
victoria and finally to astract
symbols and equations
and then they walk them through
the wording process
in insuring strong foundation
for each one before they move on
to the next and incur despects
for increase of problems having
they do number bonds and bar
modeling uh focused on
conceptual understanding of the
actual ask why behind math
concerts not just the how so the
basket walked into a whole
process and then they have metal
math with a force the kids to
tomorrow to saw problems quickly
and efficiently in their mind
and so there's the process that
they go through an apparently
it gets all the way down the
real world applications I know I
was fortunate not that I had a
high school teacher who can't be
very interested in math I have
two years to carry this in high
school and and so I went on
their engineering and I was
very.
I can probably say that without
that that matter teacher in high
school I probably would go on on
the engineering so that was a
teachers or a competitor
make competent students
I think that's important for us
to understand and so if there's
a methodology that appears to be
working in a state that seems to
me the way kids progress
educationally why don't we look
into that now I have no idea
what math framework two point
dollars and I think I appreciate
that representative towards for
that's because asking that
question that we get a copy of
that framework i'd like to see
what that but it does it
incorporate these sorts of
things that are currently in the
single model
and and so
I want to find something that we
can stay with for a long time
and work through to improve the
scores because the scores just
are appalling to me and there's
no reason they have to be so
that's on the comment on anyone
above here i'm just saying that.
Let's not reinvent something if
we know something else works so
the only other concern I had
with respect to the presentation
with a doctor shadow
director shottery
was your eliminating ashbut to
and jomitry from the program and
it replacing it with
gloss statistics I I imagine and
I also saw your three that there
may be a little bit of algebra
advanced out to broadband i'm
asking where is the calculators
it's not here at all or my
missing something in that in
that's why
so the people who want to move
on and want to advance
where where that ability for the
have some advanced calculators
classes before they graduate
high school
mister chair and in senator
greek questions I can start by
entering the last question to
undergraphic that you start on
the slide with our reinvision
high school mouth pathways
that's just a snapshot just to
focus on what where the new
course is developed and where
they are
what it's not seen is on the
right hand side of the graphic
there's a fourth year option for
your courses where calculators
precalculus ap courses are until
that could that it's a potential
model what student what course
is students could take your to
hear
that still included it's not
picking out yes and then do you
first point you were bringing up
about the different types of was
students learn concrete visual
abstract is another way of
conflict learning about using
many politics first and foremost
to understand so building
structural beneficial so like
then transferring from concrete
to then your visual using bar
models using tick diagram.
And then your abstract so moving
on those are all strategies that
are found in good high quality
instructional mouth materials
which we as a state review and
then that list out for squares
that is a core component in
those materials and so in order
for in order that practice
spread
we have to support school
leaders and teachers and having
ongoing learning on how to use
their materials not just one
year but over the multiple
years.
Without mister chair I believe
that covers my biggest concerns
and I know it's getting the
lunch time so that's some of
that
thank you senator and he
actually has a very good
questions you know and yes i'm
sitting here as a that teacher
your good math features are
doing that they may not call it
those specific things but
they're absolutely following all
of those uh first I would thank
everybody for great
interaction great attention to
this because it's not something
we don't deep into as we very
very focused on the reading side
of things so you are something
teacher is very encouraging to
see the intensity of the
questions in the concern that
every day I think everyone we
are almost an hour behind
scheduled we are scheduled to
have wednesday break from twelve
to one we will not have much
better from twelve fifty to one
fifty please try to be back on
time and so that we are not here
well into our dinner our tonight
representative please.
Thank you mister chair I would
just like to acknowledge deputy
secretary steel who's probably a
not about her last elected
meeting with us today it's been
such a pleasure working with you
and I just really appreciate all
that you brought to new mexico
and I hope that you stay
connected with us from many
years to come thank you
thank you mister chair
thank you
turned until please try to be
back we're going to try and
