Central Avenue, the southern
boundary being I-25. And so it's
my pleasure to be here with you,
Chairman, Vice Chairman, thank
you.
Before we go back the other way
real quick, we'll need a head
count for the tour this
afternoon because they're gonna
bring SUVs. So if you're going,
we'll need a really good
headcount.
and see Sharon, so make sure
you're on that list. If not wave
your hand like Cinder She.
Represent Pedigrew will go back
to you.
Good Morning, Chairman,
committee members, audience,
thank you all for being here
today, uh, look forward to the
discussion we have.
With respect to this, I
represent Lee County, uh,
Central League County, Lovington
and Hobbs area. Thank you.
Uh, good morning, Mr. Chairman.
Uh, chairman's, uh, ladies and
gentlemen, my name is Harry
Garcia. I represent House
District 69, which covers parts
of San Juan McKinley, Ebola,
Bernard Leu Oencia toro County,
you know, thanks for hosting
this uh deal here today, you
know, I look forward to uh.
Working with you people and I
know the fires have devastated a
lot of people in these
communities, and we really need
to step up and look at what's
happening around us because one
of these days, Mr. Sherman, it's
going to happen in our
communities and we're going to
be asking for the same help.
Will that being said, thank you
very much, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you Mr. Chairman. Mr. Vice
Chair, my name is Debbie Serena.
I represent House District 21 in
Bernalio County. Uh, it was a
beautiful morning. I'm excited
to be here for this whole week
and thank you for being here.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman.
Members of the committee, Gay
Armstrong from Magdalena, New
Mexico, state representative for
District 49, uh, largest house
district in the state and, uh,
been praying a lot for Mascalero
and Riodoso and uh we are really
happy to be here supporting you.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman. My
name's Alan Martinez. I
represent House District 23,
which is the northern part of
Rio Rencho and the western edge
of the town of Bernelio. Happy
to be here. Happy to see the
community starting to come back
to life.
Um
Appreciate all the
People that were involved in
fighting the fire, um, and I'm
just, I'm happy to see the
community coming back.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman. Mr.
Vice Chairman, committee
members, uh, good morning
audience and those tuning in
