I think everybody welcome back
we're gonna head into our
afternoon portion of our
presentations we're gonna start
with the status update for the
landgrad council and land
government said institute with
our total architect he's the
program manager for the
institute at the university of
you know and I believe and
there's a hand out coming out to
all the members so just be and
look at our total i'm sorry this
direct letter.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee always a pleasure
to present before the interim
committee.
Appreciate the time that you
always give us to and to listen
to me I know i'm i'm at these a
lot and i'm always talking about
something so appreciated
today I wanted to
focus on giving you all kind of
an update of the work of the
council over the past year
as well as just some general
status updates and somewhat
we've been doing and some of
obviously some of the policy
that that involves with the
council and landgrands and so.
One of the start off by just
kind of going over some
highlights for the work that's
been accomplished over the past
year
i'll strike with canada's
mentioning some of the support
technical assistant support that
we provide to line grants are in
you can follow long if you like
on the hand I don't get into the
the details about which specific
language we've assisted but I
will kind of just talk to more
high level general numbers and
and you can refer to the the
hand out actually look at those
that were receiving the services
that I talk about the first area
is capable outley support and so
we provide support to this past
year to eighteen different
landgrants in a variety of ways
as a relates to capital outlay
this includes we always begin
with the infrastructure capital
or improvement planning so they
say p plans uh we provide
assistance to line grants with a
completion of those plans those
languages that seek our
assistance we do have some
language that are completely
capable on their own and have
the the inhouse expertise or the
capacity to be able to do that
to do it on their own but we're
always there to sort of pride
assistance we also
including assisting language
with the
capital project monitoring
system reporting so that's the c
p m s system at the dfa has its
actually going to be changing
here this this fiscal year
and that's the reporting on
capitality that they already
receive in our expending we have
to assist them with actually
submitting those legislative
capable requestering the session
or leading up to the session and
then a system throughout the
session with that process and
then post session i'm if they're
are able to get capable out the
dollars from from the
legislature and we assist them
with filling out the
questionnaires in order for them
to get issue get those grand
agreements issued as well as a
system throughout the entire
process of expenditure of those
appropriations which includes a
procurement it could include
submitting the notices of
obligation as well as the pay
requests.
Yeah.
And there's a list of the line
grants that we help this last
fiscal year with with somewhere
in that process of capital
outlet next area that we provide
service to use with tear
certifications and agreed upon
procedure reporting under the
state audit act um this past
year we provided those services
to fifteen language and that
that can include either
submitting and
filling out the cheered
certifications under the state
article and for those languages
that have a less than fifty
thousand and revenue also to
executing an agreed upon
procedures engagement contract
um if they are over that fifty
thousand dollar cap or or have
you spent more than fifty
thousand or more than fifty
percent of a capital outlet
award they have to do an agreed
upon procedures under the audit
act.
And will assist them with
putting those contracts together
and then also if if we need to
help them in pulling any other
documentation or get him just
ready for those audits to take
place
I know they think she stepped
out to go provide some
assistance so language but a
nisa bucket with our offices
with me today and she she sort
of the lead on and helping in
both of those areas of
capitalist support and then also
sort of takes the lead on the
priority support with the tiered
system reporting and with the
assistant language with the
aups.
I've also assisted a ten
language throughout the year
with obtaining
either bonds or tort liability
we recoverage and insurance
just to sort of protect the
assets that they do have and
then also comply with the state
statute.
We provided assistance to twenty
language with their budget
quarterly reporting as well as
financial management and this
includes both at the individual
level working with language to
reconcile their monthly
expenditures preparing their
annual budgets as well as all
that are just bents and quarter
reports
as well we assisted I think we
have seventeen language that we
have gotten purchased and got
and i'm sort of using quick
books online to help them manage
their financial reporting and
keep sort of better records of
their financials and make it
easier for them to then be
audited or or do any brief
republic procedures engagement
in subsequent years
you know in the past we were
helping language when their
budgets are smaller and three
years a different spreadsheets
and you know it's a little bit
complicated and it's hard for
them to pull all the reports
that are needed and so moving
them and over to
an online system that sort of
allows them to create all the
reports has been I think helped
for a lot of those land rents.
We provided general government
support and this is kind of the
catch all category to twenty one
language throughout the year and
this can include assisting them
with their election and that can
be as little as providing them
with
just information and in sort of
reviewing may be there election
proclamations and sort of giving
the pointers to actually go in
and in helping them with the
conducting the election on the
day of doing their canvassing
you know serving as an election
judge I mean it really just
depends on on where the language
is and and also the ask in terms
of the services that they build
a need it also includes
assisting them with by law
revisions or or developing new
areas of billows or rules of
regulations compliance with the
open meetings act as well as the
inspection of public records act
sometimes we'll get language
that will say here I got this
this import request what do I
need to do how do I respond how
do I reply and we help and land
grants annually make sure
reminded that they're passing
their open meetings act
resolutions and that the
reviewing of how they're going
to provide notice during that
year and then also just help
them with general guidance with
it released to both the language
statutes and then any other
potential applicable statutes
such as the procurement code
or other areas of the law that
we want to make sure that
they're able to follow and sort
of understand their obligations
as political so divisions and so
you know this this work is
primarily with those languages
that are political so divisions
of the state there's twenty
twenty eight landgrounds that
are named but look so divisions
but sometimes we'll have
landgrants that are organizing
maybe another you don't know
their statute or their organized
sort of right now as a private
association and they'll come to
a seeking advice and and
understanding of the statutes
and what it would actually mean
for them to be recognized
below subdivision what steps do
they need to take to to
accomplish that.
And we also provided assistance
to seven languages relating to
property acquisitions and this
includes you know reaching out
to you
rilters on their behalf when
they're interested in acquiring
a property it's it's included
looking over
helping them with if if the
acquisitions related to capital
outlet helping them with getting
the contract in place purchase
agreement in place if they can
actually encompare those funds
helping them with the
transaction itself and just you
know whether it's the help with
assistance with the deeds
putting the deeds together
drawing down on funding figuring
out the funding source we've
been working closely with the
monzano language to still and as
i've reported in the past to try
to get him across the finish
line with the new mexican
finance authority on a loan to
purchase some property we ran
into a little snag this year
because.
At the legislature one of the
things that you know in working
with mfa we were able to clarify
that they can take any payment
back from the language including
if a legislator wanted to give
capital at the dollars to pay
for that as long as we include
the right language rate and we
had done this in the past so we
had a I think three or four
capitally appropriations assure
that included that language that
said for the acquisition of
property including to pay back
alone and what that would do is
it all would allow us to get the
loan from n m f e and let's see
uh we could secure some
capitality to sort of make that
payment in and sort of pay it
off it would reduce the the
liability that the language has
on the long end of the loan
because we're talking you know
twenty five thirty year loans
and unfortunately even though we
got that through the legislature
the governor light and be told
that language that said to repay
the loan
and I think it was just probably
a us not coordinating good
enough with that with their
office and it likely got flagged
because I know that's round upon
for the use of capitality
dollars but this one it's really
a way to sort out just allow for
those dollars to not have for
the for the communities that not
have to wait to close on the
loan until after they get the
capitality expended so for
example in the case of monzano
we were going to use that
capital expenditure to to not
pay off the loan entirely but
just to pay a portion of it and
now what we're having to do is
wait until those new grand
agreements come out have them
actually reduce the principle of
the realistic contract that they
have in order to
start the loan off at the
reduced principle as opposed to
them using it to sort of pay
towards that loan
and we also provided a
historical research assistance
to eleven lane grants and to see
you can include either doing
oral histories with the
community providing our kindle
research or geneology work and
some of this is also kind of
related specifically to let to
litigation where we've been
assisting providing assistance
the language in fact doctor a
couple bucket who walk works for
office has served as an expert
witnessed this past year.
In a property dispute case I
really into a landground and so
it's it you know that's a
service that were able to
provide and it's been helpful to
protect in those assets for
those communities and we were
also able to accomplish the
disaster digitization of eighty
three
of microfilm from the spanish
and mexican architecture new
mexico as well as the
territorial architects years ago
the unm language that he's
program had purchased these
reals from the state records in
our type center
and because there's no more that
technology to be able to read
those this kind of going away
we've been able to over the
years did you get those
digitalised and so I think we've
accomplished all of the spanish
and mexican archives
and the
new mexico or the UNM language
said institute which is a
category three center which i'll
talk about a little bit later I
want to think we've been working
on is also acquisitions and that
it includes some new microphone
that we're going to be getting
that i'll talk about here in a
bit.
We provided assistance to last
year to a number of languages
with property tax exemption
requests through the local
counties are in most of those
landgrants were able to actually
the counties agreed and provided
an exemption from property taxes
based on the fact that they are
political so divisions of the
state and under the
constitutional provision that
provides some immunity from
taxes or weaver of taxes for a
certain certain units of
government we did have a one
land grant though the sun and
twenty less work the slang grant
where the county did not agree
with that and so and we
presented before the assessors
are affiliate back in the spring
to kind of provide them
information as to why language
should be exampted as I mention
most assessors agreed with that
logic in sort of went with it
sand of our county protested at
or or they didn't agree so we
ended up going to the valuation
protest board the valuation
protest board issued a feverable
decision on that the language
should not be paying taxes on
those common lands and the
counties now sunday will count
appealed that decision so it's
it's going to the district court
on appeal and will be providing
legal service support to the leg
grant in litigating that case
are this is the second time
there are protest board has
actually decided in favor of
language but two or three years
ago we had the berlie county
valuation protest board that
decided in favor of the children
grant on the issue of taxation
of the common lands.
As I think you guys heard a
little bit earlier there was a
female settlements for two
languages here in the biggest
area the low speaker lists in
the more gain us and we did
provide some assistance to those
languages to try to give them
some guidance and i'm worked
with the department of justice
to pull together like a
consortium of folks from
different agencies to try to
help provide them support
and ensure that they're able to
sort of protect those assets are
in utilise them in a matter
that's gonna sort of be best for
those communities.
We provided legal services
direct legal services to seven
landgrands throughout the last
fiscal year and that included
active litigation in six cases
so we keep
a pretty good network between
our contract that we have with
the mexican legal aid to provide
services there partnering with
the community governance
attorney program and taking some
of those lawyers which you can
hear about this afternoon taking
those attorneys after they
finished last school and putting
them to work on some of these
issues we also partner i'm with
the UNM school of law clinical
programs are and we actually
they they actually litigated a
case with the area on the rible
language
and so we've been you know this
is the first time that i've in
my lifetime and i've been doing
this work for it for a long time
where we've been able to really
provide a meaningful services to
land grants and hopefully as a
result of someone we're doing
we're going to make some good
language law I know mark this
morning talked about some of the
decisions that have impacted
language in terms of their
governance and how they're
organized in the most of these
cases that are out there in
terms of commonly all predate
the two thousand and four change
that the legislature made to
recognize and lingerings as
political subdivisions and so
you know
often times when we go to to
trial and issues the opposing
council or citing these old
cases that really don't apply
because we're with a brand new
universe given the change that
the legislatures recognize and
so and we really need to make
some good common law based on
those changes that have been
recognized by the legislature
and what that means in terms of
hell and grants or recognize by
the courts and so that's
something that we're working
towards and we were happy that
we've been able to partner as a
mention with UNM and and also
with the department of justice
are treaty division on some
active.
Litigation and and hopefully
making some good some good law.
We also provided serving serve
assisted three landgrants and we
do this also through a contract
on one of the challenges we have
is that there's a limitation in
the numbers for serviers that
are out there we've been
fortunate that um we have a
surveyor who retired from the
uperiodsperio.
Langreen reset consequent and
the new mexico department are
justice and so that's something
that we will continue to do.
In addition to direct technical
services we also provide lease
on services between landgrants
and other entities and agencies
uh so here you'll see a list of
all of the different
agencies both of the state and
the federal level that we worked
with throughout last fiscal year
as it relates to either a
specific language issue or
broader sort of langrade issues
and so often times will serve as
a sort of a condo it to a hook
up landgrand leadership with
these different agencies or even
with some of the congressional
delegation or individual
legislators to be able address
of issues that are brought to
our attention to raised or to
get an audience of the freeze
language before some of these
are these entities and agencies.
And you can see it's quite of an
extensive list and it's it's
really I think we try to look at
these as
in most cases more as
partnerships were being able to
partner with some of these
agencies to bring a good
projects to these communities.
And that work you know it can
vary from working with the state
land office on fuel what
projects for local language
communities to working with a
federal agencies on policy
management decisions or working
with the delegation at the
federal level one reviewing
policy which i'll talk about
here in a little bit.
As well as you know helping
sheep
making sure that the complaints
has happening at the weather
let's see with the state
auditors office or with one of
the environment department we
were just been recently now
helping the several yet the
landgrand with a waste water
treatment plant it's falling on
the compliance and trying to
help bring together the partners
that are going to help them get
that into compliance and make
sure that there can reinvest the
dollars that they have into
fixing the system as opposed to
pain fines for being out of
a complaints with some of the
environmental regulations.
We work throughout the year as
many of you know one a lot of
different policy work I booked
the state in the federal level
of the biggest piece of policy
that we worked on last year and
which you may all remember is
the language in a secure
infrastructure fund
that still very important fund
for
a communities and where hope
inter get that reintroduced in
the thirty day session and
hopefully make that successful
i'm as many of you may know it
died just in its last committee
at that they're very end of the
session and senate finance made
it through the house
and I think we would have if we
could have gotten out of the
committee we we would have a
pretty good shot if we wouldn't
ran out of time and may be
getting it past on a four boat
on the senate and but that a
very important piece of
legislation for us just because
of the the need for
infrastructure
you know we have i'll give you
some examples that we finally
completed the good then compo
transfer at least an eighty
percent eighty five percent of
that transfers happen they're
still I need to work on a rode
smith that has a little bit of a
complication but the property
itself has been transferred in
now we got to address the reason
that it ah transferred initially
was because
the department again in fish
the damn for that leak was
identified by the officer state
engineer dam safety bureau has
not been sufficient for the
safety standards and so the
department of game in fish
rather than fix the damn opted
to get rid of the of the lake
completely in the community said
he know we want to continue to
have the leak and they said all
right we'll give it to you but.
Then it's all your liability
right so the community is was
willing to take that on and the
children are lingering now has
control of it that the transfer
just happened in the past
several weeks but we're now we
got to address you know making
sure we bring that down up to
safety standards and and that's
you know I think the estimate
when we first started having
this conversation in twenty
seventeen
the the options that game
official lead out where anywhere
from two million to like eight
million dollars in terms of
bringing that into compliance
and the different options we all
go back and look at the
engineering on that and figure
out and what what exactly if
anything is needed for for
repairs to that down so that's a
big one as I mention the civil
at the wastewater treatment
facility in although they have a
couple of lagoons that they need
to retire we swatter lagoons and
so those things the retirement
of those in the and the
maintenance and i'm keeping the
other ones or some pretty
major expenses that can range in
either the hundreds of thousands
to the millions of dollars
as well as affordable housing
projects that we have land
grants are engaged in on the
that need some of that water
infrastructure as well as other
infrastructure needs and then
one thing that came up this year
and and um
and many of you are probably
familiar with was the this
concept of land disposals at the
federal level I think I got a
lot of backlash
as it was part of the senate
budget reconciliation packet at
the federal level I didn't
actually end up getting in
because of a rule of
parliamentarian rule that it
sort of violated sort of the
procedures of that
reconciliation act
but if you actually looked at
the intent of that legislation
in the language
we did some pretty deep analysis
on that because of the concern
of what it meant and what we saw
in that was there was obviously
some concern if lands were sold
that reformer comma lands that
belong to the four service with
the blm that went for high end
development that could be
problematic for a communities
but we did see that there was
opportunity there we do have
many communities language
communities especially in the
north that you only be familiar
with places like bit doca.
Drampas that or completely
surrounded by four service land
and they have no ability to
expand a grow they have no
ability to place infrastructure
for their housing needs they
don't even have the the room to
place cemeteries for burials and
so
we looked at that really hard
and I thought man wouldn't have
been great if we had to pass the
infrastructure pill last year
and if that passed and there was
a need to bidies at the market
they could actually go in and
make those purchases
and not have to scramble
and you know those those type of
opportunities I think may come
back again are they me they at
least under the current
administration they may come up
again in terms of potential
disposals and that's something
we want to be prepared and ready
to take advantage of
protecting those resources and
then also you'll eiseen if the
opportunity presents itself for
a community economic development
in our communities
you know with that also comes
are any credentials into the
formal housing is exemption for
new mexico subdivision act last
year this committee actually had
endorsed that legislation but
then it never got off the ground
during the session
that is an important piece of
legislation because we've had
language like shouldn't be that
have actually hit a wall with
the the the local county who is
not allowing them to move
forward with a horrible housing
projects because of the the
needing to comply with the
subdivision act and we have
other you know municipalities
don't if you're a sort of a home
media separately that's
incorporated you don't have to
comply with the counties
requirements for subdivisions
you require you have to comply
with your own language do have
zone in authority so it kind of
makes sense for them to have
their own authority as well in
terms of developing their own
subdivision ordinances and so
that's something that we're
going to obviously look to
change
we work closely on the community
governance attorney program
changes that came out this year
also the recognition of the
santa cruz like any other
language as a political
subdivision we attempted to make
some changes to the language
that assistance find.
That would allow for raising the
cap on the tears so that less
money would be reverted and then
also removing right now that we
this the status ran there's a
reversion of of any funds left
over at the end of the fiscal
year and because of the way the
tier system is structured and
which was based on the auditors
to system reporting we end up
every year with a little bit
that doesn't get distributed and
that just sits in the account
all year until the end of the
fiscal year and then it gets
swept back into the general fund
and we were um had some ideas
about how to change that we were
almost successful getting that
past that one unfortunately died
on the senate floor past the
house past all the committees on
the senate and it died I want to
see it was like number ten or
twelve on the agenda the date
that the last day the session
when it kind of got died I think
as a result of some just like
what things weren't moving quick
enough
so and that was a really good
bill it was
it would have just made sure
that the money was used for what
it was intended for
I also already mentioned we we
worked a lot on the property tax
exemption we also participated
in the state engineer regional
water planning sessions to
provide information about
landgrants not sure that it was
that receptive or helpful it in
any of the versions of kind of
what came out of those comments
we still haven't seen ah
language reflected in that but
will continue to work on that
issue and then we've also
recently been engaging with the
state auditors office on
potential revisions to the
cheered system reporting on that
law was passed the revisions to
the audit act I want to see
around two thousand and eight
two thousand eight two thousand
ten someone in that period is
when those changes were made and
since that time
the federal audit rules and
procedures have changed in terms
of the amounts in the caps and
so it's probably is really time
that we go back and re evaluate
with that and I know last year
that bill I think kind of died
uh unarrival at the legislature
from the state outers office and
one of the reasons was it was
making multiple changes not just
to the chart system but also to
the single audit requirements
for state agencies.
And so one thing that anything's
going to happen is they're going
to separate those out but one
request that the council would
like to make on behalf of the
auditor's office and i'm sure
they or I could be reaching out
as well
is to maybe come before this
committee at some time this year
just so that they can present
what's happening in terms of
potential revisions to the audit
to the church system of
reporting and how those are
beneficial for some of our small
local government entities like
landgrandsocic is another small
counties and
and I mean sophologies and
special districts
you know at the federal level we
had the traditional use
cooperation coordination act
reintroduced this is a a piece
of legislation that would
provide a pathway for length
grants to ensure that they're at
the table and participate in the
planning process when federal
lands at a former common lands
are being managed in north of
those long range plans as a
really developed um as well as a
seat at the table whenever
there's going to be any kind of
action under that plan that's
taking place that may impact
traditional uses and it would
ensure that those traditional
uses are part of those planning
components and are managed for
it in the past we've been left
out of those conversations
because you know in the nineteen
eighties when they read it the
plans in the first actual start
developing plans the focus was
heavy on just the ecological
effects and and didn't really
take into account sort of the
needs of the local communities
more recent plan on was really
heavily focused on recreation we
were able to make sure that we
got traditional uses for
language and a second
communities a recognized as as
being important components in
the plan and this bill would
quotify that in law
also and that bills being
cosponsored by the senate side
by senator ben reland and on the
house by council interest
alleged fernandez a recently
congressman interest alleged
fernandez also introduced a
similar cherry return act that
would allow for specific.
The US four service under the
small tracks act and would allow
for cemeteries that are within
the US for service that are for
belong to language communities
that they could apply to get
those return to the small tracks
act without having to buy them
back and we do have several
minute communities that have
cemeteries that are located
within the four service the
reason that happened is that
they were on the common lands of
the language and after the US
for sustainable decision that
determined that all the common
lands were belong to the
sovereign many of these
cemeteries ended up in the hands
of the federal government and so
those that were not recognizing
the fell under the federal
government and so we have some
communities that have lost
access to those cemeteries and
and so that this bill would sort
of all give the four service the
authority to
give those cemeteries back to
the communities without having
them to pay for market value.
And then
when I want to kind of turn to
now is the language merced
assistance finding this is the
you know we oversee the council
overseas the implementation of
the fund we also oversee the
language registry which is you
know were language filed or by
laws as well as their changes
are entering any election and
then the assistance find is the
distribution that was created by
the legislature to provide sort
of a guaranteed revenue stream a
budget and annual guaranteed
budget for language to operate
are and to do programmatic to
whatever their programmatic
initiatives are and so
in your packet is kind of a the
fun has been around for since
fiscal year uh twenty three was
passed on the twenty twenty two
legislative session here's a
list of so far there's been
twenty one language that have
received money from the fund um.
And the the way that you're
eligible as you have to meet all
of the requirements first you
have to have complied with your
audit so if you made the
auditors compliance lists are
out by september first so that's
going to be coming up here
pretty quickly then it comes to
the council and then we have to
review and determine that you
comply with all the other
statutory requirements and that
includes filing with the
registry that includes doing
your budgets that includes some
of the statutory requirements
like in language specific
saturdays they have in compiled
and annual report and so once
we've done all those checks on
those languages that are
eligible under the audit act
that have complied with the
other act
with and forward that list to
the department of finance
administration and they make the
distributions at the end of
october.
So you'll see in a fiscal year
twenty three there was two
million dollars available that
was available through the
special appropriation of the
legislature made on the way that
the fund actually collects its
dollars throughout the year
subsequent to that first year is
it's based on a small percentage
point zero five percent of the
grocery states tax collect
collected state wide goes into a
fund in the that fund collector
of the year so an FY twenty four
on that phone collected one
point six
one point six seven million
dollars approximately that was
distributed last year to the fun
collected two point zero nine
million and so the distributions
in those years you can see that
reflected the first year it was
for a full distribution was a
hundred eleven thousand four in
FY twenty four full distribution
was ninety seven thousand
roughly ninety thousand and fy
twenty five a full distribution
was roughly hundred and twenty
three thousand and you can see
some length grants received a
seventy five percent
distribution based on their
previous years income and that's
what creates this reversion is
that whenever a language doesn't
receive a full distribution
there's not a mechanism
currently they just realicate
that to the other language that
are entitled to full
distribution it just sits in the
fund and so that first year you
see where we've early twenty
seven thousand
FY twenty four reverted ninety
seven thousand because it was
three language that only got a
seventy five percent or four
language I should say and then
we had um sixty one thousand
it's going to that reverted now
at the end of this fiscal year I
haven't gone and update from the
fa have requested it but haven't
gotten a year as to what the
current amount is in the fund
that'll be distributed this year
but um you know this is proven
really helpful for length grants
to do several things one it's
helped some landgrounds to make
sure that the compliant they're
able to hire
cpe's to help them with their
books for the auditing some
language have actually used the
money to hire part time managers
to help them manage that just
the money that they have but
also the programming aspect to
make sure that they're complain.
And we've had language of
utilised it to survey to conduct
surveys when they when they're
needing to sort of do a specific
project we've had also language
that have acquired properties
they've used this to leverage
either if the if the acquisition
is small enough to purchase it
outright or to leverage it for
receiving funding through either
a loan or
some other type of finding
finance mechanism and so this
has really been a game changer
for landgrandson we're hoping
that um as we continue to sort
of language build the capacity
they'll be able to also utilise
this to match federal dollars
and other grand programs to
bring more dollars into their
communities for investment.
So you know that's kind of
overall what the council does
what else is in your packages or
f way twenty twenty seven budget
request for you order perus.
In all just kind of go quickly
over the highlights it is a
pretty significant increase in
terms of you know are it doubles
with the council's budget is
currently.
But the council has not received
an increase in in two fiscal
years so we've had a flat budget
this will be our second year
when in the FY twenty five where
the council's budget has
remained flat
and so that curbs the amount of
services that were able to
provide I think we do a heck of
a lot with the the staffing that
levels that we currently have
there's a four full time staff
members that are for the council
and the the language and
institute because of some of our
other programmatic dollars were
able to share staffing but um
the council itself has one full
time fte and then the other
three included myself and we all
have a majority of our
percentage of work is in the
council but we do have some
other
obligations that we do wonder
the limit of our sit assistance
I mean the language percent
institute at u and m and so
there's a budget would reflect
sort of pin fully staffed right
through would include staffing
at our current staff as well as
growing to include a community
regional planning individual
that can oversee that and
actually help going grants
developing get to the next level
of doing projects we do a pretty
good job of assistant them now
but we really want them to be
able to actually adopt
comprehensive plans more
regularly and then put those
plans into implementation we
would also include on staff and
natural resource manager that
could help land grants manage
the natural resources that they
have to do a forest and
watership restoration projects
are and even apply for funding
and be able to not just apply
but to manage those dollars and
to you know the administrative
burden of those uh can often be
pretty
prohibited for languages to sort
of want to participate we also
would like to expand to include
a
surveyor on staff I mean I think
that would be the long term goal
if we could find somebody young
get them entered with our
current surveyor to sort out and
then have somebody out staff
that could just go and provide
the services to langrance on
call.
And then also expand our
services a legal services and
actually have in house attorneys
I was fortunate enough to pass
the boring and in an hour less
than attorney so I can actually
supervise
future attorneys were opened a
partner with the community
governor's attorney program and
I mean that's kind of how we
even envisioned it in our budget
was to maybe get one of those
attorneys in the future and have
fifty percent of their budget
pete from that program and then
we cover the other fifty percent
and then also you know continue
to hire students and get them
sort of move in and out and
understanding sort of the issues
that we're doing in and make
sure that we're able to
replicate the work we do because
i'm don't plan to be here for
every I started doing this when
I was in my twenties i'm now in
my late forties
and I want to make sure that the
stuff that we've been able to do
an institutionalized continues
well beyond myself
and so
that's sort of the the it for
the council I want to touch
briefly under institute as I
mention the language said
institute it's a category three
center which is which basically
means it's a standalone center
UNM
and it it reports to the office
of the vice president of
research and we did that
strategically we created the
senator allow us to be able to
partner with other entities on
campus um and it's worked quite
well not just for the center but
also the council which is kind
of under that umbrella uh as I
mentioned we have a lot of
partnerships with the UNM school
of law and we are also working
on developing partnerships we've
done stuff in the past and we're
trying to sort of establish
stronger partnerships with the
school of our checks and
planning in fact we're going to
be hiring a student this year
part time I have time a pain
half of of the salary for a
student with the school of
architecture planning to be able
actually get them working on
comprehensive planning and work
with language communities there
some other units on campus that
we would like to partner with
just learned about a new the
southwest of environmental
finance center I think added UNM
which helps communities of water
and wastewater projects.
Um want to see how we can
partner with them we we I just
met the gentleman
from now that I was working with
civil yet and i'm like he let's
let's partner let's work on some
stuff in that category three
center really allows us to sort
of do that cross campus the
other thing we focus on to some
of the archival research and
making some of that stuff
available as I mentioned we have
all the stuff that we've
recently do to try to we're
going to be working on getting
that organized and then making
that available and figured out
how the best that is to get that
digitized in on line available
for the general public to be
able to access we've been
recently working over the past
several years on purchases from
alchemy bright and many of you
may have heard his name alchemy
bright was historian attorney
who turned into a kind of
historian and an author wrote a
lot of books on landgrand
struggle did a lot of research
he recently just passed away
about three weeks ago
and we were in the middle of
purchasing a collection and
fortunately his family is
continuing with that most recent
purchases were actually going to
be a quiet I think seventy six
reals of microfilm that include
translations of some of the
original spanish documentation
and we've been able to get some
of his other articles and people
over the years and so we'll be
working on getting those
digitized and that'll be one of
the priorities that we do over
the next course of the next year
and then we've also worked with
the here in new mexico highlands
they have the second language
education project we've been
work working with them on
developing curriculums relates
linguines in the seconds and
will continue to do that work
there at the university of new
mexico through the language that
institute and with that matter
chair appreciate again all the
time that you've allowed me to
to speak this today uh and i'll
stand for any questions you may
have.
Thank you so much mister letter
first if we have senators to
punics
thank you matter chair and first
of all I went apologies for
living at two so I can get on a
csg committee meeting later but
first of all I want to commend
our toro and the entire
landgrand council I have watched
over the years
your activities your growth your
professionalism and how much
you're helping and in the past
when you would present a budget
request we would nickel and dim
you we would say why do you have
this extra fifty thousand I
think it's time for us to
support whole heartedly the
request they are doing so much
work for all the landgrounds and
I think that we
before the end of the interim
should take a stand about this
sar colleagues that finance and
appropriations understand how we
are invested in your council
And I was just amazed how much
work you are able to college
with such a small steps so if
anyone is the most efficient
person in in in government right
now working you're I gotta so I
was up
I I just wanted to echo as
sinister video community with
regards to the fact that given
all the work that you're doing
in all the work that's necessary
to do in the future.
That we support your your
request how hard it in that
somehow we make sure that this
request is met fully and just
one of the congratulate you on
the on your presentation first
of all but also in the working
bill already being able to
compare so thank you for that
thank you replied.
Thank you who's in charge mr
chair of managers
aren't chair thank you arter out
I want to reiterate what
everybody just said I always
appreciate you and i'm sorry
that building go through because
I thought it was going and then
I saw the clock was ticking and
I was like oh no we're getting
to the end
we got to the end so i'm sorry
they can go through I do have a
question
and i'm very hard to hear in so
that the acoustics and here it
does not work for me being as
deaf as I am
when you said we're chillily
there have an issue with the
county with their putting up the
their smaller houses and what's
a problem with that is it
because they have specific rules
they want chili lead to follow
is that when i'm understanding
better insurer representative or
that's correct so right now
under the new mexico subdivision
act.
The county has the authority to
regularly subdivisions in all um
areas within their jurisdiction
that are aren't specifically
exempted by that act and so as
they mention there are some
specific exemptions for example
municipalities within the county
they have their own
self governance in terms of
subdivisions because chimilia
has zoning authority you know
the zone some of the common
lands for housing if opposed and
in fact they've developed some
of these in the past but I think
maybe staff changes at the
county level or maybe it just
increases in the capabilities
for planning they have now
determined that they will not
allow the language to sort of
move forward because of and I
think it relates also to their
desire for emergency management
and addressing because get their
addressing without doing a a
subdivision without a plane for
a a subdivision under the
country's jurisdiction and
getting their proved by them and
so she leaves I think on their
fourth affordable housing sort
of developed area where they're
trying to retain folks in the
local community and the other
ones you know they the the way
that they have accomplished and
have changed over the years and
then they've gotten more
sophisticated actually putting
in the infrastructure and doing
some of the the lot splits which
they're not actually it's
interesting because it's not an
actual subdivision it's an
exercise on paper and the reason
I say that is normally if you
have a subdivision you split up
lots in an area and then you
sell those lots of they become
owned by different individuals
in this in since the language
separates the lots on paper
gives a lease to the individual
for an account or or at each and
half whatever the size of a lot
is but the land itself never it
remains common and saw the land
is not actually divided are
broken up that that parcel is
still the same parcel for tax
purposes
it's just not the in it but it
it is divided on their sort of.
Housing plan in order to issue
that lease to an individual but
it's an arbitrary in the sense
that the ownership doesn't
change and and if the least were
to go away the land just remains
as part of the common land of
the grant and so it's a little
bit different and they think
that's hard for the county to
grapple with
in terms of approving it and so
when we look at it we thought
well you know under the
subdivision act right now they
do have that authority the way
you fix that and you fix that in
the future so that uh bland
grants can sort of determine for
themselves how best to do these
affordable housing plans would
be to just exempt them from the
act and give them the authority
to do that.
Manager and a terrorism that
would that be something as out
of county issues that something
that we can legislate on our end
so that we can grab something up
to clarify this in the future
the madam chair representative
lord yeah so the way you can
address it through legislative
policies to just amend the
subdivision act to include
language as one of the exempt
entities and this committee did
in fact endorse a bill of that
nature last year but that the
bill just never got introduced I
think there was just some
confusion as to who the sponsor
was going to be it was one of
the last bills that got endorsed
by the committee at the end and
we were losing members and so by
the time that the session rolled
around and we just want able to
get that off the ground and
introduced with enough time to
get it moving and so we were
hoping to just make sure that
the community doesn't forget
about that need not sure that
it'll be demanded to this
session unless we included some
type of appropriation towards it
by this is something that we're
going to continue to work
towards I think it's good
policy.
Thank you matter chair and not
sure that was going to be my
question cause yet depends on
what how it's presented in the
next session but I I think
there's some importance to this
to make sure so I just want to
make sure I understand so if we
were to pass that here and
clarified it wouldn't matter
what county it is torrent county
berlin county it would be state
and that would move forward
without any objections or
jumping through hoops of high
fire from the county madam chair
representative or that's correct
because it would then be the
statute would read that they
govern their own subdivisions
thank you that I am I think you
represent greasy
thank you madame chair and think
you're throughout
real thorough presentation and
cannot test the money to the
hard work that you're stuff for
four dollars or the landground
so you know with the with penny
compensation
insurance that the ratio work to
when you put into it so yeah a
man of chair the
the budget request I think is
very warranted on
you know I think personally each
of us have to
make the pitch
you know I know that I
will be doing though
a pitch to our caucus
and specifically mentioning a
request
for the the council
and pursuing that
during the session
you know with our chairman
and regards to ensuring that
those increases are in there
a question that I have made him
chair is
the property tax exemption
what is the status of that
it is is it out a one time shot
where the language puts up a
protest goes before the
protestering board the hearing
board determines that yes
dimensional processor divisions
were were example.
Is it just an exemption for that
tax year or is it like a of a
permanent exemption from their
own end madame chair
madam chair representative
that's a excellent question and
it really depends on a couple of
factors so the intention in the
way we sort of guided landgrants
to file those protests this past
tax year.
Was under
the constitution
I believe it's a is either
article eight section fiver
section five article I think
it's such a privatically that
provides a specific exemption
for
counties minister paletti's and
then it also says other than
musical corporations I can't
remember the exact way that it
titles it
and so it was under that that we
were sort of making the request
and and if if a county approves
the tax exemption under that
section because it's a
constitutional
immunity from that tax then it's
permanent then he filed it in
the one year and then every year
subsequently that the county
though they'll still issue
evaluation but it'll show that
it's exempt from taxation.
The way some countries have
opted to do it in the past and
and we're not sure if all of i'm
going to keep it that way it's
time will tell is that there's
another provision in the
constitution that allows for
the legislature to determine.
A exemptions specifically for
its related to education and I
and so
the
some countries in the past and
we have headline grants prior
that the last year that have
received exemptions from the
counties and the way they've
done it as the county has
justified it as being for a
nonprofit educational use and so
they do have some authority
within the assessor's office to
make those exemptions those ones
usually are like good for five
years and then they have to
reapply for that educational
exemption and so there was also
a court case that exempted or
that recognized a supreme court
case in your new mexico that
recognized land it's in
conservation as having a benefit
that should result in tax
exemption and so that's another
sort of secondary argument we
made is that those lands that
are that are in common lands or
held in conservation vacant that
that's a a benefit to the state
that that should allow for sort
of that exemption
now
because we've had the one county
that has you know two two years
ago when burner leo county
protest board issued a decision
that said like the chili
language was exempted.
Brilliant county actually
appealed that decision and I
went to district court but
before it was it reached the
decision the chile and granted
bernie county were able to
negotiate a settlement for them
to be exemption on the taxes
that one's a little bit more
complicated because of the the
leases that they have they
wanted to make sure that he
captured the improvements and so
they reached the negotiation on
how they would tax the
improvements versus the common
lands.
And so that never went to
decision and so we didn't have
finality in terms of that that's
good law and so now with the
with the send of all case going
to ah district court we're not
sure how the district rule will
and even at the district court
rules in the language favor it's
still not going to be
precedential in terms of it
being a lobbits that they're all
the other counties will have to
follow the only way that'll
happen as if it then is appealed
to the appeals court and the new
mexican pills court or the
supreme court if it
got appeal to that level issued
opinion and that language are
exempted under that specific
constitutional section and so
that's kind of where we are now
so although it's it's a little
bitter sweet we got most of the
languages through we look
forward to uh this potential
challenge in terms of being able
to maybe create good law that
would make all the counties
recognize that exemption if we
get a favorable decision for
linguists okay thank you for
that the permanent chair on and
lastly
on the
traditional use
legislation at the federal level
weekend at that point for some
time now
and
when went when was it originally
introduced.
And what has been the progress
or the lack of progress
regarding that legislation.
Better cherry president could
see that a great question so
that piece of legislation
actually originated
not several years after the two
thousand four g o report was
issued and it gave
recommendations the language
collectively went to the
congressional delegation and
proposed a very comprehensive
piece of legislation that would
address sort of the injustices
that were created for language
and the response that we got
back from the majority of the
delegation was that it was too
complicated we published it to
parts that out and so when
senator now center luhan first
became a congressman he actually
tried to carry that
comprehensive bill and it didn't
didn't really get a move and so
at that time you said well what
I want to do is I want to take
the peace that deals with
traditional uses and so we've
been working with the
then congressman now senator on
that bill for better more than
probably ten years
actually has been quite hot ten
years and it really the the
largest part we problem we had
was getting the committee
hearing on that so
two congresses ago we were
successful at getting a
committee hearing and senator
then congressman luhan was was
in the was in the house it went
through sort of the first
version but never got never meet
it to the floor and then
congressman lewin switched over
to the senate so when he went to
the senate
congresswoman depollent took the
lead on that piece of
legislation and
interestingly enough it was
under the at that time it was
under a republican controls
that we got a hearing before the
natural resources committee and
it was passed by the committee
made a bunch of tweaks made it
to the floor of the house and
actually passed before the house
and at that time when it passed
the floor of the house it had a
bipartisan support and on the
floor it was actually both
republicans and democrats spoke
in favor of the bill including
the ranking member.
Um congressman bishop at the
time and spoke in favor of the
bill has been something that
provided for more local
authority in sort of management
decisions
unfortunately it didn't pass the
senate in that congress and so
that was the end of the two year
cycle congress ended and it had
to be reintroduced subsequent
congress the democrats to
control of the house and at that
time the chairman of the natural
resources committee was senator
or a representative
out of arizona and we could not
get a hearing.
On that bill a congresswoman
hall in also left to become
secretary of interior
congresswoman to resolution on
this took up the the lead uh
sponsor of the bill and we could
not get a hearing before the
committee at least in the first
year of that congress we worked
in works towards getting the
hearing and getting it sort of
moved forward and we're not able
to do that but on the senate
side center luhan had
established enough um clout
within the senate and seniority
that he was able to get it on a
writer of a of a let a larger
lands package and so and that
congress we passed the senate
but we didn't pass the house and
so the senate bill although we
tried to get it hearing because
it was now something that could
go through unfortunately that
didn't make it through and so
the
last congress we reintroduced it
early um and just because the
congress was in such tromoral
and they had a lot of other
things that have been going on
and we were not successful at
getting it hearing we did get it
marked up
and kind of moving forward for
that sort of in that direction
but it died and didn't didn't
advance there was no
land package as I was talking
about maybe getting it as a
writer on unland packages on
both chambers but there was no
nothing actually came out there
was not only because packages
they came out you know the the
the budget itself as you asked
probably remember is just on
continuing a resolutions
and so we have now reintroduced
it in this congress and were
hopeful
we're always hopeful not but
pragmatic so don't know that
whether they'll get traction and
success and if it passed as both
chambers it still has to go up
and and get signed off on by the
presidency the bill does have
its its challenges but it is
definitely a bill that's been
sort of whittled to its core
something that I think both
sides of the isle can agree with
in terms of local accession in a
sealed at the table for
communities to ensure that they
can utilize those public lands
i'm in the way that that sort of
best works for the local
communities.
Thank you for that are there
anyone there saying and it done
in the relevant to your
presentation but maybe you have
a an answer
but what is the strategy that
the one users in terms of
putting something in the
congressional record
why would we want to do that why
do people do that
out of share representatives
here
yet also excellent question.
Unlike new mexico the federal
government and sort of the
legislative process there the
congressional record is is
actually quite important to
determinations and caseload so
here in new mexico the
legislature doesn't really have
a
legislative record rate and so
you can the court can kind of
look at it if it's so chooses
but because there isn't official
minutes of committee hearings
and those kind of things that
are in record often times the
court just kind of looks at its
internal rules and the existing
law but not necessarily the
conversations that happen in the
interpretation of those laws and
and they're not required to at
the federal level it's quite
different i'm at the federal
level and when you get something
in the congressional record that
bears um
for not only the courts in
reaching decisions and
interpretations of the law but
also the agencies themselves at
the executive branch they'll
look at the congressional record
and so we have been successful
at utilizing the congressional
record when we're trying to
implement policy and i'll give
you an example
when we were going through
forest plan revision this most
recent time that just ended a
couple years ago.
Dream that process there was a
effort to expand wilderness
across the state and in one of
those places where they were
hoping to expand the wilderness
was in a rita area by india rito
and all those little communities
there are reasonable amount that
are a lot of those communities
all fall within the one hundred
of autogrant well in the
nineteen during the like the new
air new deal era
and when langrants lost a lot of
the common lands communities
lost common as because of
taxation there was a new deal
program that was set up to
purchase some of these lands and
make them federal lands for use
by the local community and they
were managed by it was like a as
a state land entity I can't
remember what they were called
they were like corporations at
the state level well when those
new york programs went away
sorted the funding for those
programs a lot of those lands
got transferred to the federal
government so in nineteen fifty
one the federal government
received from this rule
assistance I remember was called
something role corporations when
they transferred those
properties to the forest service
for management.
There was an act that had to be
passed on public laugh for
ninety one I think it was and in
our public for ninety one there
was a lot of beat and at that
time senator denis chap no
senator might have been senator
joseph motor
perhaps senator chavis my
timelines I remember but there
was a letter to be on both the
house and the floor and so that
got into the congressional
record and in that record it
said look this land has been
transferred to the forest
service with the intention that
it'll always be utilized for the
communities for use and benefit
well when the forest service was
trying to when they went through
their criteria for expansion of
wilderness there was some
parcels within that
purchase that nineteen fifty one
over the nineteen thirties
purchase that was transferred in
the nineteen fifties to the four
service that qualified that met
the qualifications for inclusion
or wilderness and we were able
to successfully see no way
public health offer for nineteen
required you all to have managed
that in perpetuity for the use
of the local communities for
grazing and other such purposes
and including in this wilderness
would then preclude that from
happening and so we were able to
sort of provide the recording
utilized that and based on the
those recommendations and and
then reviewing the record and
understanding what the potential
implications were they removed
those areas for
management as well as the wood
in the study areas and so that's
when we were able to sort of a
factually
those congressional records and
so they are important they're
very important for establishing
things like a definition for
language said which we've done
over the years in the budget
bill because then that gives
them something to point back to
when they're treating other laws
and other legislation and so the
more were able to establish that
congressional record and you do
it through having these
hearings.
You know whether it's a hearing
before a committee and providing
official testimony they also
allow you to then provide
written testimony that you can
then get inserted into the
record and so that's something
we've taken advantage of over
the years and doing some of
these bills is ensuring that
we're making a good record on
the can inform future policy
makers in future courts.
The.
Thinking representative told his
gilaskers.
Wow
the presentation and the
questions are just so powerful
and I always learn so much
listening to you I hope that
very soon.
You and your colleagues will
turn this into a book some kind
of written information for all
of us to have forever and never
my question has to do with the
materials that you are acquiring
you talked about the
or are digitizing you did the
ties eighty three rules of
microphone and you talked about
other materials
and I guess will i'm also asking
in this question which I haven't
gotten to yet
you
your on the budget it states
that the institute is a unm
intergovernment minimum has a
unem interest government can't
see it in our governmental
services agreement
and so I have two questions
there one is do you have plans
to open a museum
okay three questions to house do
you do you provide these do you
send these materials to the
regions where they are most
relevant to the land grants
perhaps
or or are you thinking of
working with an existing museum
at your name that's question
numbers one in two and a
question number three uhm is on
given that this is that your
institute the institute is on
you and property
who do the materials belong to.
Madame chair representative told
us alaska so i'll want to do my
best and if I forget one of the
questions of asking to remain so
in the first regard in terms of
the museum we have never
contemplated sort of that we do
have some landgrants you saw
earlier something good to mad
that actually have their own
sort of little local museums and
we we do try to support them as
much as we can currently the
tomat language you they have a
museum in a library and doctor
cool back up with our office has
been working with the UNM blency
a branch campus to help them
sort of digitally some of their
records and they're going to try
to work it into some correct
line for some of the classes to
tie the branch campus into
providing more sort of local
services and also provide sort
of a benefit to that local
community
in terms of the larger picture
though we do want to have a
repository and determine what's
the best way to sort of present
this right now what we've done
is for those materials that are
relevant to specific landgrants
we've got a couple of things in
some instances when we've been
able to gather a criminal
material we usually try to
separate them by language and
will supply those to local
length grants
when some of these acquisitions
that we've made for example of
some of the articles that
malcolm e bright has authored or
the center for language studies
which was kind of where he was
out of had authored when we
acquired those we actually
compiled those into a
publication the council uh
produced and then we distributed
those for freedom line grants
and so
that something that entaining
you know just members of the
public and that's something that
we we try to sort of do and we
we need to work on the piece of
once these records are digitized
and organized getting those into
some kind of repository format
it's accessible online and
that's I think that sort of the
next fees one of the challenges
has been though and I think
there's been some some of the
committee members of the litter
to this is that we do a lot with
very little in terms of staffing
right and so what that means is
that we're pulled in a lot of
different directions and so one
of the things I want to do this
year's priorities in its
reflected in the budget is that
with doctor a couple backer
because.
His expertise has been a
research historian um some of
that has sort of fallen to the
wayside in terms of his
expertise not going to waste but
not being utilized in in the
probably best efficient matter
for him because he's had to step
in and do some of these other
services we were priced
languages so one of the changes
in this during fiscal year that
we're going to do is i'm going
to switch him to actually fifty
percent of his time is going to
be council time in fifty percent
the institute so that he can
start focusing on organizing and
getting those art cable
resources to together we want to
try to pull in some students to
also be assist with that
in that way because it's not
only beneficial for
general researchers and for
the communities but it's also we
recognize it's very beneficial
to the communities particularly
when it comes to like litigation
and addressing some of these
issues and having that sort of
level of understanding and and
access to those records and
resources which really have made
the difference in some of the
cases that were litigating when
you're able to find these
records that are you know
hundreds of year old records
that you know that that want
good translation and so I think
that's an area that we know we
sort of need to accomplish and
grow and so that's part of the
reason why we're trying to
increase our
staffing so that we can actually
have other folks focused on some
of those areas that that
currently we have to pull all of
our staff into different sort of
areas right so that will be
fully staff and so
I guess with that
they did I answer all your
questions madame chair
representative that I miss any
man cherries on that one but I
do have one more when you're
done if you're if you're done
with this one yeah another two I
just have one statement I want
to make at the end but i'm good
now
madam cherry do have one more
question if yeah we just get the
responses a bit brief because we
have a couple others take it to
as well thank you
uhm being made sure being that
you're at a representative i'm
at sorry at a university.
Are representing lounge outs and
representing the cultures
affiliated with langrounds just
wondering given the current
administration's pressure on
universities
and the
conception of research and
what's allowable and what's not
allowable um and I have spoken
with some our museum directors
and significant funding is being
cut in ground such as n s f
grants and other grounds but the
message also
uhm it goes beyond money i'm
wondering if you have
experienced any threats to the
institutions are to the
institutions are continuing
continue once there um
or view for see any challenges
coming our towards the content
that you are research and so
very well provide for a
community manager
madam chair representatives last
guests at this point nor we have
not received any kind of a
backlash or or fell a threat I
think part of the reason is.
Because the sort of donature of
what we do and and because of
the support of the legislature
in this committee and this body
we are pretty self sufficient
also are or funding you know for
example with the council and the
intergovernmental service
agreement that's all money that
that's appropriate to come
through the state and so they
recognize her you guys the
council makes those decisions in
the institute although it's at
unm and so and now this more
seniors they've wrapped our
budget you know before it used
to be a special appropriation
for the studies program itself
they've have since wrapped it
into the just the ing fund if
the university gets and so there
may be in the future some
potential where they could say
we decide when I going to give
you that allocation anymore i'm
right now we've been pretty ok I
think partly because we do so
much work and we're able to sort
of produce that we're sort of
low on the rate are we we don't
sort of raise any better flags
but
if there is ever that sort of
potential threat believe me that
I this will be the first
committee I would say hey what
concerts and i'd like to get
some support for that.
Thank you mariature
I don't know do you make a brief
sementer yeah manager members of
me again thank you all
the opportunity and for also
recognizing the hard work that
we do I guess the one ask that I
would have anything this is sort
of the committee members alluded
to wanting to help support you
know how we can increase our
budget and I know it's helped in
the past I think when
represented me go garcia was
chair i'm as I think the
committee actually sent a
request for an official letter
to the lfc chair requesting that
we be placed on a future hearing
to be able to present our budget
request and then at least that
gets us in front of the the
legislators that that can
control the prostrings i'm until
that would be a request that I
would make on behalf of the
council if if i'm this body
would consider sending the
letter to the chair
for myself i'll think you so
much our little for that and we
can we're definitely work
together on something along
those same lines thinks we're
going to move forward into our
next presentation are with
indicator metal with the
easy assistant attorney general
are with the state department of
justice for the weather would be
they'll go treaty division just
to give everyone awareness we're
running about twenty minutes
behind right now so I think we
can definitely make it up over
the next you know three years so
uh presentations but I just want
to cannot give a general
awareness every one of the time
thanks.
I could have good afternoon
thank you all it's nice to see
some familiar faces of madam
chair and members of the
committee and also some new
faces I am in record ramed on
the assistant attorney general
with the new mexico department
of justice some also the
division director of the treaty
gotten to be hit all good
division
I wanted for us just give a an
overview of my presentation
today I want to first talk about
just for a brief minute or two
the treaty division statute i'll
then talk about staffing at the
treaty division on golf our
categories of work currently
that we're involved in at the
division and then some key cases
and matters that we're working
on and then of course opening up
for questions are from the
committee
so first madam chair members of
the committee so as you all
probably know
the treaty division was created
by statute in two thousand three
I don't think it was a
coincidence that it was around
the same time that this
committee was created if I
understand correctly from
representative gracious comments
earlier
the treaty division
statute is is at eight five
eighteen that section are eight
five eighteen and art new mexico
statutes it says in in a
nutshell that division is
required to review overseas and
address concerns relating to the
provisions of the treaty of what
it look his argo that have not
been implemented or observed in
the spirit of article two
section five of the
constitutional new mexico so
that's a mouthful um but as in
essence i'm this division was
created with reference to our
new mexican constitution and as
i'm sure all of you know there
is a provision of our
constitution that ensures that
the right privileges and
immunities that were guaranteed
under the treaty
need to be implemented i'll read
it real briefly here the rights
privileges and immunities civil
political and religious
guaranteed to the people of new
mexico by the treaty of what it
would be hit although shall be
preserved in violence I have not
been doing this work with
language for very long I i've
been in practice for a going on
eleven years and I started with
the secures and legal aid worked
with sectors mostly in a few
languages.
But this constitution.
It is one we can't hear you at
this moment.
Okay when read against maybe at
all okay.
This this citation this
provision of the constitution is
frequently cited by or language
communities I mean also by our
second community so it's
something that again being in
practice for about eleven years
working with the traditional
communities is just something
that's inherent and in the
nature of the job when you go
out to the communities they will
reference the treaty what a look
he's all going and I think it's
a great honor a number one to be
at the department of justice and
have this division a staff to
which will talk in a minute
about but also just to you know
again feel like we have the
support i'm not going from this
committee from and from the
legislature but also as a basis
in our constitution so currently
right now at the treaty division
we have an amazing team a four
attorneys
we've never had that kind of as
far as I can tell never had that
kind of support in that kind of
staffing previously there was an
uh an assistant turn general
assigned to work with the
directional language council as
as their council and also the
new mexico secure commission but
it wasn't necessarily a full
time position we have four full
time attorneys and one non
attorney staff we also have with
me our fellow or summer fellow
intern from yale but she's a
native of sanity
point is is that people are
interested in this kind of work
we have two assistant attorney
generals working with us in
addition to myself as well as an
honors attorney the domestical
department of justice has an
honors attorney program it's
sort of like a fellowship for
first year law attorneys are
first year i'm sorry first you
attorney is graduating from UNM
law or anywhere actually across
the country and so we do have
one attorney whose term will end
in september but the other three
of us right now or of full time
and assistant train generals
with the department of justice
going now to the categories of
work.
So you know the two primary
jobs that we have in this lines
with the the agencies
representation of boards and
commissions is that we're
council to the new mexican
language council and to the new
mexico secure commission uhm we
are proud of the fact that we
are in communication with staff
from both of those bodies on a
very regular basis I think or to
run I talked probably at least
at least twice a week maybe more
and and with the new mexico
secure commission I think we're
in the in the place now with the
commission and that it's fully
um it's it's a full commission
now we have eleven members by
statute and I think that's
almost a first with that
commission and so we're really
doing a lot of capacity building
with the new mexico secure
commission and trying to see how
we can build their capacity to
do with their statutory required
to do which is to advise of the
legislature to advise the
governor to advise other
agencies on policy that is
impactful to a second and a
course of language and counsel
as you heard from our total I
mean they're doing a fantastic
job as as the primary technical
assistance provider to to the
language in new mexico and we're
there to support them so as
questions come up legal
questions we answer them as
questions come up again
regarding policy or
even strategic planning when it
comes to the council we're doing
that where we're helping with
the the council and staff kind
of strategize for the long term
for new mexico's language
language percent
the other categories of work are
briefly described in and then
i'll get into.
Some of the matters that were
that we're working on so.
We are in direct representation
agreements with a second
language that recognizes
political subdivisions of the
state so we are working directly
with the seconds and language
providing legal guidance legal
council on a number of matters
which all i'll get to a
momentarily.
Uhm the other big bucket of work
that we do is we're engaged in
policy work so we have some
initiatives that are derived of
directly from the division
either at the behast of entities
like the council or the
commission or just because we
know based on our interactions
with the seconds and language
that these were have foreign
policy matters so we're engaged
on the policy front or talk
about some of those things.
Yeah.
Should keep going with us yeah
okay.
And when I say advocacy I think
what we mean here is certainly
in our direct representation of
the seconds and language we're
providing that legal advocacy
when i'm say out of a case he
has somewhat along the lines of
what are to read mentioned in
terms of elays on so when a
seconds or language are hitting
road blocks there's
misunderstanding maybe there's
miscommunication maybe there's
just a lack of communication we
found it helpful to step in to
take a good hard look at
whatever the issue or matter is
see if we have existing
relationships with state
agencies.
The.
Okay that's true okay
so three times a charmer with
those second time
so in terms of advocacy again
we're we're interfacing with
local state agencies in some
cases federal agencies just to
get that clarity or advocacy
that the secure language needs a
couple of other buckets a
complaints at the department of
justice and we have an open door
policy in terms of if someone
has a complaint filed with our
office we'll see what we can do
if if we can handle it will
we'll figure out how to refer to
someone that can and so we we
also deal with a complaints in
particular complaints against
the secondary language and then
lastly it's similar to the
advocacy role that I consider it
as a separate sort of bucket is
facilitation facilitation and
dispute resolution and i'm all
mentioned a couple of those
items that were working on those
matters i'm so going back to
what I think is the bread and
butter well actually the the
bread and butter work really is
working within maximum language
council in mexico secure
commission that sort of been
again one thing that has been
consistent I think throughout
the administration or i'm sorry
through the agencies a history I
would defer to those folks on
the committee that have that
history to be able to say what a
previous attorney generals have
done but the bread and butter
work yes is working with a
secure commission and the
language in council uhm direct
representation of the second
language though I think it's
fairly new to the agency into
this division but it is the work
that I think brings us quite a
bit of of meaning as attorneys
attorneys as as you probably
know our unique breed
there are certain things that we
can do that that others can't
and we take repried and being
excellent attorneys and
representing a second language
so some of the issues that we're
working on and that we're
previously mentioned by tutor in
fact
was the son into another less
worth thus uh protest case so
we're engaged in a communication
with the landgrand and will be
entering into the council
agreement with new mexico legal
aid on uh defending the uh
decision to the protest board in
front of.
District court
as mentioned previously also by
our tural and end by the the
good folks of some of the bottle
we have re engaged or maybe
engaged for the first time on a
consistent and methodic kind of
level of the sound of all will
recoin the senate will five
language there's two of the
seventh and of all seven that
are not organized in a way that
we feel that we can really
engage in in the sense that
they're not formally recognized
political subdivisions of the
state but the status of having
political subdivision uh the
political subdivision status
really does allow us to directly
engage with the sandable five
language and so we are committed
to having monthly meetings with
them to strategize not only
legal strategy putting it
together if there be one but
also policy you know if there
are other policy solutions or
other negotiations that we can
look at in terms of moving
forward that issue
customer delicerna
this this body the legislature
in two thousand and eighteen
past the house joint memorial
one which was directing the
treaty division to engage with
local stake holders on the
complicated lenus issue in touch
county we felt that it was
important to reengage on that
matter so just last week we sent
a a letter to the stake holders
including telstra county
assessor's office the tax and
rev department but will be
engaging directly representing
the chris of a little certain
language in those discussions
about how best uh to move that
issue forward another
representation of a language
that I think is worth mentioning
is that some kind of real chama
i'm sure you all are aware from
previous conversations with that
language that they want have an
irrigation project on the senate
on the real chama on forest
service land so we're going to
be working with them to help
negotiate a lease or some other
kind of uh you know formal
recognition of their right to
use school ranch and identify
those water rates and hell also
to negotiate with old.
Secures on the real charmer that
are engaged in a very
complicated water sharing
project or i'm sorry management
on the real channel.
In terms of some of us secure
representation we we entered an
appearance on behalf of a a
ditch in san juan county that
had been sued on election issue
they had also filed the the
plate if it followed a riddle
mandators to install a certain
candidate we got that case it
would stipulate a dismissal with
prejudice meaning that it won't
come back but again we were
active pretty pretty quickly to
be able to mobilise our
attorneys to work with the asset
yet to try to resolve that issue
and and we think we got a good
outcome from that
we are looking at representing
an assection in an appeal of a
state engineer decision that
appeal it folded into that is a
request for declaratory judgment
which calls into question the
constitutionality of the statute
that gives a secure ability to
approve a deny water transfer so
it's a very important issue
it also folded into that
administrative appeal as a
nineteen eighty three civil
rights claim against it in the
second and also an open meetings
act violation so we're really
happy to be having some support
within our own agency to a
prosecutor defend these these
kinds of cases and then lastly
another direct representation is
of an assection tells county
which was a botched
infrastructure job
we think that we've got some
claims against the contractor
and so we're hoping that we can
get that resolved fairly quickly
so they can get their
infrastructure redined by a new
engineer by new contractor and
they can get water flowing back
into their ditch so that's the
one book it of legal
representation i'll quickly go
over some of our policy work on
our advocacy work and then i'll
stand for questions
some of the interesting work
that I think we're doing on
policy is you know we we are
cognition of the fact that a
second and language as a whole
are going to be suffering
impacts of cats traffic fire we
know that there's a lot of good
work that's being done post fire
we think that there's an
opportunity to work with seven
seconds and the touch canyon
that area has been designated
within the enchanted circle it's
been designated as a.
High risk area for fire so it's
less of a matter of if but when
and so we want to engage with
those assections that try to
determine what kinds of things
they need to do to be prepared
to request disaster assistance
when the disaster actually
happens we have attorneys
working on a conservation
easement project to weigh the
pros and cons of conservation
easements to help protect a
traditional uh traditional uses
on both the seconds and language
we have an attorney is signed to
work on hoops historic
preservation laws uh to
determine the pros and cons
again of of having does those
state and federal design nations
uh we are working on a second
language specific omen april
guide and again we'll be working
into intro agency with some of
our other attorneys at the
department of justice to ensure
consistency in that um we
continue to engage with the
state engineers office on a
number of issues including
compliance with the secure water
transfer decisions and the
process or laid out and statute
and then most recently we've
engaged on a couple of issues in
touch county being the telstra
the tow ski valley environmental
assessment that was issued by
the four service not to not too
long ago and then the telstra
county comprehensive plan we
heard from stake holders both
the secular grandstake holders
that had some concerns about the
draft comprehensive plan um in
telstra county two other items
that were looking forward to
before the end of the year is
water right education training
the language council had
requested such a training and we
want to open that up to both of
a second language but have it
against pacific to how those
kinds of communities can engage
in the adjudication process and
then finally a leadership
conference we had a leadership
conference last september we're
invited the key stake holders
from the various second language
communities including from the
council for the new mexico
second association the
consequent the commission we
also had representatives from
the union law school present to
try to you know of figure out
what obstacle still remain in
providing legal assistance but
any other kind of assistance for
her second elect.
So we're hoping to have our
second annual leadership
conferences this form
a move into advocacy and then I
will end
i'm sorry to have a couple of
other things after that but i'll
try to keep it brief
in terms of advocacy some of the
projects that we've worked on
again this is what I consider
where seconds or langrance or
kind of getting road blocks with
with state local or federal
government and sometimes really
is it's just a phone call
sometimes it's just setting up a
meeting is just getting their
attention that that that the
secure the language needs a you
know they they have something to
say or they have questions so we
worked with the stance near his
office and getting in the second
in the calculate communication
recognized there was against a
miscommunication about where
appointed diversion was
we worked as you heard earlier
with the two female the two
language that we're getting
femer settlement funds we
convene the meeting with I was
important to have relevant state
stakeholders including the state
auditors office department of
financial administration
d h s e m department homeland
security emergency management
everyone was there to hear kind
of you know what was happening
in to be able to provide some
guidance we also along with the
council facilitated a a
discussion within mexico state
treasures office in terms of
investing investing some of
those are settlement funds
we are also pleased to hear as
or to romantian that we have
gained some contraction with the
new mexican game commission a
deed was transferred last week
or the week before uh to the t a
language for like one of the
complete they're still against
some things to work out there
but it looks like it's on track
to be resolved soon
we have two second one is secure
that you know requested
assistance
because they were not getting an
answer to from the forest
service about how a fire started
in particular the advice fire we
managed to facilitate a
conversation with the forest
service and I believe they got
through the questions answered.
A couple of other you know
questions again related to risk
management and insurance we
facilitated some of
conversations with the state
department of this management
and then
lastly I won't spend too much
time about complaints because
that's you know again we will
entertain whatever complaints
come into the office again a lot
of times it's just a matter of
making some phone calls and you
know trying to understand what
the issues are
but facilitation I want to move
on to that
you know we're engaged and and
some of these things just take
time so you know we had some
secures up in the in more county
that were having some issues
with water distribution and
water allocation and so you know
we're engaged with them to try
to negotiate some sort of water
share and agreement and
sometimes it really is just
having that you know third party
in the room to be able to listen
to the different stories that
different sides of the story and
then you know also engage the
state engineer's office to see
what kind of technical
assistance that's the agency can
provide and then lastly the new
mexico environment department
reached out because of an issue
um involving the village to the
rosa which gets its water from
the two of the rose of community
ditch and we're anticipating
that we'll have resolution to
that issue in the in the coming
weeks so in a nutshell that's
what we've been up to again none
of this would be possible if it
was just me or just even want
attorney so you know
we have about eighty eighty
matters opened up in our case
management system we track
everything that comes in every
phone call every email when it
relates to a new request or a
new issue and so I think that
kind of shows you again kind of
the breath of the work and we
could use more attorneys we're
happy that the community
government's attorney program is
often up and running
but you know look like I said
that the initial outset is that
folks that are joining our team
are not necessarily coming from
a secure language background
debate maybe from new mexico
they may be not but as soon as
they come in there there
excellent attorneys and they're
willing to jump in learn the
law.
Apply the law and provide that
kind of legal assistance and
with that stand for questions
manager thank you so much it
never ceases to amaze me how it
much legal expertise money
engineering administrative
expertise is required to meet
team historic and you know
traditional uses of land so
thank you for all the things the
working on the gave it a
wonderful call and ask for help
as well and I encourage my
colleagues to do the same i'm
looking round to see there's
additional questions
represented girls here.
Thank you madame chair thank you
and return we are presentation
you know the sound about seven.
I had kinda requested
from you
and rale
to
see how exactly
named chair the office
can find out how facilitate.
A process there's a hotel
reopened the sand alone you as
versus on the one
and.
I don't know where you are in
terms of oh coming up with some
decision
as statement etc but
mountain you know i've posted a
specific question to our two or
two letter
and I did it with the year and
purpose and tenth of really.
Qualifying
the issue your congressional
record in terms of
when you are
doing your presentation
so I guess the question that I
want to ask is
how can the
and you are your division three
going to be there
which is established to uphold
the treaty and wild it
can realize the congressional
record to get the sand about
seven issue before congress.
Merchant represent grecia
the approach that i'm taking
through the treaty division is
to first work
with the five the five language
so the first step is to and and
we've been doing this is to meet
with them on a monthly basis
for an hour and a half meg right
so we're not spending all day on
it but we also see that after
every meeting there's homework
to be done so I think that when
when an attorney and again we're
we're going to be entering into
direct representation agreements
most likely with with each of
them so will have joint
representation agreements
I think the first thing from our
from an attorney's point of view
is to first gauge the interest
of those languages because we
need consensus I think because
whatever however we decide to
move forward we'll have some
sort of impact on all of them
and we've gotten that consensus
so for
minus one language that we're
having some communication
difficulties but will get there
you know the second piece of it
is really
understanding that each one of
them also has a very different
history and so our plan is
really to have them all sitting
in listening to each other
stories seeing what the
commonalities are seeing where
each one of them has already
made some kind of headway so as
an example
to be able to ask the federal
government for some kind of
access or some sort of priority
in terms of a potential land
transfer or something to that
extent you know we need to
understand what those real
property interests are and so
some languages are certainly
more advanced and others even
within this this cohort of five
in terms of being able to
identify that so we're trying to
build off of the work that's
been done by other languages and
and some of their strengths and
some of the things that they've
done to really first identify
concretely what is it that
you're asking for it may be the
same as what previous boards are
trustees have asked for or other
errors.
It may be different and so
really all along the way having
that meaningful engagement with
the folks that are going to be
impacted by some outcome is
really our focus at the moment
but
I should say the defocus the
other part of that of course is
understanding
legally what are the
difficulties legally what is
going to be the case that we
bring what is going to be the
action that we take the action
that we bring what what federal
decision is going to trigger
we're looking at all of that
because they think the question
the congressional record I think
all of that becomes relevant at
the point that we're putting
together the case itself or in
negotiations right in in may be
pretty litigation negotiations
may be post dedication to post
filing all of that becomes
relevant but at the moment right
now and I I really want to be
methodical about how we do this
is I want to start from the
bottom build the building blocks
make sure that we have input
directly from the state holders
all along the way and as we're
going things will change I think
there would be different
directions maybe that we will
take but at the end of the day
as the consensus that i'm trying
to build with the with the
language and that takes time
but to add to your question
directly I don't have an answer
in terms of how the
congressional record will be
used but certainly all evidence
all evidence is going to be used
if it's congressional records if
it's if it's if we need to go
out into those communities and
do surprise if we need to go out
in those communities and do
interviews with some of the
answering those that know and
can really articulate what what
it is that we need to know what
will do all of that I mean we're
building the case in other words
well thank you for that
and we can that was that was
very helpful
in terms of
this process that you are
engaged in with the
the five language in the in the
reason that you mentioned fire
is that there's two languages
that I guess are.
Not political so divisions and
maybe one is an active that
start the guardian stale line
grant which is in that
and then the pataka and I don't
know about the stairs on the
petroca but can you give us a
status on the petaca
manager representative garcia I
I have to the council is also
working with us and in in these
meetings and and they're sort of
our first point of contact when
it comes to understanding the
history
the organizational history of
the various languages and so my
understanding is that you know
there are
members of the photocolon grant
and I think they've been they've
been
I think my understanding is that
they still have a language they
know they're part of a language
but they haven't sought that
formal recognition as a
political subdivision of the
state at this point and that's
this is where again as we
proceed we will want to reach
out to those folks and make sure
that there are aware of kind of
where we're going with all of
this and we don't have a a
direct direct line of sight at
the moment in terms of where
we're going but we felt most
comfortable engaging with the
five that are recognized
political subdivisions and and
fortunately and and the
representatives from the santa
cruz langrade you know have been
attending the meetings because
they were recently recognized by
the legislature so
uhm but that is my understanding
that the talk at this moment is
not organized but there may be
something that we don't know in
terms of maybe they do have some
more formal recognition I mean
formal
maybe they are acting as as
something that we don't know
they just have been recognized
by the legislature at this point
okay thank you for that man of
chair thank you for that time
and recarring it isn't lightning
and encouraging they see that
down that there is a moment
going on on this particular
issue and that the in the year
at the forefront
of the initiative so thanks
again and thank you for your
work with the treaty division.
Thank you madame chairman
representative
think you so much with the
presentation today I think as we
have more questions comma will
recharge you things went to
decade before we go into the
next presentation over over
getting my mind have been saying
thank you I saw I think
highlands today because they
preside further space for today
tomorrow and also they provided
breakfast and lunch so think you
don't folks that provided that
today
it was absolutely delicious it's
better than what i'll be eating
for dinner so think you guys for
that we're gonna go to the next
per which i'm very excited about
it's the technical assistance
for a second if we could do two
at a time of the folks
presenting so i'd like to call
it polygacy executive director
that mexico is second associate
association and john of the
martinez who's the chief secure
a bureau at the interstate
stream commission if you each
could process for about I
believe that you had ten minutes
each and the one about ten
minutes for questions and then
we'll have the other two
presenters come that way you
have a little room little time
to operate great.
Yesterday
and see polite would you like to
begin we have universal thank
you and we have delicious pears
thank you second association.
The.
When I started listed the aus.
Good afternoon welcome everybody
to last biggest
my name is palagarcia and I hope
you enjoy a little bit of peace
from my garden the picture
yesterday
and i'm very honored to build to
share a little bit with you
little bit of taste of a secure
grown food
so that's probably second the
last time not in moder
help you enjoy
it it's my distinct honor to
come and present to you today I
work with the new mexico second
association and where a
stateweight organization based
in a constant state we have
members all over new mexico and
twenty three different counties
and we provide technical
assistance community education
and now reach to a second and
today i'm really happy to be
able to share with you about our
technical assistant services we
usually talk only about policy
but i'm really happy to share
with you the underground work we
do because this is where I feel
that our communities must
appreciate what we do
and i'm also sharing the the
panel today with jonathan and we
work very closely together not
just as colleagues in working
with a second but he's also from
an asset car himself so
we have a lot of long history of
work together.
I'm gonna start by um
telling a little bit about the
approach that we take to
technical assistance and soon
out a little bit before I talk
about the actual services we
provide because the seconds are
very unique and and you'll hear
today how yes were local
governments were political
subdivisions of the state but
we're we're very unique in the
in the cultural context that
we're working with
where dealing now it's not like
a local government like a town
or a county although we do have
some similarities but a second
have a very
deep cultural history and so we
work within that cultural world
view of of water as a community
resource
we have a second that had been
managing water for centuries and
so you have the the law of how
water rights
are governed but a second also
have a very rich history of
customary practices they are
compliment what's going on with
wider law and formal rules of
governments but there's a lot of
culture and and I know answering
how I second has managed their
water and every second unique
there's all some seven hundred
across the state and so it's
really important to approach the
secure work whether a level of
cultural competence
based in and communities that
that we live in
one or sharing and the
repartimental guide how a second
allocate water so so our work is
informed by understanding of
history and culture and an
appreciation of traditional
knowledge and customs and new
ones understanding of water law
and the laws that govern a
political subdivisions
we have over twenty five years
of experience
providing services to a second
by the enemy a started
providing.
Education in our reach nineteen
eighty nine when the
organization was formed and in
the late nineties started our
secure governance project and
that's how long i've been the
enemy so we're looking at close
to you know twenty twenty seven
years or so and the second
government's project was as
established to really affirm the
the local governance at roll of
a second
two thousand three we
established uhm an a second
governance handbook and that was
in response a large part two a
new law that was passed by the
state of legislature in two
thousand three and it was the
law that that we advocated for
and it it gave us second and
authority to approve or deny
water transfer applications if
those are seconds or are moving
into her out of that second so
where were really working
towards this is
trying to give a second more
tools to be able to cheap water
in the community for
agricultural users and so since
two thousand three we embarked
on a massive organizing project
across the stain to make sure
that those are secrets updated
their bilas which are their
organizational documents to make
sure that they had that new
language and that's taking us to
every corner of the state has
been the most rewarding work
we've ever done and of course
the the infrastructure work is
rewarding but making sure we had
those contacts was the first
step and and I think it's been
very impactful work and we
worked with over six hundred and
seconds across the state sense
of developing that handbook for
most of these are seconds is not
just a one time service we
provide
these are long term
relationships so i'll give an
example this picture
here this is of my asacca and.
And
this is in our perish
and they've met several times
but it took two years to do our
biolas and so that we had a new
mexican legal aid help with that
there are contractors to enter
my a then I took ten years to do
an infrastructure project and we
had help from nrcent issue
grateful through that but it
took a while and and there is a
lot of hand holding along the
way and then for three years and
in as been working with my
second disaster recovery so
you're looking at a fifteen year
engagement and it's not just a
one time thing and their
multiple projects sometimes
overlapping and that gives you
an idea like how the time
complaints are quickly because
this this work is long term
so let me just share with you
this bill I template preamble
because it really puts things
into context of what we're
trying to do
this is a preamble that goes
into all the second biologists
that we worked on most of I mean
there's prior small percentage
they haven't used this preamble
but this preamble kind of puts
together the culture and the
water law into one place and
it's it's it's a value statement
about self governance and local
control of water and keeping
those decisions about water
local is what we're seeing is
that if you control the water in
your communities you can try
your future and if we lose
control of the water likewise
we'll not be empowered to have a
sand our own future so this is a
really important aspect of our
work so there that i'm gonna
give you an overview of the
different areas where we provide
technical assistance and I it's
hard to summarise by
nerded down to two four
categories and one is water of
course it always be the orders
would we do and this is this is
occupied very.
Big part of our work working on
water rights
water management irrigation and
water sharing
and the second area's governance
is by laws this is encompasses
our work and open meetings act
enforcement easements
general complaints with state
law and bombing in line views
planning a navigating issues
with historic preservation and
again this has been worked that
we've been doing since nineteen
eighty nine but i'm delighted to
say that since the treaty
division has established more
staffing that are some of this
work is now
the more complicated cases are
being taken up by that office
which I think the very positive
development we do some work with
financial management
mostly outreach and a very basic
level of information education
we most refer those to the
office of the state auditor and
as they've built capacity and
you're going to hear from one
million
it makes our job easier because
there's an expert in their
agency that can do the really
hard work
a major area that we work in is
an infrastructure in disaster
recovery and that's a icaps
capital outlay
a c d I up which is the fund
that the interseat stream
commission
my next light number six is
about partnerships and
a r team we have a seventeen
member team right now that does
education now reach technical
assistance and youth education
and there's a list of different
partnerships that
and collaborations that we have
across different agencies
including the inner states dream
commission
jonathans bureau the second
bureau is the one that
administers all the state
funding for a second so that's a
really big charge and
the the inner workings of the
process are with jonathan but
will we try to do is is the part
the second in applying for those
programs.
And getting through that gate in
up to first base and sometimes
we reach out the john then to
see like where some gaps and and
try to fill in when there's a
deadline I like on bond
questionnaires and things like
that but
that's a it's a really fruitful
collaboration uh and mdoj
we do keep in touch and try to
understand which cases they're
working on so that
we we don't duplicate and also
refer the harder cases and empty
office of state auditor as they
mentioned earlier death fan
legislative council so what a
conservation districts we take
referrals from the second
commission new mexico second
commission the congressional
delegation legislators and other
government officials and ross
are working on regional projects
and drop resiliency mapping and
disaster recovery some of our
car contractors include new
mexico legal aid we have on
contract a professional
hydrologist and we also work
with high water mark and they've
been are a partner on disaster
recovery the next line number
seven shows you
just a very quick snapshot of
where most of the seconds are
located by county so there's a
map the ones that are circled or
areas where there's some kind of
disaster crisis happening right
now
and
there's also a list of a second
by county
we believe there's more than
seven hundred a second but the
ones that we have worked with
that we have contacts for our
six hundred and forty nine
across the state
the next slide number eight is a
no review of the second
community digit education
program and this is
the most important program for
assessment exclusive association
and being able to provide these
services and this is a program
that you created the state
legislature created this as a
line item.
At the fd local government
division in response to advocacy
to provide this and it's been in
place since two thousand seven
uhm but it's just a line item
and it's increased a little bit
over the years and this is a in
the dfa budget but then they do
an rfp and then our association
which is a non profit has to
competitively bid for that
contract and that's how that's
how that process works and
we use the funds for staff and
contractors and it's it's the
most important piece of funding
for for our nonprofit to work
and communities
because it's direct service and
it's not something that's easily
funded from foundations or small
donations this is a really vital
piece of support for us
there's a table here that shows
you the last three years and
fiscal year twenty three we
worked with three hundred and
fifty six a second in fiscal
year twenty four it was four
hundred and fifty and physical
year to uh fiscal year twenty
five it was two hundred and
seventy nine a second we did
have a bump in physical year
twenty four cause we got two
hundred thousand of junior money
and that that was from october
our senators and
and so the the more resources we
have the more able to help help
a second
and we provide a written report
to the new mexico a second
commission every every year
the the other table on this
slide flight number eight shows
you
how many assectors but have been
assisted on those particular
types of assistance icaps
capital la eighty day app
applications by laws and
disaster recovery and what's but
most impressive when you look at
this table.
Impressive in the bad way I
guess them maybe in a good way
is is how disaster recovery has
exploded in the last few years
and and no plan intended it's it
but it's it's really overwhelmed
the capacity that we have I
think
we didn't used to do recover a
disaster recovery regularly we
used to be kind of on the
fringes because we thought that
was outsider
wheel house but when hermes pete
cafe changing happened it became
really clear that we need to get
a fall because of the high
number of a second in this part
of the state that we're impacted
hermes peak caf kenyan alone is
about ads that were that were
affected but where we learn how
to do disaster recovery work
with a link and county
and in the upper hondo that is
the part of the stain the has
been
so severely impacted time and
time again and we learn how to
work with female we learned how
to work with the hscam developed
a good working relationship so
in her it's peak caf canyon
happened we knew how to work
with those agencies and we had
something to offer and I think
that as a result of seconds have
been integrated into the
disaster recovery process in a
better way and and word we're
seeing some good results which
will talk about tomorrow but you
can see that the share number is
is quite high
so i'm gonna wrap up just by
sharing with you but the ta
resources are the first bullet
is this program that enemy as
funded through a contract and
this is one of our
recommendations going forward
possibly for the twenty six
session or for the twenty seven
session
we're still consulting with dfa
two two see how they would like
to work on this together but we
would like to institutional life
this program so I can said it's
just a line item in the budget.
Think we're thinking maybe there
should be a statute attached to
it maybe there can be agency
guidelines but something that
that helps to memorialize this
in state government so it's not
just wiped out because of budget
waves it up then this is really
something that that we're
uh want to make sure is in place
for future years
and other resources i've already
talked about in the presentation
but there's nm deal
more complex cases the second
bureau state auditor saw the
water districts and be a second
commission our places for
resources are embedded within
the agency and
for ask them the really
important thing is to
communicate and collaborate so
that a second get the support
that they need by each of these
agencies
has its own needs for more
capacity and you know so that
the individuals here can speak
to those needs within their
agencies and where where honored
to do this work and it it's it's
a lot of a second that we're
working with we worked in and
senator had a meals just checked
on the twenty four flooding
so if there is a disaster in
your district um you'll see us
there you're gonna start to be
there gonna think i'm lyoned or
not because they show
where there's a catastrophe so
ostent requestions after the
other prisoners thank you
manager.
Yeah.
Good afternoon madame chair and
members of the committee um it's
parliamentary my name is john of
the martinez I am the assector
bureau chief are with the new
mexico interstate streams
commission a second bureau were
a newly formed bureau in
basically formed in twenty
twenty three we've had a long
standing
funding program within the
agency
for many many years but in
twenty twenty three
basically because of the demand
of for funding from a second and
the growing need out there the
agency felt like it was
important to form a bureau
within the agency and so the
bureau was formally formed in in
twenty twenty three
we administer a kosher program
what is known as the assection
community ditch infrastructure
fund and this was a fun there
was created by statue and twenty
nineteen
to provide are basically plan
planning engineering service
funding and construction funds
for a secure state wide
that's on slight number two
that fund was then
amended in twenty twenty three
because of the
really
horrendous wildfire season that
we had and twenty twenty two to
add in disaster response
recovery and hazard mitigation
so that fund allocates a two and
half million dollars annually
from our irrigation works
construction fund directly for a
secure in these four different
categories
again that's you can see that on
slight number four of those of
the four different components
that the funding is used for
planning engineering designs
construction and disaster
response recovery and hazard
mitigation
moving on to slight number four
is some of the eligibility.
Requirements for in a second to
apply for and receive funding
from our agency basically
current by laws and so we rely a
lot on the new mexico secure
association and their governance
program to help these are
seconds get their biologs up to
d so that they helps them become
eligible for funding
they must be in a secure that
serves valid water rates
must have a federal tax id
number bank account and then
complaints with the executive
order
for audit compliance and we rely
heavily on the office the state
auditor and one will look there
in his staff to make sure that
these are secures can get
compliant with that so that they
can get the funding i'm and then
lastly if they have ever
received loans from the agency
are that those loans are in good
standing before being approved
for future funding
it's like number five is kind of
giving a little bit a detail on
each of the different categories
that funding is allocated for so
planning and scoping basically
these are funds that are can be
accessed by the assector to help
them plan out their project so
they may have a need out there
or a problem that they're facing
that they may not know what the
exact
engineered salution is to that
problem right what what's the
fix these planning dollars would
be sickly they'd come to us
they'd ask for some assistance
and identifying
you know what their issue is and
and requesting some support to
come up with some ideas of how
to fix that problem we would
utilize an uncalled engineer
that we have through our agency
which send him out there and
have them provide them a basic
report real preliminary
estimates of
what are some solutions for
those problems or given some
alternatives and some real high
cost estimates so that they can
go back to their commissioners
and their membership.
And making a form decision on
how they would like to proceed
with with correct in that
problem
next moving on to the
engineering assistance of this
as the second step
some assectors are ready to jump
into this step right away
because they know what they they
need to get done to fix their
issue but they basically can
apply to our agency for
engineering service are grant so
they can hire a consulting
internet to provide them design
plans and engineer estimates and
bid documents to get a project
ready to go out to bed
for construction and so these
are applications there limited
to about fifty thousand dollars
per secure per year
and all of these applications
are reviewed and ranked by the
agency according to some ranking
criteria that set forth in the
application
moving on to slight number
seven is the construction
funding so this is this is the
third step in the process again
there are many asset is a skip
step one so for those are sick
is this is their second step on
its kind of designed to be a two
year program so if they know
what their problem is and and
can move right into a design
they get the designed on your
one and they come back to the
agency and they apply for the
construction funding and the
engineering oversight dollars to
basically
build their project
these are limited to two hundred
and fifty thousand dollars per
year
per applicant or prosecutor and
again that turn of fifty
thousand applies only to the
construction cost of their
project and not the additional
engineering oversight so that
they can bring their engineer
back on board to help them bit
out this project make an
affordable decision on whether
they're contractors going to be
qualified and has the right
license to do the job.
Inspect the work to make sure
it's done according to plan
inspect and then basically sign
off on the project at the end of
the day to the final inspection
and provide him a set about
spills so that cost of of
bringing that engineer back on
board is over and above the two
hundred and fifty thousand
dollars limit again these are
all applications that are
reviewed and ranked according to
to the application criteria that
we have set force
disaster response recovery and
hazard mitigation this is one of
the new additions to the funding
source that was amended and
twenty twenty three
and basically this is to help a
second
match cautious requirements or
provide additional funding so
that they can they can get their
ditches up and running again
after the you know a natural
disaster in their area
they must have applied through
other programs such as female
dhasian department home line
security and emergency
management or the inner c s e
will be p program or or any
other state or federal agency
that they might
be involved with the disaster.
Real quickly moving out to
slight number nine are just
deadlines for the different
funding sources basically oliver
applications on our year round
basis
but
the engineering and construction
applications in order to meet
our fiscal year
budgeting deadlines and because
we are governed by a commission
as well and we have to go before
our commission to get approval
before moving projects forward
engineering applications are due
by march thirty first and
construction applications by may
ninth and we typically take a
work plan before our commission
in june of twenty of of any year
so that we have the approvals to
start on july one with the new
state fiscal year on the other
two again are you round
with basically what we need
letters of interest and proof
that they've applied for other
disaster programs before we'd
consider him and those are all
kind of on a case by case and
need basis as we go i'm in our
budgets are those two areas the
planning applications disaster
response recovery are kind of
just flat line item budgets they
don't identify specific projects
because at the time we don't
know what those needs are and we
can't anticipate what the
disasters are going to be sold
they're just a line items that
give us authority up to a
certain threshold to fund in
those categories
i'm real briefly just to give
you kind of a little history of
of our funding over the last
couple of years and the current
fiscal year and a little track
record
it was a slow start when the
assection community ditch
infrastructure fund us law was
passed it took us a little while
to get some guidelines in place
we worked really closely with in
new mexico secure association
and the new mexico secure
commission to develop those
guidelines on how this program
would be administered and so the
first few years were a little
rough and getting funding out
the door and working through um.
Working through the the
difficulties of of just a
managing whole new program in
and with within the guidelines
but since twenty twenty four
fiscal year twenty twenty four
we have assisted twelve or
seconds and in engineering
assistance dollars and twenty
eight a second with construction
funding
totalling the amounts you can
see there about two hundred
sixty thousand and engineering
four point four million
basically that work plan
included forty assect your
projects authorization to fund
forty of them thirty six of
those were completed so but a
ninety percent success rate
there FY twenty five another
twelve engineering application
or seconds refunded for
engineering twenty four seconds
for construction funding we had
a bought a ninety two percent
success rate there so it's
pretty common we request
authority for certain amount of
a secure received funding
through the process some of them
ended up backing now they can't
get bids that fit within the
budgets and that's the reason
why some of these weren't
completed but typically the
trackword record has been really
good on this year for the
current fiscal year that just
started july one we're looking
at doing twenty two a second
projects for engineering
assistance and another twenty
two construction projects for
those are secures that whole
workplan was about five point
six million
again we received two and a half
percent two and a half
excuse me two and a half million
dollars annually but thankfully
due to some additional capital
outlet appropriations directly
to the agency and or specials we
have more money to work with
them that's how we can fund
projects
that exceed the budget of just
our ecbio fund
i'm again here's just next slide
is.
Flight number eleven just real
quickly capital outlay all the
capital outlay a properties that
you
provide to your constituents the
arisec yes in your areas flows
through our agency as well and
here's just a quick run down of
the number of those by year that
we're also administering um for
individual asset your projects
right now from twenty twenty to
twenty twenty five that's about
a two hundred and eighty five
individual appropriations
specifically to our second
has totally in about twenty
eight million dollars.
Are the next few slides you guys
can look at your own peace
they're just some pictures of
some projects that have been
completed with a c d I f and or
capital outlay money or
combination of both
on slide number fifteen is are
contact information for myself
and my group we are group of of
five individuals and one part
time legal that helps
administered these funds for the
asset yes with that that
concludes my part of the
presentation as well and so
which stand for questions
thank you both for your
presentations on
on this analytic let's do a few
minutes for questions for these
two presenters
i'm happy to ask a couple
briefly it looks like so this
question is both of you you know
poly you mentioned that there
was a lot of learning that
happened with the link in county
fires on the able to ply back
here as well what how is that
affected how you work with the
secures up here in in light of
disaster but i'd pose that to
both presenters.
When we were involved in
recovery efforts in lincoln
county madame chair and members
of the committee um like we
could learn was the importance
of having a secure experts in
the field when the assessments
are being done that was the most
important lesson because when
there's a disaster declared
female and d h s m
go out and do the initial
assessments and if you don't
have an a second expert with
them they they might not know
what they're looking at they
would not understand the extent
to the damage that they might
see something and
in I start someplace in
downstream from a doctor like
some patricia where there wasn't
even in a second anymore you
could look in the untrained I
would think it was just a field
but it had been completely
covered over and so what what
that prompted us to do in hermes
pete cafcanian happened was
before the flooding started and
the gun was still smoldering and
we had gis crews out just
mapping all these the seconds
because we were safe
but
but we wanted to be out there
before the flooding started
because my concern was that it
was going to flood so bad that
you would be able to see where
these are seconds were anymore
so we sent out some folks just
to get some very quick data
to get some pre disaster
condition photos so that that
when we did
start to approach female and dhm
that we would have some baseline
data what they look like pre
disaster condition and that we'd
have a location map for where
those are located
and there were some cases where
it's like it's got a literated
some of one word damaged in
peace and parts you know it
require their have your drainage
so it wasn't totally wiped out
but it was really important to
get that based lane data and to
get it given get it fast.
But the most important I think
equally important to that was
building relationships with the
agencies and establishing the
the importance of a second and
also helping them understand
what a second are um as
political subdivisions but that
the the importance to
agriculture in our communities
and the urgency of getting them
back in operation and I think
having established those
relationships
helped us to to make the case
and we we had a support in our
congressional delegation was
would weigh in with federal
agencies when we had to
in some some cases you know make
the case at a second round
eligible for fema even though
they had been eligible many
times before we had to go
through it all over again and I
think we've gone through enough
disasters now that that's not a
question anymore it's like yeah
a second star eligible so those
are those are some of the
lessons learned but I think
we learned a lot but I think the
agencies have also learned a lot
and and they feel like we're
we're listening to now and and
consulted with on a regular
basis.
Yeah yes madam chairman members
of the committee I think my
response to that same question
is
your disaster response
recovering hazard mitigation for
our agency is really new I mean
it really is since the twenty
twenty two wildfire season down
in the hill immediate area as
well as the hermit's peak caf
can in area
we were fortunate at that time
to have a special appropriation
that we help support the efforts
of a
are being able to mobilise one
of our consultants out to the
areas to help with those
assessments of damages
we understood that hsm and
female
folks out in the field didn't
really have an understanding of
what an assector was and when
female comes in their bringing
and folks from all over the
place
back east primarily where a
sickers don't even exist and so
they had no understanding of of
what they're even looking at as
parliamentarian and so we
thought it would be good to have
um
consultant out there to help
them provide some assessments of
the damages so that it could
help back their claims to dhcm
and female we did a lot of that
work out in that area and then
we did some with the same
consultant firm here in the
hermit's part canyon area as
well are mainly to try to
come up with
any unit costs for different
types of work a lot of
settlement removal and debris
removal we also worked with dot
and trying to more blaze and and
provide matching funds for their
efforts in doing a debris
removal for a second
thank you both for that I mean
we see it all the time how
quickly these communities and
how your response groups have
suddenly become experts in these
different fields and I thought
it was very interesting that we
can't compare communities who
have been hit by disaster and
then cascading events that.
Continue on a might appreciate
that how both you are and will
hear more tomorrow I know but
how we're looking at this
for learning and helping to grow
and I hope we can consider
continue to help that grow as
different communities get
affected i'm an added to my vice
you're
thank you madame chair poll I
want to thank you for a comment
that you made where you said
that culture and water lia are
brought together into one place
because I seconds are part of
western colorado but in addition
to that as the carols don't just
think of it as I wish to be that
they think of it as an extended
member of their family
generations a problem I can also
have been taking care of a
second and sure not only
cleaning them that the water
flows but looking at those had a
gates and we see it as a family
member so that was a powerful
statement and I want to read
that again where culture and
water lot come together in one
place and my last comment madam
chair is jonathan and I attend a
new mexico boy state thirty one
years ago from different high
schools in new mexico but both
nortennials he had it to
so correct to represent northern
new mexico and I just wanted to
stay john then it's a pleasure
seeing you still working in what
we did as mark state government
to now having seats up the table
I think the american leader
would be very proud of us
knowing that the two kids from
world or their new mexico
learned something and are making
an impact and I wanted to say
that I am so proud of you had a
runner thank you manager
think you do both of you i'd
like to move forward to the
other folks as well
man while luna he's a
coordinator with the small local
body look public body's
assistance program with the
office of the state auditor we
heard so much what you all been
going on and also pamley garcia
who's the director of
considering affairs with the
office of united states senator
benry live one and we all have
this packet pieces as well
and it'll be the same thing
about ten minutes to present
each other for some questions
from all us.
Think you madam chair and think
members of the committee I
believe this is my power point
it's like okay.
Like to talk about a little bit
of what we do here at the
officer state automatic given
opportunity to speak about not
just what small public bodies
does but what the apps of the
state auditor does as well get a
little bit of a reminder so
basically we're independent
agency
so we're not under the authority
of the governor so we kind of do
a lot of different things over
there but think of a says an
independent public accounting
firm just with a few extra
things that we can do as well so
we look at you every single
report that has to be generated
by a via public entity or
receive public funds gets sent
to our office
over the sweep protects the
public funds of of the new
mexicans move on to the next
slide right here
when I talk about little bit
about smaller public bodies and
kind of move down so basically
help with other compliance and
assistance we also have a second
is another one's haggling to
navigate those on financial
reporting requirements under the
audit act and extra their own
compliance with that primarily
do cure certifications in the
uk's the smaller for public by
his assistance program and was
formed out of a special
legislative appropriation and I
very first year we are allocated
five hundred thousand dollars in
funding now we've got two
straight years where we've been
allocated one million dollars to
help this program function and
do it at that so I appreciate
that you who were part of making
that happen and education and
training one the biggest things
I notice when I took took on
this project in the office with
the need of education and
training and kind of allows this
with that special appropriation
to be a little bit more dynamic
out in the community and go to
where the actual the people are
doing the work and role in the
mexico and provide hands on
support to them at at their
level expenditure maybe in a way
that's never been
spoken to them about or trained
in the kind of treating a lot of
ways like large
missile palestine large like to
see the obligation expected to
follow the same rules and
guidelines but maybe don't have
the the expertise or education
or experience also connecting
them with i'm also with ipads we
have a little bit of an ipa
issue out there.
In the community but we also
work with connecting with them
with ones that I know here is a
here's a spears quite a few of
different ones that specifically
work on a up is a happy with
your tier certifications also on
protecting funding one that one
of the main criteria to receive
public funds is being in
compliance with our office so we
could do that to as well we help
them with their audit complaints
and now I move on to the house
specifically small component
buys assistance program helps
with a secure so focused
compliance support so basically
I help them with their tear
certifications and aups I ran at
r p in the last two years the
specifically with ipa that will
only do work with the small
couple of advice and once and a
second comes in into the office
and seeks or build up my
assistance application I
connected with ipa to get him at
what level whatever they're at
we help them move for from them
they're behind ten years guess
what we're getting ten years you
had ten years
so also hands on technical
support so if it's the phone to
the various different medians me
showing up into their
communities doing community
based trainings I help them with
that technical help as well cost
even strategies one of the
things you're doing a large rfp
for audit assistance help is I
can group them in large groups
at one time get that tonight pa
makes it more lucrative for them
for an ip to want to take on
this work as one of the reasons
why I pays don't like taking on
work with smaller public buyers
or a second and particular it's
only a couple thousand dollars
in the three four thousand
dollars but if they get a full
financial audit that could be
fifteen twenty twenty five
thirty and that goes up from
there so it's cost savings if I
can give them a bunch of
entities at one time and they
can do all of those aup's or
tear certifications and some
for financial audits have been
able to do and also tell my
training to the weather at like
what level where you at what you
need to know what can I help you
with and I kind of tailor my
trainings like that and also
protecting the also producing
infrastructure and funding as
well like.
When the main things you need to
be in compliance with the office
of the state auditor
so I hope protect that money get
access to it if it's been held
up I kind of connect different
because were one piece and and
the and many different pieces
that's involved in compliance
and so I help them with that and
also connect people with other
all the different other agencies
that might be granting the money
and if it's if it's osa holding
them back I get you in
compliance and we open the we
open that up for them as well
and
as well kind of want to talk
about some of the highlights of
smoke well assistance program
and helping the seconds in
particular through this last
fiscal year one point three
million dollars of with
healthcare outlay money I
assisted the second as they had
when he has been with how for
about one point three million
we're going to another low check
before here and again to make
sure that's numbers publicly
going to go up to be even higher
after this but this is what I
had
just direct financial assistance
so I I funded thirty five
seconds to receive support to my
program so I paid so I make it
real easy for them when they
come to me in the assistance you
don't even you just you're only
job as to work with the I p a I
candle all the contracting all
the pain of the bill so you
don't have to deal with any of
those things because before the
assistance program was do a a
reimbursement grants so now this
you don't have to worry about
that my only thing is please
work with your ipa with their
asking you for something please
provide it and I can will go
from there trying to make it is
easier as possible take that
things on left on the table that
they may be maybe confusing the
damage just give up the I p what
they need we modernize their
system all entities all yet to
the largest city of albert
yalled down to small as the
second has to deal with the
connect so I I invested
good chunk of my money to be
able to bring that and
modernizative include digital
signature one of things i've saw
with people communities is
having access to a stable
internet i've been access to a
printer in scanner not everybody
has that so I got rid of I I
made adjustment seeing that hey.
Printing and scanning and
signing at your certification
it's not it's really hard for
them they have to go travel
fifty miles to the mcdonalds to
get internet just to upload what
they scan so
or or if it's the they don't
have that so I got digital
signature and that's really
changed the game for all i'm
having digital signature to sign
there so they do everything what
they know is that connect and
then policy and advocacy is the
next thing that I want I have to
keep for this program at the
same legislature but as well as
we're looking to I hosted a
small couple of minute bikes for
my brother grassroots
organizations the help i'm
connected to dictate what tell
us what what's happening what
kind of policies can we work on
to work into the next
legislative session and one of
those things is that you make
changes to the make amendments
to the audit accessive again the
tiered system to make it easier
for them to report so if you
make it easier to report they're
going to report more often and
it consistent basis which is
going to be one of the keys to
lower in those months that those
funds that you allocate to these
the secures to be get get those
projects started and get the you
know not happening to some thank
you madame chair and they give
members of committee listening
to.
Madame chair members of the
committee so honored to be here
thank you so much for for having
me from the office of senator
bennery lauhan and pama gosia
and the constituent services
director but I also work on a
secure that's part of my
portfolio and I I don't know if
you can maybe guess why but
having a big sister working in a
doing all the great work in the
second as I as a young person
working with her tagging along
to all of those things really
installed the values as well
also growing up on a ranch so
i'm very honored to do this work
on behalf of the senator and
again it just appreciate the
opportunity to be here out what
did you bring from the luncheon
I know if I hit my garden isn't
quite a sport
but now I know better
learned
but they're deleted to be your
madam chair members of the
committee I did want to go over
a few things to the that I think
the the committee would find
relevant especially as we all
work together in partnership a
couple of things related to
policy and funding but also
constituent services through the
senator's office and actually
the considerate services that
all the the delegation really
can can help with as well
I did include a couple of
pictures and in the park point
either not in your one teacher
but the senator's visited a
number of a seconds are on the
state so some of those photos
there are of of yes I guess I
wanted to start with a couple of
the funding mechanisms that are
supportive of of a second that a
second it's not comprehensive
but these are the most common
programs that a sick is can
benefit from that are federally
funded and one is to the US
department of agriculture the
natural resources conservation
service has a number of programs
that are really beneficial to to
a sick is in particular the
environmental quality incentives
program equipped that's a really
beneficial for individual
landowners.
To do improvements keeps the
sickest running and flowing
regional conservation
partnership program which is
actually encourages different
stake holders that support a
sick as to work together in
partnership to support the work
of a second the new mexico was
conservation districts actually
has this this part of money to
work with other partners to
support a second that way also
the emergency watership
protection program although tuck
a little bit about that later at
the when I took a little bit
more about disaster recovery but
that's one really beneficial
program for a second swell
throughout the state the other
one the US army carved engineers
that one is largely funded
through the water reception
development act the last
iteration of that we had was in
twenty twenty two we usually
have a border as we call it it
you know the federal government
as well all government likes
acronyms so it's about every
five years the fall if i'll go
as well so the last one we had
was in twenty twenty two and
this authorizes the money to go
to the the civil works programs
of the armed car engineers in
particular the section one
thirteen eleven thirteen program
which funds a second and we
actually work in partnership
with jump within at the issue to
make sure that that a second has
already too to get to be funded
for planning design and then
ultimately construction
so there's a some of the funding
mechanisms the other one is
congressionally directed
spending now
we were able to send it a little
hawn and the delegation was able
to secure some money through
congressionally directed
spending
some of you may remember back in
the day we were for two months
your marks
we come congressionally directed
spending but it is a really
helpful way to get money into
local communities that otherwise
might not have access to federal
money and it does one thing to
know about this money is that.
Like the state money right you
what you make an allocation to a
state agency that it flows out
into programs the same thing
with congressionally directed
spending you find a program
within a federal agency in this
case the bulk of that goes to
the army corporation years in
fiscal year twenty three
I believe it was nine point six
million dollars was allocated to
that program fiscal year twenty
four one point five million
fiscal year twenty five zero but
that's because a few few me
remember
congressionally directed and he
just did not get funding at all
because of the at what was
called the continuing resolution
both more just a a budget that
was passed and it did not
include congressionally directed
spending but we're hopeful for a
fiscal year twenty six and so of
course then it is ohiona the
delication will work to push
money through through those
programs again I did also want
to mention their
this did not get because of the
fiscal year twenty twenty five
congressionally directed
spending did not did not pass
but send it a little high up to
that point was able to secure
five hundred thousand dollars
for it in a second youth core
now this is to support already
existing youth organized youth
i'm sorry organizations
throughout the state that
support youth work where the
seconds of particular so
organizations that are doing
this work it's an opportunity
for them to get a bit more
supporter and somewhere hopeful
in this next again this next
round but I I thought I made
sure that with you all if you
you have some interest mentioned
members of the committee and we
all know the importance of
making sure our young folks know
the just the relevance in the
importance and to make sure keep
our sick has flown the young we
have to have our young people
intimately involved in engaged
and so this is a really
important project that the
senator was as working on
umps
a couple of last things on the
policy front send it a little
hunted introduce.
Again the session of congress
the second act
the long version has called a
second community is empowered by
qualifying upgrades for
infrastructure so all federal
legislation has to have a long
name and an appropriate
appropriate the acronym so this
and then particular at late two
of the highlights of this of the
spill in particulars to make
sure that that a seconds do have
access to US d a disaster
systems for farmers and ranchers
the other part of the the other
highlight of this legislation
code of fires existing guidance
within federal agencies that
says partisan is along in a
second do not need to get a
special use permit to do usual
routine maintenance and
improvements now that's an
existing policy however as I
think as we we sometimes see
that shifts and and leadership
there can be concern of some
policy shifts that you know at
the administrative level of
regulatory level so this
legislation codifies this
language to make sure that a
second still can can do that
important to work without having
to get that special permission
to do it so
it was introduced in the last
session of congress did not pass
it send it a little high and
introduced it again this year
and like you only know that the
the mechanisms that are used for
these these kinds of things and
up to a total actually mentioned
earlier and on the bus package
is really helpful to get these
types of legislation past so I
think i'm looking for it for
something like that
too to get that attached to one
last thing i'm in terms of
policy before I talk about
constituent services and little
ohio also established in the
sicker rehabilitation working
group now this this group meets
I would say twice two to four
times a year and it does also
bring partners together to
address ongoing concerns for a
seconds in the second
associations.
This is people at the local
level of the state late level
and the federal level as well so
if any of you are madam chair or
committee members have have
interested in engaging and that
and that working group you know
by all means we'd like to we'd
love to have you some of the
presentations we've had most
recently is having the army
corvention years on to talk
about sake holders and put
scandals about the program and
how it works and how can the
second actually happen to the
responding the other the other
recent presentation on there was
related to disaster recovery and
again bringing all the relevant
entities together and how how do
we work together to to self the
problems that are sick as to
have in terms whether it's feet
female public assistance whether
it's a usd eight n r c s
emergency watership protection
program sometimes people simply
just do not know what is
happening with with the projects
or what the status is so it does
that kind of communication could
be really helpful to iron some
of those some of those things
out
i'll shipped into the
considerate services element and
I think the matter of chambers
of the community may all be very
interested in this I know that
that senator lun's office as
well as other members of the
delegation to get referrals from
you all
from your constituents whether
they're a second stand those are
other constituents so we're
always we're always glad to help
and as it relates to a second a
lot of times we actually have to
make a referral if it's not a
federal agency but all of the
wonderful presentations that
you've had here today some of
those entities are
organizations that we might make
a referral to after doing some
initial triage the last thing
we'd want to do with sender can
situate on a wild ghost chase so
it does require actually sitting
down listening to the past parts
out there or or can stitch away
and really really understanding
what the problem is and then.
In in many cases we will tell
them the new mexico association
is the best place if they tell
us that yes we we don't have our
biologic finished then that's
that's our we know where to send
out it's been a while but we
we've referred to the new mexico
department of justice as well
just you know so we do we do
referrals and we welcome
referrals and so we do
congressional increase if it's a
federal agency so we end up have
doing a lot of female now with a
different disasters around the
state
it we believe we still have a
almost one hundred and fifty
cases open for it disaster
related increase I would say ten
of those are seconds so that's
not too bad but I would say that
also speaks to the the support
that a seconds do have with
technical assistance from the
partners that you've seen
present today but again we we
help with congressional increase
to female and sick it hasn't
hurt an update or does not know
what's going on with their with
their
with their either reimbursement
or just status of a project will
do congressional increase to
energy yes you've heard me
reference the emergency water
should protection program
there's there's quite a few
projects in the so many many
people that reach out on in the
second just have not heard what
the status is and the world just
do an inquiry to enter cs and
interest yes and or can I want
to switch it soil and water
conservation district who was
the contractor that supports and
helps with without particular
program they'll give us an
update and you sometimes you
when you wouldn't think a
congressional increase would be
so insightful but it but it
really can be it can really
provide a lot of information as
we all see many times there's
must communications gaps and
communications and so part of
the work that that we do is just
making sure that.
That those gaps are closed to
whatever whatever degree
possible never make assumptions
about about what people know and
don't know so we just make sure
that people are connected to the
right places federal or not
and have a familiar with
programs and make sure that they
get their questions answered
even if they're not always a
result at the moment some of
their interesting things you may
not think that we help but
people as I get associations in
particular will reach out
because they are unable to get a
sams number or a tax exempt
status so
you know i've talked about some
more of the obvious things but
there's also something she
wouldn't necessarily think as
the kids might might need
support with a thing that they
actually do so those are a
couple of examples
when other one other example all
provide it was a really
interesting one and the learning
lesson for me not to make
assumptions about what people
people have an awareness of in
terms of the work that needs to
be done and the second reached
out regarding e a project that
was just halted he didn't know
why
couldn't really get answers they
didn't encourage to and our cs
and our cs said well no it's a
fish and wild leaf service okay
so I go inquire with fishing
wildlife service it turns out
that
that there was an issue with the
critical critical habitat area
and the we close the gap and
communication at least hopefully
or at least to the extent that
we possibly heard and it was
unsafety we figured out what the
problem was and worked too to
try to leave the
miscommunications or gaps and
communications so that some of
the ways that that that we can
help us well
I think and oh I did want to
mention I do have our all all of
this senators office locations
on the on the screen but I did
want to mention that we can help
with quite a lot of things one
thing we will not be able to be
involved in is anything that's
in the matter before the court
so doesn't matter if somebody
has an attorney we can help.
People that have attorneys but
once litigation once there's
litigation or an actual legal
motion and that's one week as
that you know as compressional
office have to back out able to
be involved but we can help with
a brady brady of things federal
or not again we do a lot of
referrals and we're happy to
take to take our full as well
thank you both for those
presentations are right now we
have a question from
representative
think you madam chair I have a
quick question possibly for each
of you but
first since your president has
to just resent you mention the
security youth core funding is
that how is that access is that
like I know say the new mexico
securitization is great
programming is that more through
them or is that accessible
through school districts if you
can eleven a little bit more on
the accessibility of that funny
madam chair representative on
sellers that's an excellent
question
yeah and I think that the
probably the best way to answer
that is to make sure that other
that all the right people have
the awareness that that on the
second wants to do a certain
project so I was like to give
jonathan martinez that I see a
call first and see where it
dropped because jonathan
probably knows already if this
particular second is interested
in the project now it will it is
for a second infrastructure it's
for a second infrastructure so
that means it's anything from
the the planning phase to the
design fees to the construction
but it is a second structure so
so if you do have a sick is in
your in your district that need
that kind of support specially
met to larger scale projects but
yet my first my first point of
contact is jonathan martinez and
then often what will do is make
sure that all of the state
holders are involved will bring
the car of engineers then make
sure that that whoever is
interested in a playing for that
funding is is really well aware
of the requirements of the
limitations.
And everything involved in what
the what the core program can
provide it is a costure so it's
it's a state federal costs share
and this is very actually very
relevant to all of yourself
because many of your
constituents will come to you
for capital outlet for for for
the different part of their cost
share as well so you you will
often see that and that's why
it's so important to work in
partnership because there's so
many jurisdictions then you have
to leverage leverage funding and
but yeah it's an excellent
question so I would say the
other the other part of madam
chair representative gonzales is
that the armor army court
actually has some really good
information on the website about
sending a letter of intent and
those initial procedural things
to demonstrate there's an
interest and that it's just a
good way to get on the radar to
just say hey i'm interested in
this in this type of funding for
my assector and that's a nice
way to get started but by all
means and any of the entities
here are world really well first
in this program so I think many
will be a great place to start
thank you thank you for thinking
better to chair thank you for
that answer and then I guess my
next my next common is actually
more of a just a statement maybe
even here for my colleagues is
aa worked with mister hers since
I was working on my
personalities like you are
trying to get us in compliance
and I would say without programs
like that I wouldn't have known
where to start a I just really
want to stress the importance
and the value that that program
brings to many second smaller
bodies that have no idea where
to start in so as funding comes
up and funding increases come up
you know we have sight
conversations about a lot of our
smaller entities that are really
having a hard a hard time
specifically with that audit
requirement that that is such a
stickler and that is the key to
many and on my regions not.
My districts not alone in that
many that are not in compliance
just strictly for that audit
requirement and so
funding programs like yours will
continue to insure that some of
our are you know our smaller
government bodies local are
still able to be in compliance
and receive the needed funding
so
there's any any possible support
just kind of voicing that in
just seeing what great job that
you all do with the limited
resources that you do have and
what a valuable service you
provide thank you so much and
think you manager thank you a
center thought
thank you manager and my
questions similar to the
representative of consolidation
since that what's the actual
process to go from a female
disaster of assistance program
into us army core of engineer
support and recommendation
repair whatever I mean I think
that's very difficult for a
small secure to figure out how I
get how do I get to the most
support that I need immediately
and then for a long term repairs
what is that process
made of charities and under that
and that's a great question and
I do want to make a distinction
between the disaster covering
work and the army core programs
the disaster recovery work is
more it's more cute so the the
finding that usually goes
towards the disaster recovery
effort at least initially maybe
even though the you know first
few years would be through
through female
and end in our cs but the army
corps program that
I imagine and this is a great
question that it's getting meet
starting to think quite a bit
but the core the core often is
for longer term projects but we
have had discussions about how
to build the resiliency and to
the corp projects for when
disasters do happen but went
within the disaster recovery
work we usually work with female
and an inner cs on some of the
more immediate to med mid range
work which.
Let you know it's up to five
years right now and this is but
send it a little hand of the
delegation really pushed for
this with fema is to get and in
our cs actually is to get a
hundred percent costure
what that's an important thing
the other thing that they really
pushed for is to get cascading
advance covered by female no if
this is a it's a little bit of a
difficult conversation because
we all know that disaster
recovery can last a decade or
longer even and so as we had
this conversations about
cascading effects on what fee my
public assistance will actually
keep covering I think that's a
that's a really important
ongoing discussion to have but
too to hopefully better answer
your question I think it's it's
a good thing to take a look at
is there those opportunities to
transition from from resources
like fema and and ust a two two
army core I think that's a
really important conversation to
have an I I feel like so far
we've talked about building
resiliency into the
infrastructure for future
disasters but answer your
question about how do we get
there from female to the core I
think that's a I think that's an
open question but a great
question and it definitely
willing to explore without a lot
more thank you for that matter
chair I recently just find it up
like thinking about what also
recently they just had some
nature sweating again
like twice now in a couple years
and the solution is anything
it's while there is an immediate
need for faster recovery I think
the long term solution requires
probably significant amount of
money so that this doesn't occur
again in the future
you can sell that infrastructure
need to be built may be solved
immediately with my money but
what a long term needs and so
i'm concerned about how we make
that transition or that females
money is being directed toward
something that's more permanent
and so
just trying to figure out how
that closer to my work for them
because they're going to have a
need they've already expressed
me.
This meeting with all not in
their district
there they're going to be asking
the state to help quite a bit
without process
madam chair ascended or thorton
also if I me for the more acute
problems of the disasters
disaster response the army court
this and this is separate from
the asset your program but the
army core does have resources to
come in and
and devote resources to things
like and I I just know this from
the work in the hermit's peak
disaster they came and worked on
some inundation maps so a weaker
get a sense they did some
modeling so we could get a sense
of for the though flooding may
happen so they did work like
that they also
worked to do some medication
measures so so they're in the
disaster I I can't speak to how
the amount of resources that
came in but they they do help
without more acute part of a
disastrous well and so I would
we would be glad to have the
conversation more to see make
sure that those types of
resources are coming in and the
way that they need to
think you send it a year I was
we were just down there for a
account to written roll
development and had a lot of
conversations just before the
latest flooding in the so
definitely I I will likely could
you touch some of the folks you
met down there and hopefully
that can help with some of that
it is a lot of the concern is
that what female replaces is
just getting it the levels just
before the initial disaster does
he have these cast heating of
anson as you know again years of
these fires etc they really do
add up I do want to think you
both representing today really
appreciate it I I have one quick
question for mr
I really appreciated all the
different things you mention and
how you reached out how you
supported you know it I talked
to someone once and they said
you gave them a call what did
you knock on their door will did
you go you know did you like
stop by you know this community
meeting like how did you try to
recharge these folks I I love
hearing all the different ways
that having a printer having a
scanner you know like how how do
you meet them where they're out
with their materials.
Any is that some is that kind of
outreach in his royal
communities are you seeing more
of that among other agents use
and departments how we see that
kind of
a manager that question what
what I do see is that i'm up i'm
a bridge for a lot of of these
seconds or smaller and please
land grants you to sixties real
communities to actual other
state agencies and they ask me
where where where are you going
like where who do I need to talk
to i'm like I know this part of
your compliance but I know you
need to report to the apartment
of finance administration so I
know somebody over there they
need to talk to them or I need
to call I my tax id number I
don't know what it is or out of
the school that's going to tax
let's go to tax and revenue
figure that out bridging those
gaps and a lot of it's really
technology is really the biggest
barrier and rule new mexico and
have access to broadband is
another thing to and it because
everything's going digital I
keep people keep asking can we
just go back to the way it was
before provide paper copies and
like we did we don't do that
anymore we can we can't do that
anymore we live in a digital
economy now it's everything is
done digitally it's just for
better transparency better
access to records so how do we
do that if it's I I have laptops
in my and like that I old like
the laptops are we kind of
recycle out of the out of use
with the nose listed
I have a stock of those when I
go up to do trainings and other
stuff I bring the computer with
me and they can be of a computer
that sit down let's figure out
how to get you in the complaints
the vast majority of the
entities I work with the how the
are the ones under fifty
thousand annual revenue those
two one two two entities on the
audit act that has that have
less than fifty thousand annual
revenue another ones in the most
rural communities and I work
with them the most and that
those with ones are the fastest
to get into compliance but the
ones that need the most support
because their volunteers they
may be of a older generation
that requires more hands on
support and me to sit there you
know and they like talking on
the phone they don't like
exchanging email so I talk to
them on the phone I do all the
stuff on like really looking at
bridge to a lot of the other
entities out there and do you
face doing a really big
deliberate ombudsman program now
it's doing also doing a lot of
that connecting people to.
Other agencies that's great
thank you think you both
representing today I think we'll
move forward with our next
presentation and our last
yes and so it is adrian oldest
director of the utter
transboundary resource center of
the union on community
governance attorneys program and
I always said I didn't correctly
maybe thank you
and we're back on schedule
everyone so that's the good
news.
Okay good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee and
hopefully we're going to get out
you ought to hear a little early
because I guarantee we're not
going to take our full time
today I made your nobles be them
the director of the other
transfoundry resources center at
the school of law at UNM and
i've got nicker straw to hear
with me nicholas estrada who
is getting greatly to enter his
third year of law let you say
hello
madam chairman members of the
committee thank you as they
drink side my name's
nicholstrada entering my
thirtieth law school at UNM.
Okay and we'll tell you a little
bit more about netgear further
into the presentation.
So for first thing i'm gonna
just distract you for a quick
moment and apologize for not
being here for the full day to
day I got in late last night
from the latest water leaders
training program I know you all
have a received lights and
larger emails inviting you to
these meetings and I really just
want to increase you if you ever
get the opportunity I believe
the next one may be down and
read or so it should be really
interesting the programs that
new mexico tech is putting on
and it's not often you'll hear
someone from one university
promoting another bit the work
that stacy tipments in her team
it's doing is amazing and I
learn something every time I
think you guys would really get
a lot out of it so I hope to see
you the next one
a brief word about the union
center where I work at u and m
we are a research and public
service project and we take that
very seriously we do research
for everybody in new mexico from
the farmhouse to the round house
we work with all branches of
government both state and
federal
and so we serve you as well so
you are welcome to call us any
time if you've just got random
questions about water in new
mexico where you've got big
schemes that you want us to take
into for you we're there for you
so
i'll go ahead and jump into the
presentation here
i'm here today to tell you about
the community governance
attorney program and I serve as
the chair of the community
government's attorney commission
and that's why i'm here before
you today
you other new mexico legislature
under the the the guidance of
representative garcia and
senator t c p no and I think
this is the first time i've been
before you were where jerry's
not here so it's it's a little
strange but these two gentlemen
put together this program and
the idea is that
the communities we serve a sake
yes landgrants and colonials
need more attorneys and we need
more judges who understand these
communities.
We just need a higher level of
education across the bar of
attorneys and new mexico in
helping and understanding these
communities and you know a fair
and equitable way and in
particular you you've heard you
know especially from from mr
luna miscrisis now these
communities have real
governments needs
I I had to whisper to to mr
my sake is actually probably out
of compliance and I need to do a
little bit of work
and get ourselves up to speed
that's the type of work that we
hope these young attorneys are
going to go out and do and so
the way the program works as a
loan for service program and so
attorneys are thirty or last
students
were rising three else apply for
this program in this year we
chose in mr strategy during the
program and so use you with my
example
neck will be committing to going
to work for these communities
for two years after law school
and he'll be going to work for
what we referred to is a legal
service provider better for new
mexico legal aid that now
potentially department of
justice to be a sake you
association for two years he is
committing to do that
and in exchange we're going to
pay for his thirtieth law school
and we're going to provide in a
living stype and cover the costs
and you all are generously
providing half of his salary for
those two years and so the legal
service provider provides a cost
share so that's how it works in
it and if mr
decides to move to mexico half
way through
we're going to hit him with an
eighteen percent interest rate
that's required by the
legislature so
it's it's a structure very
similarly to the loan for
service programs you see for you
know nurses in rural communities
things like that so
I just give you very brief or
review of the administration of
this program as I mentioned
we've got a commission at five
member commission.
Two members when myself
representative the school of law
we've got a representative the
higher education department and
then we have a representative
from each of these communities
sake yes the language in the
colonials and I and i've got to
say we we have got a great
commission now we've got a two
new younger members where making
our corns they're very
interested in engaged i'm i'm
really thrilled to be working
with them
I think i've given you most of
the information on the first
page so i'll take you to the
second page at how we do this
and this is honestly just me
maybe bragging a little bit
about our accomplishments
because getting this program
pulled together to took a little
bit of work
so we have our meetings hosted
by my center at the last school
we are the administrators of the
program as well so my staff you
know does the organization of
these meetings we have developed
an m o u with a t d because your
funding goes to hdd and then it
has to come to us we distribute
it to the legal service
providers which means that we
also have to have agreements
with the service providers and
we have one already in place
with legal aid
again be hoping to expand
opportunities with other legal
service providers we've got our
own rules of procedure and I
really want to thank
representative garcia and
actually all of you who gave
your support to house bill
twenty four in this last session
that the bill was originally
crafted in it in a fairly nice
way but as we were implementing
we found that there were just
and things we need to do to
adjust a little bit housekeeping
I think representative garcia
referred to it as and
and you know we got overwhelming
support for their for the
revisions provided in the house
bill twenty four which included
now the opportunity to expand
the opportunities for our
students that are to go to
different types of legal service
providers and that really is
very exciting and also there
were some financial elements
that we took care of making it
easier to determine starting
salaries.
Making is the easier that math
met do the cost share match with
the state legislative funds and
I also want to give kudos to the
folks at a g d who have already
promulgated regulations to
comply with HB twenty four so we
are set and ready to go
the status of the program is
that this program under the law
allows for two students per year
to enroll and so we technically
we could have two three l
students I could have another
student sitting next to me and
then four practicing attorneys
out in the field at any one time
at that's the grand vision of
this and you can imagine if we
can keep two students a year
going into this program really
are going to increase the
knowledge of the state bar about
these communities right now
we're only receiving sufficient
funding to enroll one student a
year and as you can imagine the
salaries go up for every year
the cost of education goes up
naturally the cost of the living
statement goes up and so
we will be approaching he did to
request the day put a request
into you all to increase our
budget so that we can get to the
state where we can get two
students a year and rolling in
this with bp is robust as
possible
we have already got some
students in this program nick is
actually the fourth student who
would brought into this program
we had one student who went to
work for new mexico legal aid we
had one student who was awarded
this program and we actually
gave her it to furl because she
got a clerkship with the new
mexico supreme court and we
thought you know that's some
experience that might actually
help the sake yes and language
and colonial so we let her go
ahead and complete that so
two of them will be starting
with new mexico legally this far
so we'll have a those attorneys
out there practicing in the
field you know before the year's
and then neck upon his
successful completion of of law
school in the bar exam.
I will be out there as well and
so i'm going to pass and let
nick tell you a little bit more
about himself so you can
understand that the caliber of
people were bringing to serve
these communities
sure thank you adrian and madame
chair members of the committee
thank you for being here it
really is an honor to be here
and to be accepted into this
program I have a really long
standing interest in a natural
resource law and you slaw water
law so when I first heard about
this it really did seem like a
great fit I also have a
connection to these communities
my grandfather was a gracia was
born in san jose new mexico
understand mcaldo botto
and I grew up here in stories
from him about what it was like
growing up on that grand you
know he lived in a house with a
dirt floor and no indoor
plumbing
and it was on hard life they go
crops they had some sheep and
cattle but he made it work and
it seems like a really great
experience and I think item
great in determination that he's
passed down to me so my
grandfather served in the korean
war attended here highlands
university on the g I bill um
and ended up living in grants
new mexico which is where he was
eyed at the rest of his life and
that's where I ended up spending
a lot of my summers with him so
I think a lot of these values
that land grants in a second and
colonials have have been passed
down to me through that
I you know grew up in alba kirky
new mexico graduated from
volcano vista high school public
schools went to UNM for
undergrad and it was kind of a
weird experience because covered
hit during my freshman year but
still tried to make the best of
I did a
semester long internship in the
office of senator benray luhan
which was a great experience
great exposure to this world I
got to work on that traditional
use bill one of the
reintroductions that bill has
talked about a little bit today.
Coming back to new mexico I did
a water resources fellowship
program in undergrad just
through the water resources
program at u and m and I was
kind of my folk first exposure
to the world of water and water
law and I learned kind of how
complex some of those issues are
and how communities here are
kind of struggling with those
then I went into law school at
UNM went straight through i'm
currently working on my natural
resource to certificate I really
enjoyed the classes i've taken
water law land use new mexico
administrative drafting and it's
been I think a great platform
for which I can jump off into my
legal career i'm currently i'm
on the law school's natural
resources journal and i'm really
excited because i'm our journal
symposium editor and we're
planning to suppose on the
twenty twenty two permanent
speaking cafe can you wild fires
so we're working with some folks
from landgrands from northern
new mexico who were affected by
their um and were really excited
we're getting our registration
page foot together and some
flyers and i'll try and get that
out to folks here because I
think you know we'd love to have
some of you and attendance and I
think it'll be a great
conversation adrian's also been
really involved with that in a
big supporter
and yes this summer i'm working
at the city of santa fe I have
an internship out there learning
a bit about planning zoning
municipal law and just looking
forward to my last year law
school and getting started with
this program thank you all again
it really is an honor to be here
today thank you for your
comments
all right great so you can see
we're not falling around we're
bringing some real muscle that
the table here and and i'm
really proud of the the the
students who we have enrolled in
this program and i'm
really excited to see who we
bring into it in the future I be
frank with you when I started at
the law school the attitude at
the last school was that a sake
year's language these were were
neat niche interest these are
these were things that may be
one or two students a year might
have an interesting.
What we we worked with with in
rekay and our turo and pulled
together a specialty class on
the sake is in land grants
full enrollment waiting less
students asking how they could
get engaged we're seeing this
with agricultural lock classes
which the the last call sort of
had that same attitude about in
that that it shifted within the
last week and I i'm really
hoping we can continue that
shift really make a lot of
school heavily focused on new
mexico and new mexico's
uniqueness
so really we don't have much
more than that just other than
me reminding you that we will be
tapping on your shoulders asking
for a little bit more money with
the hopes that we can just make
this a much more robust program
in fulfill the vision and the
representative garcia and
senator or tease opinion had in
the beginning
and I do want to think in in
reca in our toro and paula for
their continued support of this
program showing up the committee
showing up at our our meetings
and giving us they're good
advice and guidance so that's
what we've got for you to date
thank you so much
thank you much any questions
senator.
Thank you mister chair
i'm familiar questions more
about a comment so I just
recently i've been informed that
I have a a company it's probably
owned inside my district
actually just south of eduart
called melody ranch water
company and apparently they have
not been providing water for
that community now for too much
it's been going often on often
on the continually charging the
folks in that community but they
haven't been able to
provide enough water to actually
sustain the community and it's a
ongoing issue unfortunately
because p r c apparently they're
we've gotten them engaged now to
see what they can do to to make
sure these folks have water but
because it's probably only there
seems to be no jurisdiction over
this company now they're
basically it walked away the
owners are not responding to
phone calls there are if sort of
disappeared and so we have a
community now that is
is now out there
needing water so I have we have
a need for an attorney like like
yourself to come in and help us
figure out how to resolve this
isn't and get some instant
results
and only bring the sat because
it's an immediate need that's
happening right now and then I
just found out about it last
week and so i've got some faults
working at I not stephanie or
just also working in and we're
trying to get some resolution to
this particular problem but as
you know what about any water
it's a it's problem and so
and i'm i'm i'm actually
outraged that I wasn't aware of
this and it's been going on
apparently since for the last
two or three months and now that
we're entering the summer months
it's becoming more important for
people to have access to water
so
maybe something we can talk
about after this but you know in
terms of what it what options
are be able to us because we're
wanting it to a brick wall with
talking directly to the company
and i'm not sure how the state
can can do anything to resolve
this.
Immediate issue right now
obviously the long term
resolution is to either replace
the company have somebody else
come the end of the new world
and make it available but
I don't know if the wells one
dry we're not getting any input
from their previous owners so
it's one of those issues I just
wanted to bring up but there's a
need for people like you and a
and as people know on this and
not a fan of lawyers in general
i'm an engineer so but I I do
understand the need and this is
one where we definitely could
need to yourself of a good
lawyer so thank you very much
thank you senator
representative.
Thank you madame character and
thank you
again for your presentation and
your hard work with the
community governance attorney
program
and and thank neck therefore for
being them the model student
that we want to see in this
program
and that you know a madame chair
when we first started this
committee in two thousand and
three
two issues came to the forefront
in terms of what language kind
of
felt
significant at that early period
of time
well there was there was three
but
the top two was basically the
need for attorneys to tackle on
to take on these the motorists
and againit language issues are
needs and the other one was
doing away with the adverse
possession license
and actually we know whatever's
possession does it the you got a
person that's dead said i'm
taking acquiring some other
common so they go in there to do
a quick claim deem they
registered the deed with the
clerk they pay property taxes
and the language doesn't know
what's going on and before ten
years comes around we got these
glasses where the language finds
out that there's these people
that are taking possession of
their common that they have no
knowledge of
and and the thing is that
for the longest time
the main expenditure madame
chair of our language
communities was fighting back
these adverse possession
lawsuits
in our and
let alan grants had to sell off
some other counts
had to find ways to kind of come
up with the money to pay the
attorney.
And these are language
amendments that basically are
low income you know have
difficulty kind of generating
revenues and
and actually the other issue
that came to the fore was the
need for an empowerment of our
language through the political
subdivision status giving them
grants you know that empowerment
that they need to make
themselves a genuine you know
fighting organization for
maintaining the comments and
seeking back the losses of their
comments which was the moral was
so the bill we didn't two
thousand four through creating
police and division services
and
saw these years we
tossed around the idea and then
madam chair twenty nineteen came
around first year that governor
may help michelle the language
and was in office we introduced
the bill
passed unanimously and long
behold our beloved governor
pocket beer that
that
is the legislation you know and
she not only did that she bucket
little other legislation that
passing animously both
republican and democrat so agree
in the legislature date and
twenty twenty is we put together
what we called a rocket docket
and their rocket docket was all
these big bills that michelle
hungarian pocket be road that
pasunanimously we put him on one
docket
and we passed them as the one
and that's how the goods
community governance attorney
came into la in twenty twenty
and
it's not starting to jail
especially with the bill that we
introduce last session house
will twenty four were you agent
you know and
and the language community in
the second community because
this is just not a language bill
it's in the second and.
Colonial you know I I always
kind of forget the colonia and
but for the most part is taken
amended by the by the
language and the second
communities and
so I think what we've done this
passes we kind of streamlined we
cannot there away with the
growing pains and we'll really
focus the program and what we
originally internet it to be and
I think it's got wings now you
know we've got the new people on
the commission that early
dedicated recommended and
and then we've got gave here I
mean neck
and I want to ask nick manager
if he's related to the late
gabriel cabrian game as thrower
who was in a secure and main
grant I can hear and some legal
county
madam chair representative of
gracia i'm thank you for the
question to my knowledge i'm not
interesting factor the
astradicide is actually from
colombia south america okay
up on that is linked then so but
yeah I gave mister was on
monumental leader here in some
again
regarding the
second
and and the last week as
langrant
and he does he does come out of
that as that family that settled
east of here in one of their
first time starting hispanic
communities
comprised them maybe members
from these language that were
kind of losing commons and and
so it's a little community call
the garita
halfway between here and took
them carry.
That's what they are straight as
kind of took the rooted
themselves as ranchers and but
yeah i'm very excited agent for
the changes we made and you're
real professional when it comes
to this issue in this needs and
i'm glad you can cut
you know this fish here because
I think he's gonna be a moral
for other students
and I think you'll do good when
he's out on the ground and
amongst the communities of our
second and grants they're making
big strides in terms of their
legal needs and issues so thank
you thank you manager
thank you representative though
is the last.
Oh and i'm sure um in presenters
think you so very much this is
very exciting to hear I somehow
missed this information that we
had this kind of um i'm not sure
if you call it scholarship or
internship or what it is that
it's labeled as
coming from unm and having just
retired from you and i'm on
january first i'm especially
proud of unique for being so
involved in this project and I
really look forward to seeing
and hearing from you in terms of
what are some things that you're
learning in in your process
I
would like to ask if you are
still it would seem like you are
still allowed to work with other
scholarships as well because for
example we've got the
justice of a three so sernal
scholarship that I think you
might have been a really good
applicant for
um and so hopefully you are able
to and I I guess that's a
question
and another question I have is I
I think this is wonderful from
attorneys and i'm wondering how
we might do the same for
education because my dark
student was here he just left a
moment ago on what you
and he is for nominal and knows
landgrounds of course inside out
and so this is so exciting to
hear
can you can you tell me if you
all work with other scholarships
and
how that works out for you madam
chair.
Madame chair representative
tourist will ask is
first congratulations
on your retirement is as we say
a UNM good by tension hello
pension so
hope you enjoy your time
in retirement there is no
prohibition about uh against
the students getting any other
scholarships we we absolutely
encourage it and think they
should be rewarded for their
good work it's best they can
just
make it clear this is what we
call a loan for service program
and so
mister strait is signing a
contract that essentially says
he is you know borrowing this
money and that it will be
forgiven after his two years of
service but if he doesn't
complete those two years of
service we're going to drop the
hammer on him you know like any
other loan service.
The the legislature drops the
hammer through htd
and
you know on your note about
using these programs for other
purposes
in addition to the purposes you
mentioned one thing that that
i've been thinking a lot about
is the lack of rural water
operators in wastewater system
operators just really hard to
recruit people into this
business which I don't
understand because if I could
drive around new mexico going to
rural communities and get paid
to do so i've been jump at it
but
i've been towing with the idea
of trying to put forth the
proposal of similar type of
program for
service providers to go out into
our rural communities and make
sure these water systems in
these ways water systems are up
to speed because it is a really
significant problem we have
especially in the types of
communities we're talking about
here you know particularly in
colonias
thank you out of check
madame chair another part to my
question has to do with the fact
that the legislative finance
committee is putting their
budget together and i'm just
wondering if rather than
creating a new bill if there's
something or how do we proceed
to support more funds going to
or what do you are thinking in
terms of approaching the lfc to
provide more funds for this
project
madam chair representative our
budget comes through eighteen d
directly and so we need to have
hed include an increased budget
provision for us in their budget
request to lfc and we're working
on that now.
Thank you so much for that I was
just mentioning to in that you
know we'll see what we can get
out of member of lfc staff join
us for a simple business to land
grants and in a second so that
they understand the important
work thank you both for for
joining us today I think we're
gonna have well put the common
is for tomorrow we did have two
folks are layer grants folks
will be here mora that signed up
and are working I gave are way
or you still hear
is it
is going back okay if it does
and then lose gagas already
present it but he might have
just clicked on that part
just said yes yeah
we can give way a location what
we're done for the day so for
you
yeah if you don't mind thank
you.
And then think you are thinking
well so much and then arm at the
after that comment we're gonna
go ahead and recess for the day
will begin again tomorrow at ten
am we'll have this is going to
be an interesting one it's we
have one two three four five six
six to seven presenters tomorrow
all about post fire recovery
arms a lot of building and we
had the kind of this afternoon
and see more of that and then
after that I will have public
comment lunch and then just for
the committee in staff for the
folks who already signed up a
two were of the burns garden on
that's being lead to graciously
by losses he less language so
it'll be a wonderful opportunity
to kind of have them are chat
with a little bit more of your
questions you could ask me in
here about that as well.
There is a.
Until just future of two minute
brief comment that works and
then otherwise we will recess
thank you.
With the red light there we go
when I started yourself
madame chair committee members
when it's working to be a star
warehouse
whose
i'm just here to offer a brief
public comment time part of the
owner that we need language in
the senate on it the sun and
tony level days are sick yes and
don't earn they also the lost
brund of the second we're
located in the northern part of
the house on the northern border
the historic villages of the
northern border with tales
public
so thank you offer your
wonderful work for those who
haven't met yet i'll try to
spend some time meeting you
outside of the comment but I I
wanted to bring up one or two
quick things
in the introduction I saw online
by market words talking about
the language histories I wanted
to make a quick clarification
that worked interest for you
went when your understanding may
say this and landgrounds in your
understanding their
establishment in the historical
purpose
there's some details in there
that each language has different
right the patents
the way they got their patterns
how the patterns were given and
who they were given to for the
example between us and the
mother grant there's a huge
difference although the patent
was given to our ancestor and
forty four hours it wasn't given
just to one language right in
and i'm seeing that because
we're currently waiting a court
ruling on this on this reality
where our language which broke
off in eighteen twenty three
also received a patent because
it was our family errors who are
still live today who are part of
the original families who
receive the patent right so I
just wanted to make that you
know aware for you all so as
you're looking at landgrounds in
their histories that you
understand sometimes you can say
this language got the pattern in
this one didn't know sometimes
it's the same family and two
neighboring landgrounds so I
wanted to mention that and then
I wanted to bring she attention
briefly on a news article that
came in
july second in calcinos written
buyer
the android tease.
And and I really hope this
committee can read that
carefully and figure out what's
the best way for you all to
defend yourselves in the
committee and legislations I
guess be to sixty eight because
what's happening is not just
this person but a few other
articles by the talk news have
been very one cited and they've
been misrepresenting what HB t
sixty eight is what a political
subdivision land grant is and
it's happening in a way that
isn't just
gonna guarantee gentification
that we no longer exist but it's
also a roading it's eroding the
public understanding of laws
that you all have passed that
had been helpful to us that has
taken us decades to get right I
don't want to go into too much
detail on that but I I want to
warn you that the author the
supposed author of this
were also involved with some
very disturbing things that
happened like when the pattern
was filed in it froze all
mortgages across the state right
these are the same groups of
people that are also showing up
to some committees and making
some
very complex statements around
federalists and tree well put a
lot going to state has no right
to do things and and I just want
to encourage the same thing I
said during the committee
hearings please extend an
invitation to these people to
meet with them one on one please
hear them out because what we
believe is what we always have
we all have a right to be heard
and you all is is the committee
members and you all is lead
sleechers please learn from them
but also offer your opinion and
your interpretation just as your
political analyst did to assure
that these laws could be passed
legally and I think maybe from
you all they might be more open
to here what is ethical what is
legal and and whether their
theories hold water and not
because for us to get into a
neighborhood neighborhood it
gets a little bit too ugly and
we prefer to allow you out to
handle that in a more
more ethical public way as as
public officials so other than
that i'll leave this for now and
if I could provide any more
details outside of the the
common section I will think you
much for your time they give us
available and for now we stand
in recess thank you everyone.
