Educator apprenticeships, so
please, any.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee. Hi, my name is Annie
Armitage, and I'm your senior
policy analyst covering the
educator workforce. You might
remember that last month I
presented to you on teacher
clinical practice, particularly
looking at residencies, and many
of you had questions about all
of the other investments you've
made in the teacher pipeline in
recent years. Um, so we've
invited two presenters here for
you today. We have Julie Lucero,
the chief program officer of
Golden Apple and Phoebe Valen.
check, uh, director of educator
pathways at PED, um, and I just
wanna
Kind of highlight what an
incredible partner that Phoebe
has been for us over at PED, um,
and she's put a lot, she and her
team have put a lot of work into
thinking about how do these
different pathway supports that
all of you have funded. How do
they complement each other and
work together to help support
individuals who are interested
in going into the teaching
profession and how do we
generate that interest in the
first place. So I won't say any
more than that because they have
a lot to tell you. And first
you'll actually hear from um
Julie Lucero and then from the.
Keep people in check.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, thank you so much for
the opportunity to present here
today.
Golden Apple is an important
part of the solution of
developing and retaining high
quality teachers and is
complementary to other programs
in the state.
We are a stream of work that
both brings people into the New
Mexico School of Education, we
provide additional preparation
that ensures they are ready to
teach on day one and will stay
in the classroom or intensive
preparation and mentoring helps
support this process.
A little bit of our history. So
Golden Apple Foundation for
Excellence in teaching was
founded in 1985.
Uh, in Illinois by Matt and
excuse me, Mike Kuyke and Pat,
uh, they then
Founded New Mexico's Golden
Apple Foundation, our sister
organization, Golden Apple New
Mexico in '94, and believed that
there should be something more
done for teachers. So they
started doing a teacher prep
program in Illinois at that
time. We started our program
here in New Mexico in 2022 and
in Michigan just last year.
So a little bit about our
program, our scholars program is
the program where we recruit
diverse, aspiring teachers from
around the state. We provide
rigorous hands-on preparation
through our summer institutes.
We have strategic job placement
around the state, we really
encourage our scholars to return
to their home community, and we
provide mentoring to ensure
long-term classroom retention.
This is the heart of our
program, and we add to the
mosaic of those who are
addressing student achievement
and teacher shortage.
So the structure of our program.
So of course, I'm Julie Luther.
I'm the chief program officer. I
have about 30 years of
experience in education. I was a
teacher, a principal in both
traditional and charter. Uh, I
retired as a special ed director
and founder of a charter school,
and I had the wonderful
opportunity of working for the
New Mexico State legislature for
the Speaker of the House, and
now why I chose Golden Apple.
Uh
Seeing the proven success in
Illinois, wanted our students in
New Mexico to have the same
opportunity.
Now I do have a team who are
here joining me, Monica Aguilar,
who is also from New Mexico. Uh,
she is my recruitment manager
and Jaime Hernandez, who is also
from New Mexico, who is my
manager of undergrad support and
mentoring. The wonderful
addition to my tea.
A little bit about what our
program looks like. We have two
major ingredients are scholar
institute is one of what we
provide intensive professional
development over the summer, uh,
our scholars stay with us from
either 1 to 3 weeks, and when
they are, they join us for up to
5 years of professional
development.
After they graduate with their
teaching degree, we provide
mentorship in their classroom
for up to 3 years, 2 to 3 years,
and we do that by providing
mentors, of course, um, who are
award-winning teachers around
the state who are high quality
teachers who they can build a
relationship with to help
support them through their
journey.
So this is how our program
starts. We recruit for my team
and I, we drive around the state
and we find a scholars who are
interested in education. We also
look to SAT scores, any student
who mentions
Any type of interest in students
or um work related to the field
of education, and we try to find
them to encourage them to apply
for a program and of course,
move on to become teachers.
Then we helped support their
college persistence so that they
can earn that degree and of
course, uh, get to that place
where they are participating in
the residency program.
So here just a couple of really
what we address in our, uh,
Golden Apple. We support the
teacher pipeline. We increase
college persistence, uh, when we
are recruiting our scholars.
We specifically look for
scholars who may not have the
opportunity for scholarships,
but, you know, do want to become
teachers. We do that by telling
our stories, you know, Monica
Heimme and myself of why we
chose the profession or maybe
someone who inspired them.
So over, I started this position
2 years ago and I have really
noticed a shift in perspective
of wanting to become a teacher.
2 years ago, I was consistently
hearing, I don't ever want to
become a teacher, that is a
terrible profession in most
recently, I am seeing that
attitude shift, which is really,
really wonderful.
So a little bit about our
demographics. So right now we
have 120 current scholars in our
program.
Of the 12073 of our scholars
identify as a person of color.
And they have an average GPA as
a whole of the 3.6.
So we had our very first class,
uh, who graduated. We have 6
teachers in the classroom this
next year that moves up to about
18, um, who are doing an
outstanding job. They're placed
with their mentors. So we're
very proud of that. We will not
have the results of how long
they'll stay over time, but in
Illinois, they over 80% of
scholars that participate in our
program, Teach way beyond.
So this is what our scholars
look like and where they come
from and where they attend
schools. So we have scholars
from 23 out of our 33 counties.
Again, we, we drive around to
all of these places starting,
uh, September 1st, all the way
through April.
So we have covered almost every
county. Of course, our goal is
to have a scholar from every
single county in the state, and
these are the universities that
they attend. Uh, they are
required in order to participate
in our program to attend a
university in New Mexico or a
community college.
Where they will eventually
transfer to it for you.
So retention of our program has
been really great.
From both they have two cohorts
right 2 cohorts, 22, 23, and we
are just finishing up the first
semester of our 3rd cohort.
So we have retained 85% of our
scholars from induction.
So this is probably the most
important part of our program.
We, um,
We have the opportunity to
provide professional development
for our scholars for up to 5
years. They come to us every
single summer. Uh, they received
professional development from
award-winning teachers here in
New Mexico. We partner with
organizations around the state,
but now in January, we start
meeting with these instructors
to find out they're in the
classroom right now. What is it
that our students in New Mexico
need in order to be successful.
Uh, what
we need to train our aspiring
teachers so that they are
prepared to start teaching the
very first day.
So, some of those conversations
could be, you know, our, our
students are really lacking
engagement. So we will find ways
to include that in our
professional development over
the summer, uh, trauma informed
instruction is another big one,
we, um,
We neurodiversity in classrooms,
AI, we also ask our scholars.
From their experience being a
student, what is needed for a
student in New Mexico to be
successful. So we look to our
partners not only our
award-winning teachers, but we
look, we collaborate with
partners around the state and of
course in the nation, what is
the
The best way to approach our
students, uh, you know, students
learn differently from the time
I was in the classroom, it's
changed quite a bit, so we
always want to ensure that the
professional development that
our scholars are receiving prior
to starting in the classroom is
the right one so that it
impacts.
So right now, the demand for
golden apple has been extremely
high. My first year we had 99
applicants, and we were able to
induct 67.
Last year we had over 419
applicants, and we were able to
induct 47.
Right now we have, we opened up
our application on September
1st, and we have over 250
applicants at this time. We
close our application process on
April 1st, so we are way ahead
of where we were last year.
So we do collaborate and
appreciate all of our partners
around the state. We, uh, visit
Ed rising. We try to visit every
single Ed rising classroom in
New Mexico?
And those educator rising
teachers that do refer a
scholar, they get a stipend for
us. We do have some educator
fellows who are currently
scholars, but 60% of our current
scholars have no affiliation.
We, we look to communities that
may have more difficult times
finding teachers. And so we
visit those places and uh we try
to find those students that
maybe perhaps.
would not be, they may be
considering.
Something with children, but we
try to reach them as well. So
these are the programs that
You know, are talked about when
we, you know, we're, we're going
around the state and of course
with educator rising, we
encourage applicants, same with
educator fellows, if they are
already working in a school,
it's a great fit, so we do
encourage the applicants, we
actually track data of where,
you know, if they are part of a
program around the state, so
that we can keep that data
current, um, but Ed Rising, of
course, as you know, they are a
high school.
program,
not all of Ed Rising students go
into teaching, but some do. Uh,
of course, Golden Apple, we do
require that they are full-time
students. They do attend a
university in New Mexico, and of
course that they teach in New
Mexico ultimately.
An educator fellows, uh,
They most are are scholars who
are educator fellows are EA's
currently and of course
ultimately our goal is that our
scholars participate in the
teacher residency program. And
uh last year out of the 6
graduates, 5 of the 6 were able
to participate in the residency.
And ultimately, you know, our
goal is
If we have a partner that we can
collaborate with to increase the
number of highly effective
teachers, ah, you know, we, we
want to, to work.
So right now, Golden Apple is
requesting $1 million of state
funding.
The first year we received.
$1 million. Thank you so much
for that opportunity. FY 23,
that was in FY 23, and FY 24, we
received 250,000, both of these
were through a PD RFP process.
Last year, unfortunately, we
were not able to receive
funding.
And that is the reason we were
only able to induct 47. 1 of the
requirements not only from, uh,
you know, the public education
department and legislators is
that we have to have an
evaluation after every single
year. And so we have two
evaluations from the source
center at NMSU.
And I did provide that to uh.
Any here and so if you would
like to have copies of both of
our evaluations about our
program, you know, we will
definitely do that, but, uh, you
know, we have great success in
our program, specifically with
our demographics, uh, our
retention rates are really,
really great, um, and also, they
also give us some thoughts of
maybe some areas that we may
want to consider, you know,
increasing numbers of
recruitment, they also compare
to other states, so you.
You would also have that
information.
And uh our funders, any of our
private funders require us to
provide data. Of course, we
collect data year round, so that
is
part of our driving force.
that is the completion of my
presentation.
Do you have any questions?
Mr. Chair, um, that's all right.
We can have Phoebe present and
then do questions at then. Yeah,
no, definitely.
Um
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Phoebe Valencic and I'm
the director of the educator
pathways Bureau for the Public
Education department. Um, I also
have with me here in the
audience, um, Amber Romero, the
director of the Ed Fellows
program, and Justin Mahamson,
the director of the Teacher
residency.
So we're honored to present here
today and to provide some
information about the
recruitment efforts and the on
ramps into education that are
focused around equitable high
quality preparation for all of
New Mexico's educators.
As you all know, the most
effective educated education
efforts focus on connected
systems and a cohesive vision.
Your legislative efforts are
coming together to foster a
professional teaching pipeline
that supports equity,
excellence, and sustainability.
By linking affordability,
accessibility, and high quality
preparation. The state is
building a resilient educator
ecosystem that will ultimately
benefit students, teachers, and
communities and ensure a
stronger workforce for better uh
student outcomes.
This cohesive vision includes
multiple entry points that all
lead to high quality preparation
through strong clinical practice
experiences.
Ideally, for most of our
candidates, this will culminate
in a full year residency or
apprenticeship, working with a
trained mentor through a
co-teaching model.
On Ramp one provides early
career opportunities for
interested for candidates who
may be interested in a career in
education to gain experience in
the education sector.
On Ramp 2 is really focused on
our traditional track associates
and bachelor's degree
candidates, um, and thanks to
scholarship supports, candidates
can now get tuition free
degrees, um, and then through
our educator Fellows program,
our primary grow your own
recruitment program, candidates
can work as supplemental EAs
while receiving a salary and
benefits, and getting mentorship
and coaching and paid leave for
their program. Um, and then in
addition to this, there's also
supports that exist as you just
heard from.
Golden Apple for candidates to
get additional supports on top
of that. Our hope is that all of
these supports lead our
candidates to a high quality
clinical practice experience,
uh, through a teacher residency
or apprenticeship in their final
year of preparation.
On round 3 focuses on graduate
students and provides them
really a lot of the same
opportunities that are
associates and bachelor's degree
candidates have.
And finally, on ramp 4 is
focused on providing
high-quality preparation entry
points to our alternative
candidates who are currently
make up over 60% of um of
candidates in education.
So we are working very hard in
the department right now to
ensure that the candidates in
alternative prep programs, um,
have the same high quality
preparation as our traditional
route candidates.
Some of our alternative
preparation programs have
already modified their program
models to support residency
experiences for their candidates
by putting in prerequisite
requirements, and then aligning
to the residency high quality
criteria.
Um, we definitely have some work
to do here to ensure that all of
our alternative candidates, um,
and all of our alternative
preparation pathways meet the
same standards as our
traditional preparation program
pathway. So here's a vision for
one student's journey and their
clear articulated pathway in
education.
Beginning with a dual credit or
high school program, working
towards a paraprofession um as
working as a paraprofessional or
EA as they get their AA degree
and bachelor's degree,
completing their college
coursework and then culminating
in a final, uh, year of
residency or apprenticeship, um,
to really provide that high
quality preparation.
The state's recruitment efforts
are focused on two priorities.
The first is increasing and
diversifying the teacher
workforce by increasing access
and college affordability.
This includes maximizing
resources.
Through braided funding and
workforce dollars, reducing
tuition and related expenses by
increasing access and awareness
of the many scholarship
opportunities that exist, and
then providing living stipends
and opportunities for candidates
to earn as they learn.
Our second priority is focused
around preparing highly
qualified educators to increase
student achievement and lengthen
retention rates. This begins
with opportunities to work in
schools beginning in high
school, followed by
opportunities to serve as an EA
and working towards licener and
career progression, and finally
an opportunity to work in a full
year residency before becoming a
licensed teacher of record.
We talk about preparing day one
ready educators.
Imagine the quality of a first
year teacher with all of this
instructional experience in
their toolbox.
So legislative funding has been
critical to this vision, and we
recognize that longevity and
sustainability are key.
We are working hard to create
braided funding streams and
strong EPP and LEA partnerships
that prioritize the initial
investment on training and
ultimately result in well
qualified hires and greater
student success.
Not only will this investment
In training through educator
fellows and teacher residency
programs result in cost savings
down the line and lengthened
retention and reducing costs
associated with high turnover,
but both of these programs also
provide an added benefit of
reducing student to teacher
ratios in the classrooms where
these apprentices serve. As we
improve our data systems and
finalize evaluation models, we
hope to be able to share some
compelling data around the
impact that educator fellows and
teacher residents have on
student achievement.
So over the past 3 years, 3,345
newly prepared teachers have
entered New Mexico's classrooms.
Since 2021, approximately 250
graduates have been supported
through educator fellows, and
more than 800 have gone through
teacher residency.
That's just under 30% completing
residencies, and all of these
residents should still be
serving in New Mexico classrooms
based on their three-year
commitment.
With continued legislative
support and strategic
recruitment efforts, we
anticipate continued growth, and
we hope to support an increase
in the percentage of educators
in these high quality
preparation pathways, as well as
an increase in their commitment
to remain serving in New Mexico.
So I know that many of you are
very familiar with our programs,
but to ensure clarity, I'm just
going to take a moment now to
provide a brief summary of both
the educator Fellows program and
the teacher res residency
programs, um, and how they
individually support this
cohesive vision that I mentioned
earlier.
I'm also gonna share some
quantitative data. Um, I won't
have time today to go into a lot
of the qualitative data that
exists for both of these
programs, but I hope, um, that
you will join us on January 30th
for educator pathways day at the
Roundhouse, and we will be
distributing a save the date
soon, but we will be
highlighting um our on ramps
into education, we will have
representatives from educator
fellows and teacher residents
there, um, including their
mentors and coaches.
To share their individual
stories about how impactful
these programs have been in
their lives. Um, and we will get
a save the date out for
Roundhouse Day, um, very.
So very briefly, educator
Fellows was originally designed
with Esser funds and is
currently state funded.
The program was designed by PED
to serve two primary goals.
The first scroll is a grow your
own um recruitment system
designed to build and diversify
the teacher workforce. Educator
fellows really focus on
supporting local candidates who
would not otherwise be able to
access the field of education
and who are likely to remain in
their communities once licensed.
The second goal is to improve
student to teacher ratios and
support student learning through
small group instruction and
targeted intervention.
The educator Fellows program
provides financial reimbursement
for school districts and
charters to higher supplemental
education assistance in
elementary classrooms who are
interested in pursuing careers
and education.
Educator fellows receive a full
EA salary and benefits.
And up to 12 hours of paid leave
to focus on their degree
requirements.
As I mentioned earlier, educator
Fellows has been specifically
supportive of recruitment
efforts in our rural and tribal
communities. It provides an
access point to entry that would
not otherwise exist.
Educator fellows usually remain
in the program for about 2
years, but as necessary, the
program can support them on
their licenser journey longer.
All educator fellows receive
cultivated professional
development, mentorship and
coaching.
Aligned with our system systems
vision, educator fellows would
graduate from their program and
then go on to complete a
residency or student teaching in
their final year of preparation.
The track record for educator
fellows is extremely strong. 76%
of educator fellows identify as
people of color. 10% of the
fellows identify as Native
American compared to about 2% of
the state's current teacher
workforce. And in high-serving
Native American districts, um,
Ed Fellows cohorts comprise 80
to 90% of the local cohort.
We have educate our fellows
placed in 300 schools.
And 81 of New Mexico's LEA is
host educator fellows.
The number of educator fellows
is projected to rise, with over
520 projected in FY 26.
I'll now provide just a quick
overview of teacher residency,
although I know you are also all
very familiar with that.
Teacher residency is designed to
provide a high quality full year
clinical practice experience in
a candidate's final year of
preparation.
This program also has two
primary goals.
The first goal is to provide
high quality preparation and on
the job learning and strong
mentorship in a co-teaching
model that really supports skill
cultivation and strong classroom
competencies.
Goal 2 is to improve student to
teacher ratios and support
student learning.
Though a co-teaching model.
Our EIR grant, which I will talk
more about in a moment is
focused on studying the impacts
of co-teaching in both on
preparation and on student
achievement.
In New Mexico, legislative
funding provides residents with
$35,000 one-year stipend during
their residency placement
alongside a mentor teacher and a
partnering school district.
Unfortunately, this does not
include benefits, which has
created a barrier for candidates
and why some are not choosing a
residency experience in their
final year.
Some districts have found ways
to create a special resident
hiring line and offer their
residents benefits and sometimes
even additional pay.
The set program at UNM and CNM
are some strong examples of
this.
We're working on guidance that
may support more district
braided funding opportunities as
benefits are clearly important
for our candidates.
The track record for residencies
is also very strong. Um, 66% of
residents identify as people of
color, um, 92%, we have a 92% on
time graduation rate.
8 state colleges and
universities participate in
residencies, and these 8
universities are preparing 75%
of the teachers of the state's
new teachers.
Half of the districts in the
state already have hosted
residents or are hosting
residents, and the number of
projected residents continues to
rise.
So since 2021/800 residents, um,
have entered New Mexico's
classrooms, um, prepared through
that strong co-teaching model.
We have approximately 350 more
teacher residents graduating
this coming year and
projections, projections of over
400 in FY 26.
and that is thanks very much in
part to the predictable funding
that the growth fund has allowed
and the way that those that
those recurring funds have
supported our recruitment
efforts.
OK. So to complement the state's
funding, we've also secured two
federal grants that are designed
to support systems and um
programs that already exist in
New Mexico specifically Ed
Fellows and teacher residencies.
So I'm gonna take a brief moment
now to provide a high-level
overview of this braided
funding.
Uh, the first grant is the
Education, innovation and
Research Grant, which is really
focused on teacher residencies.
The ERA grant focuses around 3
goals. The first goal is to, is
focused on recruitment and
selection of candidates. So
we're we're trying to increase
both the number of residents and
the proportion of residents from
underrepresented areas across
the state
through, through strategic uh
recruitment approaches.
Um, we're also providing a $7500
incentive with these grant funds
for candidates from
underrepresented backgrounds or
who will be serving in high need
areas. Those statements will be
going out for the first time in
this year's recruitment section,
and this year's recruitment
session.
Um, goal 2 of the EIR grant is
focused on quality programs and
reducing the variability of
implementation from different
residency types and localities
across the state. So we really
want to ensure that residents
get the same high quality
experience, no matter where they
do their residency, and no
matter what educator prep
program they are part of.
And that's really focused on
ensuring a strong co-teaching
model and a cadre of strong
mentor teachers across the
state. Um,
The grant is helping fund us,
uh, um, train the trainer model
that provides both a foundation
training to mentor teachers and
a pairs training, which provides
specific training on co-teaching
to both the um the resident and
the mentor.
And then goal 3 is focused
around sustainability.
Um, and how do we create
sustainable funding streams that
include benefits so that
residencies can become the norm
in New Mexico.
And this is really connected to
um working with strong district
partnerships and uh the
opportunities that exist around
registered apprenticeship.
And that leads me to our 2nd
federal grant, which is our
apprenticeshipBuilding America
grant or ABA 2 grant. And, um,
the design of that grant and
what we are trying to accomplish
there is really built around a
state sponsored registered
apprenticeship model that builds
from our already existing
programs, educator fellows and
teacher residency, and aims to
create a high quality um
registered teaching
apprenticeship for all of New
Mexico's educators.
from pre-apprenticeship
opportunities and then
progressing on to EA, um,
working as an EA as they work
towards their AA and BA
apprenticeship opportunities,
and then finally graduate level
apprenticeship opportunities.
We hope to create a state
sponsored apprenticeship because
we believe that every teacher
across the state deserves the
same high quality preparation,
and that we would reduce the
duplicative paperwork and uh
financial burden on districts by
having each, um, separate
partner apply for their own
apprenticeship model. So not
only would a state sponsored
apprenticeship model ensure
equity, it would also reduce the
financial burden, um, on many of
our state stakeholders.
So as you can see, prospective
teaching candidates in New
Mexico have a lot of resources
and opportunities that make the
teaching profession accessible,
affordable and high quality.
That said, communicating these
resources and making sure
pathways are clearly
articulated, um, to our
candidates has proved somewhat
challenging.
And we also know that there is a
need to change the narrow the
narrative around the teaching
profession so that education is
really viewed as a rewarding and
viable career opportunity.
So for this reason, we are very
excited to share the upcoming
launch of Teach New Mexico.org.
New Mexico is one of the few
select states that has recently
partnered with Teach, a DOA
sponsored, um, comprehensive
recruitment and support system
for New Mexico's teacher
candidates.
Teachemexico.org will be a
statewide support system for
prospective teachers that
inspires people to consider
teaching, identifies those with
interest, cultivates that
interest and then supports
prospective candidates to take
the first steps.
Teach will help.
Elevate the teaching profession
through inspiring radio, TV,
digital and social media
advertising.
They'll identify potential
teachers both locally and
nationally, and next they'll
work to help cultivate interest
by helping candidates overcome
perception barriers,
specifically around high need
teaching areas.
And finally, teach supports
candidates with the application
process and entry into a prep
program. So this includes
application fees, uh
reimbursement, practice exam
supports and one on one coaching
and advising from local
teachers.
Teach has been selectively
supporting state recruitment
efforts since 2019, they
initially partnered with North
Carolina and Colorado, and
greatly supported their
recruitment efforts more than
tripling both regions applicants
from the first year.
Teach New Mexico.org is not live
yet and we are still building
out the resource and working
with Teach, as well as our other
partners in at higher ed and
ECECD to ensure that we
represent all of the amazing
resources that New Mexico has to
offer.
We hope to be able to launch
Teach New Mexico.org this coming
spring.
I'll close us out today by
returning to the importance of
connected systems and a cohesive
vision that supports our
educator workforce.
The Legislative support for
scholarships, educator fellows,
and teacher residency are
critical to this vision, as each
one plays a very important role
in the pathway to becoming a
confident and well prepared
educator in New Mexico.
We thank you so much for your
support for these 3 years of
recurring funding that have
supported the clinical practice
pathways for paid student
teaching and teacher residency.
And the the continued state
support for educator fellows are
most successful grow your own
program.
Continued and reoccurring
funding for these programs will
be vital to the strong educator
ecosystem in New Mexico.
And I'm very happy to answer any
questions that you may have.
Oh, thank you.
Vice chair also, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. This all
sounds wonderful. We are just
chatting that, you know, it's
been a couple of years getting
this in place from some of the,
you know, I always refer to it
as any warm body you'll do
policies of the past.
Please assure me is someone able
to have a degree in something
else. It used to be as long as
they were registered in an
online education class in the
district would hire them that
they would be teacher of record
alone in a classroom. Is that
still possible? And what are we
doing to do it if it is still
possible.
Thank you, Mr. Chair
Representative, um.
I think there is a wide variety
and alternative models that
exist and some models do exist
that um do not require many
prerequisite, um, experiences
before a teacher can serve as
teacher of record in the
classroom, as long as they have
a bachelor's degree, um,
already. I think that there is a
lot of work and acknowledgement
that needs to go into um some
revision around the alternative
requirements to ensure that
those programs are
more closely aligned with the
traditional preparation pathways
and that there are prerequisite
requirements, um, as well as um
some assurances, whether it be
practice exams, um, that are
passed prior to serving as
teacher of record.
So, Mr. Chair, what you're
telling me is, yes, people are
still able to do that if they
can get somebody that will sign
off and put them into a
classroom, um.
What do we need to do to start
moving more towards this model
where they're getting a year of
co-teaching at least with
another person, which
professionalizes it way more
than, you know, we're short of
teachers and so, you know,
you're somebody that's willing,
you know, I'm putting them into
a classroom which doesn't serve
our students well.
Mr. Chair Representative, thank
you. That is a great question. I
think that right now, some of
the systems and the financial
incentives are encouraging our,
um, the alternative pathway and
because you can make more as a
teacher of record and receive
benefits, then you can by by
choosing some of the higher
quality pathways such as teacher
residency. It is the easier
pathway for candidates to
choose. So refining some of the
systems so that the it's
incentivizing high quality
preparation, I think.
would be the key.
Mr. Chair, you know, thank you.
I appreciate that.
These out of your department,
help us on what that ought to
look like, because I think there
are many of us that want to move
towards that, and I think
certainly the paid residencies,
but often people that want to
change to a career in education,
think, oh, anybody can be a
teacher. All I got to do is hug
and love kids, um, and don't
realize how difficult it really
is and how much we want it to be
a profession, please help us on
how we start to, to make those
in disincentivize the easy route
and
incentivize the proper
professional training routes.
Please let us know because we, I
think, want to support moving
towards that as we start to, to
do better at recruitment and
filling the pipeline and, you
know, all of those types of
things towards a professional
education.
Uh, teaching for instead of, you
know, just a warm body is good
enough.
Thank you.
Other questions?
Oh, Representative Roy Buck, how
are you?
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you very much for your
presentations. I have a, a, a
couple of questions. I'm not
sure that they're relevant in
this particular presentation,
but you can tell me so if not.
So, um,
I'm gonna start with the um
The PED New Mexico, uh EED
presentation on age.
6. I'm gonna refer to um
a.
Although it may not be directly.
Anyway, my question is this, um,
In, in, it may not be directly
related to this, but this is
where it sparked the question.
How, um,
Have you been able to gauge how
these programs
have been able to
have an impact on reducing our
teacher vacancy rate, uh, around
the state, uh, Mr. Chair
Representative, that is a great
question, um, I think as as
Annie has mentioned, I think
data is one of our biggest
struggles that we are currently
working to uh strategize around.
This is the first year that we
are collecting vacancy data from
our LEAs, um, that will be a
little bit more real time than
the data that the sore report
has been able to provide, and
we're also working on
identifying and collecting the
correct indicators so that we
can see exactly how these
vacancies are being, uh, filled,
but it is definitely a work in
progress.
So thank you and and I, I kind
of suspected that because it's
early on. However, we've had
this teacher vacancy rate.
Problem for many years. We've
done everything we can, so we're
gonna look at uh return on
investment.
Particularly, um, to, to help
determine the continuation.
I know this will come up. So,
um,
And then the second part to that
one question is,
Do we have any idea yet in terms
of
Uh, how many in the path this
pathway have been
Picked up by our um school
districts around the state, or
is it too soon to determine that
right now.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative, I
just want to make sure I
understand the question. So how
many of the
Educators, um, are going
through, um, not necessarily
through, but after they, well,
and, and it may be too soon to
determine because they're going
through these pathways of
professional development, and
you indicated there were several
um components to that.
And so I'm wondering if
The
If there have been any hires by
the Independent school districts
of our educators that are going
through these pathways. Sorry, I
didn't phrase it correctly.
Thank you very much for
clarifying, um, so that is one
thing that we're also working on
that completer data and tracking
through their careers to see how
retention is, uh, impacted. We
don't, we do know that um the
majority of people who have
completed residency so far are
still.
Serving in New Mexico classrooms
and districts. Um, we don't, I
think, have because of um data
inconsistencies. We don't have
exact numbers, um, and that's
part of what we're, I think,
working on in terms of
indicators and the right
tracking mechanisms to be able
to see that.
Thank you. So that would be part
of our attempt to continue along
this in this path or um to see
how we can further incentivize
um the educators to continue and
then ultimately.
Uh, become part of our, our
teaching around the state. So
that, that's important, those
indicators that data is very
important for us because it will
help justify and answer all
those tough questions that we
get asked by our uh
Finance people, and then I have
just one more um.
Mr. Chair.
I'm so, as we all know, we have
quite a challenge because of the
legal lawsuit, the lawsuits
around the state for failing
our, our students, particularly
our poor communities of color,
students and what concerns me is
that
If we're not um reinforcing.
The what was substantially
described in the lawsuit, there
was a huge section in the
lawsuit that directed itself to
what we needed to do in terms of
educators.
In the classroom.
Um, being culturally and
linguistically relevant
themselves, but also providing
that curriculum. I'm wondering
if there's any
Curriculum that you are already
um using in the teacher
preparation, in the preparation
part of it that speaks directly
to
Culturally relevant and
linguistically relevant
education. That's part one, and
then I have one final part of
that.
questions.
Yes, so Mr. Chair
Representative, that is um
definitely part of the review
process and how educator prep
programs are reviewed. Um, it is
an element that's looked at um
through in, in the site visit
and accountability review
rubric, um, we are ensuring that
those state priorities around
culturally in the real and uh
cultural linguistic relevant
education are, are addressed and
met through their educator prep,
um, pathways. And that is the
primer and, and in the
program approval as when an at
prep program gets initially
approved.
Thank you and, and that I'm
assuming, um, Mr. Chair, that
that includes our bilingual dual
language uh preparation as well,
teacher educator training.
It does, but there's definitely
more room room for more
pathways, I think, and more
preparation programs with that
focus. Then Mr. Chair, that
brings me to my final point
relevant to this line of
question, and that is how um are
you then integrating.
Um, this professional
development educator,
apprenticeship training, all of
what you've just described with
our universities.
Um, teacher preparation,
bilingual dual preparation
programs. How are they
integrated? How are you working
together? How are you avoiding
um duplication, but in fact,
using enhancement.
Strategies versus duplicating
strategies.
Thank you for your question, Mr.
Chair Representative. Um, that
is part of what the community of
practice that residency has been
working through for the past
couple of years has really
focused on in recognizing that
there's specialization and um
specific things that each unique
program can provide and wanting
the programs and their local
LEAs to work collaboratively in
residency design and criteria to
ensure that that co-teaching
year in that clinical practice.
This experience is really a line
to the competencies, um, for
those specific programs and
those specific specialties, um,
that need to exist in
classrooms. And this, Mr. Chair,
this will be um you'll be
assessing, evaluating all of
these as they go along, I'm
assuming that's gonna be part of
the rubric and all, OK, so, and
I forgot, Mr. Chair, I did have
one other question for the
golden apple, uh, foundation,
um, uh, presentation.
And thank you for that
presentation. Um,
So,
The mere fact that your name is
Golden Apple Foundation implies
that the foundation takes a
proactive role in raising funds.
Um, and so I'm curious to, um,
To understand if you have this
information.
What other funds received as a
foundation, what is the ratio
between the funds you raise and
those that have been received,
um, from the state or another
public uh monies.
Mr. Chair Representative, so we
do receive private funding, but
many of our funders, uh,
described the continuation of
our funding dependent on.
State funding as well, they
would prefer that our funding is
also braided, uh, this year, of
course, because we didn't
receive funding from the state,
uh, we have had to rely more
heavily on private funding, but
typically we would like that to
be a lower ratio, you know, only
60% of our funding a little bit
closer to that. Uh, so that we
can sustain long term and uh
Mr. Chair and Representative, if
I could also address, you know,
back to the curriculum with
culturally relevant curriculum
that is one of the major areas
that Golden Apple addresses
every single summer, so our
scholars receive that
professional development up to 5
years in a pretty intensive
manner.
Thank you. And, and you raised,
uh, you caused me to raise
another question real quick. So
the idea is to leverage the
funds that you are receiving, so
the more we give, perhaps the
more you'll leverage private in
the private sector and in your
fundraising um capacities,
correct, Mr. Chair
Representative, yes, that is
the, the hope is that we we
would have a better balance to
continue the work here in New
Mexico. That is always our goal
as well as a state is that we're
looking to
encourage more of that
leveraging, and so it becomes so
that we can spread the money
around a little bit more, uh,
wisely, but it has to be
sustainable on your end in terms
of the private. So then, um,
have you reached out and, and,
and I know several um students
that have gone on from
undergraduate to graduate, and
then now pursuing their PhDs.
Through um state efforts, some
in Texas, some in Colorado, some
in Arizona, none from New
Mexico, but with the support of
major foundations such as the um
Who's the Microsoft guy?
Um,
It went blank, somebody, anyway,
yeah, the Bill Gates Foundation,
they're they're big on.
funding individuals but also
programs.
Such as all of these, the
private, public connections and
um and how the scholars, the
whole scholars program. Have you
at all gone after any or any of
those funds directly or have any
of the scholars been encouraged
to go after it. I'm, we're
getting ready to um to go, well,
I don't know if we're gonna be
able to go given my situation,
but um one of our family
members is graduating with a PhD
and that person has that
individual has been a Bill
Gates, um, recipient since
She was, um, targeted. I, I
don't know, targeted, but
selected from high school,
trapped from high school.
through her undergraduate
graduate, all of her pursuits,
and it's a, it's a wonderful
program that she's in, and it's
in science and technology
developing a new autism, uh, a
new program that will assist um
children.
With autism to pursue certain
educational and developmental
skills on their own through this
technology that she developed.
So it's an incredibly um
Great program. So I'm interested
in knowing whether in that and
Bill Gates is not the only
foundation. I think there are
about 7 that she herself sought
out that our huge um foundation
support for these kinds of
golden apple foundation
programs.
So, Mr. Chair Representative, so
of course, Golden Apple is
always looking for opportunities
for funders right now we do not
have any of those major national
funders, but as far as providing
resources for our current
scholars, uh, I'm one of his
positions is to provide
Any and all resources so that
our scholars are successful and
able to persist through college
to eventually get to that, uh,
residency program because as we
know oftentimes students decide
they're going into education
early on and after the first
year they decide to leave the
education program or change
career paths. So the idea behind
our program is the persistence
in education specifically so
that they can get to that.
and we don't lose more than
half. And of course, uh, so that
the residency program.
Can uh be more successful.
Thank you, thank you very much
for your presentations and I'm
gonna be very interested in
tracking success of all.
Success of all of our programs.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Her care.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. Thank all
three of you. Um, just a couple
of questions. If you're an
educator fellow.
Uh, and your district hires you.
Am I correct in understanding
that that 25,000 salary and
benefits is paid for through PED
then?
Um, Mr. Chair Representative,
yes, you are correct. So we, um,
currently work with Region 9 and
we reimbursed the LEAs and the
districts based on their ed
fellows and their salaries and
benefit costs.
Thank you. And Mr. Chair and,
and Phoebe, is there any um
A number of districts do have
them.
I understand some districts have
a lot more than others.
As it's, as the program becomes
more known, are there gonna be
any quota type situations.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative,
that's a great question. I think
that now that we are
transitioning um to hopefully
recurring state funding, um, and
thinking about high need areas
and our recruitment and
selection priorities. I think
we're going to need to think
critically about, um, you know,
how things are distributed
equitably to ensure that we are
really, um, you know, as, um, as
representatives mentioned were
really working with vacancy data
to make strategic recruitment
decisions and.
Um, use these programs
effectively.
Thank you. And then, Mr. Chair,
we have a grow your own program,
which is scholarships for
existing EAs, and they can also
be school secretaries, people
who worked with kids and and
decide now I do want to teach.
For that person,
Are they becoming, are they
being converted to fellows. I, I
know there's been some issues
with funding, the funding comes
out of higher education
department, but how does that
fit into
There's, uh
Mr. Chair Representative, um, so
the way that I'm understanding
it is there's, it's one of the
many scholarship opportunities
that had existed, um, that could
be stacked with other uh
scholarship opportunities, and
then those were primarily used
to support tuition costs, and
then the educated fellows
program would then supplement
the living costs by providing
the living wage and um earning
what you learn kind of models so
that they all come together, um,
to
as one cohesive system. I think
that depending on the
institutions, some of those
opportunities may have been
better known about or less known
about. I know that the teacher
preparation affordability
scholarship, um, is one of the
primary ones that's getting used
to support our candidates, um,
and I, I, I'm, we don't have the
data to really show what
Candidates are accessing and how
they're stacking these
resources, which would be a
really wonderful thing to look
at, um, in the future, um, to
really see what's being
effective and utilized the most.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. Thanks,
Phoebe. Please do that
homework.
And the apprenticeship model is
new. I mean, that's new money
and new program.
Am I correct in understanding
that you'll actually make a new
program.
Based on their apprenticeship
source funding and the chair
representative, um, it's a
complicated question. So,
The way we are envisioning it is
that um the registered teaching
apprenticeship gets registered
through Workforce Solutions
through our state-sponsored
office, um, as a, as a way that
districts could then hire. So
right now, teacher residency
funds all flow through our ed
prep programs and they are paid
through the ED prep programs on
like through the bursar's
office. Um, the apprenticeship
model would allow
to higher the resident and pay
them through the district easier
and it would um it would also,
um,
It would also grade in
additional labor dollars that
we're not currently able to
braid in, although the clarity
around that would look different
for each candidate. Um,
So it, it, the amount of
additional funding that it would
bring in, it looks a little bit
different depending on the
candidate.
individual circumstances.
for that, Mr. Charis, and I was
closed by saying I am a product
of an unpaid teacher residency
from the pilot with the
University of New Mexico and
Albuquerque Public Schools.
And they do work, and I stayed
another 20 years, so obviously
they're good. Thank all three of
you.
All the work
Represent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for your presentations. I'm
I'm curious, can you remind me
of the vacancy rate we have for
teachers now in uh New Mexico.
approximately 750 based on the
sore report, recent data, um,
But I think that that data has a
lot of um
Things that maybe aren't
reported including um how many
of those teachers are, um,
teacher of record models and
coming from alternative
preparation programs, um,
including, um,
things where, you know, there's,
there's, um,
Um, created staffing models and
things that aren't reporting
some of the vacancies that do
actually exist as well. Mr.
Thank you for that, um.
Uh, Phoebe, I, I appreciate
that.
Can you
All of you give me the cost per
year of each of these programs
of work per participant.
representative, so the cost for
golden apple scholar is 5000 per
year, and of course that covers
a scholar receives a stipend
every year that increases,
starts out at 2000 their first
year increases by 500 every year
after that.
Caused also goes to your housing
and food at the university that
is hosting our program and of
course the instructors.
Thank you.
Chair representatives, the cost
for the Eellows program, uh, per
year is based on the salary and
benefits primarily, and then
some additional funding for paid
leave. It usually comes to
between 35 to 45,000 per ed
fellow per year and the cost per
resident is approximately
40,000. That includes the mentor
stipends and the residents on
ram for high school. What, what
does that cost?
So right now, um, PED is not
funding, uh, the on-ramps for
high school, those are primarily
funded through um educators
rising and outside programs like
Golden Apple.
OK. And uh Mr. Chair, just one
final question uh.
Um
Oh yeah.
2/3 of our superintendents are
new.
So I'm wondering how is that
impacting your programs, um, you
know, they have a lot on their
plates.
When they step up and, you know,
maybe.
Doing teacher residency isn't
the first on their list, but
I'm, I'm just curious how that's
working.
For you.
Mr. Chair Representative, thank
you for the question. So I
think, uh, leadership definitely
matters. Um, I think strong
leadership is impacting uh
teacher retention in many ways.
Um, we are currently working on
a number of things including a
principal residency pilot to
increase principal retention,
um, and some um licenger um
And admin licenger reform that
would include stronger
preparation for superintendents
and principals, um, to really
ensure that they have the
competencies they need to be
able to lead school improvement
efforts and do that work. But it
does, it does trickle down and
um Mr. Chair and, and, um,
Presenters, I, I, you know, we
all know that.
principles, keep good teachers
and good superintendents keep
good principles, so it, it is a
multiplying effect.
Uh, how we, how we deal with all
the levels of leadership.
Uh, in our schools, and I, I
know you were tasked with, you
know, getting more teachers in,
so.
Um, but at the same time, if we
don't improve our health.
You know, everybody needs help
in their practice, so it helped
principals and uh
superintendents at the same
time.
We won't build a strong
workforce. Thank you.
Thank you.
emotion.
Under, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and,
and I just had a couple of
questions. Um,
For for pets, um.
I'm, I'm kind of trying to
figure out why golden apples
having become to us and ask
directly for money.
that
that program into their budget.
Thank you, Mr. Chair
Representative. I can provide a
little bit of the history,
um,
Senator, apologies. Um.
So we um
Beginning, I think there was in
22, 23, there was specific
funding set aside for
recruitment.
That included uh um special
appropriation of $1 million
Prior to my joining the
department, that was awarded,
um, in its entirety to Golden
apple the year um after that,
there was um some different
decisions that were made to
support recruitment with some
multifaceted approaches, um,
including marketing campaigns,
um, websites, um, and, uh, an
RFP that um this Lucero
mentioned that went out and so
golden Apple was awarded the 22
250,000 and when the clinical
funds were moved
Into the, the growth fund this
past year. Uh, there is no
longer a specialized
recruitment, um, area of those
funds. We did actually um
appropriate or um encumber all
of those funds to our educator
prep programs and support of
residency and student teaching
stipends this year, so we
anticipate that most of those
funds will be used in actual um
for those statements to support
those clinical practice
programs.
The growth of the programs, so
fun we anticipate those funds
continuing to be used to support
those stipends.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and um
And you say your last name is
and check, but don't worry about
it.
Let me check.
Um, so,
You
So you have 20 million in the
the rub fund.
And you think all of that will
be used.
For the sips.
was all used last year.
No, it was not so, um, when we
did not have recurring funding
recruitment.
Um, was incredibly, uh,
challenging because programs
didn't know how many, uh, they
could recruit for until the
appropriation was made.
Um, so many were airing on under
recruiting and over-recruiting
so that they didn't make
promises they couldn't keep. Now
that we have the recurring
funding for the growth fund, we
recruitment efforts have amped
up considerably and they are
able to recruit appropriately
given that we know we have the
$20 million for both student
teaching placements and
residency placements. Um, so
that is why we've had a
reverting balance in previous
years. Um, since this is the
first year of that, we do
anticipate some reverting
balances out.
All the funds have been
encumbered based on the um
applications of the EP prep
programs have put in, but they,
um, based on timing and the
The way the application timing
and recruitment session works
with the um with the RFA. They
overestimate their numbers
slightly, um, and so we do
anticipate we will have some
reverting funds this year. We do
actually have a, a, a request
that we're working with our
policy department to see if
those clinical practice funds
could go back into the clinical
practice bucket, could revert
back into that every year to
kind of give that ability for um
for for the recruitment and
ensure that our program.
can recruit to their greatest
ability, um, and make sure that
we have enough funds to support
the growth that we anticipate in
all of these programs. So in FY
26, I anticipate us having um
Less reverting funds than we'll
have this year and going
forward, I anticipate that
number to drop considerably, um,
eventually with very little
reverting funds at all. Thank
you,
Mr. Chairs a little bit.
Odd
That, um, you're telling me
we're gonna have reverting
funds, you can't tell me an
amount.
But yet we're not funding.
Program that we funded for the
last couple of years, and now
that program's having to come to
us and ask us for a separate
allocation when you
You just sat there and said
we're gonna have reverting
funds.
That doesn't make sense to me.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Senator,
um, we, it
The challenge has been knowing
how many funds are going to
revert based on um
program communication and and um
you know, how many physicians
are actually funded, um, and
that's where I think that if we
There would be a certain time
frame that we probably would be
able to estimate that amount,
which is probably fairly soon.
Um, I think most of the
placements have been made. Um,
and if we knew that we could
kind of pull back and draw back
down those funds by a certain
date. We could make some later
funding decisions to probably
figure out other ways to utilize
those.
chairman just doesn't sound like
very.
Good.
We, we, we keep as the
legislature, I, I can't tell you
how much money we have
increased.
funding for education.
Um, it's more than doubled.
12 years I've been here.
Yeah.
We get re-earning funds.
We've got kids that
I cannot read it all in this
state.
While proficiency level.
Um
I who knows how much from the
presentation earlier, I have no
idea what Pet believes are
proficiency level is right now.
Um, because I like doctor, not
doctor, but I just promoted.
Senator Stewart's doctor, but
Um, like she said, um, you know,
what blood test is being used.
And never really did get a good
answer for that, and so, you
know, what are we
Determining, and yet we know.
Yeah
You know, about 23%.
students can read on grade
level.
But we're gonna revert funds.
Doctor,
I mean that.
I, I'll be honest with you, that
pisses me off.
Um, I do not like that at all.
We have a program that
seems to be pretty successful. I
would like to see a little bit
more.
Uh, data from them on.
On how successful it is.
But it seems to be pretty
successful. I know it has a lot
of sport.
Uh, from this group.
And yeah, we're gonna not fund
them.
And use it all in this other way
that
We don't know how successful it
is.
I, I think that's an issue.
Thank you
I'll just leave it at that.
Thank you, Mr. John.
getting promoted, Doctor
Stewart, representative brands,
congratulations on your
promotion.
I represent a lot.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, I just wanted to get some
clarification regarding the
growth fund. Um, so I don't
know, um,
If you can help us out, and I
think it so if you can help, I'm
just clarification Mr. chair on
the growth fund, as far as it's
as far as I understand it, it's
a pilot, it's treated as a pilot
project for over 3 years. So you
shouldn't have a reverting.
Um, amount this year, is that
correct? May I have some
clarification on that, Mr.
Chair.
Mr. Chair, I can, I can answer
that question.
Um
So yeah, I just, I just was just
checking the language to to
France's point. So any money
that's not spent in that
particular fiscal year, so the
growth fund is actually split up
between the three fiscal years,
this particular case is 20
million.
Whatever's not spend that 20
million on this specific.
Presidencies or clinical
practice refers to the growth.
OK, so, so the distribution then
remains in in increments, uh.
Divided by those 3 years, is
that correct? Mr. Chair
Representative, in this
particular case, there were $60
million appropriated for
clinical practice, over 20
million for each of the three
years, but it is spent in in
each fiscal year of that 20
reverts to the growth.
Thank you. Thank you for the
clarification. Thank you.
Thank you.
I don't have any other
questions. Thank you all so
much. I appreciate it.
go to your next presentation, so
have 5 in your binders.
Innovation zone.
They're bringing it.
Deputy secretary, Superintendent
of police, when you all are
ready.
Great. Good afternoon, um,
members of the LESC, um, this
afternoon we are here to discuss
and chat a little bit about
innovation zone work, um, and so
we'll go through the PE
Um portion of the presentation,
but then we do have
Superintendent Madrid and
Principal West, um, to discuss,
um, innovation zones in
practice, um, in Santa Rosa.
So, again, thank you for having
us. So when we think about
innovation zones, work, um,
innovation zones is a frame, um,
that brings together several
components of the college and
career readiness bureau's work.
Um, and so, uh, we know that,
um,
Innovation zones are schools
that create graduate profiles.
They um create commitment to
social emotional supports.
They create programs of study
that support their students
moving through career and
college readiness programming.
And innovation zones offer
work-based learning, as well as
working with partners in order
to um enable capstone projects
or culminating projects from
work-based learning.
I think this slide discusses
very much about what the college
and career readiness Bureau at
the New Mexico Department of
Education does. They are
A very large entity, so one of
the largest bureaus within the
agency and the mission of the
CCRB or the collagen career
readiness Bureau is to foster
development of a career
connected learning ecosystem.
That means that we work to
support opportunities that will
enable all students in New
Mexico.
To jump into the career of their
choosing, including
understanding their career
choices.
Knowing the pathways in order to
get there and gaining academic,
technical, and life skills that
they're going to need in order
to succeed.
This graphics how
CCRB implements the diverse
programming, focused mostly on
secondary schools, but all
working together to create that
ecosystem.
We know that no high school can
offer every possible opportunity
to their students, but they can
provide a system that provides
career exposure and exploration
as well as preparation and
advisement.
CCRB has many resources that
assist schools in the process,
and we have a career education
platform. We have the next step
platform, and we provide funds
for CTE programs of study.
Along with that, we also provide
technical guidance and coaching
as well as the technical
assistance needed and any
professional learning that may
be related to any of these
programs on this screen.
So, innovation zones, then is an
offshoot of the um
aforementioned graphic.
Innovation zones is now a next
framework that brings together
several components of CCRP's
work.
The school that creates a
graduate profile that reflects
their community's priorities.
Then using the graduate profile
to create career-connected
learning.
Next, it creates an in a
creation, the creation of an
innovation zone includes a
commitment to social and
emotional supports, not its
program, but there's a
fundamental aspect.
Of the school culture.
This approach to school
leadership. He's every voice
from every student and creates
an environment where every
learner knows that they belong
and that their goals can be
pursued.
Innovation zones identify CTE
programs of SETI that will
support students in thriving and
contributing to their community
after graduation.
CTE is embedded into core
academics, helping students
learn in context and to see how
their skills acquired in schools
are actually preparing for what
comes next.
Innovation zones offer student.
Work-based learning
opportunities that are
coordinated with CTE programs.
that are related to students'
individual career goals.
Innovation zones work with local
partners to enable this capstone
projects, so that the capstone
projects are meaningful to both
the student as well as the
community.
So, next slide, please,
innovation zones.
are really two distinct things.
One, we have our agency mission
and vision here, the definition
of what we believe that it is.
But I think even more
importantly,
The quote comes from one of our
participate participants in the
innovation zone work last year.
And that person said that
innovation zones facilitate
real-life experiences outside of
the classroom, ensuring the
educational journey honors the
students' diverse backgrounds
while equipping them with
practical real world skills.
That's what the work is about.
So, first introduced in 19 in
2022, that would have been great
as a means of applying local
wisdom for meeting local needs,
especially related to the
outcomes for student populations
named in the Yazi Martinez
lawsuit, as well as addressing
gaps in meeting the
demonstrations of competency
that were in place at the time.
Since FY 23, Innovation zone
funds have been a set aside from
house bill to appropriation for
CTE programming and equipment.
For the uh fiscal year 2425, the
minimum award to innovation
zones was $100,000. Participate
participants are now allocating
those funds as seen in the
chart. So there's professional
services, student work-based
learning wages, purchase
services, supplies and
materials, travel, and other
equipment that may be needed
there.
Next slide demonstrates where
all of the innovation zones are
located across the state.
CCRB prides itself on the great
geographic distribution of the
participants from around the
state.
Some of the program highlights
from 2324, demonstrate.
The good work that is happening
in our schools.
So
We currently, um, or excuse me,
for the 2324 school year, there
were 22,449 students, 67% of
those students were in
work-based learning or paid
internships.
was a 324% increase in the
number of internships from year
one.
And looking at our qualitative
data, 94% of the respondents,
um, agreed that work-based
learning should be a part of
every student's experience
during high school.
Um, we know that there were 958
students that participated in
Capstone projects, and we know
that every single student said
that capstones were an important
part of their high school
trajectory.
So, um, we, uh, here have some
examples of some schools from
around the state that are doing
really great work.
We know that there are currently
51 schools that are
participating in innovation
zones.
And this first school that we
would like to highlight is last
Moana's Charter School in Las
Cruces, as one example of an of
an innovation zone school.
They have increased student
engagement, attendance, and
enrollments from year one till
now.
There are 24 students that are
working in work-based learning
opportunities across 10
different industry um
participants and partners.
They've added new career
technical student organizations
and the CTOs or career technical
organization support students as
they are um learning in their
work-based learning experience
or internships.
Then the school now based on
student interest, will be adding
3 new programs for next school
year.
We go through the next slides,
um, Alan McGordo is our next
school.
Um, many, uh, many students, uh,
who, um, participated in our uh
innovation zone survey reflected
great enthusiasm for the program
itself and also the partners
that have engaged in this work.
Students in Alamogordo are
participating in agriculture.
They're raising and selling
produce, fish and quail, and I
actually believe that Senator
Soles asked that question the
other day, or no, no, maybe it
was someone else, sorry. There
was a question about, are we
doing livestock? Um, it was at
LFC, excuse me, and are we doing
livestock in any of our um
activities um that we had, and
this is one example of how that
is happening on a small scale.
There's automotive offering
detailing service for staff and
other folks in the community,
welding where students are
creating custom arts and the
graduate profile in Alamogordo
is being pushed down into the
middle as well as the elementary
schools.
Next, we have hobbs. This
beautiful brand new building,
um, is a state of the art
building where students can
participate in hands-on learning
around the following career
pathways, just to name a few.
Energy, manufacturing, and
transportation.
Cosmetology and culinary arts
are also included in the brand
new building.
And the next slide, the new
America School in Las Cruces is
using the innovation zone work
to engage and re-engage learners
that are over 22 years of age.
Next slide is health leadership
high school located in
Albuquerque.
Health leadership high school
provides social emotional
learning in every opportunity
that they can.
They also um offer
career-focused hands-on
project-based learning for all
students that attend the school.
The next slide is the work that
we're doing in Mescalero Apache.
Um, at Mescalero Apache High
School. It is one of our
partnering BIE schools that is
focusing on post-secondary
readiness and gainful employment
opportunities for all students.
These um pictures, I know they
might be difficult to see, but
are some of the examples of
charcuterie boards, charcuterie
boards are all the rage right
now, but the students at the
high school are making them with
local motifs, um, in order to do
that. Mescalero Apache is also
Using an innovative um uh
schedule that allows for 4, days
of classroom instruction and
then the 5th day or Fridays are
for their career exploration
days.
Um, and we also um have seen
students are returning to
school, um, from some of the
surrounding um districts. So,
um, as we continue through um
the innovation zone work and as
we look to expand and how it's
supporting students. We want to
um highlight some of these,
these great programs that are
taking place.
Um, the innovation zone work has
been in the pilot, um, and so we
have turned around to be
reflective and thoughtful about
what our next steps are.
Our goal is to keep the best
practices and improve on aspects
um of uh improving student
outcomes for all and to more
effectively correlate the
outcomes that are related to
student graduation.
We also want to make sure that
this this initiative is scalable
or scale up a whole in some
cases.
Next slide.
Thank you.
So, our first step in being
reflective is to make sure that
all programs are aligned with
graduate profiles, innovation
zones are intended to align
their instructional program and
their assessment framework with
the local graduate profile.
Currently 42 out of the 51 sites
have completed that graduate
profile.
Forward, all applicants for
competitive innovation zone
programs must have completed
their graduation profile. House
Bill 71 now requires that every
district and state authorized
charter school has uh has a
graduate profile.
CCRP is working to create
standards for graduate profiles
and will allow us to bring in
partners that will work one on
one with the LEAs in order to
create a profile that meets the
new standards.
step.
We want to align the local goals
to the New Mexico Department of
Education Agency goals.
Innovation zones initially
provided a means for applying
local wisdom to close the gaps
in meeting the demonstration of
competency.
However, with the passage of
House Bill 171. We have
eliminated demonstrations of
competency.
But we have just, we have now
identified a discrete set of
goals that align to the
fundamental purpose of public of
the public education department
and especially of the college
and career readiness Bureau.
Moving forward, all applicants
will select one or more agency
goals as one of their IC goals,
improved graduation rates,
improved attendance, and
improved academic proficiency.
The application will also
demonstrate how funding requests
and programmatic components
directly align to their
self-selected goal.
I explicitly identifying a
purpose and more carefully
aligning to the agency's
strategic plan, we can more
effectively determine whether we
have met our targets and more
accurately correlate the
programming to outcomes.
Next step.
We want to implement the
innovation zone program with
Fidelity.
Innovation zones need to be
ready, engaged, and supported.
Moving forward, participants
will implement all components of
innovation zones based on a
three-year strategic plan, and
these components will include
high quality CTE programs of
study, work-based learning,
community capstone projects
aligned to credit, flexible
course design and master
scheduling. Next step plans via
the level all platform and
integrated social emotional
learning support.
s
Our next step is to make sure
that we have an annual
performance reports. We will
begin collecting and evaluating
both quantitative as well as
qualitative data.
Currently, we are collecting
qualitative data only.
By measuring outcomes, we will
be better responsive to our
legislative partners, educators,
and taxpayers, and to our
students who are the recipients
of this work.
We want to be responsive and
make an impact on student
outcomes, specifically
graduation rates and college and
career readiness.
Our next step is to provide
evidence-based frameworks. The
open-ended nature of innovation
zones in the past has led to
experiences of varying quality
and relevance.
The message from the field has
led to requests for more clear
and definitive guidance for
innovation zone schools. We will
identify expectations for
work-based learning, create
standards for the capstone
projects and produce any further
support for the framework coming
from our industry partners.
Next step is just to sustain
funding.
Launching the innovation zone
initiative has created a space
for schools to begin
transforming the high school
experience. However, we have
heard that LEAs and charters
struggle to be as innovative as
they can.
Imagine because we cannot make a
commitment to multiple year
funding for them.
So to be innovative with
scheduling or innovative and
building out a career pathway,
it would be um helpful to have a
sustainable funding source.
Well, the program has been
fortunate to have increased
funding available from House
Bill 2 over the last 3 years.
True competitive, um,
Innovation will only come with
recurring funding for new
cohorts.
Moving forward, we hope to make
a 3-year award, to which
participants can align their
3-year strategic plan, budget
and begin implementing
programming.
Finally, we want to express that
innovation zones are not just
schools that check a box to
implement a variety of unrelated
programs by itself, CTE is not
an innovation. Work-based
learning is not an innovation.
Capstone projects are not an
innovation, but together and
combined, they are.
An innovation zone happens when
a school thoughtfully
coordinates independent
programming and other
components.
To create a career connected
learning ecosystem that is
responsive to the needs of the
community, guided by the goal of
improved outcomes for students.
That includes the opportunity to
thrive and to contribute to
their own communities after
graduation.
What excites us is the potential
to assist schools that are
willing to commit to innovating
and to improving their
curriculum with embedded
academics and CTE.
We want to stop calling it
vocational education and other
electives. We want to provide
modern hands-on relevant and
applicable instructional
approaches.
We want to see schools, work
with local employers to develop
paid internship opportunities
for both, for students and
summer externships for teachers
to learn from industry partners
and bring new skills back into
the classroom.
that students are earning
industry that credentials that
really matter and participating
in competitive events that build
technical and leadership skills
only excites us more.
As we continue to learn about
schools that have created
flexible master's schedules that
allow students to be on site
with their employers during the
school day. We consider that to
be truly innovative.
Seeing more CTE completers in
our data validation snapshots
because schools have selected a
line dual credit and work-based
learning opportunities makes us
really happy.
We are looking for a changed
approach to school leadership
that doesn't see personalized
supports as just a program, but
as a fundamental assumption in
what school can be and what
students need in order to be
successful.
These schools hear every voice.
They clear barriers that inhibit
engagement and they engage
students.
These are innovation zones, and
we welcome schools ready who are
who are ready to take the leap
and push their own imaginations
for innovation that improves
outcomes for all students.
This afternoon we also have
Superintendent Madrid as well as
Principal West to highlight some
of the innovation zone work that
is taking place in Santa Rosa,
and I'll turn it over to
superintendent method.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, it's an honor
being in front of you once again
and just like we hope to do uh
2.5 years ago in Santa Rosa, um,
it's good to see you all again.
2.5 years ago, um, when you
toured our high school at the
end of the LESC meetings over
there.
Um, we've come a long way since
then.
Uh, it's been a journey, uh, but
it's also, uh, been a journey of
innovation for Santa Rosa, and
I'm gonna talk about the
boarding part of the innovation
zones that comes from the
central office portion of it,
the hiring.
Uh, the money portion of it, of
how we do those types of things.
And then Miss West will give you
the, the actual meat and
potatoes and the fun stuff that
that the students do, um, but
before I start, I, I, I
want to say this has been a
really life changing for a lot
of students in Santa Rosa.
Um, one of the things that that
warms my heart the most when,
when I see a student that's a
junior or a senior.
Go through some of these
programs, whether it be welding,
uh, HVAC or electrical, um,
They get that gleam in their eye
when they know, hey, I know what
I'm gonna do with my future now.
A lot of times, that's a tough
age for kids when they're 18 to
about 23, 24.
And they're lost, and they have
no sense of direction.
Um, but,
Now, with these programs in
place.
Kids know what they want to do,
and they may not do that for the
rest of their life, but at least
they have some direction.
And they know what they're gonna
do, and they have a little bit
of skills, artwork.
Based learning programs that are
providing them skills to do
interviews.
To learn how to look people in
the eye, to talk to them, um, it
it it it really is life changing
for a lot of these kids, and
it's really warm as a
superintendent and it's hard to
know.
That we're sending these kids
out a little more prepared to
face uh a close society
sometimes.
When you are 18 to 24 and you
really have no skills and you
don't know what you're gonna do,
right?
Um
So some of the things that from
the central office and and one
of the things
I'm really known for in my
district is that I hire really
good people.
Uh, I hire people that are
smarter than me.
And I get the heck out of their
way and I let them do their job.
I really provide a lot of
support from the central office
portion of it. Uh, sometimes
I'll have to ring them in and
kind of redirect, but, you know,
that's few and far between,
right? Um.
We won't get into that today
though. That's a a story for
another time.
But, you know, so one of the
things that, that we've had to
do that that are kind of
innovative from the central
office portion of it is, is
tiring, right?
So
We came up with an idea or, or
um of how are we going to staff?
You know, HVAC positions,
electrical positions in a small
rural school like Santa Rosa
that doesn't need a full-time
teacher.
For those, right? We don't have
the the student body that would
need 6 to 7 classes a day for uh
HVAC teacher, for example.
So what I came up with is, you
know, first of all, these are
hard, these are hard people to
find, but what you do is you
also bring them into coaching
and things that they really
like, and then you get them
involved with the school.
And then all of a sudden they're
like, hey, well, you know, maybe
I want to work for the school.
So I was able to hire an HVAC
certified technician.
Who was coaching football and
baseball for us already. Uh, I
was able to bring him on. He
teaches about 3 to 4 periods a
day, and then the rest of the
time he services our HVAC
systems, uh, in school district.
So that saves money on the front
end and it saves money on the
back end. And then on top of
that, it also gives
unfortunately or fortunately in
this case, we have old schools.
Uh, that have, obviously have a
bunch of old HVAC systems, old
electrical, uh, so what this
provides opportunity for is for
these students to get out there
in the afternoons and do a
work-based learning internship
program right in our school for
the uh help.
and I say help lightly, right?
They get to observe shadow, uh
learn the skills that this HAC
person is doing.
You know, uh, obviously when
it's safe, they'll get to do
some of the work with the under
the tutelage of the guidance of
the HVAC instructor, but they're
doing it right in our campuses,
and, you know, we're paying them
out of the innovation zones, um,
so that's 11 way to do things.
Another way is just to recruit
people. I have a, an electrical
person who works for the Corps
of Engineers, but he's really
interested in this type of work,
so he's coming in and working a
couple of periods a day, uh, a
couple of days out of the week,
I think for.
A day he comes in and teaches
his classes and is getting these
students who really involved in
electrical and it's in its
infancy right now, the
electrical part, but it is
something that is we're really
excited about and the students
are really excited about um
moving.
forward. So
I think
Before I turn over to Miss West,
one of the things that I do want
to talk about.
worries me quite a bit about
this, uh, innovation zones in
the program and, and uh deputy
secretary Dubell talked about
this, is, is the sustainability
of the program, you know, it
always worries me, you know,
when we start building these
programs that we have the right
things in place, um.
You know, and it's no secret
that in rural New Mexico are um
But
are enrollment is continuously
dropping, right? I mean, people
are moving out, uh, the birth
rates are lower than they used
to be particularly what's
plaguing Santa Rosa is, we have
big classes in our high schools
that are graduating 50 to 55
kids, and we have small classes
in kindergarten that are coming
in 30 to 35 kids, so there's a
difference right there and then
not tell me one thing it's pers,
right, that are, are people
aren't having as many kids. So,
um, anyway, so one of the things
That worries me is that should
the funding go away, then I'd
have to as superintendent make
some really tough decisions.
You have to kind of program or,
you know, kind of teacher to try
to balance our budget and what
if we have recurring funding or
we had a year to year finding
that we know it was gonna be
there. We could plan ahead and
obviously continue and um, you
know, fund and support these
programs. And the final thing
I'll say is, you know,
oftentimes, um, we hear
From legislators, um,
You know
Uh, maybe the executive branch
that, you know, we're pumping
in, you guys are you all are
pumping in a lot of money and
you are, we, we definitely agree
with that, and we appreciate
that.
lot of times, you know, it's
said that, you know, we're not
getting bang for our buck for
that, that amount of money that
you, you're you're putting in.
Um, this is something that I can
argue that I tend to disagree
with is that this is money that
is well spent, and this is money
that you are getting bang for
your buck, as you'll see here in
Santa Rosa are attendance rates
have uh seriously just dropped
completely.
Due to innovation zones and the
innovative things that students
are doing now they want to come
to school, they're engaged, um,
they're happy to be there. Uh,
so, you know, I, I would just,
uh, you know, implore you guys
to consider, um, you know,
Uh, the funding for this year to
year and um you know, I'll turn
it over to Miss West now, but
thank you for letting me present
today. Appreciate it.
Uh, Mr. She and the members of
the committee. My name is Sharon
West, um, principal at Santa
Rosa High School, and what I
want to bring to you, he's
giving you at the bank is.
For those of you that came last
year, I wish you would come back
again because I'd like to show
you my campus, still the same
old building that's falling
apart and yes, needs to be
replaced, but that hasn't
stopped us. Um, we realized that
funding is always a tentative
thing and by the end of this,
you'll understand we do also
have plans to try to sustain it
even without funding because we
believe in the program that
much, as does our community, and
I can't tell you how many phone
calls I get from parents saying
thank you, you have no idea what
it means when he takes home a
paycheck.
Because it might pay our rent
this month or it might pay the
electric bill. So it is truly
life changing as he spoke and
hopefully will continue. With
that, I have included just for
the record, I had 20 slides and
she made me cut it down to 8, so
you only got part of it. Go on
record for that, um, but you can
flip through those. I do want to
direct you to the first one,
which is where our, our work
began. We knew what we wanted to
do, but more importantly, we
wanted to know what our students
needed. That is probably our
biggest push for our second year
in innovative zone is listed.
listening more uh readily and
being accepting of what our
students want, not what we think
they need, but what they think
they need, whether it be in
terms of social emotional
reports, but what do you want to
be? We need to stop asking the
question, what do you want to be
when you grow up? They don't
have a clue.
They have no idea, but yet we
keep asking that question. I
even catch myself and I have to
read things like, what interests
you? Where do you want to go? Or
let me show you a plethora of
things that we can do for you,
and then you decide, which we'll
talk about here with some of our
innovativeness. So prior to, uh,
let me just start with this, and
he alluded to this a little bit.
Yes, he does rein me in, not too
often, just every once in a
while, um, but I think there are
a lot of people that will tell
you I'm a little bit crazy.
I take it as a compliment. I
think good teachers are a little
bit crazy.
Because they're crazy to do this
work. It's hard, it's in the
spotlight, everybody has an
opinion of how we should do it,
and so it is very, very hard and
challenging to keep those
teachers in the classroom, and
we don't tell them enough,
they're doing marvelous things
in the state of New Mexico. I
don't care about being 50th. You
need to come see my students and
tell them their 50th cause
they're the last ones that would
believe you because they're
doing great things, so with that
being said, we listen to our
teachers. What do you need?
For us to make this change to
being innovative and different
because what I am not is insane.
Insanity is doing the very thing
you know doesn't work for the
last 100 years, and we keep
doing it.
So let's do something different,
something that our students
truly believe will help them be
better placed and listening to
it. So on the screen, you'll see
we created our graduate profile.
This is what we would like our
Santa Rosa graduates to be able
to do when they leave our high
school. Notice not one time does
it say they're going to have a
passing score on a test.
That's on purpose. Yes, we want
that to do it. I'm doing the
happy dance. I couldn't get to
the man fast enough to tell him
that 29 of my
Pre pre-algebra students who did
not qualify for Alge this year.
are now entering algebra because
they passed with a 70, 70% of
the class will now move into
algebra. Why? We had the
innovation to say our kids
aren't ready, what are we gonna
do? Are we gonna keep sending
them down this path to fail, or
are we gonna stop? Say, let's do
a little pre-algebra, then test
them again at semester and see
if we can get to it. Is it going
to slow them down a little bit
for graduation? Hopefully not.
Pushing him through would be
ludicrous. What do we need? We
listen to students. What did
they say? We need some remedial,
we need some of those things, so
we listened again, we listened
to our parents, we invited them
in meeting after meeting after
meeting to ask our community,
what do you want our graduates
to look like?
This is what we developed.
Each, each semester, all of our
students go through the rubrics
and they self-assess themselves
along with their advisor.
They're each part of a
community, and they do a
self-assessment. It's really
hard to read, but it's one of
the rubrics for each of them.
Freshman and sophomore who did
not participate in work-based
learning or internships at this
point, unless they're in your
peer tutoring, I have to do the
3 on the right.
Juniors and seniors have to be
complete rubrics for each of
them, so they have a total of 7.
They weren't happy about it, but
they did assess it as did their
teachers who got to do them as
well.
We spent money in our innovative
zone to train our teachers. We
sent them to professional
development to some of the best
professional development,
work-based learning, innovative
schools, people doing things
differently so that our teachers
knew what was out there, they
didn't have to reinvent the
wheel, like Doctor Bell said,
um, it's not innovative all by
itself, it's how you put all
those pieces together that makes
it truly innovative and having
the permission to do that, which
I give kudos to Mr. Madrid. He
does. He gives me a lot of rope
to be able to try new things,
believes in it.
And only once in a while,
forse wrote back with that, we
went from basically one, we'll
take 2, we had our traditional
dual enrollment college ready
and we had welding, especially
coming out of um COVID, we
really just had welding as a
CTE. We have a business program,
but again, it wasn't full
fledged on. We have now
developed 7. We have 7 different
pathways where our kids can go.
We even have, if you truly
looked into all the innovative,
we'd have even more of that, for
example,
cosmetology.
Cosmetology is not a pathway
that I'm going to develop at
Santa Rosa High School. Those
kids are going to have to be
part of the business membership
as an entrepreneur, but it's
what they want. This year, I had
7 kids that tell me they want to
be cosmetologists. I don't have
a cosmetologist program. So what
do I do? I can't just send them
if you go to Luna, you have to
go to Luna. They can't get that
done in one day. So what do I
do? I find a a community partner
who's willing to come on board
and let those kids do work-based
learning with them. They're
having the time of their life. I
wish I'd gotten to sooner. I
might have looked younger, but
they
only done it once this year. So
it's again finding those
partners that are able that
believe in that same mission or
willing to help and work with
your kids. With that, you've got
to have changes. You have to
have changes to a master
schedule. Is it hard? You bet.
Our school doesn't even know
what, sometimes they're like,
what do you wanna do? Like, I
wanna set the schedule. I want
all of my freshmen to experience
8 different career pathways.
I want to call the class
introduction to careers. Why? I
need that for Perkins funding.
But what I need is a section of
HVAC because well you'll be in
the licensure. I have a license,
plumber. He's got an eternal
life. I've got a plumber. I've
got an electrician. I have a
welder. I can do that part. I'm
not worried about it, but we're
gonna have to change your
schedule so that it does. So all
of my freshmen.
Go to 2 different classes for 2
hours.
Each 9 weeks.
So on Monday and Tuesday live
Johnny goes to welding for 5th
and 6th period, Monday and
Tuesday, he gets his 4 hours. On
Wednesdays and Thursdays, he
goes to culinary.
2 hours, he gets one. How do I
do that? Well, it's the only way
I can offer electrical because
my electrical guy is only
willing to give up his real job
for 2 days, half days, but can't
afford them any other way.
You've got to be innovative. The
other day we had a community
schools meeting and one of the
freshmen said, I am so glad Miss
West let us do the schedule
because I didn't really know
what I wanted to do, but now
I've been able to taste one of
them. When she told me I had to
go to podcast and media, I
wasn't very happy.
They put out the best little
podcast you can ever imagine.
The school board's doing the
happy dance because they're
having the daily news read to
them. He had no idea what it
even was before he ever started.
At the same time, the math
scores that went up, I truly
attest to the P2C curriculum and
attaching it to the curves.
They're measuring. You saw a
picture of our kids redoing the
front um portion of our school,
you can turn these slides,
they're just
All the different programs or
pictures of all the things we
do, you're more than welcome to
per view through them. Um.
With that being said, he, the uh
kids came in, now they're
innovative. I knew the 8th
graders coming into my school
weren't ready for algebra.
So I can sit there and cry and
moan and groan and complain
about my test scores later, or I
can do something different. We
had a summer camp for math.
Those kids measured, they poured
concrete, they mixed, they did
volume, they used all of those
work-based skills to learn some
of the skills they were missing
prior to coming in. Every one of
those kids that went to the
summer camp this summer and has
been through the pre-algebra
just passed into algebra.
For this next semester. You want
data? That works. Those are the
faces of those kids going in. So
now instead of having
Orchids in algebra in the
freshman class, I'll have 29 in
January.
What we're doing is working
because our kids believe in it,
because our kids ask for it,
more hands-on, quit talking to
us, let us do.
So with that, flex schedule, my
seniors, same thing, every night
I go home and it's usually not
very early and I go to Dairy
Queen for my nutritious dinner
and there are my students,
preparing my chicken nuggets and
my Dr Pepper, and trust me, they
all know my order by heart, and
they know what happens if they
mess it up. With that being
said, if they're at McDonald's
until 11 o'clock at night, how
interested do you think those
students are at being at school
at 9 o'clock, 8 o'clock in the
morning.
They're not. So what do we do?
We listen to our students. We go
to Mr. Madre and say, Mr.
Madrid, I'd really like to offer
two things. The senior class has
written me a petition.
Start later. They went through
the process, they're learning it
in government. They went through
the process, they have valid
points, so now I'm sending them
to you. Would you entertain this
idea.
About our seniors who in good
standing, who are not in
instincts starting their day at
9.
Instead
He said absolutely, let's try
it. There has to be caveats.
We'll run it by the school
board, but shouldn't be a
problem. That doesn't happen in
most districts, they're not
willing. Innovative zones, if
you permission to be innovative.
We needed a skills lab.
I went to see Tech, beautiful
building. If I, if you got 53
million, I'll build one of those
in Santa Rosa. I have no problem
with that whatsoever. However,
with the money that you did give
me, what we did build was a
skills lab.
You can see it in the pictures,
when you go through with
electrical. We built a living
room, a dining room.
This is the front that I was
talking about with the math
camp.
One mother came and said, Mrs.
West, I just want to thank you.
I'm a single mother, and there's
no one to show my son how to do
these things.
I didn't know. I don't know how
to do concrete, but I learned
this summer, in fact, we had one
intern from the WebMD program
out in, she came and I said, now
look, I don't want to ruin your
surgeon here or anything, she
said, no, Miss West, I'm gonna
do it with them too, so they all
learned a little bit. Um, so you
can see the wood in the
background here in some of these
pictures, we built a mock
bathroom, living room, kitchen.
And bedroom so that our kids
could put in an HVAC system.
Why? Because when my HVAC system
died from 1922, and maybe it's
not that old, but, OK, 67, um,
and it flooded within 7 minutes
I had my entire intern work
based learning crew in that
room, saving the carpet in the
bathroom.
taking and turning off the water
and the gas to the uh heater as
well as the old air conditioner.
In the next week, we'd installed
too many splits because those 3
classrooms were no longer
functional.
They had no heating, they had no
cooling. I didn't have time. I
don't know if you know where
Santa Rosa is, but there's not a
plethora of plumbers and tracks
people running around, but I
have one really good instructor
with several little interns, and
they were pleased to do it.
And this kid in the bottom and
he says, Miss, now when the air
conditioning goes off and it's a
weekend at my family's
restaurant, which pays our
bills.
I can at least troubleshoot. I'm
not gonna fix it, but I can at
least tell my dad whether or not
it's fixable.
Or maybe it's a minor.
Those are results. I think that
you would like to see rather
than what did he score? I can't
tell you what he scored on his
math test, but I can tell you
what he's gonna score in life.
Well,
Other things I would talk about
like Mr. uh, talked about. We
have um our attendance has just
jumped up because if they don't
come to school and they're not
passing their classes, they
don't go to their internship,
and I promise you, I can think
of one little boy that
volunteers at the fire
department. It's the only way
he's getting through high
school. If I let him go to that
internship.
And he was a transplant coming
in, but he's gonna finish his
stuff so he can go to his
internship.
We talked about the whole child
again listening to it, you
talked about teachers earlier.
We have a student who was part
of our educators rising, um.
Uh group, also for
sustainability, we have created
a licensed daycare on the
campus, um, at the elementary
campus, not only for our
teachers to keep our teachers
employed, but also as an
incubator for our students. So
we have a student who and our
students still in the education
go down and their work-based
learning is at our daycare, an
actual licensed daycare, um,
have had kids totally change
their mind and want to go into
education. So they work in the
daycare, they become, we've got
at least 4 or 5 that have
become.
fellows straight out of the
program, and we'll go on in one,
in fact, is a resident
residential teacher, right?
Um, now, residency teacher now.
So we're talking about taking
the kids straight through the
whole process. We talk about
sustainability right now, the
only one without um
the only one I can guarantee
will remain is the education.
Why that little daycare would be
able to pay their interns if I
didn't pay them out of anything
else.
But like any good business, most
of you know this, it takes 2 to
3 years to become profitable.
2 to 3 years. You can't hand
people money for a year and
expect results in a year. It
doesn't happen.
I watched just be my mass
scores.
They're finally getting there
where they need to be, because
you have some sustainability. So
with that, that goes with the
whole idea that it would go
beyond. Other districts have
come to see us, they've called
us to see what we're doing,
especially smaller ones, because
everybody wants to be C tech,
but not gonna happen.
Our culinary program, um,
When we first started, we had a
room smelled really bad. Um, it
was, it has a lot of issues, but
it did have a place to hook in a
stove through different funds,
not just innovative zones, but
also 3 redistribution funds,
Perkins, etc. We've been able to
outfit our culinary program,
we've been able to actually hire
a culinary teacher who answers
what our kids need. We have a
problem with food
sustainability.
Our kids go home hungry.
If we don't, if they don't come
to school, if we don't have
school, they go home early. Now
they have the skills to be able
to take those home and provide
for their family, and they're
learning to do that, they're
learning to budget in financial
literacy, whether they have, we
give them 3 different budgets.
Some of them get to be poor.
Some of them get to be middle
class and some get to be uh
fluent. Let's just say when we
take them literally to the 3
places in town that sell food,
that would be the T&D, the
Dollar General, and the Family
Dollar. They have to stretch
that budget.
It's amazing what you learn
about your kids when they go to
Dollar General. Those that have
never been there.
And the young man that says, no,
no, no, no, we need to buy this
bag of rice, because we can
serve it with every meal.
And it will help you feel.
That child does shopping with
his mother and understands the
dollar.
Those are the real life real
experiences that innovate zone
have allowed us to do in Santa
Rosa.
Did I forget anything? I don't
think so. He didn't even kick me
once. It's a win. It's a win.
Thank you.
All right. Thank you all, uh,
Representative Luhan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I have
a few questions. Thank you for
the presentation and um really
here how excited you are and and
getting and getting everything
in place um for our kids.
Um, so I think my, my first
question is gonna go to, um, is
a quick question, can can school
district apply for uh an
internship funding without
partnering with a PED approved
vendor or partner.
It's true.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Representative
Luhan, did you say an internship
program? Yes, there are other
internship programs that school
districts may embark upon
without being an innovation
zone.
So in order to be an innovation
zone, Mr. Chair, they have, they
have to, uh, work through your
vendors or your, your partners
for clarification, um, so, uh,
yeah, Chairman Romero and
Representative Lujan that that
is typically the way that it
works for innovation zone
work-based learning, yes, they
work with our partners. We do
know of other schools and
districts that are doing
internships outside of being an
innovation zone.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, um.
So, is there
OK, and I can, I can ask this
question later to, uh, in more
detail, but the reason why I'm
asking is that here in in my
high school district in Santa
Fe, um, we do rely on funding
outside funding with the city of
Santa Fe for our intern, our
internship program, so
I guess, um, I'm, I'm trying to
figure that out and you just, I,
I believe you just answered
that, so thank you, but I think
there might be a follow up
question afterwards in that
regard, um, so, um, Mr. Chair,
as I'm looking at your
innovation zones here and I'm
looking at page 20.
Um
And you, your guidelines. How is
this?
Aligned and this is the joint
question with what Santa Rosa's
doing, is that the same? Are you
doing the same thing here in
your first graft, um,
Uh, with, with your graduates
scale here is this matching up?
I mean, what are you setting up
so that they are.
They are addressing this the
same innovation, um, guidelines.
Sure, uh, Chairman Romero and
Representative Lujan, yeah, we
think, yes, we do believe that
Santa Rosa is setting themselves
up for success, um, by being a
really model innovation zone um
school and district, um, and
what, um, we, what I was
discussing there is how we can
create some parameters around
making sure that all innovation
own partner schools do have.
Capstone projects, um,
work-based learning
opportunities and the profile of
a graduate that is completed,
yes, as well as a career
pathways. Thank you, thank you,
Mr. Chair, and I know not every
district does this does
everything the same way. I knew
in our district too, there's.
There's a um an app, I guess
it's being used. Can you, can
you tell me about that app and
like how many schools are.
Or districts rather not schools,
districts that are are using
this app in in.
I think my concern is, is, is
that Mr. Chair, um, we have
college and career centers that
come in and are really kind of
filling the space and bringing
in innovation and bringing in
either the career development
through guest speakers and all
this sort of things. So I'm
wondering how the students are
utilizing their time when
they're, you know, using an app
and and you're collecting this
information as opposed to the
time being used for them to like
doing the prep work in in this
career centers, Mr. Chair. Thank
you. Sure, Chairman
and uh Representative Lujan, I
have asked Breezy, um,
Gutierrez, our program manager
to come up, um, because I don't
know exactly what app that you
might be referring to that um
the local district is using, you
wanna maybe chat.
Um, what local district are you
referring to? I would assume
that there are different
districts doing it. I think
we're doing it here in Santa Fe,
but um, so our um.
um, Mr. Chair, Representative
Luhan, uh, thank you for giving
me the opportunity to answer
here. Um, so, um, the level all
platform. It's the only thing
that I can think about right now
that we are pushing across um
districts as a pilot to um help
with the next step plan, which
includes um many aspects of
career advising for students as
well as multiple um.
Opportunities for them to do
career exploration as well as
look at um what they want their
career pathway to do, so that
can be done in
Any way that the district um.
wants to roll it out, it could
be done during advisory period.
It could be done one on one with
a counselor. It can be done um
with a student and a parent
going through the um.
Titles of the journey that is
embedded in there, so that is an
example of the app that we are
utilizing through our office,
um, to answer your question
previously about, um, yes,
innovation zones are gonna be
different for every school
across um the state and they are
going to do different things.
What we do ask if they do the
framework components which are.
Career technical education,
work-based learning, capstone
projects and social-emotional
learning, um, safety um safety
net supports for students. How
they do that?
is innovative with how they do
the master schedule or how they
um implement work-based learning
or what industry partner they
partner with within their
specific community because that
to us is innovative if a
community only has a bank, how
are they connecting with that
industry partner in order to
provide um a need for the
community, so the framework has
components that are stag that's
that are
Static, but how they implement
that comes from these innovative
things that um Miss West was
just talking about.
OK, I, I go ahead and I'll, I'll
just, yeah, go ahead and then
can I speak to our specifically,
could you talked about a broke?
Excuse me, frog in my throat.
So initially when we started
this, we had no software per se.
Our students are, we drive them
crazy every week with having to
turn in time sheets,
evaluations, finding their
evaluators, etc. It becomes a
Constant pull for kids to have
tournament on time, but we're
teaching them. This is what
happens in real life. You don't
punch in, you don't get paid,
you don't turn in your time
sheet, you don't get paid, so
this first semester we have
driven them crazy. They have a
reflection journal that they
have to write in every day, they
hate every minute of it, but
they want to get paid, they
don't get their paycheck until
they get all of their stuff
turned in. This semester, we
have gone to AEC, uh, FFA uses
it across the board nationally
to record for record books,
work-based learning, community
service, profiles, etc.
Um, we were given a pilot at our
recent conference and so every
one of our interns will be now
doing it digitally because
that's what happens in the real
world. They don't turn in a
piece of paper or a notebook,
they do it online, they'll
record their time, they'll turn
in their time sheets digitally.
They'll turn in their
reflections are partners in the
community will evaluate them and
send them into the same system
and what's really nice when uh
it was actually a valedictorian
says to me, she goes, Miss, I
don't want to turn all this in
again. I have filled out 75
different scholarship
applications. I don't
want to do it again. I said, do
you want a paycheck? I guess
she'll be doing it again. When
she got finished, the program
kicked out her new resume. She
goes, I'm really glad you made
me do this, Miss.
And good for you, because you're
gonna walk away with something
that can be updated that quickly
once it's in the system. So
there is an app that's
available. There are several and
I won't speak to all of them.
That's just the one that we use,
but it already is being used by
FFA nationally, kind of makes
sense that we could do it
across. So again that thinks
that's what Mrs. Guti is talking
about. All of us have certain
things we have to do. We're just
building the capstone piece of
ours, um, and so, but we're kind
of in la la land with what does
it have to have.
So she would like to build a
framework that everybody must
have these components like it
has to have a community, uh,
piece to it, so maybe that will.
I hope that helps, I mean that
that does. I just would just say
with our concerned we're talking
about AI and all these sort of
things, just making sure that
human component is there and
it's not being put onto an app,
an app and and it's not being, I
mean, there's so much value, uh,
still with having the innovation
and as we're talking and our
kids don't really know what they
want by the times and they fill
out something and you, you know,
what is the real value of it, I
guess is what I'm getting at and
Mr. Mr. Chair, I mean, the last
thing I guess I have.
a few things, but, um, tracking
with success after after high
school. Are we doing any of that
through our career. And um
college um.
Assessments and through the.
Madam, Mr. Chair, I'm gonna mess
that up every time. Just give me
a pass, will you? Um, anyway,
Mr. Chairman, um, so yesterday
I've received a phone call. We
had a student leave our welding
program and enter the Tulsa
welding program. Um, he was able
to test out a 3 components
before you ever started. So it
minimized his program from 9
months to 6. He just told me he
received all of his AW, all of
the certifications, and he is
now finished and will be
returning to Santa Rosa to
practice his skill with all.
all of those things that would
not have happened.
That young man came to us was
barely passing, couldn't, wasn't
even eligible to play basketball
through some innovation and
hooking that kid on what he
wanted to do. Now he's a master
welder, won't make more money
than
Me for certain.
So yes, we are tracking, we are
following and we follow up with
what I call their 13th year.
What happened to our kids. But
if we do,
They're not successful.
I mean, I can't do much with,
they didn't pass freshman
seminar because they didn't show
up. That's kind of on them. But
if they don't pass certain
components reading English,
math, what do I do on my end to
make that happen where they're
successful. We don't just dump
them off, oh, you graduated, I'm
not talking to you anymore.
That's not what Santa Rosa does
anyway.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chair,
and I just wanted to, I'm not
gonna ask a question because of
the time, but I just want to
say, um, making sure that the
student's voice is included, and
that's what I'm hearing today,
but I'm hearing outside of this
conversation today that we
really need to be paying
attention and uh to what the the
students are saying, and I just,
I know that our chairman has
always done that in this
committee, and um just want to
make sure we're sending out that
message that when we're making,
we're doing these policy things
we're coming up with all these
things that it's really the, the
voice of the students.
Especially in the
Reimagining school leadership. I
hope that that's.
Really being reimagined and all
these things coming together
with their voice at hand. Thank
you.
Represent
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for your great presentation.
It's just a great ending to a
day. I, I have to say, um, very
exciting. I, I'm a a
representative who represents
rural small school districts, so
anytime I hear a success story
from a rural small school
district, it, um, it warms my
heart. Thank you very much for
the work that all of you are
doing to make this happen.
Uh, this really isn't in your
presentation, but it's a problem
that I see.
With the, I'm, I'm curious what
you think we should do.
To change the public school
capital outlay program.
You know, it really punishes
schools with declining
enrollment. We, and, and these
are the schools that, you know,
it's, it's.
It's just terrible that you
don't, I get it. Uh my school
suffer with their HVAC programs
too, and they can never they
never qualify, uh, for the
public school capital outlay
because there's just the way the
system works. So I'm just
curious and, and I know you
didn't cover this and that this
is, you know, just a question
out of the just something I care
about. What would you do to
change it and, and, and make it
work for small rural schools. I,
I'm just curious.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Verera, um, if I had that
answer, I, I, I wouldn't be a
superintendent, I'd probably be
a millionaire sitting somewhere
good, but, but I can try my
best, all right, um, I think, I
think some of the things is, and
they're doing some of it now
cause I'm going through this
process now with Capital Outly,
you know, we're doing our
facilities master plan and that
we're getting ready. We already
passed our bond. We, we have our
mill levy pass. We're all up to
our meals and, and they do a
waiver process. So that's
something that I'm going through
right now and I know some
schools
have qualified for there's a
certain criteria for that. I
think they're already doing it
and they're and they're well on
their way. Uh, the legislature
did a good job last year of
waiving some of the, the
matches. I think that's been
good for a lot of schools, but
also, um, I, I think, uh, you
know, taking each individual
schools uh uniqueness and
situation into consideration may
also be something that that
needs to be done, and, and I
don't know exactly how that
would be done, but
I think that would be something
to be considered because, you
know, we always say a
superintendents were 89
different schools and we have 89
different stories, right? You've
heard that uh quite a bit, I
bet, but um, so I think
something to that, and I don't
know what kind of metric that
would be, uh, you know, maybe
it's sitting down with the
superintendent and, and some
people from the community and
saying this is what we need, you
know, like Santa Rosa right now,
you know, we don't need a C
tech, but we need funding to
sustain this program to give our
students the same opportunities
that CTech has, right? Maybe
not.
grand scale, but, but something
too similar, uh at that and
scaled it to Santa Rosa, right?
It's got to be scalable. So
maybe having those conversations
with.
Uh individual school districts
because there is not a one size
fits all, or even the capital
outlay.
Mr. Chair, Representative, if I
could just, so tomorrow we'll
bring you a a bill for potential
endorsement. It's already been
endorsed by Pacuda,
um, that would extend some of
the waiver.
Um, I'm sorry, the reductions in
local match that were, that was
passed a couple of years ago.
It's also um proposing to change
some of the waiver language so
that more schools would would
have access to those waivers
because of the increased cost of
construction and their inability
to raise even if they're maxed
out in terms of bonding
capacity, their inability to pay
for their local match. So, and,
and then the bill is, is sort of
a stopgap measure if you do pass
it.
So that um PSFA along with LFC
and LESC staff can continue to
look at exactly what you're
talking about, how, how, how do
we make this system fair,
equitable, but accessible to
districts knowing that even if
they go out and ask his
taxpayers for uh to pass bonds,
they're still not able to fund
some of these projects.
Oh, thank you, thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Director,
that's really an important
answer, and I, I hope that will
help you, it certainly helped
the schools in my district
because we're really, really
struggling with, with these
issues, and the reason you've
been able to do that, you've
been superintendent now for 5
years, right?
Uh
Mr. Chair, Madam Representative,
I, I've been, I'm in my 6th
year, yes, so yeah, so I think
that's very um um important to
point out. Thank you.
And and and as they continue to
remind this committee and the
public at large, 2/3 of our
superintendents are new, and
you're not gonna take on a
capital school outlay project
the first year, I can tell you
that, so uh so I anything we can
do to support um new
superintendents is gonna be,
it's, it's gonna be, uh, I thank
you for this legislation because
that's really gonna be
important. Thank you, thank you.
Senator Grant.
was chairman and and uh
In interesting to, to hear about
this, you know, we've been
talking about.
Uh, CTE for
Lord, I don't know how many
years.
Um, and this is the first time
pets come talking about
innovation zones.
So it's like they're just
renaming CTE Innovation zones or
or what's?
What's the difference?
Mr. Chair, Senator Brat, um, we
are not renaming career
technical education, we are
creating a framework for
innovation zones for great
things that are happening across
the state that are contributing
to
Uh, the success of students. And
so with this pilot project, um,
we have looked at many things
across
Other models that have worked,
such as National Career
Academies, um, Ptech programs,
um, many schools across the
nation, um, and what are the
components of those schools that
have been beneficial to helping
students, um, move forward and
thinking about competency-based
versus
space, right? Um, so what we
have looked at is the framework,
so.
As Deputy Chief Secretary Debell
explained, um, career technical
education works. We know it
works. We showed the graduation
rates for that. We know that
capstone projects work because
when students are passionate
about a career or a project,
they will take it on and they
will complete it. Um, social and
emotional learning, all kids,
all students, all means all they
need social emotional supports,
not a program, but supports in
order to
To make sure that they are
successful with the with these
um programs. So,
What we are thinking is that if
we put all of these components
together, which are part of the
career connected learning
ecosystem that would have a
benefit to students wanting to
come to school, being
academically proficient because
if we are innovative enough, we
will understand that we are
embedding academics into career
technical education, um, we are
teaching students through the
hands-on learning or through a
competency-based skill, um, how
to do something.
at the end of the day wants to
know what can you make and what
can you do? So we believe that
these components.
Um, which are part of our career
connected learning ecosystem,
um, can contribute to the
success of students and
redefining and redesigning with
the high school experience looks
like.
Mr. Chair and Senator Brian, if
I may, if you think of it this
way, so if this is our whole
child in my hand, OK, CTE is
huge, it's the thumb of the
whole thing, but those are
skills that are separate and in
isolation if you don't put the
whole thing together. So what's
different for me, and this is my
analogy, sorry if I step on
somebody's toes, my own analogy.
I have my welding program, I
have my electrical program, I
have all those things they've
been around for 100 years, we
know they work.
But what makes this better is
the permission to do it
differently. So it the spring
semester, my English 4 teacher
will be teaching two sections of
English. She'll be teaching a
section for the college bound
that's regular. The other
section will be taught in
conjunction with the welding,
the HVAC, the electrical
teacher, so that those kids are
doing technical writing within
those programs when they're
writing it up together, they're
no longer separate.
It was a hard sell, but my
English teacher is willing to
try and go to the other. That's
the innovative that this has
allowed me to do, permission to
change the way we look at it,
where it's not just a thumb
extra the class they can get cut
out, the dumping ground for all
the kids that don't behave, yada
yadda yada yadda. The kids
aren't going to college.
This is all of it. It's
listening to what that kid
needs, what that kid wants, what
his schedule looks like, so that
he can be successful rather than
just.
In that class. It's so we've got
the social and emotional, it's
the academic piece. It's the
attendance part that's all
there. It's the capstone. What
are they going to bring back? My
plumbers, their capstone private
all my HVAC and plumbers have
put together a capstone project
where they're going to the
senior citizens, and they're
meeting with people who need
help. They don't have anybody to
help them put up the the bars in
their bathroom.
When they leave, they have
something. They built the ramps
out of the welding program for
both the 8, the Head Start
program and say, I built that
and they're proud of it. They've
all the structures on the campus
for outside my welding kits did
that under they put it together.
They see a purpose. I'm not just
welding, I'm not just this. I
have all the parts of it, and
every time I drive back home, I
said, I built that.
I was part of that. I made that.
That's the part that I see,
whether it's not just CTE, it's
that whole child.
So I don't know if that helps,
but it's easier and I really
appreciate your passion on that
and, and it sounds like at least
in Santa Rosa, this is working
really well.
The, the, the concern I have is,
and, and it really isn't with
Ped completely.
Um
is that uh
Again, we've been talking about
CTE for years.
And we're still not funding it.
And you even mentioned it. We
just, we just cut that off.
Well, we have focused so much on
college.
And what do we know for a fact?
Only about 17% of our students
will ever graduate.
We focus on the 17%, we throw
the 83% away in this state.
Like they're garbage.
Because we want to push everyone
to go into what we think they
ought to do.
Because, you know, we're the
adults.
Or the adults in the room.
No.
You heard most of us outside of
the room, you wouldn't think
that we were the adults in the
room.
OK, but I'm, you know, we, we
want to push this agenda and
push this agenda for everyone to
go to college. We're finally
getting somewhere on CTE.
And I'm afraid we're all gonna
be disappointed tomorrow.
When we hear about the changes
they want to make to the SCG.
Because they left CTE out. Yes.
If I can add to that.
Even though we're doing all
these wonderful things.
You are aware of how you
evaluate my school.
No, because we pretty much got
rid of evaluations in the state.
But yet we're giving a report
card. So attendance rates,
graduation rates, not a problem
for us.
The 3 c cohorts, all those are
going up for Santa Rosa. Look us
up. But however, at the end of
the day, my juniors.
Juniors
Have one test day, the SAT in
the spring that evaluates my
entire high school. Nobody's
asking about my CTE. Nobody's
asking the right questions. We
do not, excuse my French, Mexico
does not.
suck at what they're doing.
We're just not telling our story
correctly, I'll, I'll disagree
with you on that when you tell
you I'm saying we do so much
more if we did everything good
that's happening rather than
just a test score in the SAT
probably isn't the right test
because again, that's trying to
push everyone through that
circle of college.
But
One of the things I hear from
employers and I speak to a lot
of them, because I'm tired of
getting people to graduate from
high school and have a high
school diploma and cannot read.
They can't do basic math.
They can't figure out how to
give change back on a, on a $9
purchase from a $10 bill.
You see what I'm saying? And,
and employers need to know that
when someone has a high school
diploma, it means they have
certain skills.
That's where the testing has to
come in.
We have to make sure that our
students are graduating with
certain skills.
You know, I've told this story a
million times, so I graduated
high school and couldn't read.
So then I went in the military
almost was thrown out of the
military because I couldn't
read.
At the level they wanted me to
read at.
Did that do me any favors. Did
my school help me at all? No,
they didn't. They failed me
completely.
Because they allowed me to
continue to move up, they
allowed me to graduate, they
allowed me to get a diploma
without being able to read.
But frankly, that's what we're
doing to our students in New
Mexico.
I've been sitting up here
talking about it for 12 years,
and I'm tired of talking about
it.
But that is what we're doing to
our students in New Mexico.
87, 83% of them, sorry, I was
always good at math, not, not so
much reading. 83% of them.
Never graduate from college.
Now, Europe's been dividing that
population for years. We need to
start rethinking how we're
educating.
Not just in New Mexico, but in
the United States. I don't know
if you saw the math scores just
a couple weeks ago for the US.
We're in trouble as a country,
and we're in trouble as a state
because
National mass corres were here.
They needed to be here, and
we're way down here.
There are 2 things we need to be
focusing on in the early grades,
especially, and that's reading
and math.
We need to quit thinking that
every student's gonna go to
college, and let me tell you
what.
If every student go to college,
goes to college.
And I don't know how to come and
fix your plumbing.
Thanksgiving and Christmas ain't
gonna be so great.
Mm
With the toilet backed up.
And the dishwasher broken
because no one knows how to fix
it.
So we don't want everyone to go
to college.
We want people to be plugged in
to what best fits them.
So I hope that's what you're
talking about with this innovate
because you're looking at what
best fits the student, what best
fits their future.
Because for too long we've been
focused on what we think ought
to be their future.
And not what should be their
future.
But I don't see the funding
happening for CTE.
Every time, you know, I ran a
bill last year.
had came and said, oh, don't
worry about running, we'll do it
ourselves. We don't need a bill
to do it. Did they do it? No.
Did not.
It's happened over and over and
over again.
a bill that would have passed
easily through the house.
Me and Andreas talked about it,
so we're gonna pull that right
now because we're looking at
redoing SCG and I'm gonna get
back on the soapbox tomorrow.
Mr. Chairman
But not putting a separate
funding factor in the SCG for
for CTE.
is not what I was told was gonna
happen.
And it's not gonna work.
And we're gonna fail our
students once again.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Represent care.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
You know, honestly speaking,
every school should be an
innovation school and a
community school.
And our best schools throughout
the state do that.
And um
I just wanna say that I, I have
one question, and this is really
for um deputy secretary to bill
on page 19, your request is a
dependable three-year award.
From a recurring funding source,
allowing participants to align a
three-year strategic plan. What
is that amount that uh PD is
asking for. Yes, uh, Chairman
Romero and Representative
Garrett, what we are thinking
right now is just recurring from
the 40 million um that we have
been um given for the last two
years so that we would have um
an expectation for what was
coming in so that we could help
schools to plan out a
a little bit.
And Mr. Chair and, and Deputy
Secretary, can you just refresh
me on with that 40 million. What
were the categories that it
covered. Sure, and actually for
that I am gonna um ask um uh
breezy uh Gutierrez to respond,
please sit.
So if we go back to the screen
that showed the career connected
learning as to the initiatives
that we carry out in our bureau,
um, certain portions of that
funding goes to early college
high school, um, next gen, um,
our pilot funding for career
technical education state
funding, um, innovations zones,
um,
Don't credit, yes, um, early
college, I, I did say early
college high school, um,
advanced placement, uh, we, we
supplement some of that, um, IB
International Baccalaureate is
another one, so, um, those are
all also components that are
embedded in great things that
schools do as well as some of
our innovation zone schools. One
is an IB school. They do great
things with their IB program.
So, um,
There has been um from that 40
million, we put it into these
buckets to help um with those
initiatives as well as um due to
House Bill 198, we're able to
provide um startup money with
our state career technical
education funding for BIE
schools. So, um, some of that
funding went into that category
too as well.
Mr. Chair, is there additional
targeted CTE money.
Um, besides the 40 million, like
Perkins is on top of that, and
is there additional funding?
Mr. Chair Representative
Garrett, as of right now, um,
our funding pots are for career
technical education, it's
Perkins funding, NextGen state
funding and innovation zone
funding.
Which the next gen and and the
innovation zone comes out of
that 40 million.
Thank you. And my, my final
question is, um,
Are there universal uh checklist
standards that are expected in
capstone projects regardless.
Of the type I, when I did
Capstone projects for high
school students.
They were diverse, everything
people made films, people did
that kind of building ramps, but
there were expected written
things, you know, whatever they
did, they had to meet the
rubric. Is there a state rubric
for capstones, or is it done by
district or charter school, um,
uh, Chairman Romero and
Representative Garrett, that is
kind of what, what we're after
right now, um, everyone is sort
of creating their own rubric,
which kind of leaves.
up to
Chance and risk for us to be
able to evaluate the
effectiveness of that. So the
desire um for the next iteration
of innovation zones is that
there is a framework with those
standards, and then within that
the projects can be just like
you were saying, film projects
with a written component. The
plumbing project with the
written component that is also
attached to what might be an
11th and 12th grade English
language arts standard.
OK, thank you.
Right.
Any other questions, folks?
All right. Thank you all so much
for being here. We really
appreciate it.
All right, so we'll go to our
public comment.
So we'll wait for our Zoom
folks, we.
In person, so we'll give it a
moment.
All right.
So we'll go ahead and it will
start with the folks who are
joining us here in person. I
have my list. Uh, remember,
folks, you'll have up to 2
minutes.
We certainly appreciate you all
being here and waiting with us,
whether you're online or in
person, but first on my list is
Nat Dean.
Yeah.
Now, you're up.
Yes. Yep.
Welcome. So if you just make
sure that green light is on on
your microphone.
Welcome. You have up to 2
minutes, please.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chair, uh,
I don't see I still members of
the committee. Uh, my name is
Nat Dean. I'm a person with
multiple disabilities later in
life, and I am also disability
advocate.
And um I'll go fast.
The question that gets asked
first if we report is, what were
you wearing?
That's a hard question when
there is an episode of sexual
assault.
And I'm gonna try to tie a lot
of things together. I was a head
start volunteer as a child.
My mother was uh taking classes
to get her degree to become a
special education teacher, and
she dropped me off at Head Start
on the way from San Francisco to
San Jose State, where she took
her classes. It was a great
model and it was fantastic, but
as a victim, I was a cutter.
And no one saw the cutting
because it's very difficult to
see trauma right in front of
your eyes when it's difficult to
see because denial, even from a
parent is a vigorous lover, and
it's a very difficult place. Try
not to go there.
We don't know what we don't know
until we know it.
And those are some hard lessons
to learn.
But I want to just thank the
legislature for beginning to
have more captioning, because
when the presenters are
presenting in the backs of their
room, their, their backs are
what we see. I can't read their
lips and I don't know what
they're saying. So I don't have
access, but when I'm seeing the
committee, I can read their lips
and I have greater access. So
please, let's try to not blame
and shame when we have a
difference. Let's show and grow.
Thank you so much.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, I hope I tied all
that together in a neat little
package.
Thank you so much for joining
us. Um, so you? Thank you.
And
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, um, I
think the last time I gave
public comment was when you're
hiring Gwen as your new
director, so I don't do this
very often, but um.
I did want to introduce you to
Rachel and also give her a
chance to introduce herself to
your committee. She's gonna be
working with me on K-12, uh,
budget, uh, discussions and
recommendations, so, um, I
wanted to be a good model of how
to um
Speaking for the committee and I
want to turn over time to her to
introduce herself if that's OK.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, my name is Rachel
Mabe. I have been a teacher for
a long time. I started my career
in South Florida, um, as a math
teacher, and then um I taught
all throughout. I got a couple
of graduate degrees and taught
while I was in school and then
returned to education when I got
out of school. Um, I'm also a
journalist, um, and a new
parent. I have two little kids,
so really believe in.
education,
really believe in New Mexico and
I'm really happy to be, um,
serving our state in a different
role.
Thank you. All right, welcome.
Pope Morales.
We got a handout that we'll have
passed out before you.
Begin.
So give us a moment on that.
Right, I think everybody's got
it, please, when you're ready,
you have up to 2 minutes.
Welcome. Thank you. Good
afternoon, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Hope Morales, and I am the
executive director for Teach
Plus New Mexico. I've been in
this role for the past 7.5
years, and I make this statement
with vulnerable vulnerability
and a long-standing commitment
to our students. Since I've been
in my role supporting teacher
leaders across our state, not
enough progress has been made
for our students when it comes
to their opportunities and
outcomes in school and beyond.
During the past 18 months, I've
engaged in a strategic and
inquiry process to better
understand the history of public
education in New Mexico,
including key points of progress
and understanding our current
gaps. I've also talked with
teachers, families and students
to learn more about their own
expectations for our educational
system. I learned that our
students don't know what they
don't know, and for many
students growing up in
circumstances similar to my own
when I was a child. They don't
yet realize all the.
potential for success after high
school.
Yet they do know that they want
access to a future that is
barren, that is better than
their current situation.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I have brought copies
of a three-part report for you.
The first section includes my
own personal story, the
long-term goal of economic
mobility for Teach Plus New
Mexico, and more information
about the four major areas in
which our teachers of our
programs will be focusing on,
including measuring what
matters, giving more students
access to high quality schools?
Investing in those most
proximate to students and
increasing access to livable
wage careers.
After that section, I'm sharing
a letter from our policy fellows
that is focused on re-engaging
students who have been
disenrolled from school for
missing 10 consecutive days.
These teacher leaders are
currently researching strategies
to boost student attendance.
And lastly, in our effort to
improve economic mobility, we
want to highlight the importance
and urgency around quality data
metrics when measuring college
and career readiness, ensuring
these systems are linked across
departments and are accurately
measuring what we want our
students to achieve.
Mr. Cha, it's a lot to cover in
2 minutes, so I'm happy to
follow up with questions or
feedback from anyone. Cool.
Thank you so much. We appreciate
you. Sarah.
Welcome. You have up to 2
minutes. Thank you. Good
afternoon, Mr. Chair, committee
members. Uh, my name is Sarah
Salazar, and I am a parent here
in Santa Fe. Thank you for
hearing me today.
And for your continued
consideration of the issue I
brought before you in November.
This issue was a problem with
the attendance for Success Act,
it is missing distinction for
students with disabilities like
my child.
Whose attendance is covered in a
section 504 plan has straight
A's, yet we've been notified as
categories categorized, pardon
me, as tier 3 for attendance.
Amending the attendance for
Success Act to distinguish
students with disabilities isn't
saying attendance doesn't matter
for them.
It absolutely does matter.
Instead, amending this law would
recognize the individualized
nature of students with
disabilities and remove an
unfair punitive effect on
families.
Um, as advised by national
policy and educational experts
for absenteeism laws.
Again, I respectfully request
your leadership to fix the
attendance for Success Act to
provide special consideration
for students with disabilities.
Pardon me. Thank you.
Thank you for joining us.
Ah
Monique.
Hey, you have up to 2 minutes,
please, when you're ready.
Oh, sorry, buddy, could you make
sure your microphone is on and
we'll restart your time. There
we go. OK, there we go. All
right, please, OK, my name is
Monique Salazar, and I'm here to
update you on my son, Walter
Bradford's PSAT initiative. Walt
is very sorry he couldn't be
here today. It is an AP physics
exam tomorrow.
Um, as you, those of you that
are familiar with waltz, um,
initiative, he and his fellow
Valley students are advocating
to expand PSAT access for New
Mexico High School juniors. The
issue that Walt identified last
fall was that New Mexico PED
currently gives the PSAT to
sophomores. The problem with
that is if they don't take it
junior, they can't qualify for
national merit, national
Hispanic merit, and national
Indigenous recognition merit
programs, which gives money to
these kids, and as we know,
Well college may not be for
every kid, for those who do go
to college staying there for
financial reasons can often be
very difficult. So that's the
issue he's trying to address.
Um
The exciting part to get to
update you all on is New Mexico
PED has added this as in their
budget. So, um, Secretary
Padilla presented last week to
LFC, and she explicitly
advocated for this funding. So
they are not only aware of it,
they're very excited about it.
She knows about Walt, she knows
about what he's trying to do.
So we'll be back this session,
which is great. And as a mom, I
would like to thank you all
very, very much for taking Walt
and his fellow students
seriously. It's meant so much to
them, especially after COVID
when a lot of these kids have
had a pretty rough time. They
don't feel like they can make a
difference and so to come up
here to be in the roundhouse to
meet all of you, um, again, to
be taken seriously, it's, it's
gotten Walt super excited about
the legislative process as well
as many of his fellow students,
and um again, representative
Hman Vi Hill is wonderful to
take this on.
Kick it off. We had a wonderful
experience presenting to house
education last session, and
we're back, so thank you all for
those of you, Walt has not met
yet. He's looking forward to it.
And for those of you that are
giving him advice and
encouragement along the way,
we're very grateful.
Thank you. Good. Thank you so
much and good luck to Walt on
his final tomorrow.
Now.
Uh, apparently you
representative Garrett is
looking for a DLA, so
Oh, district legislative
assistant.
All right, so we will go to our
Zoom attendee.
So I saw a hand.
I think it was Gae Stewart.
Hi Gail. Oh, there you are. You
have up to 2 minutes, please,
welcome.
Oh, we're having trouble hearing
you. Give us a moment, Gail. I'm
sorry.
And I
Uh oh.
Sorry, Gail.
feel better.
Sorry, you, we need to check
with IT on.
What's happening with our
speakers.
Well, that's, this is Nat Dean
again. Well, that's getting
settled, I wanted to, uh, state
that there are times where I
have a severe aphasia, and I'm
unable to speak. So some of you
have seen me around the
building, unable to speak, that
was why, and I wanted to make
sure that, you know, that if I
can't
Give public comment and I wish
to, I'll put it into a voice uh
text to voice.
In the future. Oh, cool. Thank
you. There's where there's a
will, there's a way.
Thank you so much
technology makes it possible.
Sometimes, uh.
Now you're starting to sound
Uh, we appreciate your patience,
Gail.
A gale, we need you, could you
just say something so that we
can test if we've gotten it
right.
OK? Um, we can hear you. I heard
that OK. Awesome. Thank you so
much for your patience. Please,
when you're ready, you have up
to 2 minutes and we can hear you
too. So that's awesome.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair
and members of the committee.
Uh, my name is Gail Stewart. I'm
a special education lawyer in
Albuquerque. Uh, I listened to
the presentation and and
commentary this morning
regarding uh prevention of abuse
in schools, and I just said 3
points to add, um, CYFD does not
investigate anything in schools.
So to the extent information was
provided that complaints about
Activity on campus went to the
bottom of their list. I can
assure you they do not consider
it to be within their
jurisdiction, and they don't
investigate. Um, I hear from
dozens of parents every year
that have tried to report, um,
and are told that CYFD does not
investigate anything in schools.
Second, um, when a school
district superintendent.
principal, whoever receives a
complaint about sexual abuse or
harassment of a student by staff
or by another student. Um, there
really is no way to hand that
off. Uh, I recognize the
internal procedures involved in
terms of reporting to the state
and to CYFD I guess, but uh the
school district's responsibility
arises under federal law under
Title IX and without an
investigation and without
getting the abuse or harassment
stopped, the school district is
going to um be exposed to
liability. So then the third
thing is that
A simple step that this
legislature could stay, could
take and would be really
beneficial to increase the
safety of our students in
schools would be to prohibit the
covering of classroom door
windows. Um, I'm familiar with
cases in the Albuquerque Public
schools where sexual abuse
occurred over multiple school
years and in those cases, um,
Staff
Actions were in part covered up
from view, due to the covering
of classroom door windows. This
is a no cost, low cost,
absolutely easy fix, uh, that
would correct some instances of
abuse and create a lot more
safety for young children and
children with disabilities, and
I would beg you to consider just
enacting legislation that would
prohibit schools from covering
classroom door windows to ensure
that any
adult on the outside of the
classroom, could see what's
happening inside the classroom,
and that children would not be
covered up and unsafe. Thank
you.
Street.
Thank you, Gail.
All right.
I believe that's it for our
public comment. Thank you all
for joining us.
All right. Um, so members.
If you would check the
announcement tab.
We have a reception this evening
at Santa Fe Children's Museum.
5 o'clock.
I hope to see you all there.
But other than that, we will be
back at 9 o'clock tomorrow
morning, so.
See you at one of those times,
right, folks.
