We're back. OK. Welcome,
Secretaries 3
whenever you're ready
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, it's
really great to be here. So
thank you for the invitation to
come talk today. I'm Carrie
Armijo. I'm the cabinet
secretary of the Healthcare
Authority, uh, joined by, uh,
Teresa Casados, the secretary of
the Children, Youth and Families
Department and uh Gina De Blasi,
the secretary of the Department
of Health. And together, uh,
we've been working really hard
across agencies to uh reform, to
make some early reforms to the
CAA program, which is, um, the
comprehensive addiction and
recovery Act, we refer to it as
CAA, um, some changes that, you
know, there's been long-standing
bill, uh, at the federal level
for CARA, but also uh some
changes that happened at the
state level last legislative
session. So we're going to talk
a little bit of progress, where
we are with that, as well as
some intermediate changes that
have been made to address uh
some concerns. I hate to
interrupt you.
These two, handouts are from
what was presented to us by, um,
legislative Finance Committee in
June. So these are not
specifically for this
presentation, but it's
supporting data because we
couldn't get the 3 secretaries
to come. They weren't available
in June.
Sorry to interrupt.
No problem. Um, so on slide two,
and you do have a presentation,
uh, from us, um, slide two,
we're going to talk a little bit
about both the current and
future state of both the federal
CARA program as well as, uh,
2025 Senate Bill 42. Um, the
unified strategy that we're
really deploying across the
different agencies, including
the healthcare authority, the
Department of Health, CYFD, and
the early childhood Education
and Care department. We're going
to discuss the enhanced system
of support and safety that we've
implemented for
substance exposed newborns will
clarify for everyone who might
be confused about the agency
roles and responsibilities,
who's doing what, um, what is in
each person's lane, um, and then
we'll talk about future
milestones and deliverables.
So, on slide 3, just a bit of an
overview in terms of the CARA
program. Um, right now on the
Medicaid program, we have
8009,454 Medicaid members.
That's as of July, um, 297,329
children. Uh, Medicaid pays for
55% of all births in New Mexico
and covers 72% of all infants
under age one. so we are,
Medicaid is the primary payer
for, uh, most babies and
children
here in New Mexico, um, and, uh,
we have about a little bit more
than 1000 infants currently
enrolled in the CAA program. Uh,
almost 98% of those infants are
covered by the Medicaid program.
Um, again, just some context,
uh, we want to recognize that
nationally, 19 million children
in the United States, that's 1
in 4 children in the US live
with at least one parent who or
a primary caregiver who has a
substance use disorder, and that
is pretty staggering data. Uh,
so alcohol use disorder is the
most prevalent, but we know
parents are struggling and we
know kids are struggling, uh,
and so, uh, nationally, uh, this
is a big problem in
New Mexico, we rank 42nd out of
states in terms of the rate of
neonatal abstinence syndrome,
uh, per 1000 hospitalizations,
uh, at birth.
On slide 4, I'm going to talk a
little bit about the current
state of the New Mexico CAA
program and where we are headed
in the future, uh, as we
implement Senate Bill 42. Um,
today, the regulatory oversight
of the CARA program is with the
CYFD, um, so that is the sort of
regulatory entity in the future,
the healthcare authority will be
the regulator, uh, and per the
statute that was passed during
the last session. The
regulations have to be
promulgated fully by July 1st
of 2026. So there was about a
year and a half between the time
that the bill was passed and the
time that the regulations are
due.
Uh, currently, there is no
screening for prenatal substance
abuse required. Uh, it is
voluntary. Substance exposure
can be identified through
toxicology or voluntary
disclosure but not required. In
the future, we are headed toward
universal screening program. Uh,
we will be providing uh what we
call Sper, that's screening
brief intervention and referral
to treatment, not only at
hospitals, but at every prenatal
visit. It's required under the
statute. Um, and there will be
an evidence-based evaluation
tool for
um, newborns to make sure that
we are sort of adequately
checking for withdrawal
symptoms.
Today, uh, the plan of safe care
is voluntary. Um, participation
in the plan of safe care is not
required by families and
families are allowed to refuse
referrals, care coordination,
navigation, and treatment. So, a
fully voluntary program today.
We are moving toward a mandatory
approach, uh, participation in
the plan of safe care will be
required as of next July. Um,
and there, there are mandatory
elements that will be required
in the plan of safe care that
will include home visiting and
substance use disor
der treatment.
Um, today, the plan of safe care
starts at birth in the future.
That plan of safe care can be
set up during the prenatal
visits. Uh, so that's really
exciting. It's better to
intervene earlier. I think we
all know that. Um, in the, uh,
today, uh, notification to CYFD
is not required for
noncompliance with the plan of
safe care. Um, it is voluntary,
um, and a family assessment may
be completed. However, in the
future, the plan of safe care,
noncompliance will be reported.
It is mandatory reporting
requirement to CYFD
Today, we have minimal training
requirements for our providers,
our hospitals, uh, not much out
there, not a lot of curriculum.
Uh, so we are hearing about this
now from hospitals. They really
want more training. It is also
unclear under today's structure
which agency is responsible for
training providers. So in the
future, uh, what we are headed
toward is more rigorous training
for our hospitals and our
providers. That will include the
expertper piece, the plan of
safe care requirements and other
needs in terms of those
evidence-based screening
requirements. Um
and it's very clear that the
healthcare authority will be
responsible for that, those
requirements. And then lastly,
in terms of care coordination
and car navigation. Um, today we
have our MCOs, our Medicaid
managed Care Organizations um
that are providing um in-person
care coordination at the
hospital. They're at the 5
highest birth hospitals, the,
um, today, those that is
happening, um, and then we have
DOH Kara Navigators and MCO care
coordinators trying to interact
with families and do home
visits.
In the future, our vision is to
really build and leverage the
Carra Navigator program at the
Department of Health.
Um, and with that, I'll hand it
over to Secretary de Blessis.
Uh, thank you. Um, so as
secretary Armijo mentioned
earlier, this is really a
unified, um, cross agency
strategy with the goal of really
assessing risk and keeping
newborns safe. Um, and we're
gonna do that through enhancing
our interventions prior to
discharge. Um, we are performing
more frequent in-person visits
of high priority cases that have
been identified
and at the same time connecting
families with treatment and
resources.
on page 6, this gives you, uh, a
graphic of our enhanced system
of support, uh, for what we're
calling priority one babies.
Those priority one babies are
those that have a substance
exposure to fentanyl, meth,
other polysubstances or have a
fetal alcohol, uh, spectrum, um,
disorder.
Um, we are working with the
hospitals and, um, for the
priority one substance exposed
inverts until the baby is
in safe custody, and what does
that mean? What that means is
that we are assessing the risk
of the baby, whether or not the
home environment is appropriate,
whether or not the supports are
that are in the home and with
the parents, the birth parents,
are in place and we're doing
that in coordination with uh
CYFD, Department of Health and
CYFD are doing that prior to
discharge. If we find that there
is a concern
uh CYFD is taking the 72 hour
hold, um, and then is
petitioning uh family court.
The hospitals, this still
remains in place. Nothing has
changed for the hospitals. The
hospitals are currently required
to submit a plan of safe care
and, um, that has always been
the place and that requirement
still stands.
Um, we're working with the
healthcare authority, uh, MCO
uh, care coordinators on
connecting the, uh, family to,
to treatment.
Um, we are, uh, completing
safety monitoring, um, within 24
to 48 hours of the infant's
return, uh, to the home
environment. And at least, uh,
twice a month thereafter.
And then we're also working on a
post-Carra for Priority one,
cases. Currently right now, Kira
is, uh, for one year, and we
know that things don't change
after just you turn one year old
and everything's great, so we
want to make sure that we have
that continuum and we're working
with ECECD to do that.
through um home visiting
programs.
On page 7, this gives the uh
care substance categories and
response levels that we've
developed, as I discussed
earlier, Priority one cases, uh,
those are, are the highest
priority, priority 2 are those
that have substance exposure to
cocaine, ketamine,
benzodiazepines, um, those would
require, uh, an immediate visit
in the home and then at least uh
monthly.
Uh, these again are minimal. So
depending on an assessment and
the need we might have more
frequent visits.
Um, in the home
And then Priority 3 are those,
um, newborns that have been
exposed to alcohol, nicotine,
and cannabis. Um, again,
depending on the assessed need,
um, minimally, they would have a
quarterly in-person visits.
And then, uh, down below on this
graphic, it speaks to the
support for ages 1 to 3, as I
stated earlier, uh, not
everything just gets better
after you turn one years old.
There might need some
additional, uh, monitoring and
support services.
So, on slide 8, we really have
tried to break down for you and
clarify which agency is
responsible for which function
here because this is a
cross-agency effort. So I'll
start with the healthcare
authority, um, really, the
healthcare authority is the
rule, uh, regulatory entity. We
will, we are charged with the
real promulgation and the
regulatory oversight of CARA.
Uh, we are responsible for the
training, uh, the expert, the
screening tools, the plan of
safe care development and the
criteria and the reporting
requirements, what we expect
from our providers. We are also
responsible for the collecting
and reporting of data. So if
you, uh, in the future kind of
are looking for data on CAA, uh,
we will be that entity that's
taking responsibility for that.
We'll be overseeing the
hospitals. We are the licenser
licensing entity for hospitals
from sometimes folks forget that
in addition to being the payer,
we are also the oversight
entity. So we'll be making sure
that they
fulfill their responsibilities.
Um, the healthcare authorities
is also taking the lead on
building and maintaining a
portal for um reporting and
cross-agency provider
notification so that uh that is
also a piece of Senate Bill 42,
making sure that there is a way
for uh all of these entities who
are involved to communicate with
each other, as we will be
charged with making sure that
that happens. Um, it's also our
responsibility to ensure and
facilitate access to behavioral
health and substance use
disorder treatment, uh, and
other services for families. Uh,
so we are
the entity that will really be
connecting folks with the
services they need. Uh,
currently we are that
in-hospital presence, uh,
although that is, we are looking
to shift that, uh, and then our
agency is also responsible for
making sure our MCOs perform
health risk assessments and
comprehensive need assessments
for families.
As of February 1st of this year,
um, Kira is at the Department of
Health. Um, the Department of
Health has the care and
Navigators and the case managers
for all of the care of families.
Uh, the Kara navigators are
required to check, uh, the
portal daily for the plan of
safe care that gives us
notification of uh which
newborns, uh, come on the
caseload.
Um,
we are required to notify CYFD
for noncompliance or suspected
abuse and neglect, um, uh, of
the plan of safe care, um, in
the future, we're talking with
the healthcare authority about
having in-person hospital
presence. What we find is that
there are a lot of, of players
in the mix, whether it's the MCO
coordinator, where's the Kara
navigator. If there's a CYFD
investigator or family services,
we've got home visiting
with ECCD
So it seems like, you know,
having the uh Kira navigator in
the hospital having that
presence with the warm handoffs,
and, uh, that case immediately
comes onto the carra caseload
seems to make a lot of sense and
seems to streamline that
process. Um, we are responsible
for, uh, safety assessment of
caregivers in the home prior to
discharge, and we do this in
coordination, in collaboration
with CYFD and also we connect
families
with resources and supports.
So CYFD's role in this, um, you
know, and taking it from a
different public health
perspective and having DOH
involved remains similar to what
we've currently done. The role
for hospitals with reporting to
CYFD remains the same. So in
looking at priority one cases
that they identified earlier,
um, CYFD will go in and
investigate those hospital
referrals, um, of reported
substance exposure. Um, we'll
then do an immediate safety
assessment if in fact there are
a prior
ity one case of the home in
collaboration with DOH and we
want to ensure that DOH is doing
that home visit with us, um,
because of, you know, two
reasons, though Care Navigator
will be involved with that child
and that family upon discharge.
And if that child does end up
going home, we want to ensure
that the environment that it's
going home to, um, is
appropriate for them that we've
looked at risk assessment that
we determine if they need
crabettes or anything that DOH
would be supplying to them and
so they are part of that first
initial, um, investigation that
we do in that home and working
closely with us. We would
initiate that 72 hour hold prior
to discharge. So that gives us
an opportunity to go and look at
those
before the baby is released to a
home environment, um, so that we
can really do that assessment
prior to them going home. We'll
conduct the investigation and if
necessary we'll petition for
custody if the homes or the
environment is determined to be
unsafe.
We'll receive notifications for
noncompliance, referrals for
investigations if that child
does go home and they're
involved with the Kara
navigation program at DOH and
they determined that there's
noncompliance, or if at some
other reason they determine that
there's other concerns, then
they'll be making those
referrals back to CYFD and we
will go back out and do another
investigation, um, and if
necessary have our family
Services bureau, um, get
involved with that family to
ensure that we can
provide services needed for that
family.
In a stated previously, ECECD
also has a, a very important
role here, and that's with the
maternal home visiting, uh,
program, the uh Family Infant
and toddler toddler program,
otherwise known as FIT.
and, uh, early intervention
services and also the connection
of these uh newborns to
childcare services as well.
Um, and slide 9,
we looked at 149 priority cases
and how they became priority or
these were substance exposed
newborns after January 1st,
2025, that had an exposure to
the illicit, uh, drugs that we
had, uh, discussed earlier.
and through that we had a
cross-agency approach of making
some home visits because these
were cases where there was no
engagement, unable to connect
really haven't been able to
coordinate with, uh, families,
ensure that the, um, newborn is
in a safe environment.
So roughly over about a 2.5 week
period, uh, we did a
cross-agency, um, visits in the
home and it uh was a DOH care
coordinate, um, care navigators,
excuse me, um, some individuals
from the healthcare authority
through the division of Health
Improvement, helped provide
support for that. We had CYFD
investigators and we also had
New Mexico State Police, um,
because, um,
some of these
were, were some challenging
situations. So we just wanted to
make sure that everybody remains
safe, uh, not only the team that
was making the visit, but also
the families as well.
um, of those, uh, we had 148
successful visits. From those
visits, uh, 7 children were
removed. Um, it was 3 New Berns
that were on the CAA program
plus an additional 4 children,
um, that were in the home.
Um, all families were provided
with safe sleep education. Uh,
we were providing other services
like Crebets, uh, when we
determined that there wasn't a
safe sleep environment. And, uh,
other resources that were uh
needed or identified whether it
was diapers or uh formula. We
would find um homes that uh
might have some unsecured guns.
We provided gun locks because
there were other older children
in the home as well. Um, and
then we
also did connections to early
intervention and home visiting,
uh, programs through, uh, ECECD.
In addition to those 149 visits,
um, following those, um, infants
being identified. We looked at
any born after the date, um, of
the directive that was issued.
And that was so thus far an
additional 57 um individuals
that meet that prior priority
one criteria.
So we have filed petitions on 29
of those infants. Um, we've had
success in court on 15 of those,
meaning that we determine that
the environment was unsafe, um,
for that individual child and we
put petitioned the court for,
um, custody. We have had 3
unsuccessful on those court
petitions which did rule that
the babies could be returned to
home, which is really why it's
important for us to have DOH
involved with us from the onset.
so they can pick up and ensure
that those infants are supported
once they do return home. We
have 11 still pending with the
court.
Um, 6 of those we've established
guardianship with other
relatives. Um, and we've had
other interventions in 17, so
some of those are in process of
guardianship. Some we have a
parent in treatment with the
child, um, some we've had tribal
interventions, and right now we
still have 5 of those infants
remaining in the hospital
which, as long as they're safe
in the hospital, um, we're
monitoring those situations and
not filing a petition, um, until
we can determine, you know, next
steps and what needs to be done.
So, um, on slide 10, just a,
just a couple of highlights here
around hospital and health
system engagement in the CARA
program, um, and a reminder that
in fiscal year 25, the
healthcare authority began
requiring our managed care
organizations to have that
in-person hospital presence, uh,
so that began just last year.
Um, that's been an interesting
process. You know, they're
trying to really build
relationships with women right
after they've given birth. Um,
it's has been, oh, we've worked
it out with the hospital
s It was hard to set this up,
uh, hard to let them in at the
beginning, but that's working
pretty well now. Um, the
healthcare authority also issued
a hospital and birth center
directive on June 27th, um, and
that requires basically um that
the hospital must report to
CYFD's statewide central intake,
any newborn that's exposed to
fentanyl, meth, um, feed or born
with fetal alcohol spectrum
disorder or expose
d to multiple substances,
really, which one of which would
be an illicit substance. So, um,
we want to make sure that we are
tracking all of these babies
born with those exposures and
that we are intervening, um, all
patients in New Mexico hospitals
are assured a safe discharge
plan that includes every
newborn, and we want to make
sure that newborns are going
home to safe households.
Um, and so that really enables
that to happen before that
discharge occurs.
We did hold uh a cross-agency
hospital Q&A meeting in July.
Also, um, and we've answered 41
hospital questions in writing.
So we're working really closely
with hospitals, and we have also
been working on setting up
biweekly meetings with our
hospitals to make sure that we
are in a constant dialogue about
how this is working. Um, on the,
on the, um, right, you have a
table that just kind of really
shows how we're tracking some of
this data, um, MOB means mothers
of babies. Uh, so you can kind
of see we've got different
cohorts, um, identified of moms
of babies who were uh born under
the CARA program and we're
really tracking their behavioral
health claims, their substance
use claims, even any physical
health intervention, any
follow-up care at all. Um, one
of the takeaways from here, um,
and you can spend time with it
later, but one of the takeaways
is that there's very low
engagement. Um, this is
something that we've seen
nationally, the CAA program
nationally has
resulted in low engagement after
um after uh women go home from
the hospital with their infants.
It's just, it's a voluntary
program by virtue of that, um,
most of the people enrolled in
Kara are not seeking follow-up
care.
Sure
Thanks. I also just wanted to
add that in addition to the
biweekly meetings with the
hospital association that we're
doing, um, we are also as
secretary scheduled um this
Thursday to go and present at
the APCG meeting so that we can
ensure that we're addressing any
concerns or questions that the
tribes and nations may have as
well.
Thank you.
OK, on slide 11, just wanted to
kind of give you highlights
around where we are headed in
the future, what are
deliverables are, because, uh, a
lot of folks are wondering where
are we with this Kara, uh,
rollout because the deadlines
are next July, uh, and so as we
kind of talked about, we're
going to keep doing these
priority one visits and this
enhanced engagement prior to
discharge, and we're going to
continue doing that
communication with our provider
network, especially our
hospitals and providing
technical assistance. We are
also in the process of convening
a robust stakeh
old er process regarding the
rural promulgation. So you'll
expect to hear more about that.
That's happening now. Um, Senate
Bill 42 will be reflected in the
healthcare authority's executive
FY 27 budget requests. There are
some needs that the agency has
in terms of staffing and a more
robust navigation. Uh, so that
will also be reflected in our
budget submission. We are in the
process of working on that RFP
for that CAA portal. Uh, we
expect to begin our rural
promulgation in between October
and Decem
ber making sure that, um, we've
got that. So that's a fully
public process and very
transparent. We are also in the
process of selecting our
evidence-based universal
screening tool and our expert
strategy. So all of that work is
happening now. And then as we
move into 2026, we are going to
be uh focused on our training
program for our hospitals on the
new requirements, finalizing all
of our data sharing and
reporting requirements, um, and
finalizing our new regulations
by July, so that will be full
y complete
um, and we'll have a new
checklist for our hospitals and
making sure that our hospitals
are trained. So we do anticipate
full implementation in
accordance with Senate Bill 42,
uh, by July of 2026.
Um, and with that, I think, uh,
Madam Chair, we'll, we're
prepared to stand for your
questions. Thank you.
OK, thank you. Um
is there anyone who doesn't have
questions? OK, that's what I
figured. So we will start with
Representative Ferrari and go
around this way.
And um let's see.
3 minutes
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, um, esteemed
secretaries, um, one of my
questions is on the in-person
visits, um, that are, um
I forget which slide it was, uh,
for those who are at risk, um.
uh
the priority cases in in many.
levels, um, who is in charge,
well, who's who are doing these
kinds of visits who and what
kind of background do they have?
Madam Chair, Representative
Ferrari, that's a Department of
Healthcare and Navigation Team.
They're doing that when we, um,
uh, started the, uh, the program
at Department of Health in
February. We moved some of the
CYFD team over to Department of
Health. We're currently in the
process of relooking at the
requirements and we're putting
in a preferred requirement for,
uh, Master's prepared social
work.
I know that there is a shortage
of those, but we've also pulled
down the number of of um
uh MSWs that have left state
government. We've got a list of
that, so we're gonna have some
targeted outreach. So we'd like
to build that program to roughly
25 to 30 navigators.
OK, thank you. And also, um, I
guess there was one situation
that uh we've heard about a
tragedy of a baby that the
grandmother was assigned to go
and check. Um, is that not true?
Um, Madam Chair Representative
Ferrari, um, yes, that was a
situation that CYFD um dealt
with earlier this year.
And that's been changed, Madam
Chair, secret, um, Madam Chair,
Representative Freyer, that is
part of the change in what we're
doing and ensuring that there is
more follow-up, um, engaging DOH
earlier and making sure that DOH
and CYFD are communicating
often. So in addition to this,
we're doing weekly meetings with
the staff that we still have in
Family Services and they're
navigators to ensure that
there's engagement with families
and follow through.
OK, thank you. And when you have
the 72 hour um uh assessment
period where you can hold the
baby in the hospital. Um, what,
how does that, oh, to me that
sounds like it would interfere.
Does the mother get to stay
there with the baby so that
there's still that bonding or if
she's nursing, um, how, what,
how is that situation? Um, Madam
Chair Representative Ferrari,
there is no limitation of the
mother's visitation in that
hospital.
Um, so bonding with that child
is still encouraged. They're
allowed in the hospital, um,
oftentimes what we find is that
the mother is not engaged in the
hospital, if that's the case, we
have a worker that's there or if
we've identified our foster home
that they're going, the foster
parent is doing those visits,
especially for some of those
that have longer time frames
than just that 72 hours, but we
don't, um, prohibit the mother
from visiting the infant in the
hospital. OK, but she doesn't
get to stay.
with the baby or they probably
wouldn't be in that situation if
she was engaged. Is that, um,
Madam Chair Representative,
oftentimes many of those infants
are in the NICU, um, and it's
restricted and so no, they just
are there for visitations. OK,
thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Madam.
Representative Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um
so I
I'm, I'm, I have a lot of
questions and I'm probably not
gonna have time to, to go
through them all, but one of
the, I want to follow up on on
one of the things that, um,
representative Ferrari asked
about, and that's bonding,
parent-child bonding, and I, I
think I asked the question last
time when you all presented. I
don't remember, maybe it was
LFC.
where you made the presentation
and my question was about
how do you ensure that bonding
takes place between
the bonding takes place and
continues, um, once a carra baby
is identified, the baby may be
still in the hospital.
The baby may be in custody
already and you're response was,
we'll make sure that the baby
bonds with the foster parent,
which I didn't find very, a very
good response. And so to follow
up on, on Representative
Ferrari's question, you know,
how, uh, Madam Chair, how are,
how is CYFD
um, because at this point in
time, I'm assuming that CYFD has
filed for custody
Um, how are you, what are you
doing basically to ensure that
that mom gets to the hospital
because we're assuming that it's
easy for her to get there, that
the bonding continues, and after
the child, if the child is
placed in in custody, what are
you doing to make sure that that
child returns home and isn't,
doesn't remain in, in foster
care, for example, what kinds of
um
parent-child therapies are you
doing, um, just sort of walk me
through that.
Um, Madam Chair Representative
Chavez. So CYFD does not
prohibit. I mean, we do bonding
even when kids are in custody
with CYFD. We do parental
visits. We continue, and that
will continue. I mean, we want
to make sure that the mother is
getting the services that she
needs in many of these cases, we
anticipate that taking that
child into custody will allow
for her to go to treatment or
get that treatment or, you know,
work closely with the navigators
and care coordinators who are
setting that treatment
up. Unfortunately, we don't have
many treatment facilities in the
state of New Mexico that will
allow the mother and the child
to go together. We do have one,
and we're gonna work everything
we can to ensure that if that's
the route that they want to take
that we will try to get them
into a facility where the baby
can remain with them through
treatment, but we also want to
ensure that that baby can be in
a safe environment. So if the
parent chooses that
and it's not available to take
the child, that we have somebody
who can step in and take care of
that child while the mother is
in treatment, you know,
conducting whatever visitation
would then be allowed through
the treatment facility to ensure
that that bonding could
continue. I think what I said is
that we also want to make sure
that if that child is removed
from the mother and is placed in
a foster home, that that bonding
continues with that foster
parent, because the bonding for
an infant at that age is so
critically important.
3 minutes goes fast and I'm
sorry, uh, Representative Anaya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I think
I'm going to take the angel
Charlie approach here. um, thank
you, Senator Charlie. Um
thank you, Secretary de Blasio,
for answering some of my
questions earlier. I appreciate
that. Um, first question is, how
do you handle parents who are,
um, in Matt.
Are they also subject to the 72
hour hold, and second is, um, if
a child is subject to a 72 hour
hold. How is it that you are
going to navigate IFA if they're
an indigenous child
And then third
there is a lot of fear. I've had
a lot of um healthcare providers
in my district reach out to me.
One, folks are very confused
about the new directive. Um,
they, they are very, very much
so requesting more specific
guidance. I'm sure you've heard
that before, but they also have
a lot of fear that this new
directive may actually stee
families away from getting
treatment. And so I'm wondering
if you all have any sort of
public education built into your
plan.
Uh, Madam Chair, I'll, I'll take
the first question and then I'll
hand it over and then we can
kind of try it to to do the
third question. So the first
question is around parents and
Matt. So folks who are in
recovery who really working
hard, and I mean, their doctors
would have advised them to stay
on those mat services. They are
not included in this directive.
So unless there was a
combination of, for example, uh,
methadone plus fentanyl or
methadone plus, um,
methamphetamine, I mean, that
would be the only time that it
would be trigg
er ed which would be an
indication that potentially
there's a relapse going on. So,
uh, women who are in recovery,
uh, we really want to support
their recovery. That is the
clinically best thing to do for
that family. And so, uh, they
are definitely not uh under this
directive, uh, and I don't have
secretary wants to address if,
um, yes, so on that 72 hour
hold. Um, one of the questions
asked when they do the plan of
care in the hospital is if
there's reason to believe that
that child may be of Native
American heritage.
And so that question is asked
upfront there, or if a report is
called in to Sky at a later date
or, you know, there's reason to
believe um that is also asked in
the sky intake and that triggers
us then to make sure that we're
following IPA ICA.
that we're working with the
tribes and pueblos. Um, I think
when we went out and did the 149
visits, and that was done, you
know, um
differently. It wasn't called
into sky. We just looked at
those cases. I think in some of
those areas, we may not have
been paying as close attention
to whether or not that applied.
Um, it's one of the things that
we're looking at now and
ensuring that we're working that
into the response and how we
handle um those specific cases.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Anaya, um, you know, yes, more
education is needed. I've
specifically met with Focus
Clinic, Malaro program, the
Adobe program, who also works
with teens and pregnancy who
have some, uh, challenges with,
with substance use and we heard
the, I heard the same thing from
them. We've been hearing that
there's concern within the
provider community about fear,
uh, of individuals wanting
to, uh, seek, um, care and
prenatal care, um, because
they're worried that we're going
to step in and remove children,
um, I think I was able to
reinsure the clinics that that's
not the case, but I do think
that more robust training, more
communication, and getting the
word out about really what this
directive means is, um, in the
priority on trying to keep
newborns safe. We want to work
with the families. We want to
give the families the supports
and services that
they need so that they can um
maintain the child in their
home, um, but you know, it's
gonna take us some time, um,
over the course of standing up,
uh, Senate Bill 42 to end with
the training that's happening at
the healthcare authority through
the, uh, with all the providers
in the community to make sure
that um we get that message out.
At the same time, it's really to
establish the trust with those
community providers and with the
mothers as well.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Torres Velasquez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
I kind of want to build on those
same questions. I believe I've
got 2 questions. They may be
related, they may be a little
different. I'm not sure.
Um, uh, looking at page 8.
and looking at the agency roles
and responsibilities.
Um, my question, my, the first
thing that hit me is why are we
not being proactive and
culturally and linguistically
sustaining with all our
families, and I'm not sure why
that was the question that came
to me. I don't see punitive
language here, but it feels very
punitive as we go along and look
at the slides. And of course,
we're dealing with serious
subject matter here in terms of
um criminalization in terms of
mental health, and so
I just was wondering why we are
not being proactive. That's
question one. And then the other
was, um, where do we provide
treatment for the parents.
Comprehensive addiction and
recovery Act, it would seem to
me, and maybe I just don't know
enough about Senate Bill 42, but
it would seem to me that if
you've got a child in this
situation, then the parents
obviously need some help as
well. So where do we provide
that treatment? And so again,
those issues of mental health
and dis
ability sometimes come into
this. And also coming into play
in my mind is, what if the
parents were dealing with
are part of that population we
just looked at in the last
presentation that was, uh, duly
involved.
Thank you,
Madam Chair. Uh, Madam Chair,
Representative Torres Velasquez,
well, thank you for the
question. I think, um, I, I, you
know, I run the state's Mental
Health Agency and we definitely
don't want to be punitive at
all. We want to encourage
everyone to get treatment who
needs it. Um, and that's
absolutely our goal, um, is to
make sure that we connect
families with the treatment they
need. There is capacity, uh, we
can serve a lot more people. Uh,
most people who are interacting
with the
healthcare, um, the behavioral
health system really think they
don't need help or that they can
solve their problems on their
own. Unfortunately, um, that's
really not the case sometimes
with these really, really
serious substance use issues and
so, uh, really part of that goal
is to really intervene at the
hospital. Um, but Senate Bill 42
also takes that into the
prenatal environment. So really
trying to do that intervention
at those prenatal visits. Um,
and that's a really proactive
approach that hasn't existed
under the CARA program or the
framework at all, um, or in New
Mex
ic o and so I'm really excited
to be able to roll that out
because I think the prenatal
intervention is the most
important point of, uh,
intervention really before
things um kind of become really
serious health problems for the
baby, for the mom. So that's
really the goal here. I, I do
think it's a proactive approach
in terms of the safety of the
families and really making sure,
um, I think we've all seen these
articles in which babies have
been discharged to unsafe
environments, um, and there are
15 babies who have now
uh been sort of placed in an
alternative setting with the
entire goal of getting families
the treatment they need so they
can get those kiddos back, um,
and we want to support
everything about that, but I
think um this is a this is a
little bit of a switch in terms
of the proactive approach around
the safety of families while we
connect them to treatment, and I
don't know if anyone wants to
add anything.
Thank you. Um, that's time
Representative Johnson
Madam Chair, I reserve my time.
You're trying to throw in things
here that don't go.
Uh, Representative Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair
You've done a lot. I think we
need a whole day to talk about
this at the very least, because
I have a million questions, but,
and I won't even go into them
because I'll just give you an
example of why.
Madam Chair
I think it's been 2 years ago
when I asked about navigators
because navigators are part of
the Terra plan prior to what we
did this last session at SB 42.
And we were in the process of
hiring navigators, and it was
promised to me that we were
going to have
that number completed by
December, which is going on, I
think this December or Jan or
Janu by January 1st, we were
going to have
40 navigators or whatever the
number was, I don't remember,
but it was, you know, it was
something that gave me a great
relief to know because we need
navigators in the hospital, just
like you said, it's part of the
plan. We need navigators in the
home, just like you said.
But to get back to, to the
bottom line.
right now, we're having this
meeting. They're babies dying.
And I want to know how many
babies have died since the
session ended, or actually this
year, how many babies have died?
um, who should have been in
custody rather than at home with
a mom who exposed them to drugs
or alcohol when she was
pregnant.
I need a number
Um, Madam Chair, Representative
Jones, um, I believe that of
infants that were in an
environment where there was
substance exposure at birth with
Cara, um, with fatalities.
in the year. Um, I believe that
number is 3, but I just want to
get confirmation and get back to
you with that information.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair
Representative Block
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you all for being here. I have 3
minutes. There are 3
secretaries, so I don't know how
quickly I can get through this,
but first of all, I, I just want
to address some kind of
narrative that's being pushed
out there that we're trying to
be punitive with these women,
because I believe
as a state, we're trying to be
as careful as we can be to
protect the safety of that baby,
which I believe is the priority.
So my question then would be
when it comes to this rollout.
we keep on using the word
mandatory. And so I'm just
trying to figure out which
portions of this Kara.
platform that we've created are
mandatory and which are not.
And I'm wondering if you could
just go into that a little bit
for me, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Black, um, so we're, we're
moving a sort of described where
we are in this sort of spectrum
of getting from when the bill
passed to next July when things
really, the mandatory plan of
care compliance, all of those
things. Today, what is mandatory
or what really changed with this
directive, um, was the visits.
We wanted to check on every
household, and then the second
part is the mandatory reporting
by the hospitals. Uh, we want to
know about those substance
exposures. And so we have made
that mandatory where
before it was really more at the
hospital's discretion, um, they
could report it, maybe, maybe
not. We weren't seeing a lot of
consistency. So that's really
what's changed in the interim as
we've really required the
hospitals to report those
substance exposures, those four
conditions, uh, to CYFD, CYFD is
doing the investigation, uh,
with the Department of Health,
making sure that that house
household is safe for discharge.
Um, if this household is safe
for discharge, nothing is
impeded. But that's really
what's mandatory now. OK, thank
you, Madam Chair and thank you
for that, Secretary Armijo. So
I'm just wondering when it comes
to the
I know we're with the new
changes, what if the state does
not
do the proper protocols to
petition by 72 hours. Would that
mandate that the child would be
released to that mother who may
be
addicted to, well, who is
addicted to fentanyl or
something else, and that would
directly impact whatever we do
as a state. Is that correct? If
the state does not petition in
time. Um,
so, Madam Chair, Representative
Block, this is a good question.
Um, in theory, you know, the way
it should work is that once
that's reported, there has to be
an investigation. Um, actually,
the hospital cannot discharge to
anyone who's not a legal
guardian. And at that point, the
state will be sort of absorbing
the custody agree
ment So I think that the
hospital cannot actually
discharge once it's been
determined unsafe. They've
actually taken an action to
report it to CYFD but I would
defer to the secretary here if
I'm missing something. Sure.
Um, Madam Chair Representative
Block, so the 72 hours is not a
time limit for CYFD to file. It
is once we do file, we get 72
hours to go out and then look at
the home environment to
determine whether or not it's
unsafe. And then at that point,
at the end of the 72 hours is
when we need to then petition
the court for custody if we
determine it to be unsafe. OK,
thank you, Madam Chair. And
just, just to piggyback on that,
I just want to make very clear
that
a mom who is addicted to
fentanyl in that first
72 hours, I, in my opinion, I do
not believe it is safe to put
that child back into custody of
that mother to be nursing and
continuing to enter poison into
that child's body. So I I heard
a comment before about that and
that really triggered me, so, so
to speak. So I just want to make
sure that that's super clear
that we're protecting those kids
and that's all I had, Madam
Chair. So if you want to add
something, well, just really
quickly, Madam Chair,
Representative, that is very
true. Um, the hospital will not
let the baby nurse, uh, because
babies can die of overdose, uh,
and so they would really kind of
monitor that situation. It's
really at the hospital's
discretion, but that you are
absolutely correct.
Representative Chaves.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
thank you for the presentation.
Um, I do have a question
regarding this new mandate, um,
that was recently changed. My
question is, do you have plans
to go back to every substance
exposed infant since 2019, um,
to evaluate, make welfare
checks, check on that child or
drug checks. Um, I think that
the 15 month old twins who
almost died last week. We
might have missed the date if we
weren't going all the way back.
So what is our
dateline for that
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative Chavez, so that
is why we put in place here
after you turn just one year
old, you graduate out of Kira.
We're trying to provide that
level of the support from 1 to 3
years old through ECCD through
home visiting and and the FIT
program. So we will continue to
have those checks, and the
priority one cases are those,
uh, newborns that were substance
exposed to those illicit drugs,
but all substance exposed
newborns
are, um, the hospitals are
required to uh submit a plan of
safe care and the care and
navigation team follows all of
those substances exposed
newborns, uh, via the protocol
that was on the graphic.
OK, thank you. Um, that makes me
a little nervous, so I hope we,
we get that.
straightened out pretty soon. My
second question is just
regarding um healthcare and
access issues. I know that the
NICU and PICU units have been on
divert status for quite a while.
So have we talked to hospitals
and how are we going to work
around that issue.
Um, Madam Chair, Representative
Chavez, right now, uh, so you
are absolutely right, we do have
healthcare access issues. Um,
right now, the the average
length of a stay for an infant
in this um situation is about 17
to 25 days. So it really kind of
depends on what symptoms they're
exhibiting, but we're really not
impeding discharge. I want to be
super clear that we're not like
holding on to babies who are
medically eligible for
discharge. All of this is
happening while they're in the
hospital. We have, we are
meeting with hospital
s We are, uh, really, as I kind
of talked about having those
office hour type, um, technical
assistance phone calls with
them. We wanna make sure we know
if there are any issues like
that happening. Uh, but right
now that really hasn't happened
um as of right now and um as a
secretary mentioned, we only
have 5 of those 57 babies in the
hospital. They probably, they
would be in the hospital
anyways. They're just not ready
for discharge yet.
OK, thank you so much. That was,
um, good to know because I
really just wanted that answer.
And then I think, um, my last
question, oh, where was it? this
little, this little notepad I've
been deleting and writing new
things here, so, oh, sky, you
keep referring to sky. Can you
explain to the committee what
Sky is and how.
you operate that
Um, yes, Madame Cheerson Tavis,
I will be really brief. It is
our statewide central intake.
And so the hospitals use that to
call in for any concerns that
they have for abuse and neglect,
and that's where those get
called in and then screened for
the department.
Minority Whip Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
going to page 8 of the slides.
Um
when CYFD petitions for custody.
are they being
taken to a, a foster home.
or they winding up at Pinon or
at Pinetree.
Um
I
Representative Chab um
Martinez, they, it depends on
where they are in that
situation. So, if we file for a
72 hour hold and we go and
determine that the house is
unsafe, then we file the
petition with the court for
custody. So during that time
frame between the 72 hour hold
and the custody hearing, um,
CYMD does maintain custody of
that youth. So if they're still
in the hospital, um, we would,
you know, be the custodian as
they were in the hospital. If
they're ready
for discharge, um, typically
they would be placed with a
foster home, so that foster
parent would go to the hospital
for any of the, the trainings
and they work with the hospital
on learning specifically how to
care for that child.
If for some reason a foster home
has not been identified and the
child is ready for discharge. It
would be discharged to, um, the
receiving center to CYFD staff
and then CYFD staff would go to
the hospital and learn the
proper care of that child while
they continue to find, um, an
appropriate foster home for the
infant. We haven't had a
situation where a where um an
infant has had to remain in the
receiving center.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
Secretary of the receiving
Center is at Pinetree.
or where is the receiving
center? Madam Chair, yes, it is.
So, um, on your last visit to
Pinetree.
there seems to be
some serious security issues
there.
When you visited Pine Tree
or you working on a fix
to that
issue of kids just
walking away
Um, Madam Chairman Urdu Whip
Martinez, um
the kids, yes, we are working on
the issue of kids just walking
away. So, um, older youth that
remain there. We have not had
older youth, um, in the Pine
Tree office overnight for some
time now. Um, but younger youth
in the receiving center, so the
office days are separate from
the receiving center. The
receiving center is youth under
the age of 12.
Um, that facility, um, is fairly
secure. We do sometimes have um
younger kids that will try to
run. We have, um, put alarms on
the doors up high so that they
can't reach them. So it alarms
if the door is in fact opened,
um, so staff can be alerted to
that. Um, but yes, we have been
working on issues to address
that.
Uh, thank you very much. Um.
When was the last time you were
at Pine Tree?
Uh, Madam Chair, minority Whip
Martinez, um, week before last.
Thank you Madam Chair
Representative Gonzalez, uh, I'm
not sure if you were here for
the presentation. OK, we're
gonna skip you. OK, thank you,
Senator Charlie. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and thank you all
for being here. My phone is
blowing up with advocates and
social workers countering the
information that's been shared.
So, as opposed to asking
questions, I just would like to
make a statement. It's that we
all share the same goal, uh,
keeping newborns safe and
families supporting families in
their most vulnerable moments,
but families are telling us a
different
story, those advocates, the
social workers are telling us a
different story. It's not the
way that Kara is being
implemented feels less like
support and more like
punishment. If we want these
policies to proceed, we have to
build trust with mothers, with
tribes, and with relatives who
step up to take care of their
children.
This means looking honestly and
where at where the system is
breaking down and committing
together to do better. I want to
be your ally in that and, and
build a relationship with each
of you to ensure that happens.
Families are telling trusted
social workers that Cara feels
less like support and more like
punishment. Instead of
connecting mothers to treatment
and resources, our policies are
criminalizing women for
substance use in pregnancy.
We continue to hear about child
removals without notice to
tribes. An immediate removal is
a direct violation of federal
ICA and state IFPA. Yet CYFD and
state police have entered tribal
lands without permission. It's
happened in this letterta and
San Felipe, undermining tribal
sovereignty and authority. We
are breaking the law
Kinship guardians are given
fewer supports than licensed
foster parents, forcing families
to shoulder the burden alone. In
fact, it has been a well-known
strategy of CYFD to prioritize
guardianship over licensing
because it's a workaround to
avoid subsidizing actual
support. Without subsidies and
sustained support, guardianship
placements collapse, and
children cycle back into the
crisis with CYFD. This is not
family preservation, and it's
cost shifting
onto relatives. Prioritizing
guardianship without subs
subsidies, CYFD withhold
resources while families absorb
that risk. And because we don't
even track how many guardianship
placements fall back into the
system, back into that cycle
with C by um CYFD. We are
choosing to not know the full
impact. That is state state
sanctioned neglect, Madam Chair,
and it demands accountability.
Since the hospital directive
took effect, petitions have been
filed, removals have occurred,
and placements have been made,
but we are not seeing
transparent real-time reporting.
Of the home visits, petitions,
removals, and guardian ships
established, we don't know of
those. What are the culturally
and responsive placements. Um,
and without that information,
Madam Chair, the legislature
cannot evaluate whether the
program is protecting families
or producing state sanctioned
trauma.
At the heart of this is whether
our policies keep families
whole, honor tribal sovereignty
and build trust, or whether they
create state sanctioned trauma
for our families. We owe our
families, we owe the mothers
more than just numbers. We owe
them real support and real
accountability. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Great timing. Um.
Vice Chair Lopez
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
appreciate the presentation
being given today.
and mine is just a comment also,
Madam Chair.
You know, when the first
directive came out,
the, the initial response, my
right response was, well, we
have the Kerala.
So how does this counter
what the Kerala does
Um, I've had an opportunity to
speak to a few families, a few
hospitals, um, a few providers
of health, and there's, there
are some concerns even with
whatever you have described for
us today as to how you're moving
forward.
Madam Chair, um
I firmly do not believe that a
mother
really wants to hurt her child.
Um
there are those who do have some
substance issues.
and Madam Chair, if those
mothers are not seeing a
physician.
um, you know, some type of
health professional during their
pregnancy, then I think we're
not doing the right thing to
encourage.
that mother to actually get
prenatal care
Um, those I have spoken to,
spoken with, who are actually
other advocates in our
community, the concern is, is
that this may have a chilling
effect.
for mothers who don't want to go
get any type of healthcare
because whether they have a
substance, um, issue or whatever
it may be, but there's a
chilling effect that may take
place, and I think
um, it may
from others that I've spoken to,
Madam Chair, there are, I think
there already is having a
chilling effect on some
communities.
of persons
Um
Madam Chair, I know you gave us
numbers, you have all of this
information of who, where and
what.
But you know, there's such a
thing as, um, postpartum
depression that comes in.
from those of us who've given
birth, you know, I think some of
us have gone through that at
some point in time.
Um
but
I think the system needs to be
revamped and looked at, Madame
Cheris, to how we provide
services to these women
to these moms to be before
they're separated from their
child.
and it's a directive, Madam
Chair
It's not a laws. It's not
something that we've passed in
the legislature that the
governor signed.
We have the Kara Law, and I'm
glad that we have improved it
because it did need some
improvements.
and I hope Secretary Mijo that
you are, that the MCOs are
really responding nicely, really
trying to get something done.
But Madam Chair, I just, um,
for different populations in our
state, I really have some
concerns as to what this is
doing.
for a prospective mothers
and I know it's easy to say,
yes, the child is going to bond
and whatever the other verbiage
is it's used.
But when a child, when you tell
a mother that her child has been
taken away, that has certain
other effects on the mother's
psyche.
Child is a child. It's an
infant, still bonding issues.
Yes, I know, but what are we
doing to make sure that that
mother has appropriate support.
So I mean, I have other comments
and questions, Madam Chair, but
it's just
um, I'm not happy that there was
a directive done.
I really am not
as overstepping the bounds of
what I think the governors, any
governor's authority is.
We have the Kerala. That is
something that's actually
standing. It was signed.
that legislation passed by this
legislature and signed into law.
something done at the whim
is not appropriate
It sets us up for some other
things that could possibly take
place. Remember there's such a
thing called precedent, Madam
Chair.
So I just err on the side that
I'm not happy with what
happened.
with the directive. Thank you
So I, I do have a a a couple of
questions and a couple of
statements. So
OK
Mom comes in, gives birth
Does baby have to show signs of,
of, um, withdrawal, um, is, is
every mom who's known to be a
user, is baby tested? How, how,
how do, how does one become a
carra baby?
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, it's really
voluntary disclosure or baby
born with symptoms of
withdrawal. So, you know,
medically, sort of clinically
observed symptoms, uh, babies
are often born with really
debilitating, uh, symptoms. So,
or a neurological issues such as
fetal alcohol spectrum. So it,
but it, there isn't universal
screening yet. Uh, that is where
we're headed, but it's not in
place at this time.
Thank you. And, and I too share
the concerns with bonding, and I
don't have any data around this,
but you hear anecdotes of women
who
saw their baby, fell in love,
and decided to, you know, to get
treatment and to do the best
they could. I think we are
taking that opportunity away
from some moms, um, which I, and
I know that bonding in the NICU
is, you know, it's a whole
different ballgame and all of
that, but I'm just throwing that
out there.
Um
and then, so if a baby doesn't
have medical needs and you want
to do a 72 hour hold. You take
them from, you know, they're
born, you know, there's no,
there's no physical signs of
anything.
You, you hold them for 72 hours
in Pinetree.
Um, Madam Chair, they would be
placed with a foster home. We
try not to place infants at Pine
Tree. We would typically do a
foster home.
OK, and, and I, I was
disappointed. I don't believe
any of the three of you said
anything about kinship. You keep
talking about foster homes.
and, and I think Senator Charlie
really, we are
backwards to be willing to pay
strangers to take care of kids
but not be willing to support
families to take care of those
same kids. So, so I, I think we
need to have kinship, be, uh,
and it may be, it doesn't come
across as that. That should be
our number one priority, um, and
I'd like to see that more
involved in, in what, what, what
we have in front of us. More
discussion of kinship, um
and then on page, page 10, I
look at the chart and it looks
like, oh, United Healthcare, you
know, doesn't have any of these
moms, um, but, but without
knowing how many lives are
covered. You can't really make a
comparison. So, I would much
prefer a percentage or out of,
you know, out of 10,000 covered
lives United has this many, um,
just, just so we can see who's
doing what. Um, and then on page
8, there's discussion of an
unsafe home
So let's say the reason, you
know, mom, mom has a substance
use disorder, um, but she's
living in a, in a crack house.
So
is part of, you know, when you
do the home visit and you say,
oh, if she had a better place to
live, she'd have a better
chance. Is, is that an option
that you are, uh, undertaking to
get mom to have a, a safe place.
Um, Madam Chair, yes, part of
that assessment would be, you
know, to do an assessment of the
living environment, but also
part of that assessment would
be, you know, mom's willingness
to make those changes, to go to
a new environment and, you know,
we would work with the Workforce
development on housing or
whatever other services are
available if it's treatment. Our
goal is to try to get mom to
participate in treatment,
hopefully with child
attached with her during that
treatment. Um, it's really to
support mom through whatever she
needs to be able to maintain
that family unit and ensure that
that infant would be safe. I
think that's really what we're
looking at is the safety of the
infant in those situations. So
I'm, I'm guessing that she won't
get housing tomorrow or the next
day. So are there hotel voucher,
are there, are there other ways
that mom can stay with baby um
in a safe environment while
working on a longer term
solution. Uh, Madam Chair, yes,
I think there are a bunch of
different options, um,
particularly for women who are,
um, potentially addicted or
struggling with substance use,
we do have supportive housing,
we have the supportive housing
program. We cover that through
Medicaid, um, and we can
definitely connect people.
There, there have been a couple
of success stories. I mean, we,
one of the great things about
doing these 150 or so visits is
the success that we've had and
um there were some families that
were either struggling
with extreme poverty and the the
home just wasn't, um, you know,
it was, uh, there were some
challenges we were able to move
them to, you know, a new housing
situation. So there, there was,
there have been really
successful sort of interventions
that have happened, and we are
able to connect women. There,
there is treatment available
with your babies as well. So I
just want to make sure that it's
really clear that we have those
options. And then just one final
question, uh, last year, 2 years
ago, we heard from Dr. En
ri que I can never say his last
name, Eguendanos, and he let me
know that his contract was not
renewed.
And
that upset me a lot because what
they were doing was, um, and I
don't want to go into a lot of
detail, but, um, he guaranteed
us that if he didn't save the
state the amount of money for
his contract, he would not be
paid, and I can't understand why
we would throw away a good
program that is guaranteed to
not cost us money.
Um, Madam Chair, we didn't see
the same results from that
program. I think, um, and it is
somewhat duplicative of all the
car navigation and care
coordination that we're doing.
So I think there was a sense of,
it was a little bit expensive
and we weren't getting the
results. That was our, the
state's assessment of that
particular relationship.
Interesting. It, it seems like
we're not doing a great job
now. And he had some wonderful
success stories, and as I said,
he promised us as a committee
that if he didn't save the state
the amount of his contract, he
would not be paid. So I don't
think it was expensive, um, but
and I'll leave it at that. I, I
was very, very disappointed to
hear that, um
that, that contract had not
been, um, renewed. So with that,
thank you all so much for being
here and I do have an
announcement that our final
presenter, um, McKinley County
Opioid Settlement Update,
Anthony Demas, the county
manager of McKinley County had
to cancel. So we will be doing
public comment around 4, so if
you are here for public comment,
or if you are on Zoom for public
comment, um, be prepared around
4-ish. So thank you all, Madam
Secretarycretaries.
Madam Chair, I think I'm here
for a two first. So, I'm just
going to, I'm going to just go
get the I can only go one at a
time. All right.
Oh, the good news, right, Madam
Secretary?
Whenever you're ready, Madam
Secretary. And if I could ask
you to please take your
conversations out so that we can
continue
OK, uh, hello again. You'll be
really tired of me by the end of
this afternoon. So, um, again,
Carrie Armijo, I'm here to, I'm
the secretary of the Healthcare
Authority and um this
presentation is really to talk
to you all about the federal
reconciliation bill and the
implications to the healthcare
authority and um the 40% of New
Mexicans we serve through our
program. So we're really going
to talk through that today, um,
and we'll just go ahead and dig
right in. So
uh just a reminder on slide 2
that the healthcare authority's
mission is to ensure that New
Mexicans can attain their
highest level of health by
providing whole person,
cost-effective, accessible, and
high-quality healthcare and
safety net services, and our
vision is that every New Mexican
will have access to affordable
health care coverage through a
coordinated and seamless
healthcare system, uh, which we
know does not exist today, but
that is really what we are
trying to build at the
healthcare authority.
On slide 3, a reminder that the
healthcare authorities serves,
um, 848,966 New Mexicans through
our programs. Um, we are the, we
have the highest enrollment of
any state sort of by by
percentage in the Medicaid
program, we cover about 39% of
New Mexicans through Medicaid.
We also have extremely high
snap, uh, enrollment, about 23%
of New Mexicans enrolled in the
SNAP program, and you
can see um how many customers we
have like each county as a
percentage of each county's
population, um, they're in the
map.
So, on slide 4, I just want to
be really clear and I think that
my, my top line message for all
of you is that, uh, changes that
Congress enacted through the
reconciliation bill across the
healthcare authority's programs,
primarily SNAP and Medicaid are
going to affect every New
Mexican. There are implications
for all of us living in this
state, um, as people who shop at
grocery stores, as people who
access healthcare, um, that I
think it's really important for
us to know. These are not just
program
cuts for uh people enrolled in
our program. There are big
financial impacts to New Mexico,
um, and in fact you can see, um,
on the right that New Mexico
ranks highest in the United
States, um, in terms of
estimated job losses that are
going to be caused by reductions
in Medicaid and SNAP funding,
um, anticipating about a 1.7%
decrease in jobs here in New
Mexico. Uh, Medicaid serves New
Mexico as the largest health
payer, um, and regulations are
going to the new regulations are
going to
impact access and cost across
all provider types. Um, those
costs will in some way or
another be passed on to
individuals with private health
insurance. We're starting to
already see the market start to
react, um, in terms of what's
happening, premium increases,
uh, things like that are gonna
start to happen. So that is
really going to happen sooner
rather than later. Um, also our
ability as an agency to really
leverage purchasing power is
going to be more limited, um,
as, you know, that
the, the power of our programs
goes away or uh is reduced. We
are looking at the potential
closure of 6 to 8 rural
hospitals, uh, here in New
Mexico over the next 18 to 24
months, which would mean
reduced, uh, access to care for
all of us, um, in communities,
um, you know, and anyone
traveling through our
communities who might need those
services. Um, and uninsured
individuals are likely to forego
preventive care, resulting in
higher acuity, a sicker
population, higher costs, and
more crowded
emergency rooms
Um,
nearly 1.2 billion in SNAP
revenue is at stake for 1700 New
Mexico grocery stores, farmers'
markets, gas stations, and
convenience stores with these
reductions.
Um, and just a reminder that New
Mexico has the highest rate of
child food insecurity in the
United States at 23.3%, um,
which is likely to worsen, and
one of the things that we know
about Snap is that it does
actually uh children enrolled in
the SNAP program actually have
improved academic performance
and school attendance, so it
does impact the overall health
and well-being of our families.
Um, and lastly on this slide,
um, investments in New Mexico's
safety net have reduced child
poverty from
worst in the nation to 17th in
the nation, um, and federal
changes are likely to reserve,
uh, reverse that change. And
we're actually anticipating a
new census numbers that kind of
reflect some of these reductions
starting to happen already.
uh coming out soon
So, on slide 5, I'm gonna talk
about Medicaid and what's
happening in the Medicaid
universe in terms of changing uh
requirements. So first, we will
have what's called community or
work engagement requirements.
Those will start on 12:31 of 26,
2026, that's my last day of
work, really
an interesting and auspicious
date there, uh, but those
requirements will go into effect
at that date. We also will have
more frequent eligibility checks
and additional documentation
that is required for uh folk
s to stay enrolled. So, today,
we, uh, we do renewals every 12
months. We will be moving that
to every 6 months for most
adults in the program. So it's
going to be harder to stay
enrolled, and that also goes
into effect on 1231 and 2026.
There are some reduced
eligibility provisions. So the
retroactive Medicaid, uh, period
is reduced to one month. We, we
currently can cover about 3
months of unpaid medical bills.
Um, that's going to be reduced
to one month. That starts at 11
of 27. So also around the same
time and then starting next
October, um, some legal
immigration statuses, including
many refugees, victims of human
trafficking, um, they will also
roll off of the
program. So there's about 9600
individuals who will roll off of
Medicaid, who have a legal
immigration status here in the
United States, but who will no
longer be covered by the
program.
Um, there, we're also looking at
some reductions to provider
payments uh down to 100% of
Medicare upper threshold. So,
um, we will see, uh, what we
call provider taxes, which is
currently how we fund higher
payments to our hospitals. We
also have higher payments to our
nursing facilities here in New
Mexico through provider taxes,
which are exempt from the phase
out, um, but those provider
taxes, those will start to phase
out in FY 28, as well as the
payments that are
tied to that. So those higher
payments that we're paying out
to hospitals will start to phase
down in 2028. Um, and one thing
I think it's really important to
be aware of is that we're
starting to see a lot of
pushback from our federal
regulators at the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services
around the higher payments to
providers generally. So right
now we're paying primary care,
behavioral health and maternal
child healthcare at 150% of
Medicare, um.
we think that CMS might take
administrative action to reduce
those payments down to 100% of
Medicare. So just something to
be aware of. Uh, you all have
invested very heavily in
provider rates and so that would
affect our providers here in New
Mexico, pretty substantially,
um, and you may be aware that
Medicare rates are not
equivalent from state to state.
So New Mexico actually has
relatively low Medicare rates,
and those are set by the federal
government.
Um, we are also looking at
having co-payments for certain
services and populations
starting 101 of 28. So, uh,
another sort of reduction for
providers ultimately probably
coming out of provider payments.
Just a reminder, as we talk
about work requirements that
most Medicaid adults are working
here in New Mexico. Um, you've
got, uh, only about 30% not
working and that's really
doesn't factor in people with
disabilities or people who
really can't work, uh, because
of, uh, a real issue or a
parents
uh, who are taking care of
children.
Um, and I do want to remind you
that a single person in New
Mexico would have to work more
than 39.78 hours a week in a
minimum wage job in New Mexico
to exceed the federal poverty
limit to not qualify for
Medicaid. So essentially, if
you're working full time in a
minimum wage job in New Mexico,
you still qualify for Medicaid.
So the perception that people
aren't working is really not an
accurate one.
On slide 6, just a review of
impacts of the federal changes
to New Mexico. We are um
currently funded at about almost
$10 billion in federal funding
for, for the Medicaid program.
and um under the reconciliation
bill, more than 8.5 billion, a
potentially lost to New Mexico's
Medicaid program from changes to
provider payments from 2028 to
2037. So over that decade,
we're looking at a lot of
reduced payments. Um, we're
anticipating that almost 89,000
New Mexicans will lose Medicaid
coverage, um, an estimated
42,000 New Mexicans will have
new co-pays, uh, 254,000 New
Mexicans will be subject to a
new paperwork or administrative
burden in order to stay
enrolled, even though they still
likely qualify for benefits.
We're looking at safety net more
than 50% safety net providers,
including our hospitals, los
losing critical fun
ding and as I mentioned, um,
some potential hospital
closures. We are also one of the
highest uh projected increase to
uninsured rates, uh, projected
across the country, probably
most likely due to those
roll-offs from Medicaid. Um, on
slide 7,
some snap changes also on the
horizon to be aware of. Um, so
there is a new requirement, uh,
in the reconciliation bill that
states will share a portion of
the SNAP benefit. Um, so we
currently
pay out about $1.2 billion in
benefits across New Mexico. Um,
the, the new requirement is
that, and I'll talk about this a
little bit more, is that states
will pay a share of the benefit
based on their payment error
rate, and I'll talk about that a
little bit. But one thing to be
aware of is that New Mexico does
have a high payment error rate
and I'll also talk about why
that is. Um, so we are kind of
in the last tranche of states.
Uh, we may have, um, up to 2
years to
delay that sort of cost share
for New Mexico. Um, so that
could be as late as FY 30 or for
for the our, our state. So, um,
I guess a potentially good news,
although there's a lot of work
to bring down that error rate
going on.
Um, there's also a substantial
reduction in federal funding to
administer the SNAP program, we
currently get a 50/50
administrative ratio, um, that
is changing, uh, with 75% of the
costs to administer the SNAP
program. Now the state's
responsibility and 25%, um, at
the federal level.
Um, this October, we are also
expecting that the federal
government will reset the
formula for, uh, SNAP benefits.
So that is going to result in
reductions in the actual SNAP
benefits, the maximum SNAP
benefit today is about $292.
We're expecting that to go down
to about $231. So about $60 a
month, a little bit more than
that for anyone who's at that
threshold. Um, we are looking
also at additional work
requirements for the SNAP
program, um, and stricter en
f or ce ment of work
requirements, probably New
Mexico has, because of its
unemployment rate. We have a
waiver right now under for most
of the state in terms of
participation, that waiver
expires 12:31 of 25, so
expecting additional work
requirements to take place this
January.
And there are also some
eligibility reductions. So folks
will no longer be eligible for
utility deductions and other
things. So some folks will roll
off or see their benefits
reduced, and then, um, this
October there's also a narrowing
of SNAP eligibility for
non-citizens. And again, these
are legal people who are
lawfully present, but just, um,
they've reduced the number of
statuses or the kinds of
statuses that we will be able to
cover.
So, on slide 8, just the impacts
of these changes. Uh, we do have
about 459,000 New Mexicans in
SNAP today, 1700 retailers um
who are at risk of losing
revenue. Um, the reconciliation
bill cuts about 203 million up
to $203 million in federal
funding from New Mexico over
time, um, some of that hit will
start in FY 27.
Um, we are anticipating an
additional $5.5 million in
federal funds lost due to the
termination of federal SNAP
education funding, and as I
mentioned, um, we will be paying
75% of the cost to administer
SNAP. That is a $47 million
impact to the healthcare
authority. Um, that is going to
be in our FY 27 budget request.
Um, so that fact, that will be
factored in, very big change for
the agency.
Um, we expect about 459,000 New
Mexicans to see their monthly
benefits reduced, 16,000 New
Mexicans expected to lose SNAP
benefits due to their
immigration status, uh, that
starting this October.
um, 55,000 New Mexicans are
likely to be subject to new work
requirements, 20,000 New
Mexicans likely to lose SNAP
benefits altogether, and 20,000
New Mexicans to see a reduction
in SNAP benefits, um, due to the
way that eligibility is
calculated.
So, on slide 9, just a brief
overview of the Snap payment
error rate. I've been getting a
lot of questions about this
because it does have major
fiscal implications for the
healthcare authority, for the
state of New Mexico. Um, Snap
payment error rates really
indicate how accurately states
determine eligibility and
benefits for their customers,
but there's sort of two aspects.
One is how often we overpay our
customers. Um, so in New Mexico,
that is the big driver. Uh, we
are mostly issuing, uh, our
errors are mostly due to
overpayments, very few
underpayments here in New
Mexico. Um, and so right now,
the focus of our quality control
has really been on ensuring that
households receive the accurate
benefit amount, and I'll talk a
little bit about what's driving
the payment error rate. Uh, but
one thing to know is that it is
not a measure of fraud. These
are really unintentional
mistakes by states and by
customers who sort of fail
sometimes to report a change
that might have impacted their
benefits. Um, there are things
like that,
but really the payment error
rate is not a reflection of
fraud or any intentional mistake
on it by customers or states,
um.
so
under the new federal provision,
if the payment error rate is
below 6%, the state will not
have a cost share.
Um, if the payment error rate is
over 10%, the state pays 15% of
the SNAP benefit. So 15% of $1.2
billion it's 100 and, uh, over
$150 million. Um, and so, and
then there's some in between
there in terms of where our
payment error rate falls.
Currently, on slide 10, our
payment error rate is almost
15%.
New Mexico ranks 49th out of 53
states and territories, um, and
I'm going to talk about the
major contributors to the
payment error rate. So there
were some flexibilities that
were allowed during the COVID-19
pandemic that the state took
advantage of, and we did this
because we knew that New Mexico
has a very high food insecurity
rate, and we chose to keep
families fed. Um, so we waived
required interviews, and this
was allowed by the federal
government, but we waived those
interviews. That contributed
ne g ative ly to the payment
error rate. We also waived six
month interim reports that
contributed negatively to the
payment error rate. Um, we also
have a long-standing policy of
allowing for self-attestation of
shelter costs, utilities, and
independent care. This is really
designed to keep people on their
benefits. Um, so that is a
policy we're gonna have to take
a look at changing, um, and then
we also experienced major shifts
in our workforce. Um, you all
know that, uh, probably
frontline work
ers all over the United States
were impacted. Um, we are no
different from any employer, uh,
where we struggled with
maintaining adequate staffing,
making sure that we trained
people accurately. These are
complex benefit programs and so
it's really taken some time to
clean that up, make sure that we
um have experienced caseworkers
and, um, our, our res our, um
are funded vacancy rate is less
than 1% now, so it was very
high, probably closer to 40% are
coming out of the pandemic
Um, and then you all are
familiar with the Medicaid
unwinding, um, and the pressures
on application processing
timeliness. Uh, we had to choose
to sort of get people their
benefits, but that also kind of
impacted our payment error rate.
So we're in the process of
really trying to correct, uh,
our payment error rate, get
things, uh, moving, um, and I
won't talk in depth about that,
but I do want to make sure that
you understand we have a plan,
um, that we are executing the
plan. The, the focus has been on
the payment error rate provision
and trying to correct that. But
New Mexico is in a little bit of
an awkward situation because
we're very close to triggering
sort of that um cost share,
right? Um, so it's really more
to New Mexico's advantage
to stay in a higher payment
error rate status for a little
bit longer because of the way
the reconciliation bill was
written, um, and we are very
close to the edge, so I'm happy
to explain that further, but
it's a little bit of a strange,
uh, timing issue.
Um, and I wanna make sure you're
aware that um on slide 12, we
really have demonstrated our
ability to make big improvements
at the income support division.
This is the staff that is going
to be implementing the work
requirements. They're going to
be doing the biannual
verification. All of this other,
uh, these changes really impact
directly our ISD workforce. You
can kind of see that today, uh,
we are 99% timely on Snap and
97% timely on Medicaid
Uh, so this is a huge remarkable
thing for our agency. We worked
really hard to clean this up.
You might have heard about all
of the delays in people getting
their benefits. So really proud
that we've achieved the success,
but again, these pressures are
going to affect this workforce.
On slide 13, just another sort
of, um, shifting back to the
healthcare side. Um
I wanna make the point that we
also through the healthcare
authority are helping to make
coverage more affordable for
people who are purchasing
coverage through the
marketplace. We have the
Healthcare Affordability Fund,
and through that, uh, we are
able to provide additional
subsidies for New Mexicans so
that they can afford their
premiums, uh, without our
programs, uh, we project that
between 23,000 and 38,000 New
Mexicans would lose coverage
through the exchange. Um, that's
pretty huge.
The marketplace covers about
71,000 people. I think right
now. So you can see if they lost
half that really starts to alter
how our, our coverage landscape
looks and whether it's even
solvent fiscally. Um, so we are
really focused on also trying to
preserve or mitigate, preserve
coverage and mitigate coverage
losses for New Mexicans who
might be sort of um subject to
some of those provisions as
well.
Um, we think we can sort of
mitigate those losses to much
fewer New Mexicans, and we do
have in our budget, um, money to
sort of preserve, um, federal
tax credits, um, are expiring.
These enhanced federal tax
credits are expiring for people
below 400% of poverty. We will
be preserving those, uh, through
our programs, but also looking
at some pretty big other
changes. There are going to be
folks who are again lawfully
present, who will not be able to
purchase
coverage, um, and there's going
to be some shorter enrollment
windows. So all of that's gonna
affect the, uh, private market.
Um, we are anticipating that we
could see up to $1800 in premium
increases per person here in New
Mexico.
So my last slide, um, really is
what keeps me up at night these
days, um, and it's really the
pressures of trying to do all of
these sort of historic changes
for the healthcare authority and
lead the agency, um, you know,
there are a lot of pressures to
do these things quickly, uh, to
do them well and to do them at
the less amount of cost, uh,
but, you know, when you kind of
cut one of those, you're gonna
really sort of upset the
le cart. So really, we're really
under a lot of pressure in terms
of trying to manage all of this.
We are talking about pretty
historic changes in a pretty
quick turnaround time. And I
think a lot about, um, whether
we can do a good job for New
Mexico, uh, which is our
neighbors and our children and
our parents. And so I think a
lot about that. I want to make
sure that when we execute these
changes, uh, that we are able to
do them in a customer focused
way, um, minimal abrasion to our
healthcare market.
and so that's really what we're
thinking about at the Healthcare
Authority, you know there's
going to be a lot of
conversation coming up over the
next few weeks about what the
agency's needs are, um, and what
we need to do here in New
Mexico. So I look forward to
that dialogue. And with that,
I'll, I'll stand for your
questions. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you for that, uh,
for the presentation.
not for what you told us, but
for the presentation and I know
you have nothing to do with it,
so we will start with Senator
Pope. Do you have questions?
Representative Torres Velasquez.
Um, let, let me look at time
here.
One minute. We have 30 seconds.
I'm kidding. I'm kidding. Let,
let's, let's stick with the 3.
OK. Um
I, I guess my concern, um, has
to do with the implications for
how cuts in Medicaid might
affect a person's ability to
work if more referrals and more
paperwork is needed to get
healthcare taken care of and did
I say Medicare or Medicaid? I
apologize if I said it wrong.
Um, referring to Medicaid, of
course. Um, but I'm wondering
what y'all have thought of ahead
of time to
to keep that from happening
because then that would affect
not only the person's livelihood
but their life. Thank you.
Madam Chair. Madam Chair
Representative Torres Velasquez,
very good question. I think we
are trying to make sure that
when we implement the, it's work
or community engagement or
education, um, that we, when we
implement these requirements
that we make it as easy as
possible for New Mexicans to
report the changes and that
wherever possible, we're setting
up data interfaces. So, uh, I am
meeting this week with the
secretary Nayer uh from DWS to
really talk about what data do
we have, how can we work better,
what kind of supports
do they need to provide
additional work supports for New
Mexico? How many people are we
looking at by county so that uh
they are adequately staffed and
so I think there's going to be
some really good conversations
happening there. We're also
looking at potential data
interfaces interfaces with the
educational side. Um, can we
just verify that folks are
enrolled in school, so they
don't even have to report it.
Um, if the more that we can do
sort of ex parte and not really
interfere with people's lives,
the better. So we are really
thinking about all of that. The
caveat is that federal guidance
has not come out yet, and so we
don't know how that will be, um,
I, I would anticipate that some
of the changes may may require
people to report, uh, or require
them to come in person or
something like that. Um, I'm not
sure how much data will be
accepted. Um, and if they don't
comply, it's possible that
they'll have a lockout period,
um, which would make things
really difficult, but that's a
very typical thing in insurance.
uh, to avoid people kind of
coming back when they're really
sick or when they're in the
hospital. Uh, and so that's what
I'm really worried about. I
think we may see a lot of that
sort of uncompensated care
increase because people, I do, I
do anticipate that the federal
government might attach some of
those provisions, making it very
difficult for people to
re-enroll. Um,
you know, so I think those are
all things that we're really
looking at, but I'm very focused
on our customers and trying to
make it easy for them.
Uh,
Representative Anaya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, just
a comment, like, one, this is
sick and disgusting, and it's a
total disgrace. And, um
I also hope to move as a
legislator with a lot of grace,
as you all are also trying to
figure this out, um, so you have
my, my commitment to be helpful
in any way and to move with that
grace because I see your
three-legged stool. Thanks.
Uh, Representative Chavez
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, so
we've heard a lot about rural
hospitals closing. And in your
presentation, you said the
prediction is between 6 and 8.
So two questions. One, how did
you arrive at that? Can you talk
a little bit more about that.
And then also which ones? Which
ones are we thinking they're
gonna close?
Um, Madam Chair, Representative
Chavez, so that is a that is a
number that I got from the
hospital association. So I, I
really don't feel like I am the
best person to speculate about
the financial picture of each
hospital. Uh, we, our agency
does review hospital cost
reports. We work very closely
with hospitals when they are
having financial problems. We, I
typically get phone calls, um,
but there's a lot that could
change between now and
FY 28, and I'm, I'm a little bit
reticent to say which hospitals
I could tell you sort of which
ones seem to sort of have the
most concerns, um, I would be
looking at our rural hospitals
where, you know, they have high
fixed cost and not enough volume
to, um, sometimes, and I think
that's why we implemented some
new payment programs to really
try to account for and give them
some additional funding, but
it's really hard to keep a rural
hospital open. Um, and that's
not to say all of them are
having financial problems. It's
just a reality. Um, so I think,
you know, happy that we're going
to be watching the situation
very closely, um, kind of
thinking of ways to mitigate
those losses. We are fortunate
that we can continue to invest
in hospitals between now and
fiscal year 28. So really kind
of making sure that they're
investing where they need to,
and making smart choices, but I
really, I would, I feel like I
might be a little bit out of my
over my skis if I
were to say which hospitals
specifically.
Um, Madam Chair, did the
hospital association give you
any sense of why they're
thinking.
that number of hospitals might
close. I mean, I'm, I guess what
I'm trying to do is trying to
figure out, as opposed to, you
know, they throw out a number
and then everybody keeps
repeating it and we don't even
know why. Well, uh, Madam Chair,
Representative Chavez, I think
it's probably a pretty accurate
number. I've had some, there's
probably 6 to 8 hospitals that
prior to implementation of the
healthcare delivery and Access
Act that I was working with
pretty closely. Um
including some that were
wondering how they were going to
keep the lights on. Um, and so I
would anticipate as those funds
go away or phase out that
they're gonna sort of be faced
with the same struggles that
they were before, so I think
it's probably pretty accurate,
but there's still a lot of time
between now and FY 28, I think
it's just something for us to be
aware of and really working
proactively with the hospitals
and I'm sure uh Troy Clark at
the hospitals Association would
be happy to talk to you about
sort of what he's seeing. No,
you don't think.
so.
But I, um, I'm happy to provide
you with additional information
as that becomes available. I
just feel like I don't want to
speak for other hospital CEOs
about their situation.
Oops Madam Chair, additional
information would be great. I
would love to see that.
Um.
and
I got what I was gonna ask. Oh,
is there a report um
in terms of the money that's
already been drawn down from the
hospitals and if you could share
that information with the
committee as well.
Thank you, Madam Madam, sorry,
Madam Chair, Representative, are
you talking about the HDAA
program, the amount of funding.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
will be happy to get that out to
you. Thank you. And
Representative Chavez, um, some
of us were on a Zoom with Troy
and um.
Julia
last week. I, yeah, and, and,
and they were very careful to
not name any hospitals, not, um,
and, and I'm of the opinion, how
can we help you if we don't know
who you are, um, and also
another thing, um, you know, we
talked about the hospitals that
were already in trouble. We know
we have the most number of
private equity hospitals in the
country and what are private
equity hospitals after.
profit.
So as we lose Medicaid rates, as
we have higher uninsured, um,
there's no guarantee that those
hospitals that are flushed with
cash aren't going to bail
because they can't make the
money that they thought they
could make, so I'm sure they
will. Yeah, well
OK. Representative Ferrari
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, uh, Madam Secretary, um,
it's been in the news, um,
lately about the um uh $168
million in overpayments to
manage care and I was wondering
why we're um.
forgiving them and um the 119
million that the feds went back
and then the 50 million that was
um overcharged, couldn't we use
that money to help pay and for,
you know, what we're losing,
especially for Snap and also to
shore up, you know, be well, um,
members. Um, Madam Chair,
Representative, I don't believe
that was in the news. I think it
was in a blog, um, and it isn't
accurate. Uh, so I just want to
really kind of
be super clear. There, there is
a, there was an Office of
Inspector General audit of the
agencies's capitation payments
and reconciliations that goes
back to about 2014, um, and I
think that's really what is
being referred to, uh, there,
um, under that, the federal
Office of Inspector General
calculated that we owed about
$119 million I believe. Um
however, we're very much still
in negotiations about that with
the federal government and the
federal CMS, which makes the
final decision has not made a
final decision. So that is very
much in flux.
And of course, I don't think
it's an overpayment. Our
position is that we owe zero,
and that that's really an
incorrect finding and it's a
very complicated financial
issue, so I'd be happy to kind
of talk offline. It probably
would put half of you all to
sleep, but it is really about
reconciliations and um,
recoupments, uh, related to our
community benefit program, and
it goes back more than a decade.
So it's, it's kind of a
complicated finding. I just, I
don't really think it's an
apples to oranges kind of
compari
son and I think that information
was a little bit inaccurate, um,
yeah. OK. Well, thank you, Madam
Chair and Madam Secretary for
that explanation, um, because
I'm sure if there were funds
that we could recoup that we
would put them to better use
than just letting the MCOs.
have them.
uh, Madam Chair, Representative,
of course, I think a big part of
that financial burden actually
would be general fund and so I
don't think it's uh fair to say
that it's overpayments and like
I said, our position is that
there's 0,
and many of those MCOs, some of
them don't even aren't even in
the New Mexico market. We, we
don't have relationships with
them now, so it's, you know, how
you get money back from an
exited MCO. It's kind of a
complicated, uh, scenario. So
we'll work through it. I'm happy
to provide you all with updates
and information, but, um, you
know, our position really is to
try and protect the state
against $119 million finding or
hit, um, so that's really what
we're coming from and we don't
think that it's an accurate
finding. So.
thank you for that explanation.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
So just on that, on that issue,
um, if it turns out that it is
an overpayment, can't we take
companies that we don't have a
relationship with to court or
the ones we do for that matter.
I mean, it's, it's not really a
lost cause, is it? Madam Chair,
uh, maybe not. I think, uh, we
have actually been looking at
the contract, and I, we, I mean
to be, to be fair, we are
preparing in case we have to pay
this back. I mean, we are, we do
have a
plan. We've been working with
the LFC. It's been pretty
transparent in terms of our
budgets and our projection, um,
because it is a risk to the
budget, um, but I think we are
trying to figure out, there's
usually a sort of a run out on
financial liabilities and so
we're really kind of researching
that, but you're not wrong, man.
I'm sure that there could be
some liabilities for old, if
the, if there was an
overpayment. OK, thank you.
Senator Charlie.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, with
the increase in paperwork
anticipate anticipated, how is
HC going to help New Mexicans
re-enroll.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator
Charlie, great question. Um, we
will be doing everything we can
to try and make it as easy as
possible to make sure that folks
understand what's happening to
them, um.
and we are looking to really
staff our frontline workforce,
uh, to make sure, Madam Chair,
additional FTEs. Uh, Madam
Chair, Senator, yes, we are
requesting additional FTE. We
don't want to put, I mean, as I
mentioned, the pressure for this
workforce is very substantial.
Um, they are very busy and so
we've calculated in our budget
request, um, the amount of tasks
they as human beings can do, um,
and how many we anticipate
having and so we've kind of
calculated
a need for additional FTE. So we
are going to do that. We'll have
robust communications campaign.
Um, unfortunately, thank you. I
want to form it. OK, I'm sorry.
I can talk about it all day,
Madam Chair, I'm sorry. The
second question is, how much
fraud is there? We got a report
from universities, and they had
over 7000 fake applicants who
were trying to get scholarships,
and I'm wondering how are we
monitoring AI in fraudulent
claims within HCA.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator
Charlie, are you talking about
provider claims or or customers.
I'm talking about for benefits,
um, Madam Chair, Senator, we
verified the identity of every
person who applies for benefits.
We also have an Office of
Inspector General. They do
investigations. We have um some
front end analytics that we do.
So we kind of
try and hit it from all ends. I,
um
Thank you, yeah, um, Madam Chair
and secret, thank you. I just,
I, I'll just close this out by
saying I cannot believe we are
in this reality. The reality of
the federal policies on our
healthcare right now. I think
there's a difference between
intention and impact and the
intention to save money is going
to cost New Mexicans dearly.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Gonzalez.
Um, thank you, um, Madam Chair,
and thank you for the
presentation. Although there's a
lot that can be digested within
your presentation. Um, one
question I have is actually not
necessarily what's in here, but
an impact specific with the
summer food, um, service
program. Although it is not
directly tied to Snap. It is
right now, you're automatically
enrolled based on your SNAP
eligibility. And so one concern
in my mind that I've been
meeting with my school districts
currently is
how do we go about making sure
that those same schools programs
are continued to be eligible,
um, you know, with the changes,
although this bill does not
change that eligibility, you
know, it's like the domino
effect or whatnot, um, based
upon changes to SNAP eligibility
in those automatic enrollments
may be that same similar thread
of Senator Charlie about the
re-enrollment procedures. So
maybe what could you foresee
some thoughts and just general
brainstorming with my
administrators, um, school
administrators were talking
about handling those
administrative responsibilities
to get students now enrolled to
be eligible for the Summer Food
Science program, um, possibly
like a statewide marketing
campaign letting parents and
families know that it's no
longer automatically eligible
for some of these services, um,
and also possible common
enrollment forms. Um, have you
had any thoughts to, again,
trickle down effect from some of
these to other programs that
weren't mentioned. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, Representative,
well, I'm really glad you're
asking about the summer food
program. It's, um, been a very
successful program, really
exciting. I'm really happy to
work with the schools. I don't
know if I have the best answers
for all of those. I think we are
trying to think about how to do
everything in the most customer
friendly way. Um, the easiest
way for New Mexicans and
families, um, and so that will
be at the heart of our decision
making, um, and we have some
strategies. We went through the
Medicaid unwinding, which
involved snap families and
Medicaid. It was really
historic events. We learned a
lot from that, um, but I will be
really eager to work with our
communities and stakeholders on
um ways that we could do a
better, ways that they could
help us. I'm sure folks are
really eager to make that
happen. So, um, we are signed up
to do the summer EBT program
again. Continue that program and
uh make that as automated as
possible. So I know a lot of
families just got the money and
they were really surprised by it
and excited, um, and keep that
going, but, um,
you know, I think we're sort of
at the starting of trying to
think about how this is all
going to work and how our
systems are going to interact
with New Mexicans. I'd love to
work with the schools on that.
Um, thank you for that. And just
the other place that I want to,
um, you know, being in my
community, there is one of those
at-risk hospitals, rural
hospitals are Alta Vista
Hospital that um always keeping
at the forefront of a lot of
these changes, um, and in
particular, I guess maybe my
question is more the flip. We're
talking about, you know, how
there's these hospitals that may
be at risk towards, you know,
down the road loss in Medicaid,
which is absolutely true.
But currently, I guess more on
the positive, like the influx of
funds, and maybe I don't know if
this is a mural house or
another, but with the rural
Health Transformation Program,
if I'm getting that titling
right, um, the 50 billion coming
in, starting in FY 26. I know
it's the states will determine
how those funds are distributed.
And maybe that was something on
the conversation, possibly that
I was not that I wasn't able to
attend, but I don't know if your
department has any say or any
leeway on possibly some
suggestions to maybe get that
influx into our rural hospitals
in anticipation for those cuts
coming later on. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, Representative, we
will be, um, our agency's the
lead for all of that funding. We
are onboarding, uh, an expert to
sort of help us manage all of
those funds and kind of create a
system for getting those money,
the money out as quickly as
possible. We're expecting
guidance from the federal
government in mid-September. So,
kind of uh planning for that,
um, and awards will be due to
states, I believe, uh those
announcements will be due by the
end of this year. So that's a
pretty quick turnaround time,
uh, just try and get money out.
I, I don't think it's a
windfall.
I wouldn't probably characterize
it that way, but it is a way to
sort of mitigate some of the
coming losses. Um, yeah.
minority whip Martinez.
OK, uh, Representative Chavez.
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair. um,
thank you for your presentation.
I just have a couple questions.
Uh, my first one is regarding
the 88,000 New Mexicans and the
23,000 or more marketplace
individuals that you're seeing
are going to lose coverage. Is
that all encompassing of those
specific issues you put
underneath, or is it because of
the federal poverty level
eligibility, um, that we have
raised. What is the specific
issue for that
large of a number of New
Mexicans losing coverage. Um,
Madam Chair, Representative
Chavez, um, can I just clarify,
are you asking about the
Medicaid losses or the market
plate losses or both? OK. Um,
thank you for the clarification.
Madam Chair, Representative, on
the Medicaid side, it's really
going to be due the, the primary
driver of those losses, um, is
going to be related to the work
requirements, um, and
sort of not, um, deciding not
to, you know, not filling out
the paperwork. I most I
kind of talked about this. Most
people are working, um
it's really about administrative
burden. Um, the same is true for
the additional re-verification.
So we do that once every 12
months, every 6 months, it's
more often, uh, folks, we expect
folks just don't respond. Um,
it's a lot of paperwork, it's
confusing. We try, it's our, our
duty to make it less confusing,
but that's really the reality.
Right now, about 42% of New
Mexicans renew on time.
So that's on the Medicaid side.
On the marketplace side, I think
what you're going to start to
see is people um
their coverage might become more
expensive. Some of the tax
credits are expiring, uh, for
folks. We are starting to see um
there's going to be fewer people
who can actually purchase
coverage because of immigration
status.
Um, our agency is trying to
preserve the access for our
folks under 400% of poverty, but
people over 400% of poverty are
also losing those tax credits.
Many of them are self-employed,
folks who don't have coverage
through an employer, uh, so
coverage will be more expensive
for them, and we are also the
combination is also um that
we're seeing requested premium
increases come in on the private
side. Hi.
Uh, and so coverage is expensive
without that help. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you for
answering that. So I, and I
believe it. I did ask about the
federal poverty levels. So I
think that's where a majority of
that is coming from. Um, my
question then, because of the
New Mexicans that we think are
going to lose healthcare
coverage for Medicaid is the
state going to open up more PE
determiner classes because, um,
I think that MCOs, community
providers, are really running
into issues with not enough
classes being offer
ed in order to get PE
determiners on their
work staff
Um, Madam Chair, Representative
Chavez, Sure. I, we will, we
would love to do that if that's,
if folks feel like that would be
helpful. I think presumptive
eligibility is um great. It is
definitely, I prefer people to
stay on coverage and if you
didn't know, we have real-time
eligibility, so it's always
faster to try and get an
eligibility determination, but I
would be more than happy to kind
of get that additional education
out there.
Thank you.
Representative Block, thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, Madam
Secretary. So I'm just gonna go
to page 6 regarding Medicaid
specifically, and I think it
states under the reconciliation
bill, about 250,000 New Mexicans
will be subject to increased
paperwork.
to stay enrolled in Medicaid,
and even though you note that
uh they will still qualify.
I just want to clarify how many
of those
individuals who will still
qualify will still get that
insurance versus, you know, I
mean, they have to jump through
one more hoop just to ensure
access is legitimate, right? So
can you just tell me from, from
those individuals, how much
would that reduce the number of
people getting that Medicaid
coverage, Madam Chairman. Madam
Chair Representative B block,
we're anticipating.
90,000 losing coverage from that
group. It's sort of a subset of
that group. The 254,000 because
the, the policy changes really
are focused on the adult
expansion, uh,
which is the population that has
the increased paperwork, um, and
then of that population,
probably about 90.
to 100,000 will lose coverage.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair. And
then I don't see a number of
total enrollees in Medicaid on
the state. I think last time I
checked it was something like
900 and
I forget, 900,000 people. So I'm
just wondering what's, what's
the current number we have and
then what's the projected
number? And then could you tell
me
3
during and post COVID, what
those numbers are, and is this
just going back down to the
status quo pre-COVID.
Uh, Madam Chair, great question.
Representative Block, um, we
have about 860,000. What's, uh,
that's really close. I could get
you the exact number. It's about
860,000 today.
Um
during the peak, during COVID
was over a million people, uh,
enrolled in Medicaid. That was
our, uh, pre- unwinding peak, so
that was right before we hit the
unwinding and that was due to
the maintenance of effort
provision that we had to, um,
implement.
We are right now just below
where we were pre-pandemic, so
that 860,000 is just right kind
of in that same
area. Uh, so we're close and we
are trending flat. Our
enrollment is trending flat. It
will start to trend down once
these changes take effect, but
we are pretty much flat
enrollment right now. All right,
thank you, Madam Chair. And then
last question, I know that after
the pandemic, it kind of, we got
those people off Medicaid, but I
think only about 5% went on
private insurance or Bel NM
plans. So I'm just wondering how
that is affected when it comes
to the one big beautiful Bill.
A and how that affects the
people on BENM because it's
about only 5000, I think it was
about 10,000 individuals post
COVID. So what is that gonna do
when it comes to those
individuals who, I mean, it's a
very small minority of people
who got off Medicaid and onto
private insurance, Me.
Madam Chair, uh Representative,
I'm not sure if I actually have
a projection in terms of growth.
What I've seen mostly is, uh, a
shrinking sort of enrollment
target, um, so I don't think
they're anticipating a lot of
growth from these roll-offs from
Medicaid, primarily because most
of them probably still qualify
for Medicaid. Uh, so folks will,
you can't enroll and get help on
the exchange if you still
qualify for Medicaid. The
challenge will just be how the
federal government implements
that provision and whether
people can come back on Medicaid
easily or if there's that
lockout vision.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Thank you, uh, Representative
Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Somebody
has their mic on, is that you?
Oh, no, it's you, of course.
Sorry, I don't know if you've
been turning it off or not. No,
I guess it works with two of us,
right?
It
Yeah. Thank you, Madam Chair,
and thank you Secretary Armijo
for the new information. I
appreciate that there's a little
less speculation. It, it helps
with, you know, future, uh,
looking into the future, but I
have no additional questions.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Vice Chair Lopez
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
uh, just a question, and I think
you did mention it, Madam
Secretary, that the feds still
haven't put together their
rules.
uh for the, the Medicaid
changes?
Madam Chair, uh, Vice Chair
Lopez, that's correct. OK.
Um, do you already have a
committee chosen for New Mexico
as to how we will implement, um,
you know, the rules that they
bring forward, I, I hope they
give us a little leeway. Uh,
Madam Chair, back in the day
when Prora, the town of uh
legislation was passed under
President Clinton. That was my
first term up here, and I
remember it took us a full year
just to go through and figure
out how the changes were going
to be made for implementation,
and that was some huge changes
to the, the welfare to work
program, TANF as we call it
now.
So I'm hoping, do you, if you
already have a committee, um,
and I, do you, uh, Madam Chair,
Vice Chair Lopez, we have an an
executive, we have sort of an
internal agency structure around
these changes um that has been
implemented. We also have our
Medicaid advisory Committee,
which will, our Medicaid
director is talking at length at
all of those meetings uh to
really sort of talk about how
things get executed and
implemented there. Uh, we also
now have a beneficiary
advisory committee that just
launched, uh, so that has real
members who are participating
and so that's also really
exciting. So all of these, those
are kind of the forums that
these changes will be discussed
primarily. I'm happy to have
additional stakeholders
involved. Happy to get
additional feedback on that, but
um we do have a structure and
things are starting to move
forward, but it will be
challenging in the absence of
guidance. We're really hoping
that we can get some information
out, uh, from the feds pretty
quickly.
No, and I appreciate, I mean,
the Medicaid advisory committee
existed back then, but I would
hope that you do some outreach
for some of the
organizations who
work with community, um
I know the ACLU was part of it
back then, um, Center for Law
and Poverty, and a few others,
but I would hope that they would
also at least
be able to participate as you
begin to put the rules together
for New Mexico's program.
and then Madam Chair, um, I know
there's, uh, I think the B2 to 3
bill.
um
has, I think, about $50 billion
in it for rural hospitals.
Is that the information that you
were sharing or talking with
Representative Gonzalez about?
Uh, Madam Chair, Vice Chair
Lopez, that's correct. I think
that is the same pot of money,
same pot of money. Um, Madam
Chair, and 50 billion doesn't go
far.
So I know we don't need to
expect that we're going to get a
huge chunk of change because
there are many others across
this country who are also going
to be applying for monies
So that's not just a savior for,
for our rural hospitals. Just,
it's just seen where we've been
in the past years and where we
are at this point.
Madam Chair, what about our
FQHCs?
Federally qualified healthcare
centers.
What is the department looking
into?
Have you had a conversation
about FQHCs. Uh, Madam Chair,
Vice Chair Lopez, we have, we've
actually had a couple of
conversations with FQHCs and
about FQHCs, um, I'm worried
about our FQHCs primarily
because as people roll off of
Medicaid, I know they're going
to keep serving people and
they're going to serve them
with, even if they can't pay.
And so we really are going to
need to think about what to do
for our provider network. Um, I
think especially when their
mission is around serving
everybody.
who comes in the door, and so
yes, we have had some
conversations with them,
thinking differently about, you
know, what we may need to do
now, um, and so we are actively
working on that issue.
Well, I'm glad it's on your
radar, uh, Madam Secretary,
Madam Chair, the, uh, I know
when the money, the portal was
not accessible earlier this
year.
One FQHC in my community in the
South Valley of Albuquerque was
losing what had the possibility
of losing $650,000 a month.
and those are throughout the
different grants and such that
the organization has written in
order to keep the doors open,
and of course we serve about
50,000 people in the Albuquerque
area.
and Valencia County as well as
Torrance County.
So that's a huge chunk of
change. Multiply that as you
know, we have over 200 in the
state of New Mexico FQHC, so,
um, I anticipate Madam Chair,
that some of those might be
closing also.
just because of their reliance
on Medicaid.
So the other thing I wanted to
mention, Madam Chair, is, um, we
all have these little machines
that computers at our leisure
There is a a report back on June
19th. This was by New Mexico
News staff and posted on um
the Roosevelt General Hospital
and Clinic's website.
talking about the US Senate.
And, and there was conversation
during the the during the budget
process of the, the B2, the 3,
Bill.
and in there it did list um
where they said that in Mexico
had actually 15
um hospitals that were on the
list for um
potential closing, not just the
6 to 8, of course this was back
in June, so maybe there's more
positive at that point. But what
they were looking at there in
the US Senate, Budget Committee
was those hospitals that rely on
Medicaid
So that is, it's, it's more than
just a 6 to 8, but it did
mention Altavista, um, eastern
New Mexico.
uh Espanola, which of course is
part of, of Presbyterian Plains
Regional Medical Center, Ribaho,
Carlsbad, Covenant Hobbs, um,
Roosevelt, General Hospital,
which of course is in Portalis.
Lovela Regional Hospital in
Roswell Socorro.
uh, Daniel, I see Doctor Dan
Trigg Memorial Hospital, which
is in Chicomerry, Lincoln County
Medical Center, Ruidoso, Minors,
Colfax Medical Center up there
Raton.
Mimbres, which is, um, in
Demming and then Holy Cross,
which is in Taos.
and this was based on some
information from the Senate
Budget Committee, uh, back in
June. So I just wanted just to
mention there is a list of of
hospitals that were mentioned
because um they rely heavily on
Medicaid.
So just an FYI, that's all.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
will go to you, Senator Pope,
but I, I have a slide from the
presentation by the Hospital
Association that talks about the
rural health transformation
program. Um, it's 50 billion
split over 5 years, 2026 to
2030, 10 billion dispersed
annually, 5 billion evenly to
each participating state. So 100
million per state. So Montana
gets the same amount as
New York and California, which,
OK, um,
and then 5 billion at CMS
administrators discretion.
There's limited direction in the
bill for what rural providers
are eligible. There's some
guidance for what funds can be
used for, but not how states
must disburse funds to rural
providers and now my tech, I
don't want to add a caption. So
basically it says that the
healthcare authority must create
a transformation
plan by some unknown date, um,
which the things have to be
pretty much buttoned up by
December 31st. So, so I'm
assuming that you are working on
this, even though there's not
much direction and you don't
know when it's due and you don't
know what to do with it. So can
you just briefly talk about how
you are preparing for the
unknown. Um, sure, Madam Chair,
and um, thank you for, for
talking about that. I mean, it
is
I just want to be really clear,
it is, there's still a very big
gap.
These funds will sort of be a
very little band-aid on a much
bigger problem, um, and I'm
happy to kind of give you that
gap between what the Medicaid
funding is and what we will be
getting because it's still
billions of dollars in a gap.
So, um, we do have a procurement
posted to on board an entity to
help us with the rural Fund
applications, that is currently
posted and underway. Um, and
we're expecting that pretty
soon. So we're
trying to ramp up and be
prepared. There has been
discussion about the avenue for
getting funds out, um, once we
in New Mexico have the funds,
um, and it may look something
similar to the rural Healthcare
Fund, where we sort of have a
application process or a way for
hospitals to access the money
quickly. Um, that's been a very
successful model. So we're
really looking at what will the
avenue be to get the dollars out
the door quickly, um, not
sitting on them at our agency,
but really trying to prioritize
getting those
out, um, and just preparing. So
we, we really are doing
everything we can in the absence
of guidance just to make sure
that we're ready as soon as the
guidance comes out because we
are expecting announcements in
about a month from CMS about
what, what the application needs
to look like. So we're trying to
onboard some resources to help
us get those funds as quickly as
possible. So I, I will remind
folks, some of you weren't
around that we did a bill in 20
5 I guess, to fund, no, 24, um
to fund rural hospitals, and we
did the bill and we come to find
out later that
hospitals were not necessarily
transparent, that there are so
many ways that they can count,
you know, they can consider this
a loss or they can consider this
a debt, and they can, and so we
gave money to hospitals that
didn't need money and the
hospital association said, well,
the information on what
hospitals actually have is
proprietary, and I'm of the
opinion that the state
taxpayers' dollar should also be
proprietary. If you don't want
to tell us what you have.
um, then we can't decide whether
you need more. I'm just putting
it out there again that, that if
you don't want to give us what
your hospital financial picture
is, um, maybe don't expect a
bailout from the state. Just,
just throwing it out there
because that made me um
I must lose my mind. Uh, so
Senator Pope
thank you, Madam Chair and
apologize for coming in late on
this. Uh, I appreciate the
presentation.
um, and you're just laying
everything out. I think it's
important to highlight, uh, so
many folks who are on Medicaid
that are working. Um
how, uh, the snap cuts are going
to impact folks. Just want to
remind everyone that, you know,
we have members serving on
active duty in the military that
you snap with their families. We
have National Guardsmen that
you snap, and some of them are
on Medicaid because they're like
weekend warriors and working
part-time.
So this narrative that folks are
using the system and not working
is just not true.
My question is, um
you've laid out a lot of things
and I'm worried about other
unintended consequences of
what's happening with this
funding.
um, we're looking at cuts to the
VA.
uh folks who are on the VA most
likely, um, no one's really
gonna probably go Medicaid to VA
because they probably would have
just went to to the VA, right?
So they're not going to be able
to go there, but that's going to
be some limited resources, you
know, IHS in our state, um
is there a thought of how we're
talking about funding and losing
rural hospitals to where it
impacts some of these other
clinics just like what's
mentioned with FQHCs, um, can
you talk about that or is that
something you're kind of looking
at what some of the other
unintended consequences of
what's happening with this
funding.
Uh, Madam Chair
uh, Senator Pope, I think that's
a really good point. I mean, the
strain is gonna sort of be there
for everyone. And whether you're
on Medicaid or not, if you
access the VA, right? Um, which
this is just for Medicaid or
IHS, uh, these are going to be
pretty strained provider network
resources. We are thinking about
ways to try to protect coverage,
uh, try to protect the SNAP
payments, um, but we will be
somewhat limited in what we can
do through the Medicaid program.
So as we kind of think about
special session or those kinds
of conversations, though a lot
of discussion happening right
now about what kinds of ways we
can be really creative in
mitigating these when we don't
have the traditional way, which
is through Medicaid or is that
gonna be a general fund purchase
of Medicaid coverage. I mean,
those are the kinds of
conversations that are happening
now, um, but so much is done
through that leveraging of
Medicaid, uh, for all of our
provider network. So if they
start to reduce the rates
um that has a big pressure where
they, where they can get a payer
um that helps them be a little
more flexible. It's like the
FQHC question. They have more
payers over here. They can serve
more people who can't pay. Uh,
so those are really the kinds of
issues that we're, we're
questioning right now. I just
wanna be clear, there's probably
not a magic bullet on this, um,
these are pretty big losses, um,
and pretty big policy impact
really generational changes in
terms of uh
you know, changes to our
healthcare system and safety
net.
Um, and so we're doing
everything we can try to think
of. We're working closely with
other states too to try and
think through like what are they
doing or wanting to watch, make
sure that we're doing everything
we can to leverage
relationships, um, but these
changes are happening one way or
another. So, um, you know, there
is going to be strain on our
provider network, um, and we're
gonna have to think through how
do we support them here in New
Mexico for the people who need
them, and I, I don't really have
all the answers to that,
unfortunately, I sure wish I
did. Well, I appreciate that,
Madam Chair, and I
appreciate what you're talking
about and uh none of us have the
magic bulletin the answer
either, but I just think we need
to have these conversations and
understand that the system was
already strained, um.
access to folks, um, the
resources to get there. I mean,
we
did a bill a couple of years ago
to just go ahead and pay for a
National Guardsman to get
Tricare, which is really
subsidized on the federal side.
So, um, we need to really look
at what we can do here in the
state, um.
hopefully it's for the short
term, but I
I don't know, we just can't let
folks.
go without
So thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator. I'm gonna go back
to Representative Anaya for a
brief statement.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
just wanted to make a quick
suggestion on funds
distribution. I'm really glad
that we mentioned the rural
healthcare delivery Fund. My
understanding about the way that
the money ended up, um, across
the state was actually much of
it was allotted to some of the
larger hospitals. And so I would
just like to make a suggestion
that as we are trying to figure
out where this money goes, how
is it that we're not necessarily
like allocating based on beds,
but we're figuring out like who
has
some of the slimmest margins,
right? Like who's barely getting
by? How do we make sure that we
are prioritizing that money
first, um
and from what I understand, like
some of the like county owned
hospitals, right? Are some of
the like folks who are like
tightest. And so I hope that as
we're allocating funds, we can
take that into consideration
because we do have multi-billion
dollar hospitals that are
owned by out of state
corporations. And we also have
these like super slim margins
with like county owned
hospitals. And so I hope that
that is something we can take
into consideration as we're, um,
distributing money and
prioritizing where that needs to
go. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you and I do have a few
questions. So in terms of the
more frequent eligibility
checks, and you may not know
this. I mean, there are some
people who
don't need to have my son
doesn't need to have, I mean,
he's gonna have autism for his
life. He's going to require
total care. So have you, are
there carveouts for certain
groups, um, and do you know what
those are?
Madam Chair, the every six-month
eligibility checks is really
related to the adult expansion
population. So folks on the
waiver, um, it shouldn't be
unless there's something weird
that happens with the federal
guidance. Um, we should really
be status quo, you know, we've
got eligibility from age 0 to 6
for kids, um, that shouldn't
change, at least not now. Uh,
that probably will expire.
That's kind of coming down the
pike, I think, but um it's
really we're talking about the
adult expansion population for
those
of checks. And then in terms of
we just, I think we just, um,
approved that moms can stay on
till they're for the a year
postpartum. Is that gonna be
affected? Uh, Madam Chair, uh,
at this time, we haven't heard
that that's impacted. OK, thank
you. And then, um, I was out in
well in Tohatchie and Pinedale
for Indian affairs last month.
And, um, you know, when you talk
about work requirements, you go
out to some of those chapters
and there's no work. I mean,
there's no, there's no volunteer
opportunity. There's no
internet, there's no, and so I
wonder how, I mean, there are
people who sheep herd for a
living. I mean, they, they raise
sheep and they sell them and
they sell the wool and that's
how, is there a way to
to prove that kind of work, you
know, Silversmiths, how, how do
those people prove that they're
working without a pay stub. Uh,
Madam Chair, two things to know.
One is, um, that the Native
American population is exempt
from the work requirement. So
won't, I mean, I think when
you're kind of talking about
folks who do sort of traditional
uh things in their tribe or
Pueblo or Nician, um, those
things are not subject they're
they those individuals wouldn't
be subject to the work
requirement or have to report.
So, um, however, you know,
that's that data is as good as
we know, right? It's really for
folks who let us know that
they're native because we don't
know automatically, so it's
self-reported, but um for folks
who have reported to us that
they're Native American, um, and
had that verified, then they
don't have to do that. Um,
I think a lot remains to be seen
in terms of how easy or hard
this is, and it's going to be in
the federal guidance. So right
now, for example, we allow
people to give us a statement.
Uh, there's a discrepancy
between what they're
verification is showing and
what, um, you know, maybe they
lost their job two weeks ago,
and it's not showing up in the
data yet. So we allow people to
do that. I'm just not sure how
accepting they will be. So I
really can't answer the question
yet, but we'll be trying to make
it as easy as possible. And of
course, there are people in
other rural parts of the state
that are not native who are
doing the same uh
kind of work. So thank you. And
then in terms of a special
session, um, you know, people
are saying, oh, you've got to
have a special session to deal
with this.
Personally, I don't feel like we
know enough to do anything yet.
Um, would, would, uh, and I know
I'm not trying to be political,
but do you feel like we know
enough to actually take some
action legislatively. Uh, Madam
Chair, I, I strongly recommend
that we get started, um, with
what we do know and really start
to plan out the changes. These
are big, big changes that cannot
wait until fiscal year 27.
Um,
they are the kinds of changes
that take most of the, they
would take, we're looking at 18
months, not even 18 months
really to implement some major
IT changes and um, get all of
our forms updated, all of you on
board new staff. We have to, we
need the time to do that. Uh, if
we were to wait till fiscal year
27, for example, we would have
less than 6 months really from
the time that the budget was in
effect to to really make all of
these changes happen
I don't think it's enough time.
We did receive a federal a
letter from the federal
regulator at CMS basically
saying you better get started.
We're not going to waive any of
these requirements for states
for not starting now. Um, so
they have also told us we really
need to get moving. Um, so, uh,
I do recommend that we get
started and that we start
planning and we really take
action, um.
you know, I don't think that the
agency will be able to execute
the changes. Uh, so, so
legislative changes, are they
mostly budget or are you
thinking of other, um, and, and
when you answer that, please,
please let us here know, um, let
Xander know what you're thinking
so we can be preparing,
learning, um, all of those cause
nothing worse than going into a
special session and saying,
here's an 800 page bill, you
know, vote on it
So, so please keep us up to date
and uh feel free to answer.
Madam Chair, uh, what I, what I
can answer today is that the
agency has needs in FY 26, um,
and those are really for system
changes. Um, we got to get our
call center ready. So it's our
eligibility system, our call
center, and then our customer
portal. Yes, New Mexico. We got
to get all that ready. We also
need to onboard and train staff
to meet the new requirements. So
those are the main things that
we really, really have to have
in FY 26. I think there's a
lot of other policy
conversations that can happen
around how do we mitigate some
of the losses and coverage, the
losses and SNA, uh, those are,
those are sort of separate
conversations that are happening
and what I just articulated to
you is really the FY 26 need for
the agency.
Yeah. Thank you so much for your
presentation and uh for sharing
with us what
what you know and what you don't
know. Um,
unfortunately, there's a lot of
don't know, um, so thank you for
that and I think we will go to
public comment. So if you are on
Zoom and you would like to make
public comment, please raise
your hand, and we'll come back
to you. Uh, we have one person
in the room who signed up, 02,
OK. Oh, OK, I see she snuck it
in there on the side. OK, so we
will start with Linda. Oh, I
can't pronounce your last name.
Oh, Lynn, thank you.
I can't read either. And then
Marlon Beck, so Lynn, go ahead.
We'll give you 3 minutes.
That one
OK, thank you. I need help
sometimes. So good afternoon all
of you and uh ladies and
gentlemen, I want to say, uh,
thank you for
keeping the public comment in
your process.
and I also wanna
say out it
and welcome to Gallup, New
Mexico, the most artistic small
town in America.
If you have a little time, I can
help you, help prove that.
Um,
I'm here
uh, with a couple of hats this
afternoon, but we recently, I, I
have a place in Redhill Mobile
Home Park in town.
and we just in the last couple
months formed a Redhill mobile
Home Park, uh, Owners
Association and why that
happened is that we realized
that we all have one basic
concern that affects us all, and
that's rent increases, and the
last two years, each of the
years, the rent has increased
over 10% each time, which is
quite a bit above the rate of
inflation for those years. So we
decided we need to try to see
what we can do about that
because we have
a lot of people with fixed
incomes. We have older people
who've lived there 2030, even 40
years, and it causes not only
financial stress that causes
some anxiety by people, you
know, when they don't know what
rent increase is coming next.
And so, uh, looking at your
task list, your topics, you
cover such a broad range of
things in your committee that,
uh I was trying to see which,
which things it connects with,
it connects with several things.
but
I'm here, first of all, just to
let you know that the situation
exists. We have out of state
owners of Mobile Home Parks.
and in our case, the owner lives
in Florida and we, um, know that
there are some state laws that
aren't always being enforced in
terms of laws that restrict and
control the owners. So I wanted
to let you know that we have
that concern, and we think this
year that there's going to be
another introduction of
legislation that will, among
other things, try to put a cap
on how much mobile home
ow ner s can increase their
rent, uh, inflation rate or
maybe inflation in a little bit,
but not up to 10.5% when the
inflation rate is 2 to 4%. Um,
so I want to let you know about
that and I'll give you a handout
in a minute. There is a
statewide alliance of different
homeowners associations, and
it's called, it's an alliance,
it's not an association by PAC,
but it's an alliance of the
various park associations and
it's the name is
the land of enchantment
manufactured homeowners
Alliance, and you might be
familiar with that. um
but there are, they're a good
group and we're trying to ign
one of the reasons we formed our
association so we can link with
them and help them as they lobby
presumably in the next session,
you know, in terms of some
protection for, uh, for mobile
home owners.
The other thing
which overlaps with that, uh, in
your
uh, topics and so on and that
you
you mentioned affordable
housing.
which is not only a gallop
problem. It's a widespread
problem these days across the
country.
An affordable housing
um links in another, another
concern that is view on the
bottom of having, you know, just
barely being able to afford your
housing.
and then you lose your job, what
happens next?
You're unhoused, you're
homeless, right?
And I happened to be acting
chair also of a Gallup Homeless
Sunho Task Force. Uh, we started
back in January, some of us got
concerned, uh, I'm not a native
to Gallop, but I've lived here 3
times
and, uh, the seeing unhoused
people, people on the street as
I'm afraid we've come to accept
it because it's so familiar
here.
and we pay attention to what's
going on. uh Albuquerque, Tim
Keller has been really active in
a lot of ways. You got people
trying to do things, build small
homes, and so on. And then up in
Kalispell, Montana, for example,
it's illegal to even sleep in
your car. So we've been trying
to see what can we learn and do
about Don Hadhous situation, the
street situation in Gallop, and
I mentioned that here because it
does overlap with the concerns
about affordable housing
and when we've got people just
barely hanging on with rent
increases in the mobile home
park, so there's a possible link
there. So I know my time is. If
you, yeah, if you could wrap it
up. I gave you extra time. But
let me, uh, let me give you this
before I go. It's a good little
summary sheet, um, on some
points and, uh, I guess the main
thing, as they say, when the
legislation
comes up, if it does, we hope
this committee can be supportive
of things in that regard, and at
some point, maybe even have to
look at a whole another
committee or subcommittee
dealing with the manufactured
home thing and uh the homeless
thing cause it's just getting,
it's not getting better and
we're getting more young people.
The fentanyl, you know, all the
things that are going on. Oh,
thank you very much. Uh, next
we'll have Marlon Beck.
Thank you. How do you say your
last name? Hineman. Hineman.
Thank you, Mr. Himan. OK, Madam
Chair, can I make a comment?
Yeah, go ahead, Senator. I, I
just want to say his group,
they, they spoke at the military
and Veterans Affairs Committee
on Wednesday, so, um, I really
appreciate just kind of getting
this message out and I know last
session there were some bills to
try to deal with a lot of these
issues, you know, single family
homes, uh, manufactured homes
and trailer parks, so thank you.
Thank you my privilege.
Thank you. Go ahead
Does that work? OK. Good
afternoon, Madam Chair and
committee members. My name is
Marilyn Beck. I'm a little sad.
We're 1 hour and 15 minutes
early because I think CYFD
should have stayed longer. I
think it's the most pressing
issue in our state. I drove 120
miles to be here, so I have a
few comments about addressing
the care hearing earlier this
afternoon. First of all, the
secretary doesn't know how many
children have died. It's 4, not
3. It's 4 children have died in
the past 3 months on Kara plans.
That's public information, and
I'm sad she didn't know
Um,
one was the 18 month old who
died August 2nd after a failed
trial home visit, and, um, so I
guess if she's only tracking 12
months, we didn't track the 15
month olds or the 18 month old.
There is a teenager living in
the receiving center, and that's
public knowledge. She's been
living there since March.
So that was just flat lie.
I want to elevate the previous
concerns about shadow foster
care, kinship guardianship
without the support of the
state. Um, I have personally
brought this issue up to both
the Children's Court Improvement
Commission and, um, Don Walters
at CYFD. This is a known
phenomenon and it must stop. If
it is safe to place, it is safe
to pay.
Lastly, and I just want to give
you one good news, um, we
actually have the highest number
of kinship care placements in
the country. So New Mexico is
doing one thing correctly. We do
have the highest number of
initial placements with kinship.
But again, I will reiterate, if
it is safe to place, you should
pay.
And then finally, like many of
you again, I'm here and we're 1
hour and 15 minutes left to the
committee meeting, so I'm just
really sad you didn't get to ask
harder questions.
because I want to ask you when
is enough enough?
In the past 4 months, our state
has seen 6 maltreatment
fatalities. 6.
6 and 4 months
Two of them were suicides of
teen. There's a teen in a mental
health. There's a teen in a
shelter in Albuquerque right now
in, in health crisis, and I have
said to Teresa and Diego at the
governor's office, we cannot
afford a 3 suicide in 4 months.
Two suicides have two youths
have felt so desperate they took
their own lives.
Two rushed trial home visits
have failed. One ending in the
unthinkable.
She was the 4th Kara baby and
maybe that's why the secretary
didn't count her because she
wasn't under 12 months, but she
was 18 months.
2
former foster parents, actually
they were current when charged.
Two former foster parents have
been charged with felony, child
abuse in the past 45 days.
The most recent one has a
criminal history that includes
domestic violence and multiple
DWIs.
It makes you wonder how she was
ever licensed.
Like Eleanor Chafis knows
deeply. Bernalo County has
currently a 60% vacancy rate.
Other counties, including some
of yours,
have a 100% vacancy rate.
Following the most recent
fatality, 5 workers in
Bernalillo County were placed on
leave, leaving one county office
manager when there should be 5.
And in addition to the
presentation you just heard from
HCA sounding the alarm about
federal funding. The feds just
released a report last week.
There'll be a presentation
tomorrow morning.
saying that once again, our
children are in imminent danger.
Safety is their number one
concern.
and if we don't fix the system
within the next 90 days to 2
years, we risk losing all
federal funding. That's in
addition to the Medicaid
concerns you just heard.
Another lawsuit was filed in the
past month over a child abuse
fatality in Silver City that had
5 separate failed
investigations. 555
not one time did they put eyes
on the kid.
She died
on her 5th birthday
the day of her birthday
Last week, a father left his
young children alone, and it was
a very sad situation, um, to go
support their infant child. He
was charged with felony child
abuse. This was in Albuquerque.
Yet when the stake takes your
children into CYFD and they
allow your children to walk out
of the receiving center, 4 years
old and nonverbal.
That's just business as usual
This is not a media perception
problem. This is a deadly virus
in a corrupt agency that is
threatening the lives of our
children right now.
I'm not going to stop 6 kids
have died in 4 months and it's
not going to stop.
This, these issues of
state-sanctioned trauma.
Thank you for saying that
Tomorrow, I want to say these
issues of state sanctioned
trauma are manageable.
Tomorrow at 20 p.m. you will
hear from the Kevinness
settlement plaintiffs team.
Ask them hard questions. Let
them speak longer than an hour.
These are manageable issues. Did
you realize the Protective
Services foster care, there's
only 2000 kids in it. It's the
same size of a high school. When
we talk about breaking up CYFD,
how, how many, how many kids are
in your high school?
2000. If you call your principal
and say, my kid's in 2nd period,
where's my kid? They better
answer that question. Our
secretary didn't know how many
kids have died in her care in
the past 3 months.
I text someone, a legislator on
Thursday night about the KOB
hearing about the, the wandering
nonverbal child from the
receiving center at the time
where there were 7 nonverbal
autistic kids sleeping in the
receiving center and a teenager.
And do you know what that person
said to me
She only has 18 months left.
That's what a legislator said to
me on Friday afternoon or
Thursday afternoon.
Just wait
I want to be very clear
Our children cannot wait another
18 months until we get an
election and hope a new leader
is finally going to cut it.
It's not gonna happen
Every day this goes unaddressed
is a day our virus is getting
worse. Our kids are not OK right
now.
You go visit the receiving
center, you visit AMI Kids, you
visit Amistad, you visit Casake.
Our kids are not OK.
I think we look at
Representative Chavez's solution
because nothing else is working.
And the the sad thing about that
is, why is that solution the
best solution on the table? It's
because
the elephant in the room is that
our governor is not addressing
this. You know what they said on
that KOB hearing?
Have Teresa come and do, come
sit at the receiving center.
Come work at a pine tree, and
I'm gonna say the governor
should be doing
the same. We should be, I mean,
if you are not part of the
solution, you are part of the
problem. 6 kids have died in 4
months. Guys, that's unheard of.
That's unprecedented. This is
the number one issue facing our
state. You know, where else
juvenile justice is in charge
of? CYFD. Youth mental health,
CYFD. I will leave you with this
The fierce urgency of now cannot
be overstated. Thank you. Hey,
thank you. We have two folks
online. We have Mechaitzini.
Misha
hello, chair, members of the
committee, um, eh, um, my name
is Mikea Betzini. I work with
Bold Futures. I'm a policy
manager, and um when we talk
about Kara, what we hear most
from families is that the system
focuses too much on surveillance
and punishment and not enough
support. Parents tell us that
reaching out for care during
pregnancy often comes with fear,
fear of being reported,
investigated or separated from
their children. Instead of
building
trust, Kara, as it's currently
implemented with the directive
pushes families away from the
very resource that could help
them.
We've heard directly from others
who want who wanted prenatal
care, but stayed home because
they worried that being honest
about their substance use would
mean losing their baby. We've
heard from families who are
struggling, but who are met with
CYFD instead of housing,
treatment, childcare. We've
heard from grandparents and
relatives who step in to keep
kids safe, but are left without
the resources to do so. What
families say they need is clear,
stable housing, treatment
without stigma, mental health
support, childcare, cultur
ally rooted care they can trust.
They want providers who will
walk with them and not report
them. The truth is, when we
support families, we support
children. Every child's
well-being is tied to the
stability, health, and strength
of their parents and caregivers.
Punishment and fear do not build
strong families. Care, trust,
and resources do. I urge this
committee to listen to the lived
expertise of those who have
survived these systems and to
make sure Kara is implemented in
a way that centers and support
s families, so that every child
grows up in a safe, stable, and
loving home. Thank you.
Thank you, Micah, and next we
will have um Quva Hubbard.
Good afternoon, chair, and
members of the committee. My
name is Quva Hubbard. I am from
Albuquerque, New Mexico. I am a
person that has been directly
impacted and who works with
families in the child welfare
system.
I feel centering people with
lived experience and CYFD
decision making ensures that
policies and reforms are shaped
by the very voices and most
impacted by them.
Lid experts bring insights, no
report can capture, exposing
system blind spots offering
practical solutions and
grounding change in the
realities families face every
day. Their involvement also
addresses the over policing of
families in child welfare,
challenging practices that
unnecessarily surveil or punish
instead of supporting and
strengthening them by advocating
for a second chances,
strength-based language, and
practical timelines that reflect
the real pace of family healing.
Lived
experts helped design policies
that give families a fair path
to stability.
including them at the table in
decision making and policy work
shifts power from a top down
approach to one rooted in
partnership, trust, and
prevention. It keeps reforms
deeply human, reminding all
stakeholders that behind every
policy are real children,
parents, and communities whose
well-being depends on getting it
right the first time. Thank you.
for the public comment, all of
you, um, and since we don't have
our last presenter, we will be
in recess until tomorrow morning
at, I believe, 9, but let me
look.
9:15, 0, you get to sleep in,
woohoo, um,
yeah, and just a reminder about
