Um,
it's gonna
Introduce you to the uh
Budget and the requests.
Of the Supreme Court and the
office, the administration of
courts, Carl Reichste is joining
me today.
From the Supreme Court we have
Elizabeth Garcia, she's our
clerk, chief clerk and Christina
Keys, who is
Um, helps us with budget and
finance.
We also have here today.
Um, the chair of Budget
Committee, uh, Judge Chavez, and
I will
a brief explanation of our
budget process.
Um, as we go forward.
Um, I tend to give a brief
opening statement and I'll turn
it over to Carl with some
specifics of AOC and I'll take
chair, I'll take your lead on
Whether you want questions as to
each entity or you want AOC
Supreme Court together, um, but
we're pleased to answer.
Any questions, uh, that I'm, I'm
able to.
Uh, part of your material, and I
know you have a voluminous
amount of material, and I know
you've gone through this for
several days, uh, at least with
regard to the Supreme Court is
this handout, and the handout.
As on its cover, uh, the doors
of our courthouse are beautiful
historic courthouse.
Part of my state, the judiciary
will introduce you to
courthouses throughout the
state, new and old.
The reason I start with that
graphic.
Um, it's because I know you've
had
Over the days, a large
discussion about mostly the
criminal justice system.
which we have a lot of different
partners and we are one.
Here's what we control.
We control those things that
come through those doors.
And so I want to put that as we
make this budget request.
Um, in the context of our
operation as an independent.
branch of government.
Um, I have reviewed.
And part of a summary will be
I've reviewed your um LFC
report.
The PowerPoints that occurred
yesterday. I want to focus on
two of the recommendations that
we think
We have performed well on expand
specialty courts.
Um, that is largely a discussion
centered around currently EOT
and diversion, competency
diversion.
And approved case management.
Um, we have
Consistently, uh, increased our
Um, closure rate on our cases,
including
Uh, the number of cases disposed
of by the Supreme Court.
And we'll continue to work with
our judicial partners on that.
So one of our asked today, we
have those laid out for you in
our budget. I don't want to go
through each one in this first
slide, Carl has presented. I
want to highlight 3 if I may.
First and foremost is pay
increases for our lowest paid
employees throughout the state.
I'll refer you again, um, to the
inside cover.
Of the, um,
pamphlet with our gold doors.
Those show you the number of
employees you have in, if you
are in that judicial district.
Those are the court employees
you have in your judicial
district. This has a direct
impact.
On your constituents, and this
is a matter that has been
lingering for some time. We
continue to fall behind the
executive.
In pay equity, and we want to
make that right.
I our employees, and it is for a
certain level of employees and
Carl will um get into the
details as to those.
That is our first priority.
We also appreciate, I want to
say first of all, I appreciate
both the commitment you've
provided to judicial salaries
first and foremost, and the
commitment you've provided to
increase.
Judicial security and security
at our courthouses, it's not
just for judges, you may have
less, well, you may have
concerns about security for the
judiciary. It's also about our
employees. It's about the public
that use that go through these
doors. We want them to feel safe
when they come.
Um, to access justice, and we
will continue to use that money
well.
Unfortunately, um,
We have uh
Um
Encountered a number of
Uh, violent incidents in our
courtrooms throughout the state.
That is a continuing trend,
unfortunately.
And it's a, it's a matter that
needs to be resolved. We very
much appreciate your commitment
to, um, courthouse security.
Most relevant, I think, to
discussions you've had in the
last, the last one I will focus
on and then um I will turn the
particulars over to
Um, coral.
Uh, with regard to the judiciary
as a whole and then Chell take
your guidance on whether you
want me to focus specifically on
the Supreme Court, but.
Um, the, uh, ongoing request for
Um
Funding for behavioral health
programs.
We have to utilized the money, I
hope, um,
You feel as I do, we've, we've
utilized the money as quickly as
we can with the money you
provided.
Uh, in the interim to set up a
competency diversion.
And assisted outpatient
treatment.
We have uh started what are
called pilot programs.
Um, that's how we do it in the
court system, it's almost like
a, a lab. We set these programs
up in districts, see how they
work. We compare that to
nationwide best practices and
um.
We try and replicate that same
program in other districts.
This to me is the clearest
example of.
What we can control and what is
controlled outside these doors.
OK, we
Um, as a judiciary.
Cannot educate mental health
providers. We cannot license
mental health providers.
Um, we need the assistance of
the executive, and they've been
very proactive in this area, as
has the legislature in ensuring
that we have the resources if
you want someone to go through
AOT or competency diversion or
This beat determined competent
not to stand trial, we need to
have those providers available.
And um we appreciate both the
commitment to the courts to
operate these systems and the
commitment to the executive.
To bolster these
Um, with that, um, I am going to
turn it over.
To, uh, Mr. Reichstack for any
particulars on state of the
judiciary and AOC and then we'll
take direction from the chair.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, good morning. I'm
Karl Reissse. I'm the new uh
director of the administrative
Office of the courts, as the
chief talked about our number
one priority this year is really
our employee compensation we
have about 2000 employees across
the state of New Mexico in every
county.
Our entry level brand uh
employees in our branch of
government make 25% less than
their counterparts over in the
in the executive. Um, the
practical impact of that means
we can recruit people, we get
them in, and then, uh, they're,
they're happy to leave for other
government agencies uh in the
executive or, or even in the
local governments.
And so to try to fix this,
Um, we're proposing, uh, for
your consideration, uh, targeted
pay increases for our employees.
This is all folks making under
$100,000 so this is not our top
most, most uh highly compensated
folks on the country folks
focuses on our entry level
folks. Um, many of those folks
making less than $45,000 can
qualify for means-tested public
assistance. Um, we also have MIT
does a living wage study that
doesn't, doesn't really
including the extras, just how
you can get by, um, and our
folks making under $45,000 fall
below that sort of living,
living wage level. And so we
really want to concentrate on
them, and we ask your help
really trying to get them up to
um a a decent level of
compensation. And these folks
are our court clerks, right?
These are the folks who are
processing the filings every day
in our courthouses, we rely on
them to make sure, um, our
paperwork, really electronic, of
course, is
processed correctly so that we
can pull the data to have to
share with you all about what's
happening with our cases in our
courts. Our judges rely on them,
um, to make sure that
Everything gets filed timely.
The information is to them in
the courtroom and they can
address that with the attorneys.
Um
But if we can't recruit and
retain great people, it, it's
really challenging to have that
information process, uh, flow
effectively. Um, in FY 23, and
we're updating the study, um,
for the
60 day session and FY 23 with
40% turnover under uh among that
group of people.
Um
It's just very high and then it
ends up costing a lot of money
and in re-recruiting,
retraining, uh, etc. So we're,
we're really hoping we can look
at that this year.
As the chief said, our, our
security concerns, I know, um,
the legislature, uh, has a lot
of security concerns too, um.
Only continue to increase and we
on this slide have a
Sapling of some of the
incidents, um, that happened
just up the road in Espanola,
just in the last year, gentleman
came in the magistrate court.
Slumped over and a firearm fell
out of his clothing.
Um, he was overdosing, the judge
administered him Narcan.
And secured the weapon, because
there's no security personnel at
the magistrate court.
Uh, in grants, we had, uh, a man
show up to district court
carrying an ax, saying he was
going to uh kill the judge.
Um, thankfully, that was
district court. We did have one
security officer present in the
sheriff's office, responded
quickly, we were able to
intercept the man before um any
real harm was done, although it,
uh, certainly scared a lot of
people. Uh, OK, so, so our man
walked into the courthouse that
he needs to be sworn in as
sheriff. Um, thankfully, the
sheriff's deputies were able to
intercept him. Um, history of
bomb threats, um, history of
planning drug in Lasunna finding
drugs, Santa Fe.
Um
had a
Sort of a manhunt up in Clayton,
um, where our employee ended up
having to to hide really shelter
in place in the courthouse while
the law enforcement cleared the
courthouse for them. So this is
um
Incidents that are, you know, in
the front of our mind and really
serious to us.
Um, at the district court, of
course, the county sheriff will
Uh, provided by statute
security, magistrate court that
doesn't exist, we, we try to
contract with local law
enforcement. Um, but our rural
law enforcement agencies, as I
know you've heard, really
struggle to find, um,
Fine folks, we try to contract
with private security where it's
available, um, and so we have
this $25 million request.
Really focused on equipment.
It'd be a six-year, one-time
request to really up our, um,
door swipes. We have a
courthouse, for example, that
has door swipes that are
operated on AA batteries, um,
not, not a great security
practice and we need to bring
these up to 21st century
standards.
Um, it's the cheap side, uh, in
behavioral health, uh, in the
special session, the legislature
gave us $3 million. We're
already off to a running start.
We have 3,
court districts, the 3rd in
Donana County, the 4th, San
Miguel Mora, Guadalupe Counties,
and the 12th in Lincoln and
Ontario counties that are
piloting these um
Competency diversion program, so
folks coming through the
criminal justice system that
regularly are found incompetent,
we're able to intervene early,
um,
Hopefully connect them with
local treatment providers and uh
hopefully divert them out of the
system, get them a little bit
more stable so they don't
continue to cycle through and
cycle through. Um, we already
have a program evaluator
contracted, even though those
programs are just beginning and
so um we're hoping to have some
good, uh, early data for you
all, uh, as, as quickly as we
can.
On the assisted outpatient
treatment side, you hear about
AOT a lot. Uh, we are working
very hard here in the first
judicial district that's uh Rio
Riva Los Alamos, and Santa Fe
counties, um, to stand up our
assisted outpatient treatment
program. We've had a couple of
really good, uh, meetings with
the county stakeholders and
providers, um, and we need, of
course, uh, to get some
attorneys representing the folks
there and we're hoping to get
that pilot started here in the
next couple months.
Um
We continue to see our case
filings go up just a little bit,
which, uh, to me is a is a
positive sign, up a little bit
in district court, 4%,
magistrate courts, and Metro
court89%. Our clearance rate,
that's the amount that's uh
looking at all the cases we
finish compared to the cases
coming in the door, um, continue
to remain high. So if you had
100% clearance rate, that means
you finish one case for everyone
that comes in the door. So in
the district court, we're almost
there and the magistrate courts
uh were finishing slightly more.
Cass, then we're coming in the
door, and then you see our
appellate courts, uh, really
cranking on the cases as well.
We have our 55 uh treatment
court programs statewide. We
also had a 4% uptick uptick in
um participants in our treatment
courts in the last year, so
we're, we're hoping to continue
that trend, uh, and the 25 and
then 26, and I already talked
about our behavioral health
programs.
Um, on the challenge side
though, we continue to see our
percentage of the state, uh,
general fund appropriation
shrink, not that long ago, it
was 2.7%.
FY 21, 2.63%.
This year, 2.48%. Uh, if we were
at the 21 funding level, it'd be
$150 million. Uh, you'll notice
we're only asking you for, I
think 117 million, including our
one time. So, um,
Uh
You know, that that's some
headwind. We have our little pie
chart there showing our, our
small sliver of the overall
general fund that we represent.
And as I talked about in FY 23,
all of our employees, we had 36%
uh turnover, um, across the
state, across all courts.
That led, that's about a $13
million it's about a $17 million
cost just in retraining, etc.
Um, Mr. Chair, I don't know if
at this time you want to ask the
committee wants to ask us
overall questions or if you want
me to go straight into the AOC
specifics.
Why don't we just
Go to the agency specifics in
that way we can see exactly
where it is and then go back to
questions and or maybe questions
across the board for for
everybody. I see my district
judge, so I got some questions
for him.
He's paying attention. I seen
him raise it.
Right. I think a little quicker
though Carl because Mr. Chair,
the AOC, of course, is the
administrative arm of our
Supreme Court, our Supreme
Court's charged with
administering all of the courts
throughout the state, um, and
they do that through us. Our
budget gets broken down into
these 4 sort of sub-budgets, if
you will, these 4 programs.
And uh you can see we have some
significant needs.
Um, we also have some
significant one-time requests.
We have $40 million for our
courtroom modernization. We
literally have analog technology
to record our courtroom
proceedings, and we're trying to
make that digital. Uh, we got a
great start with the $16 million
appropriation, um, from you all
and to start FY 24, that will be
expended by the end of the
current year, um, and we'd like
to complete uh all the
courtrooms around the state, but
the price tag is $40 million. I
talked about the 25.
$2.2 million security special.
Um, and we also need $430,000.
I'll talk more about language
access and our interpreters here
in a little bit, um, that 430 is
also our request for, for part
of our request for.
Um, the administrative support
budget at AOC funds uh critical
programs like our jury and
witness program to pay for jury
jurors across the state or
language access program to pay
for interpreters, or judicial
performance evaluation
Committee, those are the folks
who evaluate judges, our
communications team, HR team,
fiscal team, um, and our
operational expenses like our
leases.
Our HR team was real busy last
year. We brought in 67 new hires
just at AOC, uh, we only have
about 216 people, so that's
again, that's that 30% turnover
rate, we're just not, we're just
not able to beat it. 27 new
hires and 25, uh, year to date,
that's through last Friday. Um,
and, uh, you know, I know you
hear this from, from around the
state government, but we had 7
candidates already this fiscal
year, just in the 1st 5 months,
say, you know what? That's not
enough money for me. I can't
come work for you.
Um
So we're asking for uh HR
project manager you funded one
of our two requested positions
last year we're here asking you
for the other one this year.
In fiscal services, um, asking
for one other position there.
We've been carefully rolling out
these matching funds for
district courts that's benefited
a lot of uh the districts around
the state, uh, this year we we
were able with your help, thank
you for the funding to add our
first new fiscal Services
employee in over 7 years. Um, we
need one more person though to
really round out that team.
Our urian witness, um,
Expenses, uh, continue to climb
because we continue to have more
jury trials at 747 jury trials
around the state and paneled
almost 25,000 jurors. And of
course, we have to pay them and
uh by statute, we have to pay
the minimum wage. We also pay
the mileage, uh, if they're
coming from far away, um, but we
need to be able to pay them. And
so, uh without $2.2 million.
We're going to run out of money
to pay jurors in mid 2026, um,
which will lead to some real
hard questions. Well, it'll
first lead to us going to the
board of finance and asking them
for money, and then a little
secondly lead to some real hard
questions about what kinds of
trials can we move forward with
and that sort of thing. So, um,
like we'd, we'd appreciate some
help there.
Mm
Since we're using more jurors,
we have to pay more people,
process more payments, and so
we're asking for one
administrative position, uh, in
that area as well.
Uh, as we use more jurors, uh,
we're also using more in court
interpreters.
Um, and you see, uh, here in our
charts, New Mexico pays the
least and our demand for
services is increasing
exponentially in the last couple
of years. Um, so supply goes up.
Our pay is low, it makes it real
hard to retain our interpreters.
We do this through a mix of uh
contractors, we have 65
contractors, interpreters, um,
so they just take individual
jobs as independent contractors.
We have a few folks on staff,
um, those folks on staff also
handle our scheduling and so
we're asking for two folks to
just dedicate to scheduling,
free up our staff or
interpreters to actually be in
the courtroom. We continue to be
the only state in the union that
Um
Uh, lets anyone serve any
citizen, serve on jury
regardless of their ability to
speak uh English, that's
enshrined in our state
constitution, um, but we need
the interpreters to fulfill that
constitutional promise. And so
this is a a real important um
area for us that $430,000 for
our contractor increases will
bring us up to the Arizona rate
of $65 an hour, so we're, we're
not asking for the Texas sized
rate of 85.
trying to just get um some
progress and retain, um,
And recruit a few more
contractors.
Um, our second budget area is
our judicial information
division, uh, sometimes it's
marked a statewide judiciary
automation.
Um, they handle all IT
infrastructure for the whole
state, every court in the state.
So that's paying the, the
internet bills, whether that's
um
Whoever the provider is there,
CenturyLink or Windstream in
more rural areas. Um, that's our
cybersecurity team, that's all
of our applications, you know,
from, from email to our case
management system.
Um
And we rely on these critical
folks, um, to really keep our
courts up and running, uh, with
our case management system, the
judges don't have the case
files, it's real hard to, to
continue with your trials and um
And hearings.
Uh, we have 8 positions
currently that are are one time
funded and we'd like to move
those over. That's part of that
6.1 million at the top of the
page, um.
At 6.1 million also includes
things like paying the internet
bills, um, that adds up to a
little over a million dollars a
year, um, are for the record,
annual licensing, um, which is
an important project that'll add
up as we as we bring more
courtrooms online.
We're also looking to add a few
more positions. Um, you all are
frequently asking us for data,
the executive does the same, and
we have 0 positions dedicated
full time to data, so we're
asking to add two of those this
year, um, two data scientists, 2
data analysts to our team, um.
So two folks for a network, uh,
our network system and two folks
to do application support for
like our, our e-filing for
attorneys, our case management
system, and our public access
systems. Um.
In the court operations
division, you might remember
this used to be called the
magistrate Court division, but
it's the court operations
division now that the district
courts directly manage the
magistrate courts. Uh, however,
we still have to pay. We had AOC
and our budget still pay the
leases for those magistrate
courts.
And those go up every year,
right? We're, we're renting on
the open market and we, we have
to pay fair market value, so we,
um,
would appreciate you all funding
that increase. We're also this
year gonna um
Looking to add a service
contract with the security
provider so that if a door swipe
goes out, rather than stop
everything and procure
something, we'll just have
someone on call to to send him
out. Um.
And we've got uh 12 folks in our
statewide toll-free, uh, call
center, um, who are currently
one time funded, and we'd like
to keep them on those that call
center handles more than 10,000
calls a month, and that's
everything from, hey, how do I
get to the courthouse to, um, I
missed my speeding ticket court
date. What do I do?
Right? And if we can help people
get set up for a new court date,
not need a warrant, then our law
enforcement folks aren't serving
bench warrants and people who,
you know, were, were speeding a
couple miles over the stop sign,
they're out, they're actually
getting uh a couple of miles
over the limit. They're actually
out there on the road getting
the, the violent folks.
Uh, and our last, uh, air Mr.
Chair, um, pretrial services,
uh, excuse me, our special court
services, we have pretrial
services, behavioral health, or
access to justice, help folks,
um.
Without attorneys and then our,
our court appointed attorneys.
Um,
In pretrial services, I really
want to highlight our electronic
monitoring unit. These are the
folks, they're based in
Albuquerque. If judges order
defendants pretrial to wear a
GPS monitor, for instance. These
are the folks doing the
monitoring on the nights and the
weekends and the holidays. Uh,
this unit's never had permanent
funding from the legislature and
their one-time funding expires
at the end of the current fiscal
year, um, over the last 12
months, they've investigated
more than
245,000 alerts, and that
resulted in 201 benchmark, uh,
bench warrants, um, and they
have about 215 people they
monitor every day. It's
particularly challenging to
recruit and retain these folks
because they're working nights
and weekends, and then on top of
that, I don't have permanent
funding. So these are all sort
of term jobs. Everybody in state
government knows if you land a
term job, uh, go find a perm
one, before that funding runs
out. So it's hard to, to keep.
Uh, on those folks.
Our behavioral health programs,
um, we're looking to permanently
fund what you all funded over
the summer, um, our competency
diversion AOT uh programs, so
that's treatment, that's uh
local program managers in each
of our pilot sites, uh, two
folks at AOC statewide to
oversee it, and then also um
our, our annual cost for the
data tracking and, and case
management system.
So we'll, uh,
Let's get that last slide and
then last one, Mr. Chair. Um,
finally, on our access to
justice front, um, we're looking
to, uh,
Really stand up a statewide
self-help center for folks
without attorneys. We have sort
of a hodgepodge of, of centers
across the state, uh, right now,
efforts across the state in each
judicial district, we really
want to centralize that, make it
easy for our folks without
attorneys to find things like
court forms, know how to connect
with, you know, legal aid if
they qualify and those kind of
things.
Thank you, Carl. uh, Mr. Chair,
um, Carl's learned well from
Arty. He has learned to speak as
fast so he doesn't get as much
like,
uh, if I could, if I, if I could
reserve uh
45 seconds for the New Mexico
Supreme Court. We a separate
court, right? Um, so you've
heard from AOC I talked to
generally about the
court operations, our budget is
small. I just want to highlight
a couple of things, uh, with
regard to our requests.
Um, I want to start with, um,
sort of the positives, which is
um our case management, um, we
have a clearance rate of 110%.
And we've been recognized and
putting the money you've given
us to hybrid hearings. Um, we
have more and more of a
capability to conduct hearings
remotely. We have a rural law
program that we literally take
on the road we've been down the
Las Cruces will be up in your
area, hopefully next year, uh,
Mr. Chair, um, we do seek most
concretely in our list, and I
know.
you'll review the material, um,
the need for additional staff
attorneys and technical editors,
why is that important? It's very
boring but very important to our
process, we are going to a term
system which is consistent with
how the United States Supreme
Court does it. We are about to
complete our oral arguments.
And then we want our opinions
out 6 months from the time that
our um term ends.
And so that litigants have.
Uh, finality to their decisions
and then they know by the time
the court term ends, all the
opinions will be out, um, in
order to do that, um,
We need the assistance of staff
attorneys and very importantly,
these technical editors
literally proofread and make
sure there's no errors.
I'm in the opinion, the last
thing I will focus on, we
appreciate the capital
commitment to our old building.
We've used that money well.
We have done a complete study
from an architect to ensure that
the money that you are
appropriating to us is well
spent.
In a planned way.
One remaining, um, on the
supplemental is the generator.
We made a supplemental
preparation uh request of
342,000. With that, um, will
stand for.
Questions on AOC, the Supreme
Court, or
We'll start right there and
discuss and then we'll go to
each district in individually.
OK.
Uh, Representative Chapman.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
45 million for security.
Uh
I think that's essential that,
that uh we keep you guys safe.
Is that gonna be spent in one
year? What's the time frame for
putting this on the ground, you
know it, I wonder, uh, is it uh
something we put it up and then
it just
6
5 years to get it done or should
we appropriate a little bit each
time.
Tell me the time frame for this,
Mr. Chair Representative Carl
you and on the details I
understand this to be six year.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Chatfield, uh, the $25.2 million
request as the chief said, it's
a 6-year request. We really
wanted to show you the, the
scope of the request. I realized
that you might choose to slice
that and fund it differently.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. That, you
know, that sounds uh
That, that sounds doable, OK?
Cause one year it was, it looked
to me like it was pressing it a
little bit. My second question,
Mr. Chair.
Ankle monitoring.
I remember a couple of years
ago, I don't think it was last
year, I think it was the year
before last when we all found
out that the heart and criminals
that we put ankle monitors on.
We're not monitors at night, of
course, we all know that no
crime happens at night, right?
Uh
And so happy that we put up some
money to have them monitored at
night on weekends. If you all
worked with staff to see if we
can uh make that recurring. I
don't think that's something
that we have to make a decision
every year that we want to have
criminals monitored at night and
on the weekends, I think we got
all think that we need to watch
them.
Especially at night and on the
weekends, so, uh, have you
worked at all with staff? Have
you, have you, is there a move
afoot that we, that that become.
You know, I don't know how much,
I don't know what the necessity
is, but I think it ought to be a
recurring expense. Tell me about
that.
Mr. Chair Representative
Chatfield, we've certainly uh
discussed this at length with uh
our LFC analysts and LFC staff,
Mr. Soy.
Um
We think it's really important
too, we've been doing the 24
hour monitoring since about
2020. Uh, but again, like I
said, it's just been this one
time, so hopefully we can, we
can make it permanent. Chair.
What do we need to do to make
that recurring.
Uh, if we approve it what this
special request and next year we
have to come back and do it all
over again. I, I, I think I've
got an idea that next year we're
gonna want our hardened
criminals, monitored at night
again, and Mr. Chair
Representative Chatfield, this
is a recurring request. We're
asking for for recurring general
fund for that you're requesting
today would be recurring.
Not like the the uh
appropriation that we did in the
past, which was non-recurring.
Mr. Chair Representative, that's
correct. At one point.
$3 million roughly is uh
recurring request.
Thank you, thank you, Mr.
Representative, if I can add on
an operational side that, that,
that money is used.
Um, and
I want to inform the committee
from an operational side, we've
made improvements.
Uh, including a process by which
if someone violates that they're
they violate their conditions of
release that they're held until
the original judge.
Uh, can hear that case, so
that's a change we've made in
the last calendar year.
Um, it uses the money you've
given us in order to
Uh. Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Senator Rodriguez, thank you,
Mr. Chairman. Um, good morning,
Justice, and uh of course Carl
and staff, thank you for your
work. Just a quick question, a
little more information on the
25 million for the security,
which is beating that to the
bone, right? But let me just
ask, um, the, if it's allocated,
for example, over 6 years, that
would be approximately 4.2
million per year. And the only
question that we're wrestling
with here is, what about um
How's it going to be allocated,
for example, have you already
determined that, like to make
sure that rural communities and
other areas get.
get some support here too. Thank
you. Mr. Chair, Senator
Rodriguez, yes, this is a
statewide analysis of every
magistrate court in the state,
uh, so including our, our rural
areas.
Yeah, so the process is, um,
and, and
The chair of our budget
committee, Judge Chavez is here
as part of a district's budget,
they will make that request.
It'll be a security request
either for their district court
or their magistrate. And so they
advocate for that, they back it
up with the needs and then um
the decision to fund is made.
Some of it is um based on the
actual building.
Um, older buildings require more
infrastructure, um, newer
buildings have those sort of
built in, so what you funded in
Sandoval, for example, will have
those things if you go down to
Socorro, there's a lot of needs
for espanola.
Yeah, good. Thank you very much
for, for that. Uh, so, um, thank
you on that point and then one
more is more that more a comment
than a question here is that on
the um the pay for employees and
an absolutely, it's been forever
that employees in the judiciary
have been underpaid and the
vacancies that we have dealt
with and you more, you work with
us every day, um, happened from
many years ago because I'm not
even sure we ever brought him
to.
not only in numbers but also in
salary and so I remember during
COVID it was extreme for
everyone but the courts really
felt it then and I can certainly
uh sympathize with you on that.
Now, 40,000, I think the total
like I don't have it right here.
I was trying to, to decipher
this. Yes, under 45,000, that's
gross pay for an employee. So,
my goodness, by the time you,
you get home with the net pay,
you're hardly have anything
left. So, um, yeah, I really
I do hope that we can do
something about these salaries.
If we're going to build these
vacancies, um, and not only
retain recruit, but retain
employees, and we need to pay a
little better, my goodness,
actually quite better when I say
a little bit of a good
statement. So, um, thank you
very much. I'm not gonna prolong
the conversation, but I
appreciate all your work and uh
and all that she did justice
you're right, when I worked in
the first judicial court, you'd
be surprised at the amount of
employees that would waive their
state.
Health benefits to apply for
public.
on salary.
Oh my goodness. Thank you. Thank
you for the information.
represents small.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair,
and, uh, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chief
Justice, Mr. Director, thank you
and tell the, your team who's
here, it's fundamental services
that are uh so deeply important
and you all provide. Mr. Chair,
I know, uh, in the house we were
proud to provide extra funding
in collaboration with our Senate
partners uh around a number of
different areas, including
replacing the fees and a lot of
other areas, uh, and the start
on security.
in other pieces. Mr. Chair, Mr.
Chief Justice.
A couple of key questions I
have. One,
appreciate the proposal to raise
uh pay scales for lower paid
employees.
I can well imagine that there's
robust competition for many of
these employees between the
public sector and probably also
within the private sector,
within the legal community, and
there is a clear need to have
the best quality employees in
our court system.
However, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chief
Justice,
It strikes me that I have to
ask. We've seen recently sort of
the move by you all to provide
very significant funding to
employees who are leaving.
essentially buying additional
leave time and sort of that
balance, I wanted to ask how you
see that balance between the
additional reward for employees
who are departing after
incredible service and the
pressure to both bring and
retain employees who are maybe
at the beginning or more in the
middle.
I'll, I'll have Mr. Oste address
the, the particulars of what you
are describing as PTO, which
What you want to know, we spent
some very quality time with the.
important corrections, uh, to
explain that policy a
representative we've also
answered.
Number of requests by both the
Senate and the House with regard
to documents.
I will tell you how many uh
documents we've turned over in
that regard. To answer your
question as if from a managerial
perspective.
Fair question. They go together.
Um, and
They, the, the PTO policy is not
just for those that leave, but
it's for sitting employees that
have the ability to accumulate
enough PTO.
Um, the policy itself is a
recruitment.
And I, I won't get into the
details cause I don't want to
consume all the time, but you're
right, um,
We make those decisions both
with regard to pay and leave.
Both as tools to retain
qualified employees. I know you
heard last this week, I think
alone, if I read the paper
correctly.
That's where I get my facts with
regard to what you've done.
There have been bonuses to the
DA's office.
Um, when I presented to the
courts and corrections.
My last exhibit at the end of it
was
I believe it was the Environment
department saying, come join
environment, we'll give you 5
days to leave the day you start.
Um, so to answer your question,
it's a fair question, especially
from the legislature, how we're
appropriating that money,
certainly from the legislature,
and we'll answer all those
questions.
But directly it, they're joined
together. It's for us to get
qualified place. Do you have any
particulars you want to have?
I, I just wanted to add, Mr.
Chair, Mr. Vice Chair, um, we
really see our paid time off
policy as a recruitment and
retention tool. Um, it was a way
that we could manage recruitment
and retention within our
existing budgets, right? We're
not asking for more money for
that. Um, and that was sort of,
you know, the last year we asked
for 11% for our employees
targeted the year before that,
we asked for 10%. You, you gave
us 2 on top of what their state
employees got, but we just saw
ourselves kind of backsliding.
And sort of thought, OK, within
ourselves.
What can we do to try to help on
the recruitment and retention
side, and that was our, our
effort in that direction.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chief, thank you
very much. I appreciate sort of
that and look forward to kind of
the additional detail, but uh
appreciate the sort of the very
clear and strong answer there
and excited to see them and
understand and maybe that's
reflected in performance metrics
about how the recruitment tool
as you describe it, which makes
sense, how that's working and
how we intended to work and how
we can match as we start to
look, you know,
we broadly talk about our
plateauing of revenue, how we
can maximize, uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
Mr. Chief Justice, the second
question is around, um, in the
the data security. We have made,
I think, very uh much a priority
to invest aggressively in data
security, which we know is
vital. We have many instances in
our state and obviously all
around us where um violations of
that
Security cost, uh, time, money,
and things.
more dear than that, right?
Um
Do you all do data security
through Department of
Information.
Uh, and technologies to do it.
So wonderful question.
Um, I, I want to answer
directly.
In two parts.
First is we do data security.
Did Cassie Hay ahead of Jed
here. We have a security team.
We operate our own IT system. If
I can urge you to do anything is
to let us operate it and ask us
about what we do with regard to
our own security.
We don't do it.
No pun intended
we don't do it. We do it. That
should be.
I pursuer.
But I, we, we really urge
Our policymakers to allow us to
Run our own security. We have
judicial partners out there, and
we've seen it in the last year,
both with regard to LOPD and DA
that have been attacked.
Um
And we, we need because of the
work we do, we need to be able
to manage our own.
IT and data security, and we do
it robustly. We have tabletop
exercises.
Um, we do.
Everything we think is required
in order to ensure
For you that are court system.
Uh, IT infrastructure is safe
and we will give you all that
information on that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Mr. Chief Justice. Um,
I look forward to that and have
no, no doubts about sort of the
seriousness and gravitas and uh
effort that put into it. I, I, I
assume, and we don't have to
dive into it too deeply now that
um
The district attorneys do or do
they do that through with you
all, is that they're separate
piece?
Mr. Chair, Mr. Vice Chair, the
DA's are separate from us as
well, and I, I did want to add,
um, we do cooperate with, um, do
it, and we, we participate in
their statewide cybersecurity
efforts. I mean, this, it's a
collaborate, it's a
collaboration, we just need to
maintain our independence as a a
branch of government in this
area. Sure, OK, Mr. Chair, I,
I'll, I'm very interested in
that. We're investing and I
think the chair's leadership, I
very strongly support.
Significant continued investment
and do it. And we have pushed
every other
Part of government.
I think appropriately to be part
of do it because that is both
the intended and area that's
easiest to sort of have robust
funding to have just a sole
focus on that security, not get
involved in any of the other
parts of any of the other
executive branch
responsibilities, but to be
laser focused on that security.
Now we and I.
Deeply respect the separation of
powers and sort of our
fundamental approach to
constitutional government. And
so we'll be very
Respectful of that.
And Mr. Chair,
We've got a, we're gonna face
more and growing threats, and we
have to be prepared for those.
So, it still seems to me that
there's
I hear, Mr. Chief Justice, sort
of the very strong answer from
your end. I look forward to, to
learning more and exploring more
about how to leverage things the
best.
And in every other instance,
we're pushing to centralize or
to to work.
Bred to it and to fun do it.
To do this critical work and
we're open to those
conversations, especially with
doing it Carl makes a good
point. We are not resisting
certainly with regard to best
practices, we meet all those
as's a matter of certain we
trust from you and we look
forward to that conversation to
show you and do it, that the
system that we have and that if
there's other ways in which we
can communicate to them to
ensure that it's a safe system
without allowing them to
intrude.
Into
Um, because I won't spend a lot
of time, but you, you're
spending a lot of money on
technology. These are now
systems in which all three
branches are interacting, we
just need to be very careful
about our proprietary work,
that's all understood. Thank
you. Thank you very much, Mr.
Chief Justice. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
I presume Syria.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um, uh,
So this summer, um, the courts
came before us, science and
technology, and, and they have a
very impressive IT group
department, very impressive
people running it. So I, I, I,
after the meeting, we felt like,
yeah, they can be separate, and
if they get infiltrated, it will
be on them, but this is one
department that they are so
highly, I mean their people are
amazing, so I felt OK with them
being separate from do it. Um,
and
I think, uh, but again, if they
get infiltrated, it will be on
them. They will have to figure
it out because do it won't have
any really say in it the way
it's the way they want to set it
up. Um, but we have this high
real reliance on IT. I was a
little worried about, um, we
didn't get any uh uh the IT
business analysis and the
network systems administration,
we to get any recommendations
from, from us, LFC.
It's on the
page 3.
Yeah, well, I just wanted to ask
my question again. Those are
important areas that we need to
really look at funding, making
sure they're funded and uh, uh,
so.
They work in asylum. They need
to probably be in asylum for
safety and security in their IT
system and and for all their
data protections, right? Right.
And you can correct me anytime
she's just as you're on the,
the, the thing we should be
doing with do it is doing cost
savings. If we have a vendor
over here that can supply to
them and do that. I mean, you
don't want a data breach.
In your system saying, here's 25
Ankle monitors, and here where
they're at and you're finding
out where the victims know where
the ankle monitor guys are in
that data beach could be let out
pretty quickly, cost savings in
IT but siloing, it goes the same
way for a state police. They
want to be siloed because some
of the information they get,
they may arrest somebody, but
they may not charge them and all
of a sudden, you know, their dad
is out there.
And so Silo or I'm gonna call it
silo and I don't know what the
term exact term is keeping their
systems separated in operational
is probably the way they need to
work.
Now, do we need to do cost
savings across the board, but do
it, do we need to keep them in
the training, the cybersecurity
and the latest I notice there's
no cybersecurity request in
there.
I don't know why, but that, that
was interesting to me in this
world that we don't have a
cybersecurity request for for
data breaches or for that. So
they
Oh, I understand why they want
to work that way.
But they should also say if
there's cost savings with GST
providers that are in the
system.
That can, they can use to
provide that.
And then cross reference it, so
they're the latest with I, I'm
not a data guys. Croser
something the latest would do it
to make sure they're on top of
where they need to be.
Seems like the way we should do
it.
That's right.
That um and uh representative
center, and that is what we were
doing during the tabletop
exercises.
Do it, participates and when in
attacking or comes up one of the
conversations is and often it
comes from do it. This is a
vendor that handles this well.
So those conversations um.
Our.
Thanks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Um, we should probably have to
do it in all these I'm the last
person to ask that question be
answering that question, send or
share.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I got 3
kind of broad questions. One
goes back to the, to the do it
and cybersecurity and all that.
I don't want anybody looking at
the stuff that I have. I've got
personal information on people.
Um, but I also have expert
companies that do it. I don't do
it.
Um, but that's why we have do it
to do that for the state.
I also know that the state of
New Mexico let my stuff out,
because an agency was not
Working with doing it. And so
now my name and social security
number, birthday and my home
address all out there in the
world.
Because an agency in state
government,
Decided not to work with do it.
And they were hacked.
This can do it, do it.
Hope so, cause that's what we're
paying them for.
Um
But I've got a uh two other
questions. One is, is really
crime related.
You know, we hear all of these
things, um,
That
we have crime because there's
really no punishment, um.
Uh, the, the certainty of
punishment is the deterrent, the
certainty of no punishment.
is an incentive to keep doing
what you're doing.
How do we give a certainty of
punishment instead of a
certainty of freedom with no
With nothing. We keep letting
bad guys out. Bad guys keep same
crime.
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator.
The, um
The part of that process to
answer your question, which we
can control because we don't
pass a law and we don't.
You wouldn't want me to arrest
people.
Um, is that for the certainty.
Once they enter into our system.
That they are
Um, they go through their city,
they go through the system
efficiently and effectively.
And it is on us to make sure
that
They're not delays in the trial
process once that indictment.
I brought.
There are other concrete things.
We can do
And we have done. One is
I mentioned earlier, um, the
change in our rules to hold
people that are out prior to
trial, if they violate their
conditions of release, they are
held until that judge.
revisits and decides whether
that person needs to be held for
trial.
Um
We have also in some districts.
Created what's called a case
management order to ensure that
Because once they go through
these doors and the indictment
is filed.
It's like
Poker with the cards up.
It's what information does the
state have?
And what information does
defense have and then let's have
a jury decide.
One of the concrete things, I
think that can be done.
by the policymakers.
And one of the things that holds
us up and causes frustration,
Senator, is this dispute over
the evidence, the discovery.
I would urge, and I'm, I'm way
over in your area now, I would
urge if we're talking IT one
place in which this discovery
can go. So the evidence that the
police officer has on, on camera
or otherwise, and go to one
place, defense counsel can
access it, and we can be off and
running.
Um, with regard to the judicial.
So, Mr. Chair, and uh.
Chief Justice, I
Something changed.
We didn't used to have this
problem.
At least not on the
The scale that we have it today,
what changed?
One of the main
Factors and I think you've
looked at it this year, uh there
are a number of
And much more of an increase in
drug related.
Minor offenses which creates a
high volume in our system, but
they are low category crimes.
Um, I think that is one of.
The differences I've seen is a
justice.
Um, I sat, I went down to Metro
court. I would welcome anybody
here.
Go on a Saturday arraignment the
Metro court and see what comes
through Metroor from a Friday to
a Saturday morning, and that
will show you exactly the
question you're asking. I think
there's been an increase in
behavioral health issues that
you're addressing and certainly.
The
Um
The input of fentanyl and other
narcotics is, is causing our a
large burden on our judicial
system because it's causing
property growth.
So,
Mr. Chair and Chief Justice, I'm
I'm
I'm somewhat confused here
because it's, it's not.
It's not the low-level drug.
Thing that's causing all of the
problem, especially in
Albuquerque. There's something
else.
Because the low-level drug guy
is not killing people.
Too stoned to kill people.
People that are killing people
are the people that I'm
concerned about.
But I also think the people that
are killing people are the same
people we're letting out.
That is a.
In observation, respectfully
sent, I'm not sure it's borne
out by the facts. We can get
that to you. So the question is,
is it someone that is let out
early committing the homicide.
Um, I don't know if we have a
particular date on that,
Senator. Let, let me ask Carl.
And let me just say, Mr. Chair
and Senator,
Yeah, our, our role, of course,
our judges' roles and the jury's
roles is to decide the case. And
so, as the chief was saying,
that's really been our focus is
when the prosecutor files that
case, let's make sure it's
moving through in an orderly
fashion to, to either a plea
deal or a verdict, and that's
been our focus is make sure, you
know, let's try to remove some
of that friction from the system
and let the jury decide who's
guilty and who's not.
Um, on the pre-trial side, yes,
I can maybe talk with you
individually, senator on um the
stats we just finished uh uh
another independent review
showing that if folks that are
um on pretrial monitoring.
Very few of them are are are
committing new crimes and very,
very few of them are committing
any violent crime while while on
release.
So, Mr. Chair and Chief Justice,
what, we have the highest.
crime rate in the world now.
Um
That's a good question and it's
one.
That if I had the answer to
that, I, I may run for a
different office, um, it is
complicated, Senator. It doesn't
mean it's not.
Achievable or question we should
work towards. When I, when I
went to the, to you all on AOT
and behavioral health that is.
Behavioral health issue is one
element to the problem you're
describing.
Um
I can as a Chief Justice, solve
the crime issue in New Mexico.
What I can do is help break down
the components that cause that
and do what we can as a
judiciary understanding our role
in the constitution to assist
you and one of those is
behavioral health.
Um, if we can work on that area,
we can mitigate some of it. We
can mitigate some of it in
pretrial detention. We can
mitigate some of it in
rehabilitation with regard to
drug possession. You can
mitigate some of it in the
policies that you pass executive
can mitigate a lot of this with
the crime labs.
And the backlog we have, and
they do a tremendous job.
But when we're ready for trial
for these people that you're
describing.
We're waiting on crime labs to
get the evidence gather so the
case can be tried, so it's a
hard question. It's a fair
question. All I can, the only
way I can answer it is again, to
tell you what we can control and
do our best to do that.
That's my honest answer. OK. So,
Mr. Chair, I just, I'm concerned
because
The only thing we seem to talk
about is behavioral health.
And again, that's a low level,
low-level crime people that are
doing that.
OK.
But that's not the
problem. It's a problem. I'm
gonna be wrong, but that's not a
the problem. The problem is that
you go to Albuquerque for the
culture and you stay because
they stole your car.
That's a real problem.
The real problem is that
We, you know, killing people and
And frankly, I think that it is
drug related, the the the
murders are drug related, but
it's cartel drug related or some
other gang drug related, it's
not.
It's not just random.
Um
So there's, there's something
going on. The random stoned guy.
OK, mental health helped the
random stone guy, but that's not
what's, that's not what's making
national headlines about
Albuquerque and the state of New
Mexico.
But I have one other question. I
appreciate that.
Uh, one other question.
Did y'all build a gym over
there?
In the Supreme Court building?
Yes, there's an exercise
facility in one of the rooms,
correct?
Why? Oh, Mr. Chair, I'm sorry,
Mr. Chair, Chief Justice, why?
Um, center.
Good question, part of, again,
the um
At least for me and others.
Part of the quality of life and
ensuring that you have a balance
is in order to reduce.
Um, the
The stress of the particular
work is to be able to exercise.
We wanted to make that
available.
Um, to our employees, we think
it.
It is a wellness tool and we
also hope.
Um, that it reduces, um,
Absenteeism through illness or
otherwise, but
That's
That's why.
So Mr. Chair and Chief Justice
was this?
Was this in the budget that we,
was this in house Bill 2
somewhere along that's a
particular question I, I think
this was probably last year or
the year before, um,
It it was not
Last year's houseboat. I
apologize, they don't have the
institution.
So, Mr. Chair.
We know if it was in house bill
too.
I, I do not know what have John
look and see if there's a
request in House Bill 2 for.
Uh, Mr. Chair, to, to my
knowledge, it, it wasn't in
house built to, um.
The, I believe the um the money
for equipment, uh, was out of
the uh general fund. Uh, their
general and appropriation from
two years ago or so.
I just when when I heard this,
uh, um, Mr. Chief Justice, it
just
I would like a gym in this
building too.
OK.
Um
But I, I walk a lot, not only
around this campus, but around
town.
Just because I eat too much
here. I'm trying not to.
that take over. But so I'm just
wondering if that was the the
best use of of tax dollars. So
with that, Mr. Chair, I will,
I'll stop.
Represented
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and uh
I appreciate you guys being here
today, Chief Justice and Mr.
Rustick.
One of the questions that I
have, and I, I apologize in
advance for being redundant, but
I'm all about.
Retention and not as much on
recruitment, and I like to keep
employees around and I was
shocked to hear about.
Some of your lower paying
positions that you have, could
you give me a description of.
Of $45,000 job. What, what is
that title?
Mr. Chair Representative
Vincent, are folks, we sort of
commonly call court clerks, if
we really call judicial
specialists. That's our job
title, and there's a judicial
specialist one and then with us
a couple of years as a judicial
specialist too, and then maybe a
senior and then you can go on to
supervisory roles, uh, and those
are the folks that are in the
court clerk's office, and
they're processing the
paperwork, whether that's
physical paperwork coming in
over the filing counter, they're
answering phones, calls from the
public, um, and they're making
sure, especially that the judges
and the lawyers have all the
filings that are coming in that
they're properly docketed so
folks can find them. Um,
they're, they're called the
right thing so that we can run
um reports and statistics on it
later.
Um, it's a
Job that uh requires at least a
high school diploma, but it's
increasingly complex because
there's so many little facets to
the job to make sure that we
marked every piece of paper
correctly so that we can find it
later and run statistics on it
later.
Oh, representative by just down
in Kurzos and Alaggordo. When
you walk into those courthouses,
it's the first people you
encounter.
And the one thing with
particular with regard to your
jurisdiction is we have to have
courthouses in these communities
you've required that those
employees need to be there. Some
in your district commute.
Um, and so they're making that
decision as well is what is the
cost of having to commute. So
when, when you
We were just down there.
It's so folks, when you walk
into the courthouse, it's a
first ones you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and when
you hire one of these.
Court clerks.
And you put your.
Blood, sweat, and tears in them,
and you really get that, that
diamond in the rough.
And you have them in there 3 to
5 years, and they quit.
And they move on.
I noticed you said you had a 40%
turnover.
Is that due to specifically
money.
Mr. Chair Representative uh
Vincent, I think so. We have, we
haven't uh been able to do any
kind of comprehensive study on
this, but anecdotally, uh, we do
an exit kind of exit interview
with folks as they're leaving
and a lot of the time it's due
to the compensation.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and
Mr. Rick, what I'm asking is,
you know, I, I know I'm not
trying to be as competitive as
Texas.
But if you offered me $25 more
an hour.
I might just have to move to
Texas. And I think that we need
to take care and retain our
employees.
And crime is at the forefront of
everybody's mind, and
How long does it take to train a
brand new.
clerk
Mr. Chair Representative
Vincent, it's about a year for
you to get really good and and
just kind of automatic at
whatever kind of piece of paper
is coming in and you can just
know what to do with it, follow
the correct procedure, get it
filed the right way.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and when
we talk about a 40% turnover
rate.
And you add the years on 40%.
We have to have the sharpest
tools in the shed if we're gonna
fight crime.
And to have all these people,
and I know you're a team.
But always take care of those
ones at the bottom, because
they're probably gonna end up
moving to the top.
And so I'm, I'm a real big
proponent and I hope that we're
able to ever classify,
reclassify these employees to
where you can get their pay
scale up, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair
Representative Vincent, yes,
absolutely, we are looking um
for the sharp, the sharp tools
in the shed to continue to move
them up.
Um, as quickly as possible and
my HR team handles handles those
requests and it's a, it's a high
volume of requests because our
courts are looking to move, um,
up our high performers. It's
just, you get stymied because
you're losing sort of the other
group, and then you're
constantly retraining and
retraining.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and you
know, just thinking um
If you paid me $45,000 a year.
And by the time everybody gets
their cut out of my check,
there's just not a whole lot
there and um.
That's, that's too bad. The
other thing that I wanted to ask
is on the behavioral health
pilot program, the uh Coated
version. How is that? I noticed
on uh slide 6.
On, um, item 3.
The participating districts.
And those are all pretty big
districts and 2 of those
districts are in my area that I
represent, how are those
programs going?
Mr. Chair Representative, uh,
we're just starting, um, but
it's often pretty promising
start, especially in the 12th
District court, we've got
providers on board. Um, we're
getting, uh, we've got those
navigators on board and those
are kind of the linchpin of this
idea that the navigator is the
the professional who's really
helping that defendant.
Knowing what the defendant needs
and then connecting them with
the provider and the services in
the community, so, um, it's just
starting, we've got this
evaluator in place, so we're
we're hoping to really know kind
of what the impact of the
program is soon, um, but
promising so far.
And one of the obstacles, um,
having just visited your
district is the providers in the
community and a lot of them rely
on providers in Donana.
So, so one of the questions is
how do we ensure
Um, that we have adequate
providers in the community and,
and we also trying to the
operation Don Yan and not
overstress.
service
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you presenters for your, your
answers. Appreciate your time.
Thank you. Thank you. We'll kind
of wrap this up kind of quickly
so we can get moving on. Uh,
Carl, I think we're gonna have
to fund you guys a pay study.
And see where you're at in the
market.
Uh, I'm, I'm sorry, I apologize.
I, we left you out of the
statewide one, we should have
caught you guys up with that.
But then I look across the board
and and we talk about you have
people under the poverty line at
45,000. Why are you not taking
your vacancy savings, your
funded vacancies, and bringing
those people up above that,
instead of doing what you did
with the money. If you really
want to recruit and retain your
employees.
That is an option.
To do that, and a lot of um do
that why are we not taking care
of our employees first in that
way.
Um, excellent question center
we've just had this conversation
with Carl. We, and it's similar
to the question from
representative, we are doing
both.
So we will not, you know, we
rely, this is a, a
As you know, you know, better
than I.
But
For this sort of parody to
occur. We need funding from the
legislature, but we are also
leaning on our individual
districts and we will to bring
Um, those lowest paid up, so we
We
We are doing both.
I, I don't have your funded
vacancies. I know what it is
currently, but I don't have your
funded vacancies, but to bring
those people up below the 45,000
threshold, you could have
probably done that pretty
immediately with
$1.3 million and, and get those
people held and and not be
losing them.
So I mean, that's something.
We need LLC to tune you up on or
or your HR people. I mean, it's
important to keep good
employees. It's important to
keep trained employees. That's
the number one issue for me, um,
for the last couple of days, I
mean, we are a declining
population in replacement of
labor forces shrinking tighter
than you can imagine, and this
is gonna be an issue across
every sector.
And so it's they're just not
there. The population increase
in immigration, you can do open
to all the borders you want.
It's not gonna settle the labor
issue across the board.
And, and so we got to start
figuring out where, where we're
gonna do to keep who we get in
retain them, and how we do that.
You know, I don't think PTO is a
is a recruiting tool. Pensions
are recruitment tools.
And pay as a recruitment tool.
And the more you pay, the more
the the longer they're gonna
stay. And so, if you have to
move them up at a different
level, that's why a pay study
isn't important to you and
important to us, so that we know
where employees can live, can
make a good living and, and not
just be paying.
Health insurance and taking a
little bit home knowing that
their health insurance is gonna
be paid on later on in their
life, so it's, it's a whole
personnel issue that
That
People in in uh there's
underlying issues with employees
that we don't see as employers
that you need to engage your
employees in.
And and to make sure that
they're staying, it may be that
person that's leaving, it may be
for a little more money, or
maybe it's childcare, maybe it's
parent care, maybe it's
something else that's happening,
that we have to help them and,
and, and move forward in order
to retain them. Have you guys
initiated any of that underlying
stuff or looked at any of the
underlying why those people are
leaving at at a rate when
they're trained up to leave sure
money is gonna be a factor, it's
gonna be a big factor, but is
there an underlying issues that
we're not seeing when they
leave.
After a year of training, um,
Saturday, uh, chair, we do do
that. We conducted both with
exit interviews when I visit
each district, when I visit each
district and many of the
courthouses in those districts.
We bring all the employees in.
The first question I ask who's
been here 0 to 5 years?
5 or 10, and the reason I ask is
I want to know what brought the
people into the judiciary for
those 0 to 5.
And for those 5 to 10, what is
keeping you with the judiciary.
The difference in our branch and
it
It depends whether it's r or
urban, so Santa Fe, you're
competing with the labs and
you're never going to outspend
the labs, and that is what it
is, right? They're gonna
Um, in a rural communities.
We have to have these
courthouses open, that is a
requirement you have imposed and
In order to do that, we have to
have a person in there, so we
don't have the flexibility as
much on some of the remote work
and those kind of things. So it
does, it, it makes it harder,
but we do look at that and we
would welcome a pay study.
And that detail, I mean.
I, I, I just think you're gonna,
we're gonna have to figure this
out cause the labor pool just is
not there and world in Mexico,
you're exactly right, makes it
even harder. And, and so I think
that's something that's gotta
change. Let me ask you on the
interpreters.
I was in court the other day
and the interpreter was on Zoom.
Wasn't even there, and then I
think the interpreter wasn't
even from New Mexico.
And, and so we're paying $57 an
hour, correct?
Right, that's correct, Mr.
Chair. That's a pretty good pay
for an hour for being on a Zoom
and not being, you can stay in
your home and do at $57 an hour.
I don't know if the other
requirements on the other states
that they have to be in person,
you have to talk to the, they
should be there in person in
order to talk to him before, so
they know what.
Set everything up for the judge,
so nothing, people get nervous
in court.
So they don't misinterpret it
and they have that, I mean.
And Mr. Chair, this happened. I
mean, I, a judge was about to
just my case cause I couldn't
hit pound 6 quick enough one
time
I was there but I couldn't get
the, it to, to function.
And, and Mr. Chair, the world
we're in is all states across
the country are really facing
this interpreter shortage, and
that's where they were
increasing that rate, and
they're letting them appear by
video. Um, it's not on my little
slide. Minnesota's gone to $90
an hour. Most of the folks can
do by video.
So you can, you can be in your
living room in New Mexico one
time zone difference, you can
interpret it in Minnesota,
right? And so that's, that's
just the market we're competing
in. Uh, I agree it'd be great if
we had the number of people
locally to to be in person, but
it unfortunately, it's just not
the reality we have. We have to
go this route, or we won't have
anyone.
And, and they're not, they're
not court employees. A lot of
these and they're picking the
job, right? So it's different
from me being able to send
someone to Gallop, they're
selecting and they're gonna
select whether they have to get
in a car and drive somewhere or
remotely, that's the reality we
face, your experiences, a real
one.
Yeah, man, that's the workforce.
That is the interpretation
workforce, right? I'm gonna pick
where I'm gonna work at what
dollar rate, and I know what I
need to make to take home and if
I do 3 cases in Minnesota and I
do.
vibe over here and I, I, I don't
know how you fix that, but it
just.
But we're trying to reduce
costs. For example, we have a
plea deadline so that we are not
paying for interpreters to show
up for trial or jury selection,
um, if they're not needed
because we've, we believe that
is wasted money. So we're trying
to save money in that category.
Senator Rodriguez. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. If I can elaborate
just a little bit on that, uh,
justice and uh Carl, um, you
know, this brought a thought to
mind here that only those people
like myself who have worked or
dealt directly with deaf.
People,
uh, deaf individuals, uh, I
didn't realize that a sign
language interpreter could also
be on Zoom, um, good and and not
good because of deaf person
relies uh also on expressions,
for example, much different than
us hearing people, um, you know,
they can see a sign language or
English language interpreted
into sign, but they also need to
have that expression to go along
with the sign.
And so I don't know how that
works well for deaf people. I
mean, are you saying that maybe
a person justice or Carl could
go in, um, to court for
something, but that deaf person
would not have an interpreter
there, but would have to be
looking at a screen to try and
understand what they're saying,
so tell me how that would work,
Mister Chair, Senator. We do our
best to get our American Sign
Language interpreters in person
and um
But, you know, the reality is
you need the interpreter, you
have to provide it one way or
another. Do you have anything
else you want to say, Frida,
freedom about that runs our
language access program. Good
morning.
The way it works with uh
American Sign Language
interpreters. Uh, we do try to
accommodate those in person,
majority of the time.
But because we don't have
enough, um, a lot of times it
turns out to be remotely.
Um, our courts are very, very
good at making sure that that
can be accommodated, um, and it
is exactly how you explain it.
The um
A party need the interpreter.
in front of a screen and has the
perfect.
View of the interpreter.
Um, a lot of times, if after
giving it a try, we realize it
does not work and it does have
to be rescheduled to accommodate
to bring somebody in person.
Thank you very much for that
information, um, but I, I have
to counter that just a little
bit with all due respect, only
because I myself have a child or
had she now lives in heaven, um,
uh, due to illness several years
ago, but she was born deaf. And
so we do sign. We sign, we sign
language. I never
became a certified interpreter,
but we do sign language and so
um
The point that I'm trying to
make is that no matter how
clear you can be on a TV screen
or a computer screen.
To relate that information, uh,
interpreting for a deaf person.
It doesn't do justice. I, I have
to be very clear here. I know
you're doing what you can with
what you have. So please don't
take this as a, as an affront as
for what you're doing. I, I know
you're doing everything you can,
but have to be an advocate for
people that are deaf because I
do know for firsthand, uh, what
they need as far as visualizing
something for in the expression
part, but also
It's not only the expression of
facial expressions and so on to
go with the with the word and
the interpreting of the sign of
the word with the sign, but it's
also the motion of the hands and
the arms. Sometimes it's a
little slower, there's a delay,
you know, how we all experience
that and on television, and when
that delay comes in, and then
more gets sad.
That deaf person may not be
picking up all that they need
to. So, um, anyway, thank you
for that information, but just
wanted to put my 2 cents in on
that and hopefully we can do all
we can to have them in person.
Thank you.
Thank you. Let me ask you about
the warrant fund. I mean, you
told our LFC and Felix that you
had about 200,000 balance, but
in, in the share system we're
showing projected our current
balance as of today at 1.4
million.
But you told our analysts you
only had 200,000, so I'd like a
full audit of that warrant.
fun.
Um, in its projected balance of
of
2.2 million for next year.
Um, that's what shown and Cher,
that's what was showing this
morning.
Um, we can't help but share
shows if it's wrong, what you're
showing in your system over our
system. We don't see that. So
Mr. Chair, our FY 24 year-end
balance in the warrant fund was
$9400.
And that's in our draft audit
report, so I'm
There is some disconnect there
and I'm happy to talk with you
and staff and figure out what
that is. Yeah, could we, uh, I
want to see a full audit on that
warrant fund to see where
exactly, cause we haven't added,
you haven't asked for any new
judges and that's where.
Kind of program them out of and
so.
Why is that thing dropping in so
quickly and where's that money
going out of that that warrant
fund that's that's something I
want, I wanna see.
Um
You know.
In certain words let me let me
wrap up and then I'll, I'll go
to you. Um, that, that's one of
the things, uh, when are we
gonna go back into the courtroom
at certain times. I mean, Zoom
is good.
I do civil cases which zoo is
good, right? If you try to go
into the courtroom, you really
can't go into the courtroom
anymore.
Yeah, and, and so when are we
gonna go back to, to actual in
the courtroom time.
Are we gonna move in that
direction ever again. I mean,
we're over the pandemic, I
think.
It's good to see a judge in
person rather than me trying to
hit.
Star 6s to on mes get dismissed.
Some of those things are very
important that that they see
those people face to face.
Um
It's human nature, that just can
choose human nature, especially
in criminal or or drug cases to
see where they're at.
Correct. And it's a, it's a good
question and um as far as
operating the courts, I'm
Slightly agnostic on it. I have
advocates that want
A lot of advocates or or
Um, lawyers that want to be in
the courtroom.
Then we'll go to rural
communities. I'll talk to the PD
for Gallup, and they'll say I
need a remote because I'm a
contract PD and they're not
gonna pay me to go down. That's
a hard balance.
We work
Post COVID as much as we can to
get back into the courtroom. Um,
I think it's something we need
to look at comprehensively.
With the bar and practitioners
and interested parties to see
where is that balance? Where?
When do you want to appear
remotely? And when do you want
to be in the courtroom and try
and devise a system that's
statewide, but I, you know,
I can bring someone in that will
say, I want to be in court all
the time and in rural
communities or other communities
or they'll say I, I love being
remote, it's cheaper for my
client.
That, that's a position we're
in.
I mean, you're gonna go to some
type of blend. I mean, you, you
need to move to some type of
blend, I mean, the most biggest
enhancement was when you can
schedule a time to go to DB and
you're there and then you come
back 5 times later to finish
your work
but that's a different story,
but there's gonna be a blend
that needs to happen and now,
you're gonna have to adjust to
that. And Mr. Chair, the only
type of hearing that's presumed
to be by video are traffic
cases, and that was done so that
their law enforcement officer
prose.
right? So the officer can just
pull over, do the quick hearing,
and get back on the road. Um.
If the defendant requested to be
in person, it can be in person.
The other hearing types are up
to our judges in Bernalillo
County, both the Metropolitan
Court and the 2nd District Court
are moving back to much more in
person intensive, um, and
They have more of the details on
that. And it, it does need to be
a hybrid. Here's the obstacle.
We go down to Carrizozo, a
strike that you go down to
Secorro. They, they don't have
reliable Internet service in
order to do it.
Again, not become Lincoln
County, I go to Carrizozo. They
don't have reliable power.
We're going to be asking for a
generator in order that we have
consistent power in the
courthouse. So I agree with you,
um, and we're working through
those obstacles. You may have to
schedule with the power
companies when you can hold
court.
But an option is Starlink, uh,
it works very well. I may be an
option for the courts. Let me go
into some, some budget numbers
in the last 4 years you've had
the highest increase of any.
Agency
Division 91, 90.1% increase over
the last 4 years. And, and we
see these numbers and I
understand the pace stuff, but
some of these are astronomical.
I mean, the speech detects when
I agreed with Artie to do that
was a set number and come back
in another year. Now I'm looking
at another 40 million that that
$75 million system when ours in
the legislature right over there
is pretty damn cheap and, and
That's a lot of money. I mean,
I'm, I'm about done with that. I
mean, we spent that kind of
money and, and asked for an
additional 40 million to do
that. It's just.
Something's not right.
You want to just overall and
I'll.
The overall number is just, you
know,
New Mexico's, we're not a poor
state anymore, right? But now
we're seeing a flattening, and
we've brought everybody up where
we thought, OK, let's bring him
up as much as we could capacity.
And let's see if we can get a
leveling off of operations and,
and say, OK, we need to fix pay,
we need to fix small things in
recurring money, but a 90%
increase.
It is a lot, you went from 26
million to 50 million.
In a 3-year period. That's a lot
to handle.
It did, sorry, go ahead, go
ahead. I'm sorry.
Um, it is a lot to handle a
large chunk of, as you described
as the FDR detects.
Um, again, I would provide the
invitation to come see the
courtrooms that we've
implemented. It is a tremendous
advantage towards the efficiency
of the judicial system to get a
record, so we can get these
things through quicker, um, we
will give you details as to the
number of district courtrooms
we've completed 29 district
courtrooms and hearing rooms.
Or putting at least getting the
FDR into our magistrate courts
so we know what is going on in
that courtroom. So when someone
comes to us and says, Magistrate
X is doing this. I'm just not
taking hearsay, right? I have a
recording. It's a wonderful
invention. Um, it is, it is a
big number. I would, it, it, FTR
detects is transformative. I
would invite you.
To come to the 2nd, it's
probably the closest for many of
you, we'll give you a tour that
where it's been fully
implemented and we'll give you
details how we're spending down
this money center.
OK.
I, I, I just, I mean, at what
point, right, we're leveling
off.
And we know that recurring money
is flattening. We've made some
moves, especially for in the
court for reducing fines, and we
have to replace that with
reoccurring general fund.
Uh, I, I think some of that's
gonna need to come back as we
move forward. I mean, if you
still want initiatives and we
need efficiencies. The only way
we're going to fund it is, is
with taxpayers and fines, right?
And I know it was hard to
collect and I know it was hard
to do, but.
Every agency across the board
from the the Department of
Agriculture, the cattle
inspectors want fee increases
cause they're they're underwater
environment department needs um
arts needs them.
state police needs him, you
know, a speeding ticket is $25
plus the, I think the court
costs if they actually hold you
to it, and sometimes they don't.
Um.
But we're gonna have to see
that.
Come across the board, I mean,
uh, we're gonna have to fix this
in New Mexico. We can't just fix
it by, by saying, all right,
we're just gonna reduce spending
over here. We're gonna do
something over here. It, it's an
all across the board approach
for everybody and everybody's a
little different, I mean.
And Mr. Chair, a lot of the
increases recently are sort of
just bills, bills coming due,
right? We stood up pretrial with
one time money, um, you all like
the program, so then that
becomes recurring general fun,
um, in our, in the jury, for
instance, um, we're mandated by
statute to pay the jurors
minimum wage, you increase the
minimum wage, but you actually
didn't give us funding for
several years and then now that
funding is coming due. And so I,
I, you know, I think a lot of
that is just the knock-on effect
of choice.
I don't think we can give you
funding because I'm looking at
your.
On my glasses on.
John may have to help me, but
in, in the jury.
Neil was like 2 million and then
increased to 5 million in we
kept moving it up, so.
John can help me find it on the
sheet he prints shit to print up
too little.
I have glasses and I can't still
can't see with my glasses. Don't
go beyond the I believe we asked
you for 2.2 million last year
and we're asking for that again
this year.
Yeah, and I think there's 5.5 in
in in I thought during question
5.5 this year.
It should be 2.2 new in in new
money or for jury and witness.
Mr. Chairman, for jury witness
specifically it's, it's 2.2.
OK.
We know that doesn't work. We
know we got to fix problems. We
know that we know and, and, and
We can't be adversarial to each
other.
Whether it's executive, whether
it's the courts, where it's the
legislature.
We get in these positions where
we don't like what you did.
Well, it puts us in a position
where we have to say, can we
fund that, right? And and that's
why we get adversarial with each
other. I mean, the executive for
your pay increases, I mean, 2
years and, and it took us a
while to get that done, right?
At some point in New Mexico, and
I don't know.
Maybe I'm gonna be shot or
something. We cannot be
adversarial to each other.
We have to say, we need you to
fix our crime problem. You're
part of the solution. We're part
of the solution.
The executive part of solution.
The DA's are part of the
solution, and we can't get
territorial adversarial if we
really want to fix these things
in New Mexico, right?
And and
I don't know how we're gonna.
We're gonna have to get over the
political policies and say,
I don't want to see my friend
when they go to the hospital and
they fly your daughter in cause
they have a broken arm cause
they don't have a clinic in
Magdalena, and then their
suitcases are robbed, or I don't
see my staffer who rides the
train get his cataly converter
store and then has to rent a car
and, and, and uh
I don't know at what point we,
if, if you, me, the executive,
and whoever needs to sit in a
room, but we're gonna fix this
crime homelessness problem.
And we're not gonna get
adversarial about it. We're
gonna say this is what fixes the
problem.
And we may not be perfect. We'll
make mistakes. But if you don't
try,
Then we're never gonna
accomplish anything and I know
you're not adversarial, but I,
there, there's been some issues
and, but we have to get over
that.
At some point in time in, and
so, as we talk about crime and
homelessness, I mean, in the
special session, we included you
because we think that's the best
lead, the first point of
contact, right? Uh, you can
manage the district and how you
can get the money out.
I mean, we've talked to every,
every presenter in the last
couple of days, whether it's a
DA's or public defenders or
Or who I can't remember who else
we've talked to. It's, it's,
we're gonna fix this together.
And I don't want to see an
adversarial tone from, from even
You know, um, outside groups or
people saying we just want to
incarcerate him. That doesn't
fix everybody's problem.
I mean, Gallup is a perfect
example of where we pick up
people at night.
For detox and hold them
overnight.
Other cities do not choose to do
that when they see people 12
degrees like before lasting
gallop. We have people out on
the streets, and we hold them
overnight. We know who they are.
I mean, that's why our FBI crime
statistics number is so high
just because they interact with
the police officer, they're not
held.
Against their will, they're held
for their safety.
And
And our prime number is so high,
but, you know, they said Gallup
is worse than Albuquerque and,
and, but I understand what's
happening in Gel. It's, it was
an all call prom since.
The day before I was born,
probably.
But we're gonna have to figure
this out altogether, and Chief
Justice, I don't mean to cut you
off, but
I mean, you've heard the
conversation's really the only
point we really agree.
Well, I, we should quit right
now here.
I agree with you 100%. It, it,
and it should not be adversarial
and, and for government to run
all three branches have to run
and they have to communicate
that the model I will say,
outside of the the policy matter
of behavioral health, which is
important.
On that question, the three
branches got together in a room
and talked about what role each
plays and tried to work out what
is now before you in this sort
of pilot system.
I thought it was much more
effective than, as you
described, and you're absolutely
correct.
An adversarial system in which
people get territorial sharp
pointing fingers.
Um, so I will tell you as chief,
I will make myself available for
those meetings.
We agree on more than that. I,
I'm not a lawyer. I'm a funder,
right? So I can't tell you on,
on what needs to happen on the,
on the courts or the criminal
side or that. I can tell you,
OK, if you need $12 million for
behavioral health system, then
tell me how it's gonna work and
then does it really work and,
and we can work together to get
that, but I agree and, and we're
gonna
You know, Albuquerque, everybody
wants a tougher crime law, but
does it really work, right?
Well, the judges.
Will the judges uphold what the
statute says, and they have
discretion. Will they actually
uphold it to where they need to
be.
If it's a father with two
children that have no other
source of income discretion is
very important, right?
But if it's it's someone else,
it's it, they, they're gonna
have to hold the law because
they've been pretty weak about
upholding some of the laws for a
couple of years and, and, and
that's they're part of the
problem and we're gonna make
them be a part of the solution,
so, with your help, we'll do
that. Uh, it's an open
invitation, said the chair, I
will make myself.
No, I, I know you we have in, in
your not having cereal, uh, and
but I think that's something
that we're gonna have to lead
in, gonna have to make sure that
read it in a way that that works
for everybody, so.
Thank you for your time. Any
other, Senator, what you had a
question?
Sir, I've been, I've been on and
off the list 5 times.
Because, because I didn't want
to poke at the bear too much and
Yeah
I.
It's funny. I went down to this
summer, we were in
Union.
And I went to, uh, I was sitting
between the dean of the law
school and, and the dean of the
medical school.
And
I asked one of them, I said, uh,
of our medical school graduates.
How many are retained within.
The state.
And she said, well, I really
don't have those figures, but I
think somewhere around 30%
because of the residencies that
they have to do.
As the dean of law school, and
the dean of law school says,
well, we're real proud, we get
about 80% retention in the
state.
So
It looks to me like we're making
a whole lot more work for one
than the other.
And when we start talking about
crime.
I know
Everybody gets their time in
court, and
Both sides get represented.
And
I happen to have more attorneys
in mind.
My family than I do in the
medical field in my family.
So I understand.
How this works, I think, but
Have we ever audited as LFC ever
audited the uh
The crime tracking and pretrial
detention factor.
Oh
John, if we ever audited that,
the, the
You know, the, the, the crimes
that were committed while people
were.
Before they went to to.
UNM's Institute for Social
Social Research has done a lot
of that analysis that that we've
referenced in reports are
leveraged in NFIR is looking at
um
uh pretrial detention and um
And what, what they, what
they've mostly looked at is uh
the
Effectiveness of the Arnold tool
in the 2nd judicial district.
Um, finding that it's, it's
mostly working as intended.
Can you, can you send that
report to me and so
That seems to me there's
We've got hiccups in the system
somewhere, and I know we can
talk behavior else all day long.
Then we spend a bunch of money
in that too.
And we don't seem to be making
much effect there. So,
Cost effectiveness.
Is out the window.
Somewhere
And
I know that, I know that it's
not all your fault. I know it's
not anybody else's fault, but
somehow.
We're losing control of the
society.
And uh authority in the society.
If that makes any sense, you
know.
And, and
We all have to work under some
kind of authority.
And it seemed like there's a
group that decided they're above
the law.
And, and
I'm very concerned about that. I
know you are too.
And, and
We need them.
I agree we need to all get
marooned somewhere.
Uh, if juvenile crime is up and
CYFD is, is
Not doing their thing.
And it doesn't help you any.
Uh, so
There's a problem with, with
crime in her state.
And we have to acknowledge it,
and
Somewhere.
Somebody's got a
Come up with some kind of
answers.
But don't mean to poke the bear.
I told you I was, I'm not a
bear, but
very non-adversarial, uh, and my
apologies that your family is
made up with that many lawyers
if my family's made without many
lawyers, I wouldn't go to
Thanksgiving.
Um, UNM Law School graduates
about 100, so 80% retention is
probably 80 attorneys.
And given the needs of public
defender and DA if you hired all
of them out, you still wouldn't.
I, I don't know what the
graduating class of the medical
schools.
We certainly acknowledge
That it is concern of the public
with regard to crime. We are not
disputing that.
Um, I just advocate for, you
know, our role in the solution
and we're working with the other
branches of government, we will
try, we did be health, whether
it's juvenile crime.
Cussing, divorce.
Happy to, to work on that.
Miss Cherry probably takes 4
attorneys to keep me out of
trouble.
Thank you. Thank you for the
presentation. You're gonna stay
there. We're going to go to the
court of appeals next, right?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Chair, unless you need anything
else, thank you. I think Adrian
wants to visit with you for just
a minute. OK.
You know.
All
OK. Uh thank you very much,
Judge, and the other nice
gentleman here. We are on tab
215 for um members to, to find
the information and thank you
for your presentation that you
handed out. You can proceed.
Good morning. Thank you so much,
Senator, uh, and members of the
committee, uh, I'm Jennifer
Atrip. I'm the chief judge at
the Court of Appeals. With me
today is Ramon Maestas, our
chief clerk, and on behalf of
the entire court of appeals, I
want to thank you very much.
for taking the time to consider
our court's FY 26 budget
requests. Uh, but before I get
into that request, I do just
want to express things to this
committee, uh, as well as a
larger legislature for your
support of the Court of Appeals
budget over the last couple of
years. This has resulted in much
needed funding increases for the
court, and we've put these funds
to very good use and they've
made a difference in our
performance. For FY 24, our
disposition rate was over 100%.
This is the 6th year in a row
that the Court of Appeals has
achieved a 100% or more
disposition rate.
Over this last year, we also
improved our time to disposition
in civil cases by 16% and in
criminal cases by 6%. And I'm
very pleased to report that at
the end of this last fiscal
year, the Court of Appeals has
cleared its backlog.
I'm so very proud of the
successes that our court has
achieved so far and really
grateful to our staff and to our
judges. Of course, we have more
work to do and our general fund
and special requests this year,
focus on three initiatives so
the court can continue to build
on those successes. Our first
key initiative is improved
performance, uh, starting this
fiscal year in FY 25, the Court
of Appeals has adopted national
timeliness standards set by the
National Center for State
Courts.
And although, uh, as I just
mentioned, we've made some
really great progress. We still
have a ways to go to meet those
national standards. So our first
request uh that will assist us
in improving performance is
funding in an FTE for an
additional judicial specialists
in our clerk's office. This
position will uh hopefully
eliminate delays in the
initiatory and beginning phases
of the appellate process. We are
also seeking special one-time
appropriations for mediation and
pro tem.
funding, so we can continue
these programs in FY 26. Uh, the
Court of Appeals has uh utilized
pro tem judges over the last 3
years, and they have uh been
integral in assisting us in
clearing that backlog and
starting in February of this
year, February of 2024, the
court began its mediation
program. It's currently staffed
with a contract attorney chief
mediator and retired judge
mediators and just in these 1st
10 months of this mediation
program.
we've resolved 20 cases through
mediation with a success rate of
over 50%. So we come to you
today uh requesting special
appropriations so we can
continue these programs in FY
26, and we certainly hope next
year we come to you uh seeking
permanent fund for these
programs. Our second initiative
is the effective administration
of the court. We spent the last
couple of years building up our
uh administrative and management
team, and this is really tied
in.
an important for improved
performance. If we don't have a
professional management team for
our court, uh, attorney and
judge time is diverted on just
basic day to day court
operations. So we're renewing
our request. We, we made this
request last year for a
financial specialist funding for
a financial specialist uh to
support our court's fiscal
operations. Our 3rd and final
key budget initiative this year
is for our Albuquerque
courthouse. We're one of 3
judicial entities that own our
own building.
Supreme Court, Metro court, and
the Court of Appeals, we all own
our own facilities, and, and
this really presents a a huge
budget challenge without
adequate funding for our uh
courthouse if something breaks,
we're either left with the
choice of foregoing needed
repairs or potentially leaving
vacant positions open, which is
detrimental to our performance.
And so, uh, after a significant
review by our facilities manager
and our building committee, uh,
we've identified repair.
and renovations that are needed
within this next fiscal year,
and we are seeking a special
appropriation to cover those uh
those things that need to be
fixed, uh, in FY 26. Uh,
finally, the court is requesting
funding and an FTE for an
additional custodian at the
Albuquerque courthouse. That
building is 37,000 square feet
and right now we have just one
dedicated custodian. He does a
phenomenal job.
But it is more than a one person
job, for sure. Um,
Members of the committee, uh,
I'll just close by drawing your
attention to the, the courts
Flyer budget uh presentation.
This includes all the items I
touched on today, as well as the
judicial salary shortfall, some
operational increases, uh, or
capital outlay and supplemental
requests and then it highlights
our court's performance on the
left-hand side with that, uh,
again, thank you all so much for
your time and your consideration
and we're uh happy to stand for
your questions.
Thank you, Judge, and thank you
for all your work too, and I
will go to members in a second,
but I, I can't help, I can't
hold it here, just thinking
about the fact that you have
only one custodian for the whole
thing that it's terrible, yeah,
truly, so hopefully we can get
that changed. Any members from
the committee have any questions
or comments from Judge Atrap?
For her, I should say. No. Oh my
goodness, this is gonna be much
easier than Senator, you do. OK.
Thank you, Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you and thank you for your
presentation.
just as a follow up on your
capital outlay.
Have you been a fairly
successful on that in prior
years.
And your request.
Uh, yes, members of the
committee, uh, senator, um,
Yes, last year, uh, the
legislature supported our
request for approximately $50
million in capital outlay for
security upgrades at the
Albuquerque Courthouse, uh, and
we are well underway in getting
improved security at our
courthouse there, uh, this year,
uh, we're seeking capital outlay
to replace uh the stucco on the
outside of the building. Our
building is 15 going on 16 years
old, uh, and the Albuquerque Sun
is just, uh, really taking a
toll on the stucco, as well as
reconfiguring some existing.
space in our clerk's office. Uh,
we, we have moved, um, since the
building was built from purely
paper documents to largely
electronic, uh, and we, we have
an administrative team that
we've been building up and we
need some additional office
space, so the capital outlay
request, uh, one of them this
year is to reconfigure that
clerk's office space.
Oh, Madame Chero, just one more
part home.
So, uh, within your request, do
you go through a statewise or do
you um
or do you uh
To your individual legislators.
Uh, members of the committee,
Senator, uh,
We're, we're uh serve the entire
state of New Mexico and so we
don't have like the first or, or
the 2nd uh dedicated senators
and legislators, uh, that, that
serve our court. We, we serve
all New Mexicans.
sorry I had to call as we're.
So can you repeat that again?
I'm sorry. Sure, yes, Senator,
uh, we serve the entire state of
New Mexico, so we don't have
dedicated representatives and
senators that are, you know,
just for our court, as it's the
entire state of New Mexico.
And uh, Madam chair, um, the
last part to our staff home.
Would they be allowed to go into
the geo.
Um,
yes, thank you, Senator. They
would be able to get into the
geo bond, of course, um, into
the geo bond bill for the
statewide um referendum, but um
it would have to be, as always
vetted through the um the
Geobonding process and capital
outlay process and the
governor's um executive uh
requests and recommendations for
geoon statewide and legislative
approval, of course. Thank you.
Oh,
I just suggest that you
Do both.
You know, and just work with
that and uh just
But very much. Thank you for
your information. Senator, thank
you for that recommendation. We
will certainly look into that.
Thank you so much. Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, just, uh, a point
of further information here that
because you're one of the courts
in the unified budget, it would
be discussed within the unified
budget first. Thank you. Of
course, thank you. All righty.
Anybody else? OK, thank you,
Jack. Thank you so much.
Or don't we sex is the district
courts, and we are, I'm going to
start, usually we go for the
from the 13th through the 1st
that we can do the opposite, um,
this way it doesn't really
matter. I just.
Oh, OK. I just so you put down,
we have a list here I'm trying
to to get to this, so.
We have who put this list
together again? You did? OK. We
usually start it this way
forward, so but you want to
start with the 6 1st to follow
it.
OK.
All righty. We have a list here
that's been put together for us
by staff and um this is based on
the distance, you said roughly,
OK. Thank you. And people
haven't waited here, so
goodness, I want my first
judicial district here first,
but I guess we're gonna have to
wait a little bit, Judge, so
let's, let's just do as the list
suggested, and that's 6th, the
6th District um for, um, and
then we're gonna move on to
To the 3rd and 5th and, you
know, all the years, um, I've
been here, I see it start from
like the 13th I'm going all the
way to the 1st, and I kind of
never liked that because the
first judicial district is
always last, but OK, so let's um
let's go with 6th, here we go.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, thank you. My name is
Jared Hoffa and I'm the chief
judge of the six judicial
districts.
Uh, for those who don't know,
that is the Southwest part of
the state with uh Lunar County,
Hidalgo County, and Grant
County, Silver City Demming, and
Lordsburg. Uh, we have 3
district courthouses and for
magistrate court houses for
magistrate judges, and 4
district court judges.
Um, with me today is our CEO and
CFO Angelique Munoz and
Gabriellelans Morales is our
financial specialist.
Uh, we have a very modest budget
request has been vetted by the,
the budget committee of the,
the uh judiciary and the Supreme
Court, uh, 0.8% increase, uh,
from the FY 24 General Fund
appropriation, and there's a few
other things, uh, including the
shortfall for judicial salaries,
the uh
Uh, FY 26 appropriation change
then is increased to 1.8%, uh,
specifically, the only one that
I really want to highlight is a
FTE plus the funding for uh our
term to per judicial specialist
too for Hidalgo County District
and Magistrate courts in Hidalgo
County, uh, we had traditionally
just had a single court employee
at our district court that
serves their full time, and when
she is sick when she takes
leave, what has been happening
is we have a district court
employee travel from.
Demming or from Silver City to
cover that courthouse. Uh, we
have uh partnered with our
magistrate court and worked very
well now that we're consolidated
in this, this position is a
floater position that works, uh,
approximately 3 days at the
magistrate court and 2 days at
the district court and actually
resides in Hidalgo County, so
that when uh.
In our court clerk in Hidalgo
County needs to take time off,
we don't have to put such a
burden on the other uh clerks I
have to leave their families at
7 o'clock in the morning to
drive to Hidalgo County, the
courthouse open and come home at
6 o'clock, so that that's the
main one I wanna highlight stand
for any questions. OK. Thank
you, Judge. Any comments or
questions? We have Senator
Woods. Thank you, Madam Chair. I
noticed that you're
Number of days to disposition of
criminal cases or
Increased quite a bit in
2025, or at least it shows here.
And also, uh,
Your disposition for civil
cases.
Is, is there a reason?
For those increases.
In the number of days.
I, I, I know that we actually
did not hit our target on the uh
uh clearance rates, and we were,
we provided a comment on that.
Um, we have at the beginning of
the fiscal year, uh, I had just
become chief judge and I
implemented a case reassignment
to have some judges focus on
certain areas because of the
what we've been hearing about
all morning about the lack of
resources. The judges were all
standing on top of each other
trying to get the same attorneys
into.
So that initially slowed us down
as we reallocated those cases
and we have uh picked back up,
uh, as far as the, uh,
The time to disposition on the
uh
On the civil and criminal cases,
I was not aware if it has gone
up, it has not gone up past our
target. We, uh, we, we've met
the target in our first quarter,
uh, so far this year, we have
exceeded our clearance rate is
well over 100% and our time to
disposition.
We're working incredibly hard.
And I think if there was a
delay, it was because of my uh
case reallocation.
OK. Well, thank you very much.
Thank you very much, uh,
Senator. Anyone else here with
questions or comments, we're
going to make sure because we're
running a little bit behind for
the sake of time. Thank you for
your work and certainly look at
these requests. We got the
special request for the FTE also
on here, so thank you so much.
All righty. We're gonna go to
the 3rd, uh, district court here
now, let's see who's here.
Better.
Very good, very good. I thank
you, and, and Mad, thank you and
members of the committee. We are
representing the 3rd Judicial
District. My name is Conrad
Perrea, the chief judge of the
3rd Judicial District, Donana
County, primarily with our
county seat in Las Cruces, New
Mexico, seated to my right, Miss
Bernice Ramos, our CEO, behind
her is Miss Amanda Oliveri, our
CFO. We also have a modest
budget that we'd like to
present. Uh, we're looking at a
5.9% increase and a total
increase of 800.
$37,000
837.7, uh, is our number.
We have
to brag about some of our
accomplishments, and we look at
our court statistics just to the
bottom right, um, our district
court has had many new and
reopened cases in the amount of
8,074 cases, we have closed
9,0748 of those cases. Some of
those are backlogged from the
COVID times. We have a clearance
rate of 101.06%. Our magistrate
court, which is the busiest
court in uh the magistrate court
in the state of New Mexico has
new
new and reopened cases of
21,209.
Cases closed, 21,894, with a
101.17%, um, clearance rate,
jury trials in Donana County
alone this past year have been
60, 60, uh, we operate under a
court management order and our
cases are turned around rather
quickly, so we have a lot of
jury trials and we heard the AOC
asking for an increase in jury
money because we have a lot of
trials. And with that, I'm one
of those criminal judges.
And I have shared in 1/3 of
those criminal trials, amongst
my other duties, but we have a
lot of, of, um,
Of operations in our courts, uh,
with that, we'd like to stand
for questions. We do have other
information if you need it,
ma'am.
Madam. Thank you, thank you very
much. Um, any questions or
comments from the committee?
Oh, thank you.
I think it's gonna be simple for
you here. So maybe that's a good
indication. I hope so too.
Thanks for your. Yes, you bet,
and we're moving a little quick
only because I said for the sake
of time here, so, uh, district
court number 5. Is this a 5
right here? OK, it's a 5. Thank
you.
Um
I'm Mark Sanchez. I'm the chief
judge of the 5th Judicial
District, uh, made up of Lee Lee
Chavis and Eddie Counties in
southeastern New Mexico. Um, we
are gonna be making some
requests of you, um, Senator
Rodriguez, I wanted to comment
on one thing, uh Mr. Chair, Mr.
Chair, um, I've had 5 trials or
hearings involving non-hearing
litigants, um, and, uh, two of
them were alive, uh, for I had
an interpreter's life. The other
thing we remote, uh, we did our
best.
to make sure that the monitors
were positioned properly so that
the uh non-hearing people and
the interpreters could see each
other. I made sure that the
focus was on uh the torso from
the waistline up.
So that um the uh interpreters
could be seen in their, in, in
all their gestures, and so, um,
We try to be fair to all of our
litigants, and so, uh, I just
wanted to mention that, uh, all
the judges in the room are doing
the same thing. I, I know they
are. They want, they want to be
heard. They want the tis to be
understood, and they want their
uh decisions to be made on a
fair basis. Our budget request
this uh morning is going to be
modest, um, we just wanted to be
able to do our work. That's
pretty much the theme of our
presentation. I'm gonna turn it
over to um my chief uh uh
executive officer, Mr. Kennan uh
Crowhurst, uh, who does a good
job keeping
things in order in our district.
Thank you, thank you, and let me
just interrupt for just a second
here and just say thank you for
those comments about hearing and
no hearing people. I appreciate
all your efforts and the efforts
of the courts. As I said
earlier, um, you know, I know
that you're trying your best
with the circumstances and the
funding that you have and the
number of interpreters and
everything else, so I just
wanted to, to shed a light on
that to make sure we continue to
do that for deaf people. We need
to know these things. Thank you
very much thank you.
OK.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, I'll break down
our um request into 4 sections,
the first section will be uh
personnel request for our court.
um, in the amount of $289,000
800 dollars.
Uh, the first, uh, FTE is for a
judicial specialist senior in
our Eunice Magistrate court, who
has seen an explosion in cases
last year they had 1900 cases
this year they had 3,373 cases.
And so, uh, in our uh workload
study, uh, they, uh, actually
are in need of 3.8 employees and
currently they have 2 clerks, so
we're asking for one additional
clerk in
The Eunice Magistrate Court.
Um, number 2 is our judicial
specialist too, uh, for a, the
Rosville Magistrate Court, we've
seen an increase in cases there.
Um, and they are in our workload
study, they are, uh, at a 9.25
uh clerks and they currently
have 8.
We're asking for that additional
part is that it? Oh no, sorry.
Do you have more to add or you
done with your request. I don't
want to move on to senators and
representatives until you finish
your presentation, but I wasn't
sure. OK, yes, OK, yeah,
quite a bit more. OK, let's see,
here we go. I'll go very
quickly, uh, a court services
specialist for our entire
district to help with, um, IPA
request ADA, uh, loss prevention
control.
own safety.
And then a paralegal in the uh
Levington District Court to help
with a speed along getting uh
paperwork and orders from uh
Self-represented litigants to
those people.
Um, the second item, uh, overall
is, uh, a request for 265,000
for contractual services, this
would be for to add to what we
currently have in contractual
services to uh increased
security in our 5 of our
magistrate courts.
Uh this is would be added so
that we could try to um hire
actual law enforcement officers.
For security in those magistrate
courts rather than just private.
Um, we request $11,000 for uh
the um
Refresh IT refresh or the 15 new
employees that we have.
And then the last uh big item is
uh 50 $500,000 for pretrial
services.
Employees in our entire
district. There would be 2 of
those employees placed in each
one of our district courts.
Uh, across our district.
And with that I'll stand for
questions.
Thank you very much for that.
Uh, we did make note of all that
and we do have your, uh your
handout also thank you for that
information, but, um, oops, tell
me.
Oh yes, of course, yes, I was
just gonna go on senator. I have
seen you and I'm gonna go to you
first because you're just so
kind. So there we go, Senator
Woods.
I've got a question on your
handout here.
You've got a, um
Under the general fund budget,
you ask for
Um
You have salary shortfalls of
142. 140.2.
And then over here on the,
I think that's the 3rd judicial
district, and this would be you
can give us that money if you'd
like, but
we're on the 5th. Yes, sir. Um,
so sorry, thank you, Madam
Chair. I am 3 days behind.
You can still ask questions
about the 3rd senator in a bit
we pass on. Thank you. All
righty, so any other questions?
OK.
Senator Gallegos.
And then Representative
Chatfield
and Senator Woods, uh, we'll, we
will take the money from the 3rd
also, but
I did want to give you guys a
chance to give us the outcomes,
um, a lot of the times we see a
lot of NAs and I understand 25,
26, um.
They have them in there, uh, but
it looks like we've had some
good progress, I think, and some
of your outcomes, you know, the
number of days, uh, disposition.
Um, you look at even the active
in civil cases in days of 290,
299. Is that attributed to, uh,
and I'm just trying to think
through the new facility that we
have, or what are we doing
that's changing the outcomes,
um, it's
Due to the uh um
Resolution of COVID.
Due to the new facility, it's
do the hard work of all the
judges and all the court staff.
Uh, we do need some more funding
to keep that record up.
One of the things that's causing
us to suffer, and now, we'd like
to be faster than that. One of
the things that's costing
causing us to be uh slower than
we'd like, is it the uh public
defender's office and the DA's
office is understaffed.
All those officers are
understaffed, and so, um, a
lawyer can only be in one place
at a certain time, um, if they
were better staffed, we think
that we could probably move more
cases.
More quickly through the system
and so the um
Unit in jail magistrate courts
uh Senator Digo Madam Chair, sit
right in your district, uh, I, I
know you know that, and I know
that you've seen the traffic
jams in jail, uh, and there's
some things going on there that,
that um um burden our, our
district. um, we're happy to do
the work that the burden uh
involves, um, but it's also uh
something that causes, that
brings revenue to the state.
And so our, our part of the
state produces more than 30% of
the revenue for the state.
Um, and so, um,
We'd like to have the money so
that we can do good work for
you.
Well, thank God, man, Your
Honor, uh, Senator Woos actually
has a really good idea of how to
get all roads fixed and in Lee
County, so, uh, partner with
him, help him out, but I just
wanted to highlight the outcomes
because, and I know even there
in Eunice, the new facility for
the magistrate court there is
300 times better than what it
was in the old.
Hospital and so I know that you
guys are doing the best with
what.
You have
I just wanted to look at those
and highlight those, but I thank
you both for coming all this
way. You are probably the
furthest from the capital.
We, we kind of noticed that too,
but it's OK. We're happy to be
here. Thank you very much,
Senator, uh, Madam Chair,
so we'll use the money that you
give us as best we can, move our
cases along. Uh, we do need the
roads to move the product.
Um, efficiently, um, and so, uh,
thank you recall that most of
the transportation of um.
Of petroleum products is uh by
tanker truck, and so the better
our roads are, the more
efficient we can get that to uh
the refineries.
Thank you. Thank you. Uh, we
have Representative Chatfield
and then we got Representative
Vincent.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
Mediterra.
We listened to the
administrative office of the
courts a while ago, and they
asked for uh funding for
pretrial services, some of which
is uh ankle monitors, uh, people
to monitor the ankle monitors
and uh you're asking for money
for pretrial services. I
understand there's other higher
courts and court of appeals and
the Supreme Court, uh, are, are
we, is, is this a situation
where you two different
divisions are asking for funding
to monitor.
the same thing. Uh, do we need
to consolidate so that uh this
represents a change in policy,
Madam Chair. Um, so, uh,
initially the plan had been for
AOC to uh manage and oversee
pretrial services, and then the
decision was made that that
would go to the districts and
would be handled locally, and
that's the reason for the
request in this budget. So Madam
Chair, we don't need to find the
AOC for pretrial services we you
need to prefer the 5th.
I,
uh, I'm just asking, oh, sorry,
uh.
Which one?
Representative Chatfield. So
what this is is these uh are the
actual people. This money is to
hire these 6 people to actually
do the program in our district.
It is separate from the AOC's
money in their management of in
their money for the ankle
monitor and the, uh, all that is
separate that they do, these are
the actual people on the ground
that implement the program
within our district.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
You, then we're gonna go to
Senator, I mean, Representative
Vincent.
There we go.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I just had uh one question
regarding your security. Are you
asking for additional security
or you ask representative uh
Vincent, uh, so currently we
have private security.
And it's paid at a much lower
rate than law.
Real certified law enforcement
officers. This would be money
that we would add to that
contractual uh money that we
have to then go to those law
enforcement agencies and
requests that they provide, we
pay them to provide security
because they have the ability to
arrest power.
The tension power of private
security is fine as a deterrent,
but as a solution to
Real
Law enforcement is less than
what we would like.
Madam Chair of the security
officers, and it's a kind of
symbolic in the magistrate
courts, uh, they can't do a
whole lot, they cannot arrest, I
cannot cite, cannot detain, and
so they don't really provide.
Security in an acute situation.
And so that's the justification
for our request.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
couldn't agree with you more. I
think you, you know, we want to
make sure that we're protecting
our courts so that you feel safe
in there and I like the fact
that you're going with a
certified officer. Now, would
you partner with, would they be
on your staff or would you
partner with the city?
The plan is to partner either
with the city.
The sheriff's the city worth the
sheriff's department.
Uh, and partner with those,
bring them into or contract with
them. So we would provide the
money to the law enforcement
agency, they would provide us
with the officer. They would not
be our.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
guess the thing that I would ask
is, have you contacted them, do
they have the personnel to
release.
To uh provide the services that
you're asking for. Sometimes
it's hard to get.
Responses back, uh, we have been
in contact with uh Eddie County.
They say that they are, would be
very interested in it. Lee
County is struggling a little
bit with
officers, so we might have a
little bit of problem there, uh,
in Eddy County, also some of our
local like Artesia police
department was interested, but
they, no one will commit to
providing
Until we are able to commit.
The money. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and you know, I just like
to always throw a plug in for
those retirees, that would be
perfect for them to go in there,
and I always look for the, the
retirees that have a little bit
of gray hair and a whole lot of
knowledge and they're, they're
able to, their situational
awareness is just at peak and
there's still a lot of tread
left on them. So, uh, just
wanted to throw that on you.
Thank you. Sorry about that.
We're gonna say something.
It's just a joke. You're home.
Thank you very much and we're,
uh, I think that's all I have
for this one, and I'm gonna move
on for the next thank you Thank
you, Madam. Sure, thank you very
much have a good day. Yes, you
too. Thanks for all your work.
I'm gonna have um Judge Bide
come up uh to the podium here
and present your budget, um.
Next, and I may have to step out
for a little bit, um, and then
come back, but I will, oh yes,
we do have the chair back so we
can proceed and um
from there. Thank you, Judge
Bisham.
All right, thank you very much.
So with respect to the first
budget, uh, do you all have our,
our handouts, uh, where we're
requesting a fairly modest
increase here. Uh, I want to
thank you for your time
considering our budget increase,
and I also want to thank the
judicial branches Budget
Committee, uh, for screening
various requests and the like
and making sure that everything
that we've presented to you and
requested from you has been
thoroughly vetted. So thank you
on both fronts. Um, also, if
you'll indulge me just for a
moment, I do
I want to say, uh, on behalf of
my court and myself, uh, thank
you to Senator Nancy Rodriguez.
I don't know that I'll have an
opportunity to do that again
while you're a senator, um, but
both personally and for my
district, uh, she's been
supportive, inspiring, and
instructive, uh, and it's much
appreciated. It's really
benefited our district. So thank
you.
Um
With respect to our requests.
Um, I think that you'll see that
certainly the bulk of them.
Or, I guess.
Asking for coverage of
Amounts that are being rolled
into uh our budget by virtue of
the uh general Services Division
rate increases, cost of
workforce investment plan and uh
to cover the judicial
compensation shortfall. Um, so
those I don't think are too
imaginative. And by the way,
because I was expecting to go
later. I have failed to
introduce uh Kathleen Bhill, who
is our CEO and administrative
wizard that makes everything in
our district truly function with
the money that you
Do give us. So, sorry for
neglecting to do that.
Um
In addition, uh, we've, we're
asking for a $85,000
increase for contractual
services for security for our
Rio Riva Magistrate court.
Uh, in Espanola and there was an
anecdote, I think that was
provided earlier during the AOC
testimony and it's indicative of
the issues we're having there.
They do need additional
security, uh, and we've been
working with both Sheriff
Merrifield and uh contract
service providers to, to get
that done.
Um, and the 85,000 is based
upon, uh, pretty thorough
investigation of, of what it's
going to cost in either of those
instances to, to accomplish
that.
Um
Let's see, just one other issue.
I, I guess I should ask. We've
got a couple of small requests
for special requests for
computer refresh, digitization
of microfilm and upgrades to our
Wi Fi system, which I wanted to
stress is actually in the public
end of the Wi Fi. We've got a
private.
Or court staff and judges and
the like, and this is on the
public side to make sure that as
um
Attorneys and pro se litigants,
their needs to access evidence
and data on computers and phones
is growing, so it's to
accomplish that.
Um
Do you all have any questions
about those requests.
I'm happy to answer any if you
do.
Senator Ros. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Um, thank you, Judge
Bheid. Um, I think you have very
eloquently described what you,
what you are asking for in the
2.8% increase is actually very
reasonable. It seems like most
of what you're requesting is um
on fixed costs that we impose on
you, uh, insurance and all the
other stuff that you're asking
for. I noticed that the special
requests are really a total of
$255,000 under specials probably
will be looking at that.
And um I'm happy to see that the
you're continuing with the
workforce investment plan. Thank
you for championing that. I
really appreciate that. Uh, we
need to increase our salaries
for employees. So, um, that's
good. And then, of course, the
shortfall for the compensation
for the uh for the judicial
compensation we're talking
about. So in rate increases, so
it's overall very reasonable and
um I don't have any questions. I
want to commend you and and your
staff and all the district
judges in the first
Judicial district for taking
care of three counties, my
goodness, that's a lot. So thank
you and they're very unique and
different counties, uh, and that
makes it, you know, a, a joy,
but each one requires its own
separate considerations and the
like, so let's and before I
Uh, you know, I, I don't want to
uh omit the following requests,
which is one I cannot stress
enough how much the judicial
compensation increase request
would mean to our district both
Santa Fe and Espanola in
particular, have access to so
many other governmental branch
opportunities and jobs, uh, in
Santa Fe in particular.
It's, you can walk across the
street to a different branch,
uh, once you've been trained by,
by our courts, uh, and get a
substantial increase in pay. And
so it is and obviously Espanolla
is not very far away either, so
our population centers are, are
somewhat unique. I know it's a
problem faced by everyone, but
While we can't necessarily
compete with Los Alamos National
Labs and things of that nature.
I think we should be on parity
with the executives so that when
we train people up, we can
retain them.
Um, so that's particularly
important. And then the other
piece really was to, to push as
well how important the language
access funds and improvement.
Um, you're absolutely right, uh,
Madam Chair, to point out that
uh
There are limitations with
respect to what interpreters can
do on video versus in person,
but the bottom line is, is that
this is a constitutional right
that people have that we are
working to protect and allow
them to actually exercise and
without the service, we can't
and as courts, we are working
constantly to try to make sure
we can put enough pieces
together and we're running out
of language access people to put
together by video or in person
to allow people
to exercise that right. So it
really, those are two critical
pieces.
Thank you, thank you very much,
Judge. Any questions or comments
from the committee members.
No. Mr. Chair.
I, I'm reading your presentation
and I haven't seen microfilm in,
I don't know how many
actually read this stuff.
There's not a newer system that
you can go to over my oh, so
this is to digitize microfilm.
So let me assure you I am never
gonna come to this group pushing
microfilm. I wish it had never
happened, but uh it is a
process. It's sort of a dead in
technology and digitizing it so
that
It can be accessed and searched
on our computers or maybe even
added to jit and its database
and the future is a key step. So
yeah, I'm not going in that
direction, I promise.
I hadn't heard that since the
80s that or a floppy disk,
right? Well, I, I tried to say I
was tempted to say microfiche,
but that sounded too fancy
not for Santa Fe
Thank you. Thank you. Any other
questions? See none. Thank you.
We're gonna move on. Thank you
very much.
To the 12th.
Oh.
Mr. Tur members of the
committee. I'm Angie Schneider.
I'm the uh chief judge for the
12th Judicial, uh, that's
Lincoln and Otero counties, and
we've got uh 5 district court
judges and 4 magistrates and our
county seats are Carrizozo, uh,
and that you heard a little bit
about earlier and uh uh
Almoordo, and I'm joined by our
CEO Audrey Hokari, and Bobby
Shearer is here. She's our
program manager, um, and one of
our funding requests uh pertain
to a uh a program that she will
oversee.
So I, we asked her to be with us
today, and we are asking for a
3.6% increase in our budget and
uh I believe all of you have
the, the uh handout in front of
you, so I'll just kind of do a
brief overview and stand for
questions. We are seeking
funding for what we're calling
the reach reach court. It is our
young adult court targeting
individuals 18 to 25 years old
in the criminal justice system
and then increases for uh
benefits and uh uh judicial
salary.
And um
Again, you've got the paper
right in front of you, so I
won't read from it, but I will,
Mr. Chair, stand for questions.
Questions from committee
members.
Represent Vincent must be in his
district.
It is in my district, Mr. Chair,
and I'm, I'm real proud of this
group right here. And I just
wanted to make a comment and I
appreciate the judges that are
in our district, and I know that
they're tough, and I, I hear it
on the streets, and Mr. Chair,
Proudly to report, we don't have
that big crime.
In, in, uh, Lincoln and Otero
Counties, I know we do have our
problems, we have our issues,
but we do have strong judges and
they're making good, they're
making good judgments, so I just
wanted to thank you for that.
OK. Thank you. Thank you. We're
gonna move on to the uh.
7.
And just so you know, we kind of
coordinate so the distance could
go first and they could get back
home and grab some leave and
just so they have a longer
distance, so we're on the 7th.
They're on their way up.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee.
Um, I'm Maretti Murphy. I'm the
chief judge of the 7th Judicial
District, which consists of
Sierra Socorro torrent. Oh, we
are asking for a very modest,
uh, approximately 4% increase in
our budget.
Um, to cover, of course, the
judicial salary shortfall.
And also for 200
$32,600 for pretrial services to
be implemented within our
district.
That would include one program
manager and 22 positions for
pretrial service officers.
And um with that, I will stand
for questions. Questions from
committee members.
Representative Armstrong. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. Just want to
thank you all for what you do,
for all of those counties, and I
appreciate your work.
Thank you guys.
We move on to the 9th and then
the thank you guys appreciate
it.
The 9th is coming up and then
the 10th will be behind them.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
committee members. My name is
Donna Mauer and I'm the chief
judge in the 9th Judicial
District, and with me is Kevin
Spears, our executive officer
and Lucy Valenzuela or court
financial officer and modest
seems to be the word of the day.
We have a modest request for
you. We're a district and I told
you all last year that we are
good stewards of the taxpayer
dollars, and we continue to be
good stewards of the taxpayer
dollars. We have lower versions
and a low vacancy rate.
Low vacancy rate and our request
this year is focused mainly on
security and treatment court.
And with that, we'll stand for
any questions that you have
members.
See that? Oh.
Comments are charged are free.
Put it on my IOU.
Thank you for uh representing
Clovis. That's the, that's where
I was born and raised and
through your court system when I
was a young man, they
straightened me straight. I was
completely
so you did a good job. Good
deal.
Thank you, everyone. How much
should we charging for the
comment.
Yeah,
they'll be buying you lunch
today, yeah,
the venue, uh,
we're gonna jump to the 10th,
right?
Good morning, everyone.
Morning, Mr. Chair.
Members of the committee, my
name is Timothy Rose. I'm the uh
newly appointed chief.
Judge in the 10th judicial
district which covers Quy
Harding and Duvaga counties.
Well, we're making two requests
for increases to base this year.
Uh, which includes two important
programs to new hires.
One would be for a security
bailiff. In the 10th we have, of
course, the 3 magistrate courts
in each county and in the one
district court.
Uh, 3 different courthouses,
every courthouse has a uh houses
all the county employees in each
county on the 2nd floor of each
courthouse is the uh district
court. We've made
Over the last couple of years
and continuing to do so now a
lot of physical improvements.
Uh, that's in the works such as
security badges, you get in
certain doors.
However, we have uh no bailiffs.
We have one part-time, uh,
contract bailiff that uh
provides some security for the
district courts were asking this
committee to approve a $56.1,000
increase to debate so we can
have a full-time, uh, bailiff.
Um, while we're making
improvements to the security of
the buildings, it's, I think,
vital to our courts to be able
to function.
Uh, with order in the courtroom,
decorum.
And provide safety to the people
that appear in front of us,
especially when we're moving
back to in-person hearings.
Uh, so we have the 56.1 request.
We are also
Uh, excited about having a
pretrial services division in
our district.
Um, we started out asking for a,
a pretrial services manager.
We've, we've, uh, coordinated
with the 9th judicial district.
Uh, to utilize their manager who
would supervise not only the 9th
judicial district, but the 10th
Judicial District newly
established pretrial services
program.
So we're asking only for $61,100
to hire a lower level pretrial
services, uh, person that would
actually be doing the check-ins
uh with, with the uh people that
have been released on criminal
cases.
Not only
In this pretrial services is
something that um
Uh, my previous employment was
as district attorney, uh, in the
district for the last 12 years.
Uh, we started
Um, pretrial services 3 or 4
years ago.
Uh, with the coordination of law
enforcement, the probation
departments, the jail, the
courts, uh, and it's been
working really well. But how
within the courts is where that
program should be.
Um, it will not only allow us to
provide better services to
people that are, that are
released, um but provide some
supervision and report back to
the courts when people are not
doing well.
And hopefully provide some
intervention.
Uh, in people's lives, uh,
before they, uh, simply commit a
new crime.
Uh, so a total of $117,700 is
our request.
And that's our only request, uh,
a new request for the committee.
Uh, we'll be happy to stand for
any questions, either myself or
Amanda Hammer, our CEO.
Represented Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just one
question. Will your security
bailiff, will he be, will that
person be a certified.
Officer.
I hope so. And we have some
pickings, but I'm assuming it'll
be uh uh either retired or
current with experience with
Chelsea enforcement.
Representative Chatville.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair,
I'm looking at the map here. My
district is in the 4th, the 8th,
the 9th.
The end the attempt.
Uh
Pors and, and I, I just want to
say I appreciate.
To each and every one of you,
the job that you do in these
rural areas, you know, we, we
struggle to just have the
minimum of, of
Of staff and safety and you know
one time when I was on a
different public board. A guy
called me up, told me he was
gonna kill me, he, he, and he
called each of the other board
members and with the same thing,
of course, the state police
dealt with him, but, but it's
not a lot of fun to go into work
and know that there may be a
threat to your life. I've done
it for, you know, that lasted
about 3 months.
And so I, I believe that you
should have security. Uh, when
you go to work, it's not a, it's
not a lot of fun to go there
without it, and I think, I
believe that our rural areas
should have the same uh staff
and the same pay and the same
security that we have in the
bigger cities. So I just wanted
to say that I appreciate the job
that, that y'all do.
And uh we need to fund you
appropriately. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you. I don't have any
other questions. We probably
should move uh representative uh
Chatfield Senator Campo, Senator
Woods.
Uh, all in the subcommittee for
all that eastern side of the
state that they they all
represent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
We're gonna do the 8th next.
In the 11th and the 13th.
Oh yeah, yeah.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. I think
we're still in the morning,
members of the committee, uh, I
do thank you for the vetting
process.
Uh, that you're going through
with all of the state budgets,
special thanks to our local
representatives and senators
that are on this committee.
Um, the 8th judicial district is
the northeastern part of New
Mexico, it's Taos, Colfax and
Union County, so all of
northeastern New Mexico.
I think the handout that we've
provided to you is relatively
straightforward, so I don't want
to use your time in going into
any particular details unless
you have questions. I think
importantly our asks are, are
lockstep in line with the
judicial priorities. Um, we
really focus in the 8th on
access to justice, efficiency.
time to disposition. You, you
have our performance measures,
and I think that's an important
uh element that you'll see
throughout the judiciary, but in
particular to the 8th, if you
look at our performance
measures, we've dramatically in
all respects reduced the time to
disposition in criminal cases
and civil cases and the length
of time that people are are
waiting those times, um,
importantly, in our asks is
that's what we want to continue
to do is help people have timely
disposition in the in the.
cases so that the stress, the
anxiety, um, understanding that
ultimate outcome is resolved in
in the most efficient fashion of
providing access to justice, due
process, uh, and other
appropriate constitutional
constraints. Um, so one of the
important asks that I want to
emphasize is we're one of the
few districts that does not have
a staff attorney.
Staff attorney really helps in
the time to disposition for
cases is they can kind of
provide an analysis of the cases
to our 3 district judges, our 5
magistrate judges, they can
help.
they are CEO and Amy Quintana,
our CFO, um, with contracts and
other programs that we have.
Um, again, I think our, our
Our handout is relatively
straightforward, and I know you
have a number of these to still
go through, so that being said,
I'd stand for any questions, Mr.
Chair.
Questions from committee
members. Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman. I
just wanna quiver.
The work that you do and thank
you for your work and also to
everyone else in our audience.
Thank you very much, Senator.
No, no other questions. Thank
you. And, and I apologize if I
could just add two things
briefly, chair. Um, I just want
to touch base on the, the, the
interpreter piece that we have
and I know uh vice chair had
left, but talking about, so you
guys are aware when we do jury
trials and you don't have an
interpreter in person.
You have to continue those
trials.
And so a lot of times jurors
come in and those interpreters
aren't available and you can't
really do that remotely. And so
the increase in pay, we're
hoping that brings more people
to our state, provides more
access to that. The other piece,
the security piece you heard um
director Rice talked about
Clayton where we had an employee
that had to be locked in a room
that was a safe.
And the sheriff's office didn't
come back and let her know that
she, she had to go out. So we
were getting calls from her
hearing that fear, so that
security, it's not just for the
judges, it's not just for the
staff, but it's also the safety
of the people that access our
courts. So thank you for your
time and hope that you prove the
judiciary's request that that
interpreter issue that
initiative, Senator Rodriguez
and I, I think is very important
to the courts and how people can
see in and even going back face
to face in the courts very
important for judges and NDA's
to do that, so I, I don't know
how we get there, but the
interpreter you, especially when
they're on a Zoom and not even
in the state, I mean, it becomes
very difficult, so.
We'll look to Carl. I don't know
if he's in the room to to try to
help fix some of that and see
what they are, but.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
committee. Thank you. We're
going to the 11th.
I, I gotta ask it so the 11th in
11th and 11th Division 2, right,
or separate. So we're gonna get
the division 2. No, we are one
judicial district, Mr. Chairman.
We have two DAs were the only
judicial district that has
divisionalized district
attorneys. That's where I got
it's a very common uh
perception.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, thank you. Uh,
first of all, it's always nice
to appear in front of the
legislative committee for
hearings being chaired by
someone from your hometown. I uh
Well.
uh, Senator Munoz's chairman
Munoz, both from Gallum, um,
also, uh, was determined one to
acknowledge that I served in the
legislature with 3 of your
members, uh, Senator Rodriguez,
who is leaving, and she, I'm
sorry she isn't here, uh,
Senator Gonzalez, who served
with me in the house from from
Taos before he moved over to the
sun side and so her accomplices,
um, so it's kind of, it's fun to
come back after all the years
that, that I've been, been gone
in.
Another branch of government
with you, um, my name's our
David Peterson. I'm the chief
judge, the newly minted Chief
Judge of the 11th Judicial
District, which served McKinley
in San Juan counties would
basically have the entire
Northwest corner of New Mexico.
Uh,
In, I'm the first.
Resident McKinley County judge
to serve as our chief judge.
District's been in place for a
little over 60 years and um all
of our previous chief judges
have always been from San Juan
County, uh, but, uh, we're, uh,
we're coming here and I'm
singing the same song that
everybody else is, uh, we're
presenting a very uh
conservative budget. It's a very
small increase. Most of it is
tied with the judicial salary
increases and the increases for
insurance, uh, the only new, uh,
real.
Physicians that we're asking for
uh are a couple of entry level
ones, uh, Representative Vincent
mentioned about uh what judicial
specialists who are, those are
entry level cle clerks
basically, uh, and we are asking
for uh additional help for our
CFO. My, my CEO Judy Schwabels
or Jody Schwabel is here, our
Cloverberter uh Waitto Jones is
here in our deputy CEO John
Quadrama are here uh with me.
And the other thing that we're
asking for is, um, like
everybody else, security stuff.
And we have an interesting
situation you'll see it says 50
$53,000 for Gallup District
court. Uh, we're fortunate in
this respect, we have one of our
longtime serving uh McKinley
County Sheriff's deputies is
retiring.
Uh, and, um,
He is interested and he is
qualified uh to uh serve, and we
are proposing to offer him a
contract, uh, and that will not
interfere with his PERA
retirement, which is very nice
for him, uh, he's, uh, a very
experienced officer. Uh, he's
very familiar also with our
court system. And it will also
help us do what happens in a lot
of the other rural areas. Must
where sheriff's departments are
spread pretty thin. I don't have
a lot of deputies to cover
really large areas.
And so occasionally they get
called out and then we end up
with no security, and we have
sort of a unique situation our
magistrate court security is
already covered via a contract
uh with our lease for the
building, I think we're unique
in the state for, uh, for that.
So, uh, with that, uh, Mr.
Turman, I'll, I'll stand for
questions.
Um, I love the sheriff was, but
he probably gave me a couple of
tickets, um.
I don't think you have to offer
him a contract. I think he can
go under the return to work
program, where he can
Get the benefit and then still
get the pay. So that's just an
issue to look into.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, uh, yeah, and
we, we have sort of looked into,
into that and one of the things
that we could do is um he's
retiring on December 31st, we
can actually because of the
level of the contract, we'd be
able to do an immediate contract
with him, he could come on board
on January the 2nd. Um, but, uh,
and he, you know, it's
53,000 is a lot less than, quite
honestly, if you tried to hire
somebody, the salary and
benefits you'd be looking
between 80,000 and $90,000 and
he really, he's gonna be there
basically uh.
During our regular hours, which
is Monday through Friday 8 to 5.
Sometimes we run a little bit
long if we have jury trials or
something like that. I think
that's a good point, but, uh, we
also want to take advantage of
someone who already knows our
system, knows our personnel,
knows our facility and uh we
kind of don't want him to get
another retirement job before uh
we kind of land him. So that's,
that's the thought.
Well it's not much of a
retirement if you're going in
December 31st of January 3rd,
just let the poor guy be aware
of that. Right, I, I'm gonna go
into some questions cause I, I
just think that in our DA's
office.
And we know and you and I know
that this problem is gonna
exacerbate itself beyond repair
at some point.
Out of the 9
1000 cases in the district
court, and I don't know how many
of those are in McKinley County.
If we don't have a DA and a
prosecutor, either in the
magistrate or the DA I don't
know, 17,000 in the magistrate
court.
How bad of a failure are we
going to see in that system?
I'm hearing 600 cases good.
could fall through the cracks
whether DWI criminal something.
Do you have a grasp on that
cause I know you've been monitor
return too. I know there's a
couple other citizen in the
gallop that have been very
concerned and, and I've been
concerned. I tried running a
bill last year to give the 11th
the authority and the executive
would not.
give me a message and, and so,
how concerned are you about
those court cases. Well, uh, Mr.
Chairman, uh, obviously, uh, and
members of the committee, we're,
we're very concerned about that.
We, we have, as you know, and we
have had a serious uh shortage
of personnel, both in the
district attorney's office and
to a lesser extent in the law
office of the Public Defender.
Uh, which, uh, as other judges
have said, if you don't have the
attorneys available to appear in
your various courts, uh, then,
uh, you can't process cases, um,
district attorneys, as you know,
as chairman and members of the
committee, it's an independently
elected office. Um, it's not
under the auspices of the, of
the courts, district attorneys
are in the executive branch.
Uh, in, uh, I, there has been a
concerted effort by members of
the bench and bar in our area to
help recruit um new assistant
DAs and new uh assistant public
defenders.
Um
It's
we share the problem with a lot
of other or many of our other
rural communities do, uh, Mr.
Chairman, it's just really,
really hard to get a new
attorneys who want to practice,
um, in, uh, in, in outline, uh,
areas, um, I think it's a, uh,
it's a serious concern. It's one
of those things that points out
that we euphemistically say we
have a criminal justice system.
We don't.
We, we never have. We have a
bunch of disparate parts that
sometimes don't work very well
together. Um, and
Most of them are not uh under
the auspices of 18 single agency
or whatever, many of them are
very independent law
enforcement, corrections,
probation, DAs uh public
defenders. One of the other
issues that we have in McKinley
County, for example, is we no
longer have a single contract
public defender who lives in
McKinley County.
Most of my contract public
defenders are coming out of
Albuquerque and even other
places of Santa Fe, Clovis, Las
Cruces.
Um, uh, I, I guess it and you
can look by our closure rates.
We do everything we can to
schedule cases and to push them
through, uh, the, the system,
and we have been very
successful. We have one of the
highest clearance rates of any
judicial district in the in the
state.
Uh, but, uh, at some point, uh,
will that, uh, present
difficulties that cases will not
get uh prosecuted, um, it's
possible.
Uh, and I, I would be, you know,
facetious to tell you that, oh,
no, that's not gonna be, uh,
gonna be an issue. Um,
Everybody that I know of has
been trying to brainstorm those
issues to try to alleviate
those, those problems. Um,
And we're going to continue to
work on it, and I agree with
what the Chief Justice said.
It's that we want to work
together in a collaborative way,
and you said that, Mr. Chairman,
we don't want to do a bunch of
finger pointing and, and sort of
accusing one side or the other
or one completely the other not
doing his or her job.
We're all gonna have to work
together to work on this. I, you
know, I remember the old
biblical thing that, you know,
the Jesus said that uh poverty,
uh, the poor will always be with
us. Well, folks crime has always
existed and it will always be
with us. That doesn't mean we
surrender to it. It means we all
have to really work very hard to
come to uh the appropriate kind
of kind of solutions. And I,
I've been doing this for a very
long time. It's almost 50 years.
You know, of, of practice and a
lot of that in both criminal
defense and prosecution, um,
you know, we just have to all
work together, we all have to
work hard. I will guarantee you
that our judges are working
very, very hard. Um, our
district is, this is
interesting, uh, in the course
of about the last 18 to 24
months, we've replaced half of
our district judges. We've,
we've replaced half of our
magistrate judges, so we've got
a bunch of new people.
Uh, on the bench and they're
learning, um, and we're gonna
work and we'll work with, uh,
with you and with everyone else.
Thank you. I appreciate that. I,
I, I just, I'm concerned because
that case load do break a leg on
the stool in the stool cannot.
He stood back up in that leg is
broken currently in our system
and, and we're gonna have to
figure that out, so and, and Mr.
Chairman, those are, those are
district-wide, uh, caseloads. So
that includes uh both counties,
both San Juan and McKinley, you
know, we have with 3 district
courts and we have 3 magistrate
courts, so it's everybody.
Right. You want to add something
now, um, representing Alison.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I also
just want to make a comment that
I appreciate the work that
you're doing. You know, I
believe in what you're saying
about working together.
I think uh one of your district
or your district is probably one
of the very few that has to
practice and work with
jurisdictional
cross-jurisdictional issues, but
you're handling it very well and
thank you for keeping San Juan
safe as much as you can. Thank
you.
Miss Sherman representative
Allison, thank you very much and
I know you mentioned you talked
about interpreters, but we may,
I think we're the state capital
for interpreters. We have uh two
primary Native American
languages, Navajo and Zuni, that
we have frequent interpreters,
we have Spanish, uh, and Mr.
She, I have a Punjabi
interpreter. I think he's, I
don't believe we have anybody in
state. We've talked about
getting people running. I have a
criminal defendant in a very
serious case who only speaks
Punjabi and
if I didn't have a uh
interpreter from out of state to
be able to assist in that. I
wouldn't be able to process that
case, so that's another issue
we're working on. Thank you, Mr.
Mr. Chair and Mr. Peterson, I
agree with you that um,
Interpreters are very, very
cute.
Because, uh, in my native
language, one English word I
could use a whole series of
sentences to describe that one
single word and our county is
very diverse.
Maybe about a couple, a couple
of months ago, there was a drug
bust.
And you needed somebody to
interpret for you from Mandarin
Chinese, I believe it was to uh
address the issue. So thank you
for what you do.
Thank you Mr. Chair.
Representative Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I'm not that familiar, well,
first of all, I wanted to tell
you if I was a bet man, I could
tell you came from the house cuz
you're very well spoken. I
appreciate that this German, uh,
Vincent, I, I, I tried to suck
up every chance I can officially
and unofficially. I spent 8
years in the House of
Representatives. Yes, sir, I can
tell. I like the questioning
I'm not that familiar, well,
first of all, I wanted to tell
you if I was a bet man, I could
tell you came from the house cuz
you're very well spoken. I
appreciate that this German, uh,
Vincent, I, I, I tried to suck
up every chance I can officially
and unofficially. I spent 8
years in the House of
Representatives. Yes, sir, I can
tell. I like the question
Mr. Chair, like I mentioned
earlier, you know, I, I don't
know a whole lot about the
courts because as a young man,
I, I was scared straight one
time and I never.
Went back to the courts again.
When you have an uh a log like
you have a backlog, is it, can
other, can other people come in
and take some of your case load
and get you.
back to where you need to be, or
does that have to stay in your
district.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Vincent, uh, it's, it's a very
good question and, and no, we,
we don't just rely upon our
existing judges, uh, we have
access to pro tem judges,
sometimes those are retired
judges or judges from other
districts right now, we, we have
uh one of our magistrates is not
uh able to uh to work in
McKinley County and so we've
been very fortunate, uh, to, uh,
be able to do a contract with a
retired magistrate judge from
another county who's willing to
come.
in and, and, and help out, um,
and so we, we try to fill in as
much as we can on that. We're
also exploring doing some um
creative things in criminal
cases in what we call plea
bargain facilitation by bringing
in a retired district judge to
talk, uh, both with uh the
defense attorneys and what the
prosecutors and seeing if he can
sort of uh I'll call it mediate,
uh, a possible plea arrangement
and because if we do those
cases, if we went on.
More of those cases out, it
frees up our time to do the
trial work that we have to do.
The the scarcest resource is
German and representing Vincent
that I know of and.
The public fisc of New Mexico is
jury trial court days. Those are
Few and far between, and we
don't want to squander, so we
try to use those very, very
wisely.
Thank you for your answer. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Senator Campos,
thank you very much, Mr. Chair,
just a very quick comment and I
uh again compliment you for your
50 years of service in the legal
field and your 8 years of
service here and I'm always
intrigued by that eternal energy
that you have, and I just hope
that, uh, as you continue with
it, that more people learn from
you. You've been an excellent
asset to the state of New Mexico
and all the work that you've
done. So again, thank you very
much for being here with us
today, Judge Mr.
Combus, thank you for your, your
kind words. I sometimes think,
uh, as my wife says, I'm a
glutton for punishment, uh, but,
uh, I, I very much am enjoying
uh being on the district court
bench, um, uh, nobody, uh,
confused me or, or anything
about becoming the chief judge
and all the travel that we do,
uh, you know, I, I got to, I
made my first trip to Lovington.
Uh, in, uh, from Gallup to
Lovington is 435 miles one way.
I never got outside the state of
New Mexico and I crossed 11 of
our 33 counties. Uh, I have been
to Hobbs before, Mr. Chairman,
but never to uh uh to Lovington
and Judge Sanchez was our
gracious host down there, so
we're a huge state, but we're
kind of interesting uh in that a
lot of it is, I call us one of
the mid-majors. There are 4 of
our judicial districts, uh, the
3rd, the 5th, the 3rd, the 11th,
and 13th are very similar. We
each have about 3 counties. We
have a couple of small cities,
but we have huge land areas, we
have very diverse populations.
We have about 8 or 9 district
judges in about 6 to 9
magistrate judges, so we have
multiple courthouses. And that's
what we try to do. Thanks. All
right. Thank you for your time
today. I'm gonna be in trouble
with my committee because you've
got to talk the longest
it's German. I apologize, you
know, it took me 7.5 years in
the house to learn when not.
to talk.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you. Turn the heaters on at home
so when it warms up, it's not 12
degrees when I get home not
subzero yes sir.
Uh, the 13th, 4th, 2nd, and then
metro, so.
All right.
Good morning, uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. Uh, my
name is Philip Romero. I'm the
court executive officer for the
13th Judicial District, uh, me
and my staff service the people
and serve the people of Cibola,
Sandoval, and Valencia counties.
With me is Chris Wolf. He's a
court financial officer.
For our district, uh, I wanna
just, uh, our chief judge Jim
Noll is not able to be here
today. So I just wanna just let,
let you know that he was unable
to be here. He sends his
apologies.
Uh, our district, again, I
mentioned the Cibola Sandoval in
Valencia County. We have 8
courthouse facilities, 17
judges, 9 district judges, 8
magistrate judges.
Uh, just want to echo some of
the requests that have been set
a little earlier regarding court
compensation for our employees,
our staff, I think it's very
important that we take it
seriously. We try to get those
people funded and and and good
salaries so they could live, uh,
just this week, I got turned
down by uh unemployed on a,
they're one of the top
candidates for the job and just
they were, they were looking for
more money, so they were gonna
go to the prison, so in our
counties we deal with a lot,
dealing with the executive with
the prison so in Valencia we
have.
The prison facilities there as
well in Cibola County. There's a
lot of work at the prison
industry, so we lose a lot of uh
staff that were fighting for
those same kind of jobs there
with the courts.
Our modest request is in the
realm of security and
contractual services, so we're
asking for a small increase to
fund up our security at our
magistrate courts. We
appreciated the funding that
we've received so far and we've
been able to fund our magistrate
courts and have security uh
under contract with the Valencia
County Sheriff's Department and
the Sandoval County Sheriff's
Department, all the facilities
are covered in that district. So
we're looking to get that done
in Cibola County. We've
contacted the sheriff there.
contacted uh we we we've tried
different sources there just
because it's been a little
tricky. The manpower has been
tough to really get the sheriff
don't have the people to, they
want to service the field first
in their short-handed in the
field. So he's not able to get
us people out to cover the
courthouses, uh, we're looking
at private contractors next just
so we're trying to retire
people, but we, we have some
funds available. We're looking
to get those funds. We have a
vendor that's able to be out
there. We're looking for a local
vendor, uh, to provide those
security for our magistrate
courts.
A couple of the during the ALC
presentation, two of the
scenarios that were presented
were within our district. So,
uh, you might have heard of the
guy who showed up to with an ax
to the district court and
grants.
As well in Valencia County, uh,
there's a defendant now that's
out and he's uh a bomb expert
and we're, he's coming in and
out of our courthouse checking
in. So those are the
complications that we're dealing
with our courts. It makes our
staff function a lot better and
more safely. They come to work
with better when they see the
security at the front and
screen, so I, I really think
that that's important for our
district. We could operate a lot
more.
Better with staff safe and being
able to function that way. We
have a couple other special
requests that we've asked for.
We have a complex that's being
built in Sandoval County and
expansion of that courthouse. So
we're looking for project
support services, that's an
architect that's gonna be able
to help us and work along the
lines to make sure we're keeping
in with the deadlines with the
contractors and to make sure
we're using the money wisely and
we're not having to go backwards
and spend steps backwards. So we
have that contractor on board
with us and he's able to guide
us.
along that process
We're looking to get that funded
as well as part of the
infrastructure for that building
and IT support that's gonna
come, uh, we wanna make sure we
have the state of the art card
readers card access, cameras,
everything that's integrated so
we're able to see that and view
that in, in a, in a good manner
and be able to download it and
support that so we have
retention going forward so with
that said, I'll stand for
questions.
Representakan. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman and thank you, Mr.
Merrill. Uh, 13th judicial
district serves my community and
In addition to the
Number of facilities that we
service or that we maintain the
number of cases that were
presented before this committee
last year.
Uh, including as far as uh more
in serious violent cases is kind
of something, it's troubling.
And as our Valencia County, um.
Experiences growth, um,
We also are experiencing our
share of increase in crime, so
I support um your efforts. I
thank you guys for all your hard
work. I've known Mr. Omero since
we were kids, so I appreciate
you advocating for us and the
service you and your staff do
for uh this 13th judicial
district.
Thank you, Representativeaka.
Yeah, and also because
redistricting they picked up
most of both, so you're gonna
have to meet this down just to
get familiar with each other.
Thank you. Yes, sir. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you
for your time. Appreciate it.
Thank you, folks. We're gonna
jump to the 4th.
Good afternoon. My name is Flora
Gegos. I'm the chief district
judge for the 4th Judicial
District that covers Guadalupe,
San Miguel, and Mora County.
With me is our CEO Jeff Romero.
Um
As all of the many of our other
uh districts have stated uh
we're, we have a modest request
this year, um, that would enable
us to continue our current level
of operations that we're
providing today as well as um
We're also asking for as part of
our request, uh GSA GSD rate
increases work investment plan,
uh, funding as well as funding
for judicial salary increases,
but along with that we're also
asking for one new position that
would be an administrative
assistant to assist our domestic
hearing officer.
Uh, so that we are not pulling
other people from their other
jobs to do that work. Uh, they
would help monitor as well as
file and uh also uh set up
hearings.
We're also asking for funding
for um
Contractual services with local
law enforcement, uh, that we
have some security officers that
are hired within our court. We
do not have any officers that
are um
Level 3 security, um, so they're
not able to arrest. They, of
course, don't carry weapons on
them while they're in our courts
and security continues to be in
a concern in our district.
As well as all the other
districts. Uh, we're also asking
for a refresh for our IT uh to
um update our software licenses
to make sure that uh what we're
what we're doing electronically
continues to work for her.
Um, then we also do have some
expenses for our forensic peer
support specialists that are uh
not going to be covered by the
uh program of funding from the
competency competency diversion
program, and we are one of the
pilot programs for that.
And with that, we will stand for
question.
Cabos.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
Chair, and of course, Judge,
it's good to see you. Thank you
very much for the fine work that
you continue to do in our, our
district. If, if you could maybe
give me just an update in terms
of the Mara courthouse project,
if you have any information, uh,
I would appreciate that if you'd
be able to share some of that
with us today. Um, Mr. Chair
and, uh, Senator Campos, um, I
have some information that I
believe they're still working on
the plans, uh, for doing the
addition to the Mota courthouse,
uh, the uh administrative.
Office of the court as well as
the uh Supreme Court has agreed
to, um, make a man of the
matching fund, um,
To help with that build, uh, so
I think we're still in the
process of getting that uh.
In that MOU signed, uh, and for
them to move along with that
project.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair,
and again, thank you very much,
Judge for your leadership as we
move forward on that project.
Thank you, Senator.
Thank you. I think we're gonna
have to point a special master
to oversee construction of that
so we can get it completed
within the allowed time frame of
what, 30 years? We are all
hoping that it will be completed
soon.
Yeah, I mean, it's been hanging
out there, so we need, we're
gonna have to, the legislature's
gonna have to step in and
appoint a special master to
oversee the construction and
finish that project because
I've been here 16, and I think
it's just as long as that, so.
We need to get it done at some
point. Thank you for your time.
Thank you.
The 2nd.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Marie Ward, and I am the chief
judge of the 2nd Judicial
District Court.
I am Bernalillo County with me
today also is our CEO Katina
Watson, our CFO Darrello Molina
and uh Dasha Bazura with our
fiscal office, and I also have
with me this morning presiding
family court judge Jane Ley.
Um, before we get into our
specific budget request, I just
wanted to, um,
Make a statement in support of
the request by AOC as well as
all of the districts as it
relates to their security
requests. I chaired the
statewide security Committee on
um for the judiciary, and this
is something that um
We
Um, she really significant
growing trends in a very
negative way.
Um, and it's statewide.
Certainly there are a number of
issues that happened, um, in my
courts in the second judicial
district, um, but the rural
districts are not immune, and
they don't often have uh the
level of security that we're
fortunate to have in Bernleo
County, and so I make a plea on
their behalf for your
consideration.
We also strongly support the
employee compensation uh
initiative under the unified
budget, um, as discussed by
AOC.
For our requests, um, we are
looking at, um,
Certainly the judicial
compensation shortfall as the
other courts have requested.
We're seeking to judicial
specialists, one for our civil
division, one for a domestic
relations division. Those are
our frontline staff that help
the public on a daily basis,
process all the paperwork at at.
Answer the first line of
questions, field calls, and
we've given you some data in our
handout.
We're also seeking 7
administrative assistants to um
help with our court monitoring.
Right now we have 41 judicial
officers. We have 33 monitors,
but with turnover, it's about a
41 to 27 ratio.
Without a cord monitor, we can't
be on the record and it's really
critical for the work that we
do.
We're also seeking funding for a
financial specialist senior, um,
since 2014, we've had a um
Budget increased by 62%,
however, there hasn't been a new
um fiscal staff person added in
that entire time.
We are seeking funding as well
for our community gun violence
intervention program manager,
that funding is currently um
through the county and that will
cease at the end of this for a
pretrial services, um,
physicians, we're asking that um
those be funded by a general
funds, those, those positions
have been around for a
significant period of time,
majority of them have been
funded by the county AOC stepped
in and helped us with several
Um, these are really important
positions and as you all know,
um, when we don't have general
fund, these are term positions.
We really need to keep
qualified, hardworking,
dedicated people in these
positions.
Um, and so we're asking for that
for general fund to to to plant
the uh CSSD money or judicial
specialist and administrative
assistants and one of the
hearing officers.
And then we're seeking to court
clinicians.
They
Core clinicians with our court,
uh, they do consultations, they
do assessments, uh, regarding
children and family and their
needs in terms of uh safety,
custody, time sharing.
And they're scheduled 6 to 9
months out and when it comes to
family, as I'm sure many of you
can relate. Time is of the
essence. You need to get your,
your, um,
Um
Concerns addressed and to be
able to move forward out of the,
the justice system on with
family life.
We're also seeking 200.
Excuse me, 15,000 for EA court
peacemaker. Currently we have
the only EA court in the state
of New Mexico. We were the 6th 1
in the nation. They have
incredible outcomes as it
relates to child welfare
matters, um, and we would like
to um
Be able to offer peacemaking to
those families that is more in
line with um the traditions of
Native American population they
serve.
Our big ask and our, our primary
um I wanna say, number one
priority is a family court
judge.
Um, currently there are 4 judges
in the family court in the 2nd.
There are 8 hearing officers too
of those are funded, um.
child support services division.
The judges um hear the most
complex and challenging cases.
Our hearing officers focus on uh
domestic violence and child
support cases, and some limited
family law matters, but our
judges here, divorce.
Kin guardianship, which has
expanded significantly after
address custody and visitation,
many of which are emergency
basis, heritage and then
emergency firearm protection
orders. Many of these types of
hearings have to occur within 10
days, and they need the
immediate decision and action of
a judge, um, so a hearing
officer is, is
Um, not always the um most
efficient and effective way for
families to get their needs
addressed.
Finally, we have some special
appropriation requests. We have
our foreclosure settlement
program that has now, um, in, in
every jurisdiction, um, we're
very proud of that program. That
program has previously been
funded through uh various funds
and it's currently being funded
through the consumer settlement
fund, and we're just asking that
that funding continue.
We're also asking for security
hardware system.
Um, upgrades to cameras, access
storage key card system. That's
a security issue, uh, in our
courts, um, we
were alerted to some
vulnerabilities when there was
an individual that was able to
access, um,
Uh, secured hallways and a
judge's chamber.
Um
And then, um, as other courts
have asked for, we've asked for
um an IT refresh, um, and
license update.
And with that, we stand for
questions.
Thank yousresentative Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and uh,
Thank you. Um, Madam Judge, I
was wondering if you could
elaborate a little bit more on
the um community gun violence
intervention program manager.
Um, so it sounds like that was
specialized funding, um,
And so looking for the, for us
to incorporate that in
recurring, is that correct?
Yes, Mr. Chair, um, uh,
representative Dixon, that is
correct. We started that program
with um
One of our other program, uh,
managers and clinicians that was
works a lot with our young adult
court and now supervises, um,
many of our specialty programs,
um, that program has been
very popular. There's a long
wait list, and so we were able
to secure funding through the
county to add another position,
so we can have more than one
track going at a time. That's
really critical because um we
often have, you know,
co-offenders that need to
They can't attend together, um,
and so they, somebody has to
wait to be able to get into
another track, and so they're
not getting the benefit of that
while they're
Lingering on probation, um, and
currently there is a waitlist of
13.
success rate of that program is,
is about 80%, which is very good
considering that this population
and that we started this program
just as COVID hit. And so for a
while, it was all virtual. Now
it's in person at juvenile
justice.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
That sounds wonderful. Um, and
really interested in seeing the
metrics and the data on that
that it just sounds like a great
opportunity. Um, and so I
appreciate that you guys are um
working to expand that. Um,
question about data. Um, you
know, we've been talking a lot
about crime rates and what, you
know, where our investments um
from the legislature have been
making a difference. And one of
the um obstacles that we
Seemed to run into on a frequent
basis is
Adequate data and data sharing
between entities. And so I'm
just wondering um if you could
Uh, talk a little bit about um
how
How the second judicial district
shares data and works in
collaboration with the district
attorney, public defender, uh,
law enforcement, and then within
the um judicial system as a
whole. I'm concerned about
different data platforms and how
um we can take data from one
entity and another and try to
analyze.
Um, you know, to look for
solutions or commonalities,
things like that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, um,
Representative Dixon, um, that's
something that I think all of
the justice partners in Bernao
County do seriously have a
concern about, um, we have a
very active um criminal justice
coordinating counsel, and we
kind of reinvigorated the
subcommittee that's working on
the data sharing piece. I know
Bernalillo County specifically
is uh is um helping us pull
together the, the partners to be
able to do that more
effectively. Part of that work,
of course, comes
to um stakeholders also working
on, on definitions and shared
understanding so they're all
talking the same language. Um,
but that is something that is
still an ongoing um initiative
in Burling County and something
that all all the stakeholders,
DA public defender, MDC, law
enforcement, they're all very
interested in.
Thank you, Mr. Terry. Thank you.
Um, and, uh, last year, um, the
legislature um was able to
appropriate some funds to New
Mexico Tech for their iCASA, um.
Entity which helps with some of
the data governance issues and
so I don't know if you've been
in contact with them. Yes, yes,
the subcommittee is working with
them.
Wonderful. Thank you so much.
Uh, I have no other questions.
No other questions. Thank you
for your time. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, members of Metro court.
Before you leave, there's a bag
of prions in my office for your
father, so I never have to hear
that again.
Right, Judge, go on.
Good morning, Chairman, members
of the committee. My name is
Joshua Sanchez. I'm the chief
judge of Metropolitan Court in
Albuquerque. With me today is
our CFO Lisa Lowe, I'm sorry,
our CEO Lisa Lowe, our CFO Erika
Perrine and Nicholas Stickler
are financial specialist is also
with us this morning.
I just wanted to speak in
support of AOC asking for
employee compensation. Um, I
know that we have some of the
best employees and most
dedicated employees in the
judiciary, um.
I wish that they didn't have to
work 2 jobs and kind of sell
arts and crafts on the side to
make ends meet, uh, I wish I had
a wand to be able to give them
all raises, but I know that we
go through this process, so I
would really encourage you to
support, uh, again, raising the
wages for them. I'm gonna go
ahead and turn this over to Lisa
Lowe, our CEO to give the
presentation.
Hi, good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, thank
you so much for your time this
morning and your consideration.
Um, I just want to also.
Put it out there that Metro
court also has a modest request
of about 3.6% increase to our
base budget of that increase, we
are asking for funding for 9 FTE
positions, 6 of which are with
our background investigations or
pretrial Services division.
Um, we have 2 that are with our
probation division, and one
position that is in our, that is
currently weren't funded. Um,
we're asking that we can ensure
that the fee funding and
temporary funding positions are
moved into the general fund.
Additionally, we're asking for
our um funding for our expenses
in category 300 and category 400
that are currently funded
through a grant that we have
with the Bernoglio County.
And lastly, we're asking that we
just um
Get funding for the judge's
salary increases for GST rates
and for the width.
And that is all, with that, I
turn that over for questioning.
Represented Baca.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and uh
good morning, Judge Sanchez. Um,
First I want to thank you for
the work that you guys do. Um,
Judge Sancheson liked Mr.
O'Marro from the 13th Judicial,
we actually all grew up in the
same community. Uh, we grew up
watching our dads play softball
together, so I've actually, as
the elder, has seen these guys
grow up, so, um, I appreciate
the work that you both do.
You know, despite our concerns
of our fathers, we actually, you
know, at least 2 out of the 3
turned out OK and 1 became a
politician, so
I do, as I said, the important
work that you guys do.
It it it's really for our
community, it does make a
difference, so I want to thank
you for your work and uh
I appreciate what you, what you
do.
Chairman, members of the
committee, uh, representative,
thank you for that. Uh, you
being the elder out of the three
of us, so I, I can tell you that
we all looked up to you, uh, as
we grew up watching you go play
football, you were somebody we
all looked up to as a role
model.
Or not, you get beat up
representative Cruz.
Thank you German. Judge, want to
thank you for your work as well,
the entire court staff.
Uh, can you expand a little bit
on your term to term?
Mr. Chair and Representative de
la Cruz, we do have uh all of
our positions right now are
funded through others other
entities, so we have a grant
with the Bernalillo County.
That's the ask for the 6
positions for the pre-trial
services division. We have had
that for quite some time,
however, being that those are
term positions, and people tend
to want a permanent position
with the state, um, we're asking
that those are funded, uh,
through our base budget.
Um
Did, did you want to know what
those positions are for. Yes,
please. OK, sorry about that. So
6 of those 6 positions are
funded with our pretrial
services division, so 6 of those
are intake positions. They do
all the questioning and all of
the, they, they gather all the
information to determine whether
or not defendants should be
released into um
The public, that information is
shared with our judges, one
position is also an investigator
position, and they prepare all
the paperwork including
background investigation, um,
for the judges for arraignments.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
OK. Any other questions?
See that, appreciate your time.
Don't forget.
Chairman, members of the
committee, thank you very much.
I will, uh, not forget those and
I'll say thank you on his behalf
ahead of time. All right.
Perfect. Thank you.
Wherejourned till one o'clock.
