They make their way back from
lunch.
Oh, it's being passed out.
Yeah.
The the policy brief is behind
tab number 6 and then the
presentations will be passed
out.
Kong, so then the other one.
Coming along now
But Jessica, Tim, please.
Alright, thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
members. Um, yes, just to clear
up materials, there's a staff
brief for you behind tap 6 in
your binders, and then there are
two handouts that are making
their way to you. Um, so, again,
thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee. My name is
Jessica Hathaway. I'm a senior
policy analyst for all of you.
Um, you can see I'm joined by my
colleague Tim Badeau, and we're
both analysts for you. And then
we're also joined by Deputy
Secretary Castillo from the
Public education department and
Emily Bay.
who is the CEO of Everyday Labs.
I'll be kicking us off today and
taking the first part of our
presentation before I turn it to
Miss Bayard, then Deputy
Secretary Castillo, and then Tim
will actually close us off, so
two analysts are kind of giving
you a sandwich presentation
here.
So we're gonna start with that
brief again behind tab 6 in your
binders and on page one.
So the first thing I want to
point you to, um, we're actually
not going to spend too much time
explaining why attendance is
important because you all know
that we've spent a lot of time
as a committee talking through
this, and we gave you all a very
in-depth report on this last
November where we really
established the rationale for
why we care.
But I do want to start with
figure one here, um, to show
some updated chronic absenteeism
rates. So you can see and we
share we shared this with you,
um, again last November, but
also in June that we reached
this high, what we hope is the
high of chronic absence in
fiscal year 22 of 40.7%. We saw
that God go down ever so
slightly in fiscal year 23 to
39.2%. But there's actually new
data from the public education
department and Deputy Secretary
Castillo.
We'll talk about it in more
depth, but we did want to let
you know that PED is reporting
for fiscal year 24, a statewide
chronic absence rate of 32.8%.
This is a 6.4% point drop, but
more importantly, it's a 20%
decrease between last year and
this year, and that's notable
because that's pretty
substantial improvement over one
year's time.
We as staff don't yet have
disaggregated data for you so we
know it still matters which
students this improved for and
didn't improve for, it also
matters what schools they go to,
um, and what grades they're in.
So we'll continue to come back
to you with that, but statewide,
we did see again a drop to
32.8%.
So moving down to the very last
paragraph on page one. What I
will say is that we've also told
you, um, that students miss
school for a variety of really
complex and varied reasons, and
that makes chronic absenteeism
and inherently challenging
problem to address. That's also
sometimes frustrating um for us
as analysts on this and also for
you as members to hear because
it means that the solutions are
also not simple. But that does
continue to be true. What we
hope to
through this policy brief though
is not just talk about how
chronic absenteeism is a driver
of poor student outcomes, which
has been the focus of our
conversation so far, right?
Things, for example, like
proficiency drops whenever
chronic absenteeism rises.
But we also, the more we've dug
into this, um, we've really come
to understand chronic
absenteeism as a symptom of
broader wide systemic
dysfunction, and those
persistently high rates of
chronic absenteeism may be
indicative of the need for us to
focus not just on interventions,
but also broader health of our
schools and making sure that
school is a valuable and
worthwhile endeavor for all of
our students. So we'll spend
some time getting into what
exactly that means if you'll
turn to page 2 with me.
So starting the first half of
page two, again, I'm not going
to spend much time on that first
section of a review of the
policies. This is a very, very
quick summary of the state's
attendance for Success Act for
you all to have if you want the
really long report on it from
last November, we'll send that
to you. But what I do want you
all to remember is that you all
have created a policy framework,
and you've also put funding to
that framework. So for the last
two fiscal years, in addition to
our law, you've appropriated
$5000 to support.
Attendance initiatives
recognizing that having a policy
framework in and of itself is
likely not sufficient.
Again, the funding part of all
of this we'll hear a bit later
from Deputy Secretary Castillo
on what that is supporting.
Where I do want to spend more
time is on the next two sections
of this report. So this first
one is we're actually going to
spend some time distinguishing
between attendance and chronic
absence. And then 2, we're going
to talk and have that longer
conversation about attendance
and chronic absenteeism as
symptoms.
So in discussions about uh
school attendance, the terms
attendance and chronic absence.
They're often used completely
interchangeably. But we actually
wrote a fair amount about this
because the difference is more
than semantics. It matters for
two primary reasons. The first
is that high daily attendance
rates can actually mask chronic
absenteeism. And the second is
that the strategies used to
encourage high attendance may
actually differ pretty
substantially from those that
are used to address chronic
absence.
So let's spend some time on that
first part of high attendance
rates masking chronic absence.
So,
Um, daily classroom attendance
with that measures is the
percentage of students who
attend school on any given day,
but it does not account for the
cumulative effect of absences
over time. Moving to the bottom
of page 2 in that italicized
font there. We're going to make
that a little more real for you
all. So consider a school that
has 100 students in it and a 90%
attendance rate for an entire
month.
On paper, this looks really
promising. 90 out of 100
students are attending. It means
that we would have that 90%.
We're all oriented to think of
that as pretty high.
However, 10 of those students or
10% could have missed every
single day of school, that
entire month in the daily
average attendance rate would
have remained at 90%. So this is
what we mean whenever um daily
average attendance rates, if
those are high, you can still be
masking chronic absence and so
again, different strategies used
for different purposes.
Um, moving to page 3, we want to
point out to the chronic absence
then is not simply the opposite
of attendance rates, which is
sometimes how it can feel.
Um, for schools, it's much
easier to take daily attendance
and analyze those average daily
attendance rates at various time
intervals, whether that's daily,
weekly, or monthly, than it is
to calculate and track chronic
absenteeism. In fact, some
schools and districts may not
even even calculate chronic
absence rates themselves at all.
They might send that
information, for example, to
their district office or to
their state office, and there
will be a bit of a lag in time
in the amount of time that they
actually have in between when
they report that data and when
get it back.
We know that accurate and timely
data on both daily attendance
and chronic absenteeism is
really imperative.
Going back to why we want to
distinguish between these two
Terms, attendance and chronic
absence. I'll now turn you to
the middle of page 3 here.
And the, the second reason we
told you is because the
strategies are different. So
whenever we're talking about
improving general school
attendance, and I'm on the
bullet points there on page 3.
that can be achieved by
addressing school climate
issues, fostering strong
relationships between students
and staff for promoting the
value of education and ensuring
students feel safe and supported
at school.
Adressing chronic absence,
though often requires more
targeted interventions and
necessitates identifying
underlying causes of again those
frequent and high levels of
absenteeism.
And this is where we can get
into things that are a lot more
complex to solve, for example,
chronic health challenges that a
student may face or
transportation barriers or
mental health of students.
Schools need to be monitoring
both attendance and chronic
absenteeism and we need distinct
strategies to encourage both
attendance and address chronic
absence.
As New Mexico has shifted to
this focus on chronic
absenteeism that was directed by
the attendants for Success Act.
Um, we point out here in the
brief that it may have
inadvertently emphasized the
most extreme challenges and in
turn neglected some of the most
foundational strategies that are
actually more about improving
the overall health of the
educational system.
OK, I'm gonna move to the very
bottom of page 3 and then into
4 and 5 next. Um, what we're
gonna do next is kind of expand
again that understanding of
chronic absenteeism. We told you
already that often analysis on
attendance issues will mostly
point to chronic absence as a
driver of poor educational
outcomes. However, it's not just
a driver, it can also be again
that symptom.
If you turn to page 4, you have
seen this graphic before, Tim
presented this to you when we
met in June in trauma. So I
won't spend too much time on it.
We can certainly return to it if
you have questions, but the
takeaway, um, that you can, you
know, summarize from this is
that no matter the income levels
of individual students in a
school, if we see high chronic
absence, we see lower
proficiency. So it's affecting
all of our students, and this is
additional evidence that it may
again chronic absenteeism may be
a symptom of over
All systemic health.
Moving to the bottom of page 4,
we're then going to explore
chronic absenteeism as a
symptom.
And if you'll, um,
Stay with us on this. We're
actually going to do this
through a kind of medical
analogy. So,
We have found that chronic
absenteeism in schools may
actually be more like a
persistent medical symptom, and
just as a recurring symptom in a
patient can signal a more
serious underlying condition.
Chronic absenteeism may also
reflect dysfunction that needs
to be improved. So take for
example a system, or sorry, a
symptom like high blood pressure
and hold that up if we were
comparing that with chronic
absence. A doctor treating high
blood pressure, um, might
initially alleviate the
patient's blood pressure through
medication.
However, they probably wouldn't
stop there. They would be more
likely to maybe both prescribe
that medication while also
treating um the high blood
pressure in a way that looks for
root causes which could range
from lifestyle factors to such
as diet or stress, for example,
two more serious diseases.
You can't do just one or the
other, right, with the high
blood pressure analogy. In this
context, and taking it back to
schools.
Our schools are often operating
as general practitioners with
limited tools at their disposal.
And they're trying to manage a
really complex condition that
actually requires specialized
care and resources that may be
beyond their reach. So while
short term, um, interventions
can kind of act as prescriptions
for that symptom of chronic
absence, truly reducing chronic
absenteeism will require
system-wide changes rather than
interventions by themselves.
Moving to page 4, we also just
want to point out that given the
complexity, um, it's very clear
that schools can't do this
alone, right? So if they're
operating as a general
practitioner, they're gonna need
some support in that and
potentially other professionals
in that realm too. The bottom
half of page 5 gets into
underlying challenges that you
all have heard about, so I won't
read all of them to you, but I
will quickly point you to the
bullet points there.
And the underlying challenges
that we are finding contribute
most to that systemic health
side of chronic absenteeism,
include things like
socioeconomic factors, mental
health and well-being, the
school environment itself, um,
barriers to attending school.
And then one that is a little
bit newer that we're going to
explore on the next page and
that's competing interests and a
perceived decline in the value
of education.
So turning to page 6, this is
the last page that I'll be
focusing on before we turn it
over to our other presentation
uh presenters.
So we've provided this in kind
of two forms for you on this
page, in a written form and also
in a graphic, and we'll walk you
through both.
But every single day, um, as Tim
and I were working on this and
putting this together.
Um, we realized that our
students are facing a critical
question of do I attend school.
That's the critical choice that
is behind our attendance
challenges.
For that to be possible, we draw
this out in the requisite
conditions and figure form. So
figure 4, there again on the
right-hand side of your page,
um, demonstrates how students'
decisions to attend school are
the result of several different
mental calculations that they're
making that are inseparably
related to beliefs about the
importance of attendance, the
physical barriers they might
face, the physical safety of the
school environment that they're
in, their emotional health and
motivation, their grasp of
academic content.
And their perceived value of
education that they receive
relative to other potentially
competing interests.
So let's draw out a couple of
those. So for example, do I
attend school today? Maybe I go
to the requisite condition of
will I understand what's being
taught. For me to want to go to
school, it's necessary that I
understand that. And if we look
at the root cause, that could be
the material accessible to me in
a language that I will know,
right? That could be really
important for that requisite
condition to be met for our
students. It could also be
content knowledge and academic
interventions. A student feeling
behind in school is actually.
Very well studied as a reason
that they might not attend.
Um, moving to another requisite
condition, do I find value in
what I'm attending?
So for example, um, a root cause
behind that could be competing
interests and responsibilities.
We see this particularly at the
secondary level, right, where
students might actually feel a
need to financially work and
help their families and so the
things that we can do really
differ based on those requisite
conditions. But for example,
having instructional materials
that are responsive to students'
needs could help with that
condition of understanding what
is being taught. Work-based
learning and career technical
education that offers a really
ro
robust way to actually
acknowledge the work students
put in, particularly secondary
students could help us whenever
we think about competing
interests and responsibilities.
The last thing I'll point out
about this figure in particular,
is that you'll notice in the
root causes, some of these are
that burgundy color we always
use and some are that darker
turquoise color.
When we were making this.
You'll notice we actually only
categorized 3 of these as
specific attendance
interventions, and those are the
top 3, and they're the things
that get out what we often see,
right? So school communications,
family understanding, and
accurate data, and that
manifests in activities like
campaigns or letters talking
directly with parents, um,
attendance taking. The rest
here, we actually categorized as
systemic health interventions
that are more about making sure
our school systems are
functioning in a way that
supports our students.
And as a byproduct, you'll get
greater attendance as well as
other positive student outcomes
that we care about. For example,
their mental and emotional
well-being.
So, um, I'll close by just
saying, uh, we'd be remiss to
not recognize that we're also
educating in a time where we've
got a rise of smartphones,
social media, widespread
internet access, and it's made
it a lot easier for students to
find alternative avenues for
learning and engaging with the
world beyond school. School is
no longer the only source of
learning, perhaps has never been
the only source of learning, but
there are competing interests
around that in terms of where
students are accessing material
from, particularly.
whenever we sent them home
during the pandemic and norms
about attending school changed.
But we also have students who
are facing very significant
mental health challenges and
greater socioeconomic influences
in today's world.
So with that, I will turn it
over to Miss Bayard, and then
again, Deputy Secretary Castillo
and Tim will close us with the
rest of the brief. So don't lose
track that we'll start on page 7
next.
Thank you.
Wonderful. Thank you, Ms.
Hathaway. um, and Mr. Chairman
and members of the committee,
thank you for having me here
today. Um, I'm Emily Bayard. I'm
the CEO of Everyday Labs.
Everyday Labs, uh, we provide a
comprehensive set of services to
school districts to reduce
chronic absenteeism
Oh great, thank you.
Um.
There you go. OK,
um,
Our work, Mary's family
engagement practices with
research and behavioral science
to tackle this complex issue.
Uh, we were founded by Doctor
Todd Rogers, who's a professor
at the Harvard Kennedy School
and the work came out of some of
his collaborations with Dr.
Karen Mapp, who's a family
engagement expert at at Harvard
and also Hetty Chang, who leads
attendance works. Uh, today, we
serve 1.5 million students, um,
around the country.
partner with over 60 schools.
I'm here today, um, because
through our, our research, we
have learned a lot. Um, we have,
um,
Uh, from a research perspective,
we have run a randomized control
trial gold standard research on
how to improve attendance with
over 14 districts nationally, to
our knowledge, that's more than
any other organization. Um, and
so today, I'll spend time
sharing lessons that we've
learned from both that research
as well as our, you know, actual
experience, um, working with and
supporting school districts, um,
and then I'll also share a few
examples of, of states as well.
So let's dig in.
Um,
There are 6 key takeaways um
that I'm, I'm going to be
sharing today. And I want to say
that um one of the things that,
uh, Miss Hathaway mentioned is,
um, you know, the attendance for
Success Act. And coming out of
that act, I think New Mexico is
in a really unique position of
having established um some
really key structures. So the
structure of attendance teams,
the structures of a multi-tiered
system of supports for
attendance.
Improvement. And so it really
positions districts and schools
in the state to be um at a
greater state of readiness to be
able to implement next steps.
Um, so, so the first, the first
key lesson is that significant
improvement is possible despite
the complexities. Miss Hathaway
just talked about, um,
All of the different things that
can sometimes be underneath
chronic absenteeism, um, the,
um, uh, health of our, the
health of our schools and of our
systems. And so sometimes, um,
it can be, you know, very
challenging to see progress. So
I'm here to tell you that
progress is very possible. Um.
I wanted to share a couple of
things. So first an average and
then an example. So on average,
there's 11 states that have
reported their chronic absence
rates so far for fiscal year 24.
And of those 11 on average,
states are seeing roughly, um,
over the last two years have
seen a total of about 20%
improvement, which is, you know,
on par with what we're seeing in
the New Mexico data. Um, so 10,
improving 10% a year in this.
kind of post pandemic peak
world, um, is, is, is very
achievable. What's really
exciting is that we're seeing
districts and schools when they
put all the building blocks into
place, we're seeing them improve
25%, you know, in a given year
or more. Um, this example, um, I
know the print is very small,
but want to share the example of
a district in the Southwest.
It's an 11,000 student district.
Um, they have 22 schools.
Of those 22 schools, 18 of their
schools last year, one year into
our partnership together,
improved more than 20%. They
reduced their chronic absence
rates by more than 20%. So it,
it, it is possible.
Um,
The second lesson that um I want
to talk a little bit about is
that we, um, very, very, uh,
typically see, um, and this is
nearly universal, that schools
underinvest in prevention and
early intervention activities.
Um, and this is really critical
because what we see from the
data is that every absence
matters when it
comes to learning. So what you
see up here is a chart of um uh
we, we took 100,000 students
sample and we matched their
standardized test scores. They
were map scores with the
student's attendance rate for
false for fall semester. And
what you see is that you see a
really continuous decline in
achievement scores that is
pretty linear with absences. And
so what that means is that we
don't want to wait to intervene.
until a student is chronically
absent. We really want to make
sure that we're intervening
early, even before a student is
chronically absent.
Um, and what this really implies
is that, you know, in an ideal
world, we would want to be able
to invest time and resources
across the different absence
tears in in New Mexico, there's
4 absence years. We'd want to
invest that time and and
resources proportionately. But,
you know, in real life, as I'm
sure you know, so many of you
are educators, as I'm sure that
you've experienced, that can be
extremely challenging,
especially.
When you're in a school or a
classroom that has a really high
rate of chronic absenteeism, you
can get overwhelmed by students
that are tier 4 students that
are severely chronically absent,
missing 20% or more days who
really require individualized
interventions and supports. Um,
but the problem is, is that if
you're not spending enough time
on prevention, you're never
going to, um.
You're you're never going to
shrink the number of students
that make it to tier 4 that
really need that individualized
support. So we have a very
non-catchy saying that you
can't, you know, individualized,
intervene. You can't tier 4 your
way out of chronic absenteeism.
You really need to start sooner.
So how, so how do you do that?
Um,
Um,
The challenge that a lot of
school staff face is that
oftentimes the staff members who
are kind of most tasked to
attendance improvement, or
wearing a lot of different hats,
right? And they're stretched
really thin. And oftentimes, you
know, using an Excel model of,
you know, manipulating data may
not also be their strong suit.
And they have a really limited
amount of time every day and a
really limited amount of time in
their, you know, weekly or
biweekly attendance meetings.
To tackle this. So it's key to
make it really, really simple
and give them the tools that
they need at their fingertips to
really be able to um to spend
more of their time doing high
impact work um in tier 1 and
tier 2. And, um, apologies, I, I
skipped this side, but this is
just making the same point in a
national survey that we ran, we
found that, uh, school staff
charged with attendance
improvement self-report that
they spend less than 10% of
their time.
On prevention activities.
Um, so the good news is, is that
we've seen that when we provide
these simple tools and the
scaffolding of, of training. We
really are able to see folks
successfully shift their time.
So we're now on slide, uh,
Uh, slide.
7, I don't think this one is
there.
Yeah.
Apologies. The um.
It's the one after this one.
Um,
So, um, so we find that when you
give folks an easy way to see,
you know, how many of their
students are in each tier and
then be able to click into, for
example, the tier of students
that are moderately chronically
absent, pull up that list.
You've done some of the heavy
lifting for them. And then when
you can auto identify what are
specific patterns that students
are facing. So for example, a
student who has a pattern of
they've already been chronically
on track to be chronically
absent early.
In the year, or they're a Friday
misser, you make it easier to do
some of that individualized
prevention activities that, um,
that is, you know, part of the
tier 2 work in New Mexico. Um,
and then we also find that um by
making it easier to communicate
for staff to communicate with
each other about what barriers
students, a specific student or
family is facing and what are
the next actions to take?
Um, we can really coordinate
that work and really serve many
more students in far less time.
Um,
And the screenshots I was
showing you were just examples
of, um, of screenshots from
districts that that we work with
and a tool that we provide to
them.
Um, so that leads us to, to
lesson number 3.
Which is most, most districts
and most school staff.
don't really know which
strategies are effective, both
which are maybe proven to be
effective in research, but also
which are effective in, in your
context. And we find, you know,
usually, you know, you take a
scattershot approach. And this
is an example of a pretty common
list of attendance improvement
strategies that, you know, are
provided, um, to school staff,
and it's kind of a menu, you
know, to, you know, figure out
which of these you want to do.
And all of these
strategies have value.
All of these strategies have
value, but these strategies are
also.
Time consuming and take a lot of
resources and effort. And so we
found that when, that it's
really crucial for schools to
know which are the strategies to
invest their the most time and
energy in that they're most
likely to be successful and
there's 22 ways to do that. So
the first is we have to, uh,
while it would be great for more
research to be done, attendance
is understudied and
underresearched and underfunded
compared to literacy, for
example, um, we do, there is a
lot that we
Do now. So, um, the attendance
playbook put out by Futured and
attendance Works has about 2
dozen evidence-based strategies.
And then John Hopkins' evidence
for ESA has dug into the
evidence more deeply and has 4
proven strategies for attendance
improvement. Um, one of which is
actually, um, some of our work
at at Everyday Labs. Um, so, so
that, that's a great starting
point. But then that still begs
the question, schools really
still need to know.
Which strategies are going to be
effective for their students in
their context, especially in a
state as diverse as New Mexico.
And so, um, we've found that
when we provide tools and
reporting to schools so that
they can see, you know, what has
been the improvement in
attendance that students have
that students have experienced
when they receive a particular
intervention, whether it's a
home visit, maybe, or maybe
they're part of a check and
connect.
Program,
um, that they can really make it
helps them make decisions about
prioritizing their time. For
example, there's a district, um,
that I was just talking to
yesterday who has invested a lot
in Check and Connect, which is a
um a form of a mentorship
program that is evidence-based,
and she was saying, you know, in
some of our schools, it's been a
great success and in other
schools, we just don't have
enough adults at the school, you
know, teachers and other staff
who are who are bought into this
and it's just not, not working.
Um, for us, so we need to move
on to another strategy and home
visits is another example. It
can be incredible game-changing
powerful strategy, but also
sometimes we work with schools
and districts that maybe are in
a really rural area where
driving times and distances are
so far that it can just be
really difficult to to make it
work. It's so resource
intensive. Um, so those are
just, just a few examples. Um,
and so again, providing that
information is critical.
Um,
So that takes me to the 4th, the
4th lesson, which is, um, that
applying behavioral science can
successfully change norms,
beliefs and behaviors around
attendance. Miss Hathaway
talked, um, talked a little bit
about um the uh perceived value
that a student or family finds
in attending school and in
attendance and how and how that
can present a barrier. And one
of the things that we see um
And so you'll, you'll see this
chart. So one of the things that
that we find over and over
again, not just in education,
but in all areas, is that when
people don't have a lot of
information about something,
social norms become really,
really important.
So we tend to conform to the
behavior of others. We look
around, you know, what are, what
are my friends doing? What are
my classmates doing? What are my
neighbors doing? And so we
actually have a lot of power,
everything else being equal, we
actually have a lot of power to
shape those beliefs by um by
really providing that that
narrative and that information
to folks. Um, and so, you know,
when we message about
attendance, it's
Really important that we focus
that messaging on, on positive
social norming and pay attention
to these, to these social norms.
Um, and sometimes it can be
tricky. So here's an example of,
um, what we call a social nudge,
um, in a different sphere and
the energy sphere that did
something really simple,
compared your energy use to your
neighbors, and by doing so leads
people to conserve 3% um
electricity.
Um, that's an example of a
social norm that's like working
in the way we want it to.
Um, I want to share you, share
with you some examples of social
norms of communication that can
backfire.
So this is a um poster in Boston
that the Boston School District
put everywhere bus stops, it was
a huge campaign and it was
trying to prevent dropouts by
raising awareness of the
problem, which is a very like
well-intentioned thing that I
think a lot of us, you know,
would look at this poster and be
like, that, that's great.
Um, what this did though, is
that actually this was this was
saying a lot of, a lot of kids
are dropping out of school.
It's was making it somewhat
normal to drop out of school and
making people feel like
It's something that was
acceptable because other people
were doing it. Um, so it's an
example that backfired. Another
really common thing in the
attendance world that can
backfire is perfect attendance
awards. This can backfire for
two reasons. Number one,
particularly with high school
students, we've done some
research that shows that when
high school students receive
perfect attendance awards,
actually, their attendance gets
worse.
And that can be in part because
high school students don't
really care. You just told them
your attendance is, is, is, is
uniquely good. Like it's, it's
better than your peers, and high
school students don't
necessarily want to be better
than their peers when it comes
to attendance. Some high school
students, but not all high
school students. Um, another,
another problem with it is that
perfect attendance is a goal
that's unachievable for most
students. You've already missed
one day of school, like you
might as well give up.
Um, and then finally in
communications, another way, a
place where we often go wrong is
in writing for lawyers rather
than humans and families. Um,
and so I'll talk more about that
in a minute.
So, the good news is, is that
when you get the details right
because these details do matter.
You can have an impact on these
beliefs which then translate
into a change in behaviors. So
this is an example of an
everyday labs, um, set of
chronic absence nudges, you'll
see it looks really different
from a typical kind of
attendance letter or truancy
notice, and one key feature is
that graph.
On the bottom is comparing
Casey's attendance to her
average classmate in her grade
at her school. That kind of
personalized social norming
comparison can uh can really be
transformative and help a
family, a student or a family
member to understand like, oh,
this, this is important. This is
something that I need to pay
more attention to. Um, Ms.
Hathaway also talked about the
importance
Of, um, um, enabling families to
connect to resources, some of
which, you know, might be
outside of the scope of what a
school can provide. Um, and so
that's a really key component as
well that we find important to
to communicate about. And when
we do this, we in the research
have consistently seen, um, a
reduction of chronic absence
rates of 10 to 15%, um.
And it's really about applying
some of these, these key
principles to have effective
communications that are driving
norms.
Um,
All right, I'm going to move on
to
A 5th lesson
Which is timing is almost
everything.
So, this is a typical, um,
attendance pattern throughout a
year, uh, for a school district,
you'll see that there's dip
days. If you looked really
closely, those dip days tend to
occur in some predictable
places. For example, before and
after Thanksgiving break, before
and after winter break, etc. Um,
also, what we often find is that
attendance is at its strongest
at the beginning of the school
year in August and September,
and then kind of deteriorates
over time. However,
usually what we're doing as
educators is usually we're
focusing on attendance during
September attendance Awareness
Month, and we're communicating
with students individually about
absences when an absence occurs.
And instead, um, what we really
want to do is flip that approach
and communicate about absences
when the next absence is most
likely to occur.
So we can do that again by
looking at these patterns in the
data and by, you know, we
facilitate monthly workshops
with um with school staff that
are really quick. They're just
half an hour, but it gives them
a little bit of time of like
what's cut you right now we're
in October, we're talking about
what's coming up, you're all
going to have, you know, you
probably in your data are seeing
dip days around Thanksgiving
break and winter break. Let's
get started in planning what are
going to be your strategies and
incentives during that.
time of the year. Um, and then
also in those attendance
letters, those chronic absence
nudges that I just showed you,
we don't send those, you know,
when a student has their 5th
absence, we send them during the
windows of time that we know
absences are most likely to
occur. So time is important.
And then, uh, finally, um, our
6th lesson is that it's critical
to design approaches and
strategies to work within the
reality that staff are really
stretched thin and are
overwhelmed and have limited
time and resources and when I
say staff, I mean school staff.
So once again,
That means that, um, you know,
what we've seen is that our
partnerships and it took a lot
of trial and error to get to
this point. We've seen that our
partnerships are critical
because um,
It's providing school staff with
simple, easy to use tools and
data analysis. I showed you some
examples of that earlier. It's
providing school staff with
automated identification of of
student attendance patterns so
that they don't have to look at
the data. They can just easily
when they see the parent or call
home, they can say, hey, I
noticed that that Marcus is
missing a law school on Fridays.
What's going on on Fridays? Is
there something that, you know,
that we can help with?
Um, automation is critical. We
found that it's critical to
automate every possible
communication possible because
we want to free up school staff
time to focus on building
authentic relationships with
students and staff and really
and really doing the work.
Um, and then finally I talked a
little bit about, you know, uh,
provide building in time for
staff to be able to spend
planning their tier 1 and tier 2
activities. And finally, ongoing
professional learning because
oftentimes turnover of the staff
is high.
Um,
So
I wanted to leave you with just
a few examples.
Of how some other states um are
tackling this.
Um, we work at the state level
in Louisiana, DC, and Hawaii,
um, and then also South
Carolina. They've all kind of
taken different approaches in
Louisiana, and the state has
funded pilots with 7 of their
largest school districts that
have produced some great results
then with the idea and
understanding that districts
will take over that funding in
the future, um, in DC, um, the,
you know, DC is interesting
because it's a district and a
Territory, state that ask city
body, um, but they've taken an
opt-in approach where, um, any,
any district or charter network
that wants these resources can
get them.
Um, in Hawaii, they've taken a
really kind of focused approach
of focusing on on their lowest
performing schools, their CSI
and TSI schools, um, and making
these tools and resources
available to them. And then
finally, South Carolina didn't
fit on the slide, but in South
Carolina, um, they've asked us
to support their highest needs
student population. They're
McKinney Vento students.
Um,
And the, you know, an approach
like everyday labs doesn't have
to be everyday labs, but an
approach like everyday labs can
have a lot of benefits, you
know, building on top of the
building blocks that you already
have in place. Um, and, um, also
when you focus efforts on tier 1
and tier 2, it often yields a
really high return on
investment. So with everyday
labs, you know, we see
specifically for New Mexico
running the numbers that you
know for every $100 put into
this kind of
An approach, you would, uh, see
3.3.7 absences being prevented.
Um, so thank you.
Well, I get an intra song, yeah,
yeah, here we go.
That's break, right?
moon walking
Good afternoon, Modes, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee, and Candice Castillo,
I'm deputy secretary at the
Public Education department and
I'm going to be talking a little
bit about the attendance
improvement efforts that we have
been focusing on at the agency.
I'll start with um professing
that it is impossible to discuss
attendance improvement without
addressing chronic absentism. So
a lot of the information that
I'll be sharing today will be
focused on chronic absenteeism.
chronic absenteeism has become
an extremely urgent issue post
COVID as we all have seen the
huge spikes nationwide and in
our state having students miss
10% or more of classes are not
only hindering their
Academic learning abilities, but
also their social emotional
development. We know that this
trend is not a short time trend
that is gonna be addressed
overnight. It's going to take
some time as we have heard the
complexity of addressing this
goes beyond just seeing students
not being in school. I would
also like to mention that as we
heard before, um, Chronic
absenteeism in this case is just
a symptom of a much deeper.
Complex
issue that I'm sure that we here
all have the desire to create
the best conditions for our
students to be able to learn and
thrive and it is my hope that
after sharing this information,
we can continue moving in a path
where collectively we can make
that a reality for our students.
So,
For the agency in our state
addressing chronic absentees and
an improvement, um, improving
attendance has been a top
priority. It has been driven by
our attendance for Success Act
but also for all the post COVID
challenges that we have seen and
also making sure that we have
now, um, having to shift how we
engage our students. The
students are not engaging in
learning in the same way as most
of us when we had our
opportunity to
Go to school. And as part of
that, it is so critical that
when we're thinking about
academic learning and how our
students engage that we're also
thinking about their
non-instructional needs because
those supports and resources is
part of what driving to want
them to be in school. So when
we're talking about chronic
absenteeism and why students are
not in schools. Why are we
seeing more students um missing
out on classes and they're
Academic learning, we have been
working on identifying some of
those barriers and these
identification of barriers is a
combination of different
feedback tools and surveys on
different spaces that we have
been, but at the top of the
list, there's this is our only a
couple of them is illness. We do
have students, especially in
post COVID that have might
develop um serious illness or
chronic conditions that force
them to be consistently out of
school. We also have the
household
challenges and a lot of those
have to do with when our
students don't have a secure
housing and they have unstable
um access to food and other
basic needs. We talked about um
how we engage students different
in education. A lot of our
students have boys that they
feel disconnected or they don't
feel as motivated, especially in
the world post-COVID as they did
before to be in school. And it's
also very true that post COVID
we
We have seen a great need to
address mental health um issues
and ensuring that our schools
and as a school staff and as
educators, we know how to um
address those situations is very
critical. We also have
transportation, um, challenges
and in a place like New Mexico
where we have um a variety of
settings. This is also um one of
the big um barriers that some of
our students express,
especially.
If in the community where they
live, they only have access to
one route for the whole
community um that is going to
school and interestingly enough
there's um like I said,
different reasons why students
are missing schools, but one
that also came to line is the
role that technology plays
today. So we have a students
voicing that they often have to
stay late, whether it is by
choice or because they're doing
homework, but then they stay up
so late um invested in
The technology that they're
exhausted the following day to
attend school.
So once we have realized some of
these um barriers which I know
it's they're not necessarily
new. I'm going to be talking on
the next couple of slides, what
we have specifically done to
address um chronic absentee. So,
as Ms. Hattaway mentioned
earlier, you guys have been um
appropriating in the last two
years $50 for attendance
improvement and some of the
focus of that um funding has
been
put to place in one, we chose
the first year that we got the
appropriation, um, the 7 largest
school district in the state to
receive attendance improvement
grants so they can do dedicated
um support and resources to
improve their chronic
absenteeism, right? We also to
those that did not get awarded a
grant and just anybody across
the state provided access to
what we call re-engagement
services. We also use
Um, part of this funding to
create an attendance awareness
campaign because we truly
believe that the issue that
we're seeing with chronic
absenteeism, it's everyone's
issue. It it impact all of us,
not just the student or the
family that is dealing directly
with this challenge. We also
were able to increase the
technical assistance, support,
and professional development
that we provide our school
districts including um doing
that through to annual dedicated
And then conferences that we put
together with other partners.
So onto the good news, um, I'm
excited to report that all these
efforts are starting to provide
results. We saw on our um 23,
24, chronic got sympto so
reported data that are rate for
the state went down 6.4% points.
And I know that sometimes we
look at the big rate of we have
this much of chronic
absenteeism um students,
however, I
I think it's notable to mention
that when we're looking at the
states that have currently
reported their chronic absentee
rate for that same year. New
Mexico is at the top of making
the biggest strides on moving um
chronic guts into some
downwards, which is, again, we
definitely acknowledge and
recognize that we have a lot of
work to continue doing, but we
also want to be able to
celebrate the progress that
everybody's doing our school
districts, our schools, our
families.
because it takes a lot to move
this much in one school year. So
I mentioned that part of the
appropriation was utilized to
award attendance improvement
grants to 7 of the largest
school districts when we put
this into perspective and you
might be wondering why the seven
larger districts is because
those 7 school districts
combined have over 180,000
students. So if we can see
progress in this school
districts, we
We know that we're going to be
seeing progress across the
state. So on this slide, you
will see which of the, which
districts were those,
Albuquerque, Farmington, Gats
then Las Cruces, Rio Rancho,
Roswell, and Santa Fe with Santa
Fe being um the school district
that had the largest um decrease
from this 7, they had 20% points
decrease in their chronic
absentee which it's an amazing
accomplishment and the other
thing that I would like to note
on this slide is that um most of
these districts did actually
reduce their chronic absentee
tend to strategies provided by
the funding.
Some of the strategies you can
see on the next slide and for
example, um, I just mentioned
that Santa Fe was one of the
biggest drop on chronic
absenteeism. They went from 50%
to 30% and part of their success
was thanks to having additional
attendance coaches. So having
dedicated staff that can make
that connection with the
student, with the family, being
able to address any um
challenges that they're facing
connecting them with services
and resources. We also have seen
a lot of success um on
Albuquerque Public schools. They
utilize a lot of professional
development to create a culture
of attendance in their campuses
and having a system that is
research and based. Ms. Baylor
mentioned John Hopkins
University, their early warning
sign framework has been very
successful in Albuquerque and
then we also have places like
Roswell that utilize a digital.
Attendance platform to keep
their students and family and
staff inform on when students
were um most the most but also
um how to prevent and provide
some targeted supports to these
students.
And because we have seen the
impact of having this dedicated
attendance improvement, um,
grants. We wanted to make sure
that we are providing
sustainable support to the
progress that has been made. So
we decided to continue funding
the 7 largest school districts
that we do, um, we did the first
year with the appropriation or
half of the appropriation, but
this fiscal year 2025, we are
expanding.
That um reach to have and add
another 7 school districts that
can be part of having that
targeted funding to improve
their attendance. So on the
orange um square you will see
the ones that have been added
for 2025 and how much they're
receiving and then on the TL one
is the returning school
districts that will be utilized
in this funding to continue
their success. We also made
available to any school district
across the state, the
opportunity to have dedicated
and student re-engagement,
support and resources and what
that meant is that they were
able to reach out and ask for
support if they needed somebody
contacting the students, also
providing coaching support, both
academically and
social-emotional and just making
sure that we could keep tabs of
what we're preventing um these
students attending schools and
again having somebody dedicated
that can connect the student and
family to resources.
We want to continue doing that
this current fiscal year.
However, we're shifting our
focus a little bit to high
school seniors. The reason why
is because we're also have been
observing a trend and as my
co-presenters both um stated
before the competing um
competing activities that our
seniors have, some of them are
already working, some of them
might just feel like I can do
more if.
I have a job versus being at
school so we wanna make sure
that these students are not
dropping out at the end,
basically like the end of their
goal when they're just about to
graduate so we want to focus
that re-engagement effort on
providing work work-based
learning opportunities for them
to stay in school, make sure
that we have dedicated support
so they can graduate on time and
have that coaching both academic
and social emotional because
again, based on evidence, both
From research and um the
practical that we have seen with
the previous one, we have seen
the success of having that
dedicated person and I included
um one slide. I know you have it
and can read at your leisure,
but I think this gives you
really a good picture of the
impact of having that dedicated,
not just staff, but also a
system that allows for
identifying intervening,
monitoring and tracking, what is
going on with the student and
How we can ensure that they're
keeping schools. You, you have
these success stories from
Manzano High School, which is
one of the high schools that
have been using that John
Hopkins um early warning signs
framework and I think um we all
will agree that seeing all the
way from staff, the students
themselves and families
articulating the value of having
that connection does creates a
difference on their motivation
to attend school.
In addition, we utilize part of
the funding to create awareness
campaign for attendance, as I
stated before, I think it's
really important for all of us
as a community as a whole
understand the impact of not
having our students in the
classroom. Um, it's not just a
school um challenge or a family
challenge is something that's
gonna impact our community at
large, so we focused on ensuring
that we were providing our
schools with engagement
materials from.
Talk kids on how to communicate
with families, have the students
create an attendance pledge,
have incentive, and I know some
of you did receive, um, we
wanted to show you what that
looks like. We have pop sockets
because we know our students
love their cell phones, but we
also have bags and stickers and
a lot of different um items just
to keep reminding them that in
order for them to get where they
wanna be in the future. They
have to be in the classroom
today and hopefully some of you
as you drive.
To Santa Fe have seen the
billboards we have done, um,
billboards across the state as
part of our fall engagement
including digital media in the
most common platforms such as
Instagram and Facebook, and then
the plan is as we heard before,
there are deep sessions where we
know our students have a hard
time keeping with their
attendance and the spring part
of it is one of those. So during
the spring, we will increase
the awareness of this campaign
by adding radio and movie
theater ads.
And so talking about um how we
have supported school districts
directly. We have increased our
technical guidance and support
by offering more office hours,
helping them developing their
attendance improvement plans,
having professional development
mini sessions, um, and also
focusing on the kindergarten
cohort. Again, we talked about
the chronic absenteeism is when
our student means 10% or more of
um classrooms. So in
that could be around 18 days in
any given day. And with our
little ones, our kindergarten,
sometimes we as families just
think, OK, one day is not gonna
be a big deal. But however
studies and evidence shows that
when we have kindergartens,
first graders, um, miss and
second graders missing schools.
They're going to be falling
behind on their ability to
develop that reading, um,
mastery that they need once
they.
Get and reached 3rd grade.
A key piece of the effort that
we have seen on our chronic
absenteeism decrease has been
the strong partnership that we
have been able to develop both
locally and nationally. Locally,
the New Mexico parent Teacher
Association and United Way have
been incredible partners,
especially when it comes to
supporting our um the attendance
conference that we host um twice
a year and also just supporting
our professional development and
being an ambassador of voicing
the messaging of creating that.
of attendance and improving
attendance all around, but we
also have been very fortunate to
have attendance works, which is
considered the authority on
addressing chronic absenteeism
nationwide, and they have
recently launched a challenge to
all of the state education
agencies asking them to commit
to cut chronic absenteeism by 50
in 5 years. And New Mexico, we
decided that we were going to be
early adopters of the challenge
because
We love a challenge, don't we?
So at PED we say absolutely yes
and we have already started
working on sending some of the
frameworks that can allow us to
be successful and just as a
reference, um, the school year
that we're going to be utilizing
as our best line is the 2022, 23
school year.
I briefly mentioned we host
those um those two attendance
conference throughout the year,
one on the fall, one on the
spring or fall one is coming up
on October 28th and those are
just great opportunities for all
of our um educators that are
involved in supporting students
learn and understand one, what
is working to what are the
issues and how they can be
addressed and learn from peer to
peer what are some of those
success um stories and
strategies that are happening in
And how they can implement it in
their particular school.
And so that was a a
Kind of like a high level
overview of how we have been
utilizing the appropriation that
has been awarded to us to
improve attendance. But as I
said earlier, we have much more
work to do. Having our students,
even if it's 30% uh and seeing
that decrease, but having 30% of
our students means class is
still not something that should
be accepted as the norm. We want
to continue working on ensuring
that we can go to pre-pandemic
levels.
At the very least and just so
that um we can all have it in
perspective prior to the
pandemic, chronic absenteeism
rates nationally were around 16%
and New Mexico was around 90%
and we're currently sitting at
about 32% and the national
average for those that have
currently reporting is averaging
30% or so. So we still know that
we have a lot of work to do. And
in order to be able to do more,
we definitely
more. We will need more funding
to be able to expand um that
targeted focus just as we have
shown with those 7 districts
that this year will be 14 that
can have um that dedicated
funding to address chronic
absenteeism and improved
attendance, especially with our
most at-risk populations because
we know that if we don't um
provide the, the right
environment for them to be
successful and engaged in
school, it's gonna uh again
impact all of us.
A society. And a key piece of
improving attendance really um
hinges on ensuring that we have
behavioral health supports and
social emotional. We talked
earlier about mental health
being one of those barriers that
are keeping our students from
attending school. And we,
there's also studies that shows
that that lack of motivation, a
lot of times have a lot to do
with that social emotional um
anxieties or just feeling like
they don't.
Law and so having that
connectedness for our students
is crucial. Making sure that our
families and anybody around the
student that is the village that
really we stay support our
students, understand the key
role that being in schools
plays. Yes, we have a lot of
competing um activities nowadays
with our students, but nothing,
nothing can really replace that
um instruction that you get when
you are in the classroom. And so
we want to make sure that we
Can increase our family
engagement efforts to ensure
that all of our families are
involved in, in ensuring their
students are in class. And we
know that data is the driver of
all things, so making sure that
we can increase our data sharing
capabilities, especially when we
have to make decisions and
adjustments during the school
year. Well, it's great to see at
the end of the school year, all
the efforts have paid off and we
have seen improvement being
able.
To do a more timely adjustment
or support is key to ensure that
we can continue moving on the
right direction.
And so with that, the
recommendations that um I want
to share before I wrap up my
presentation is we currently
have one full-time employee that
is our attendance coordinator.
This employee supports 89 school
districts, 100 public charters
to ensure that we can all work
for those over 300,000 students
to be consistently um in school
and I'm gonna pause very briefly
because she's sitting over here.
There she is. Miss Angela
Christine is um our attendance
coordinator. And if we're going
to really tackle this challenge
of cutting chronic absenteeism
by 50%. We need to be able to
have more than just one person
doing all that support. So our
recommendation is to be able to
build a team of 5 that can be
focused on 5 quadrants and be
that um ready and available
support um for our school
districts and in those different
areas.
I talk a little bit about the
importance of making timely
adjustments. So how we can help
our schools enhance their
student information system and
capabilities so that we can have
more access to real-time data is
crucial to be able to not only
keep track of what type of
interventions we can um
implement when or they can
implement when, but also again,
knowing how we as a state
education agency can truly
support the efforts that they're
during the school year and not
the following year after we see
the end of the year um data. And
then lastly, we saw a lot how
having someone that can connect
with the student and family
having a dedicated person, not a
person that is wearing 5
different hats makes a
difference. The most successful
um interventions that we saw
through this attendance
improvement grants where the
school districts that had
dedicated staff that their job
was mainly really track those um
barriers and provide the
resource and allow the student
to really have an advocate,
somebody they can feel they can
go to if they were going through
something. So our recommendation
would be to be thinking about
the creation of funding to have
what we want to call campus
attendant interventionist, which
is just really that dedicated
person that can be that
connector because that's what a
lot of um.
Our students and families have
said that is lacking our schools
our schools should be a place
that are creating welcoming
environments for everyone that
comes across those walls. So
having these, these position
will allow us to be able to do a
lot of that. And so, um, I that
this pretty much about my
presentation, but I just want to
remind again all of us that
improving attendance and
reducing chronic absenteeism.
It's really about.
All of us coming together to
create the best opportunity for
our students and I want to say
again thank you for the
opportunity to allow me to share
this with you and I'll pass it
on to.
Great. Uh, thank, thank you, Mr.
Chair and thank you, Deputy
Secretary. That was actually the
perfect way to end that
presentation because uh what,
what we're going to transition
to now is just uh page 7 of the
staff brief. We'll go back, uh,
and I'll just very briefly and
give you all enough time to ask
questions of our lovely panel,
but, um, I, I do want to walk
through some of those
interventions that we've uh
talked about at LESC, and that
you heard discussed up here
from experts in the field about
uh things that that are working
uh as prescriptions going back
to our medical analogy for
attendance interventions, and
then things that you should be
thinking about in terms of the
the health of our education
system. Uh, and, and what I love
about the way the deputy
secretary ended her
presentation, um, was she said
that everybody has a role to
play, right, that all of us have
a role to play, and I, I think
that's exactly where our
conversation went at LASE when
we were developing this brief
for you.
Uh, and so we've broken this
this out into 3 separate actors,
right, in, in the educational
system and the first one that
you've got right there on page 7
for you is a school district and
schools, and what we've
developed at the very bottom of
this page is sort of a
checklist. This isn't
necessarily a thing to, to bash
on school's heads and say you
need to be doing all of this
because in a lot of cases,
they're already doing a lot of
this. Um, but this is, I
consider it a tool that a school
could sit down and
Look at this checklist and say,
are we doing all of these things
or where can we make
improvements to either
improve attendance interventions
or to improve the health and
climate of our, our school.
And so for schools, we've got
broken in attendance
interventions we've got 3 big
categories there. The first is
data collection. You heard a lot
about how schools have this
responsibility to dig through
data and the people doing that
might not be very savvy with
data and they might not have the
tools that they need to do that.
Uh, and so underneath that two
sub bullets, teachers should be
taking attendance daily, and
that attendance when it's taken
daily should be accurate and it
should go into a system where
it's displayed accurately so
that the people who need to
Use that data, have access to it
immediately. Uh, on attendance
plans, you've set up a framework
in the attendance for Success
Act that that requires schools
to set up a team of people to,
to really dig deep into root
cause analysis of why students
might be absent in the first
place. And so these, these here
are reminders to schools that
that root cause analysis should
be authentic and it should be
directly tied to the students
themselves that are experienced
absenteeism.
Um, often what what Jess and I
saw when we reviewed attendance
plans earlier last year when we
were developing the first
report, we saw schools going in
and and writing their attendance
plans as compliance documents.
They write, uh, this is, this is
something that that we have to
do for the state so that we can
just move on to the next thing,
and, and that it might be a
symptom of the form itself
doesn't allow schools to do that
authentic engagement, or it
might be something deeper that
the schools are just bogged down
with paperwork and they need,
they need some
extra time to do that. Um.
In addition to doing that,
every, uh, because there's so
much work to be done once that
plan is developed, there needs
to be responsibilities set at
the school level, each person
that's on that attendance team
should have a clear
understanding of what their role
and their responsibility on that
attendance team is. Uh, and, and
in, in that same way, the entire
school should be bought in on
that attendance plan. So when
it's developed, it doesn't just
go into a stack of papers and
get lost. It's something that
the school buys into and is
tracking progress on maybe
quarterly.
The meeting and saying, uh, you
know, we, we, we have seen, you
know, this particular student is
absent for this reason. What can
we do as a school to help that
student get to school?
Uh, and the last thing there is
on communication strategies. I
want uh I won't reiterate what
Ms. Bayard said, but those
attendants strategies, they
should be timely, they should be
relevant and they should be
written in students' home
language, and they should
provide that context for
students' absences, uh, so that,
that parent is not getting a
number and saying, well, I don't
know what this number means.
They're understanding that their
students absence in context of
the greater school in context of
the students' peers.
Uh, in terms of systemic health
interventions, schools should
also be focusing on these 5
things, uh, schools should be
building a transportation
program that that reduces
barriers to transportation.
Schools should be thinking about
the value and the relevance of
their school to the students in
there. I lost my opportunity.
There's a group of students that
came in. I was gonna like quick
poll them and turn around and
say, how many of you think that
your, your school is valuable,
right? But, but I wonder what
would happen if we asked every
student in New Mexico, what
would make school valuable to
them and
And then ask uh schools
themselves if they are doing
those things that are making
school valuable for students.
Part of that is understanding
students' individual goals, so
that when they walk into a
classroom that you can make that
direct connection with that
student and um I love there's a
slide in the PED presentation
that has all of those quotes
from students. Uh, there are a
couple of quotes on there that,
that, uh, I'm sorry, Justice is
going to pull it up for me so I
can keep talking. that really
resonate, that really drive home
this this idea that um
Schools are, you know, uh, at
the very top, this is my safe
place uh or right in the middle
there. Thank you for making me
feel smart or at the top on the
right, you believed in me when I
didn't believe in myself. Those
are quotes from students, um,
and, and that's something that,
that, uh, it's it's critical to
ensure that a student is, is,
feels that way to get to school.
Uh, I sort of talked about
school culture, so I'll skip
over it. Um, supporting families
outside of school, uh, this is,
this is a task that every school
has that's sort of an unspoken
task, uh, that, that, uh, is
really sort of rooted in the
community schools model, right?
But uh schools now have this,
this, this new responsibility in
recent years to understand their
community and deeply understand
their community. And if they're
suffering from poverty that
those schools need to understand
what resources in that community
are available.
So we heard about a partnership
with United Way, that, that is
one of those resources in
communities that that schools
can partner with to provide out
of school time opportunities or
to shorten those gaps.
And then finally, professional
work. Uh, this is something that
you all talked about in HB 130,
when you created your new
framework for school time or
instructional time, you did a
little carve out for
professional work time, and it
was a very um there was a lot of
discussion about that
professional work time being
protected and ensuring that
teachers have dedicated time for
all of the things they have to
do, not just for taking
attendance at the beginning of
the school day, but also for uh
doing the interventions.
That they're supposed to do that
because their attendance plan
says they have to, right? If, if
it becomes more of a thing that
they want to do and that they
have time to do rather than a
thing that they have to do along
with all of the other things
that they have to do in the
school day. Um, it, it becomes
much easier to do.
Uh, I'll, I'll turn the page and
switch gears and talk about our
next actor in the system, uh,
the public education department.
There are 4 things under
attendance interventions and
once again we heard from Deputy
Secretary Castillo on a lot of
the things that the department
is doing around attendance, and
I think uh you you'll read some
of these and you think, and they
will resonate with both with the
department is doing now and what
they plan to do in the future.
Um, the first there is policy
development and guidance. So we
heard a lot from Ms.
that there, there are some
strategies that work and we know
what works, but the schools
themselves might not know what
works. And so the role of the
public education department in
that sense, is to connect
schools that don't know what to
do with the resources that help
them get to what they want to
do.
Uh, part and the one of the ways
that, that, uh, both our our
report and the LFC report that
came out earlier this year, uh,
suggested is by creating some
guidance or some guiding
documents that school districts
can use, uh, to, to understand
best practices.
Uh, in terms of data collection,
all of the, the data that they
collect on attendance, it needs
to be collected and aggregated
and published in a timely
manner. Um, I'm sort of, uh, I
don't want, I don't mean to put
the the department on blast on
this one, but we, uh, you've
seen analysis of 2024 attendance
rates and LESC staff has not
received those attendance rates.
Uh, and if you
Uh, think about, you know, staff
not being able to get aggregate
numbers, uh, it might be also
true that the schools themselves
are not getting the numbers that
they need to make timely
decisions to intervene quickly,
especially given that the
schools themselves might not
have the data people to be
analyzing data and rely on the
public public education
department for that data.
Uh, in terms of attendance
plans, uh, PED has been working
on some changes to their
attendance plan, uh, platform
that's going to go out to school
districts in the next school
year, uh, and part of what the
department needs to do as they
uh receiving all of these plans
and reviewing all of these plans
and approving all of these plans
is is some deep analysis on
whether or not the plans are
doing the things that the law
says they need to do. So
authentic root cause analysis
and uh those interventions.
that the law prescribes. Uh,
that's a lot of work. It's very
difficult work. and so the
public education department will
need staff and they will need
time to get through all of those
plans, and, and we'll get to the
legislature's role in that, but
they also might need some
guidance from the legislature on
what they should be looking for
as they review those plans.
And then finally, uh, a quick
nod to the communication
strategy if there are
communication strategies that
work, the public education
department can just publish
those Ford school districts to
use. That's not a huge cost
barrier or anything like that,
uh, schools, if they need that
resource, uh, can rely on the
public education department for
that.
In terms of systemic health, uh,
this is a much deeper
conversation, I think with the
what, what you all are working
on in terms of the Martine Zazzi
lawsuit, uh, as well as just
sort of big state level
conversations about governance,
but the role of the public
education department is to
provide strong, sustained,
productive oversight for public
education in the state. Uh, and
the department, I think, to
improve the health of the
education system overall, I
think needs to take
deep critical look on whether or
not they have the capacity and
ability to do that right now.
Uh, and the value of and
relevance of school, uh, the
department also needs to reduce
barriers to innovative practices
and uh create or incentivize
school schedules designed to
re-engage students.
Uh, in transportation programs,
the department needs to work
within the statutory guidelines
that they have over the
transportation formula to build
a transportation distribution
that effectively meets districts
needs.
In terms of school leadership
development, the department
plays a critical role in
overseeing educator preparation
programs, and overseeing
standards for educators and uh
and overseeing professional
development, uh provided to
educators.
And then supporting families
outside of school, the public
public education department has
a responsibility and a statutory
requirement to collaborate with
the uh CYFD with the Children,
Youth and Families Department,
other state agencies like Early
Childhood Education and Care
Department, Department of
Health, might also have a role
to play in those those root
causes of why students might be
missing school, but those that
you heard this morning from
Superintendent Blakey that that
partnership with C CYFD.
Might not be an effective strong
partnership right now and it's
unclear whether that
partnership, the role of that
partnership is between CYFD and
districts or CYFD public
Education department or all
three of them. So there, there's
a lot of work to be done to make
sure that those partnerships are
effectively connecting the
schools with the resources that
they need.
Finally, we'll turn to the final
page and uh talk about the role
of the legislature in this
conversation.
Uh, for attendance
interventions, the legislature
has two primary levers, and
those primary levers you've
already exercised, and we'll
continue to exercise into the
future, but the first is the
policy framework you've created
in the attendance for Success
Act. And so that policy
framework can be strengthened
and can be bolstered and can be
used to clarify the types of
Uh, interventions and the types
of activities that schools need
to engage in when they identify
students in each tier. Um, and
it should also provide more
clear expectations for schools
and for the public education
department in how how plans
should be developed. The team
members that need to be on those
uh in in the room when those
plans are developed, and then
how those plans should be
implemented throughout the
course of a school year. All of
those things are, are uh
mentioned in the attendance for
Success Act, but can be
strengthened.
To provide a much more clear
roadmap for both PED and for the
state.
Uh, and then in terms of
funding, uh, there, there are a
couple of streams of funding.
The first that we've already
talked about is public education
department needs capacity to do
this work. Uh, and so if you put
funding below the line, as has
been done in the past, sometimes
PED will take from that below
the line funding and fund a
couple of staff members at the
department. Uh, that's not a
deep systemic way to think about
the PED's budget. PED should be
budgeting the staff that they
need to do the work that they
need to do in their operating
budget.
And the below the line should be
grants to schools, and you'll
hear more about that in the, in
the, uh, on Friday.
In addition, that the, the
schools and districts should be
provided the resources that they
need. So once the, the funding
leaves, the legislature goes to
the public education department
and gets distributed to schools.
You saw a breakdown of how that
funding that $5 million is going
to go out this year, uh, TRC is
going to get $30,000 from that
grant and, you know, if I'm a
school district, I'm asking
myself, what do I do with
$30,000. So the funding needs to
sort of match what the act says
needs to happen in those schools
and then should be sufficient to
provide the interventions that
the Act prescribes.
In terms of systemic health, uh,
you all have already made quite
a bit of progress in systemic
health in improving sort of the
funding for, for a lot of the
engagement activities both in
House Bill 130, which created a,
uh mechanism for schools to
build innovative school
calendars, uh, more directly
tied to students' individual
goals, incentivize professional
work. You've put funding into
CTE programs which are extremely
engaging for kids, as Jess was
talking about.
Um, the, the 4 things that I've
listed for you here are sort of
outside of what you have already
done. Um, school transportation,
uh, I'll I'll take the hit for
this one. We, we put together a
report last year, uh, giving you
a slew of recommendations for
the school transportation
formula, including a
recommendation that we make a
commitment to redesigning the
transportation formula so that
it makes more sense to districts
and uh we simply haven't done
that. And so school
transportation often is one of
those things.
Sort of falls on the back burner
as all of the uh exciting
initiatives moved to the front.
Uh, effective state governance,
you all have had a discussion in
in previous years and this
discussion will continue about
the best effective structure to
run the state education system,
uh, it might be that reforms are
necessary to stabilize state
leadership or to establish a
statewide educational plan or
goals for the state and monitor
progress.
towards those goals.
Data governance is a is a new
one that we've been focusing on
for you this year. A lot of the
data collection woes that you'll
hear are tied to the Project
Nova and one of the issues that
we've identified with Project
Nova is that it was sort of
developed by data people and
pushed out very quickly, and
there wasn't a whole lot of uh
input or buy-in from educators
who are expected to use the
system every single day. And so
data governance is the idea that
if you
Get the right oversight, the
right people to give input to
the systems that are being
developed, they will be
developed to serve the needs of
those systems of those people.
So you'll hear more about data
governance in November. We will
talk about some research that
we've been doing on that. And
then finally, uh, uh, community
well-being is that some of these
supports that we're talking
about don't exist in school and
that the funding that you all
provide, we, we are, we are your
staff for schools and for public
education.
Um, but you all, uh, have
recognized the need for support
outside of school as well. Uh,
and so part of that might also
be creating a framework for the
cross-agency collaboration that
we know needs to happen between
PED CYFD, ECECD, DOH, uh, that,
that might be a statutory
mechanism that you all have to,
to force for lack of a better
word, uh, meaningful
collaboration between the
agencies is to to address the
goals that you identified in
statute.
Um, I have gone way over my
time. I apologize, Mr. Chair,
but that is all we have. We'll
turn it over to you.
Right. Thank you all, Senator
Souls.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. um, I
think some fairly just kind of
quick questions, uh, lots of
talks about there needs to be
additional funding. Is there
going to be funding requests
from the PED and agencies to put
in more than the 5 full-time
employees at PE to support
attendance. I looked at my Las
Cruces and the amount of money
they've had supports about 4
full-time people. That's only 1
per high school and doesn't
touch elementaries or middle
school, which seems woefully.
inadequate if we're going to
make a big difference, um, and
is there going to be substantial
increases in budget requests
from the PE and agencies dealing
with housing, food,
transportation, mental health,
um.
Belongingness like the CTE, we
know students who are engaged in
CTE at more than just the
introductory class graduated
95%, yet those programs often
are underfunded and are fooled
with wait lists. You know, those
all are straight up money are
the
And I, I don't, I don't want it
to be rhetorical, but I don't
think everybody in the room is
here, but are those requests
going to be made by the
administration, um, and are
Budget, but it's often.
Looked at, checked the box and,
and ignored it feels like.
Seems like there's money fixes
some of these problems are is
that money going to be in the
budget request going forward?
And, and I realized that's
somewhat rhetorical. You all
don't necessarily know, but if
the requests aren't being made,
then we're all just throwing up
our hands and going, oh well, if
we had more money and more
people.
Thank you, Mr. Sher, um, Senator
Souls, that I know on Friday you
will be hearing from um the rest
of my colleagues, but yes, we
are making request um to be able
to do a lot of the work that we
have mentioned that we want to
do and expand so those should be
coming to, to the committee on
Friday.
And, and thank you. I appreciate
it and you know, as
Representative Baca, he's not
there right now, but we're a
wealthy state. We've got enough
money to do any of these things,
we need to put in the enough
resources, not just enough, you
know, where we know it's gonna
take this much and we put in
half that much and let's see
what we can get for half of it.
We ought to really be doing it
if we've got that commitment,
otherwise we'll be here again
next year lamenting why things
aren't changing.
Because, you know, we're not
putting the resources, we're
putting in hopes and wishes.
Thank you.
Represent.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. Uh, thank
you, uh, everybody, couple
questions, um.
And comments, um.
Jessica, I really appreciated
the inclusion of
Chronic absenteeism versus
attendance. It's, it's really
important because if we don't
really even know what we're
talking about or who we're
talking about. So thank you. And
then my first question is, have
we done a statewide audit.
Of student information systems
and which and what percentage
actually monitor.
Chronic absenteeism. When I,
when I worked at APS, I believe
it was flagged if.
And absences at that point it
was flagged.
But our, our system's flagging
this because it's so easy.
As a teacher or principal, it's
like you can anecdotally think,
oh, a lot of people are
abstinence or I think he was
absence and that's not the case
because there's tardies and
everything else. Have we
systematically looked at our,
our technology in place now.
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Garrett, um, no, we have not
systematically looked at all of
those student information
systems to compare them to one
another and figure out who is
flagging what at different
points. There are a lot of
different ones in use across the
state. Tim did do a review of
SIS systems or that's redundant,
um, of SISs, um, a while back,
but we mostly found that we have
a wide, wide range of them being
used across the state, so
systematic review has not
happened to see.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Garrett, the, the interesting
thing about SIS is is that uh
some of them will consider that
early warning system as part of
like their built-in
functionality. Some of them,
it's like a tack on that like
the district has to pay extra
for uh things like that and um
ultimately, our hope is that
Project Nova does a lot of that
work by providing a real-time
data system if if Project Novo
is working as intended and if
everybody's bought in on it, um,
theoretically schools could be
uploading.
Their data on a daily or weekly
basis, and the state would have
access to that real-time data,
um, so that a statewide
early warning system could
theoretically exist, um, but.
I said to my colleagues.
Yeah, um, uh, Mr. Chairman,
Representative Garrett, um, when
my, my organization has done a
review of all SISs, the top 15
in the country. And so my guess
is that the ones in Houston, New
Mexico are probably, you know,
each district are on that list.
And what we have found is that
um there's really no SIS that
has those those features that
staff really need to do their
work. There are um two
US companies, as Tim mentioned,
where you can buy an additional
like bolt on, but um, but really
what it is is that it's an
additional um system that's
needed that effectively sits on
top of the SAS.
Thank you. Um, and then Emily,
this is a question for you. So I
see in the footnotes that it
would cost 200, uh, excuse me.
$2.8 million to serve 330,000
students in our state, is that
correct?
Yes, that that that's correct,
and that's assuming across, um,
89 districts that all have
different, um, SAS systems that
need to be integrated with if
through Project Nova, there was
real-time data available or
near-ish real-time data
available and essential
repository, then that cost would
come down by
um by almost $1000 to $1.9
million.
Thank you. And, and, and I guess
what we'll need and maybe it's
being done on Friday is how much
are we spending?
Across the state on all these
attendants initiatives now.
You know,
What are we spending and
If you don't know the answer
right now, that's OK, but, but
we need to know, I mean, here's
a different companies and we
have one here that does
something.
But what is the actual cost?
And, and as senators Soul said,
Um, are we talking about more
money, or are we talking about a
wiser targeting? I don't know
the answer.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Representative Garrett, in terms
of funding that has been
specific to attendance, it is
that $5000 appropriation that
you all have made the last
couple of years. That being
said, attendance is tricky when
we're talking about it being
systemic because components of
the state equalization guarantee
that goes out to districts, for
example, they're at risk
component of that could also be
used for this. Um, our
colleagues at the Legislative
Finance Committee also found um
that
In fiscal year 23 with at least
64 districts funding attendance
for personnel through those
funds. So there is substantial
state investment, but in terms
of an of an overarching number,
it is a little difficult to get
to exactly.
Thank you.
Other questions for members?
All right, so I had a couple,
um.
Is that
Tim had mentioned about um
attendance data and the LALC
staff not getting attendance
data, would there be a reason
for that from the department
side?
Thank you, Mr. Sherman. I think
it was just um the timing of our
reporting and when the brief um
was completed, we as part of our
process, especially this year,
um, we wanted to make sure that
we were double checking every,
every report that we received
and that we were giving
districts an opportunity if we
found any discrepancies with
what they were reporting and
what we were calculating an
opportunity to resubmit that
data. We had a couple of
Districts that took on on that
opportunity so it just took our
validation process a little bit,
um, longer than expected, so I,
I think it was just sort of like
a timing when they were
preparing and we had finalized
the data at the minute that it
was filing finalize and
certified we did share it with
um both EESC and LFC.
Cool. Thank you for that. Um,
and then another thing that was
mentioned was about the
partnership with CYFD and I know
this is something that I brought
up um with the APS
superintendent and Tim alluded
to, to some of her comments this
morning, so I was wondering what
the what the PEDs um
relationship is like with uh
children, youth and families
department in terms of um
compliance with the attendance
for Success Act.
Thank you, Mr. Sherman. Um, as
we all know, um, CYFD also went
through a transition and they
have new leadership and I can
say um from the last almost one
year we have been having um
every other week we meet with um
CYFD the um Mean evenvento
person from APS. We have our
transportation department in and
we're really trying to um get to
that root cause.
of what is happening and how
each of the agencies have a role
and can support um it has been
an ongoing conversation. So at
this stage of our process or our
engagement there hasn't been um
any particular, um, let's say
solution right of like this is
the path that we're going
forward because it's as as we
all um articulate it in our
conversation, it's a little bit
complex. Sometimes even.
Deciding what type of funding
can help a particular um group
of students have implications,
so we have been having those
conversations and we
participate, um, like I said,
every other week, um, more or
less, and I'm hopeful that we're
going to be able to come up with
more actionable steps, um, in
the next couple of months and
how we can best support the
concerns that we have been
hearing and how we can align the
resources that we have at each
of our agencies.
To support our students.
And I'd certainly be interested
and look forward to that because
um I think for us in determining
what we're going to do and move
forward with that law is that
this is a part that has been a
big blind spot for us. Um, and,
and we
Don't have a good picture of
what the relationship is, what
CYFD.
May or may not be doing in terms
of the referrals they're
getting, um, and, and what's
happening and what are the
outcomes with the students and
the families that they're
engaging in. So it's something
that that I'm anxiously
anticipating because it's a huge
blind spot, as I said, um, but I
look forward to that. Thank you.
Thank you all so much for the
presentation. We appreciate you
being here today. Thank you.
All right.
So healthy universal school
meals we'll give a little bit of
time for transition.
And folks to get in place.
All right, Connor, when you're
ready, please.
Alrighty, uh, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee.
Uh, my name is I'm hoping you
all know, uh, is Connor L.
Hicks, policy analyst for the
LASC. Joining me today is Deputy
Director Laura Henry Hand of
Student Success and Wellness
Bureau of the Public Education
Department.
So as a quick recap, uh, in the
2023 legislative session, uh,
you as lawmakers made a strong
statement in support of student
well-being and academic
excellence by unanimously
approving Senate Bill 4, now
known as Laws 2023 Chapter 30,
which thereby established the
healthy universal school meals
program.
Now at the heart of that
legislation is a simple premise.
New Mexico students cannot be
expected to succeed in the
classroom if their stomachs are
empty.
In recognition of this reality,
the healthy universal school
meals program provides state
reimbursement in addition to the
federal funding already
guaranteed to these schools to
ensure that every New Mexico
student has access to two
healthy free meals every day.
So as we meet today here in
Albuquerque, schools across New
Mexico have been operating this
program for just over one full
academic year now. This
presentation on my part provides
an opportunity to take stock of
where the program stands based
on analysis of both quantitative
and qualitative data. So without
further ado, let's dig in.
And I'll keep my food puns to a
minimum.
So for the 2024, 2025 school
year 902 schools have applied to
participate in the Healthy
universal school meals program.
To date, only one school system,
Pine Hill Schools, has opted
out, which they tribally
controlled school. Now on the
top of page two, you'll find
figure 1, which breaks down
participating schools based on
their meal program option. And
I, just to give a quick
refresher of what those options
are. Number one, we'll talk
about standard schools. Uh,
under the National School lunch
and school breakfast programs,
the
programs. There are 3 categories
for federal meal reimbursement
free reduced price, and paid.
Schools that are standard
schools collect meal
applications annually to
determine students' eligibility
for the different meal pricing
categories. And the 2024, 25
year where we have just 35
schools in the state that are
designated as standard. Examples
of those standard schools, uh,
Los Alamos Public Schools, the
New Mexico School for the Arts,
uh, Des Moines High School,
Saint Mary's Catholic School in
Albuquerque.
The next we have provision 2
schools, and they collect meal
applications, but they only do
so once every 4 years. They have
a baseline eligibility numbers
through that application process
and then reimbursement is based
on claiming percentages for
those other 3 years. All
students are then able to eat
for free during those years
under provision 2. and this year
as it was previously just one
school, South Valley Academy
Charter School operates
provision 2. And the last
program option, uh, is the
community eligibility provision
or CEP.
And you're going to hear me
refer to that a lot, and that's
because 95% of our schools in
the state operate under the
community eligibility provision.
This option allows schools to
provide free meals to all
students regardless of their
family's income.
Provided that 25% or more of
their students are directly
certified as eligible for free
meals. Uh, and that 95% number
we see now is up from 76% in the
prior year. And that growth that
we saw there, that significant
jump, uh, is due in large part
to the US Department of
Agriculture's recent rule
revision in October 2023, which
lowered the identified student
percentage that 25% number I
just mentioned, it was
previously 40% and now it's 25%.
So the vast
majority of our schools in New
Mexico now qualify for that, and
the public education department
undertook once that change was
made undertook an aggressive,
uh, outreach campaign to make
schools aware of this option
that their new eligibility
status.
So once a school is designated
as CEP, the percentage of meals
reimbursed at the free rate is
determined by the formula that
you'll see on page 3.
The remaining percentage of
those meals are then reimbursed
at the federal paid rate. And
importantly, there are no,
there's no reduced price
category under CEP.
And so for state budgeting
purposes, which is obviously
very important to this
committee, a greater number of
CEP schools provides a more
stable estimate of federal
reimbursement year to year and
ensures that school food
authorities across the state are
maximizing their federal
reimbursement. So instead of
relying on school food
authorities and families to
request and submit school meal
applications, our reimbursement
percentages are going for both
free and paid meals are going to
be set formulaically for most of
our schools.
So you as lawmakers approved the
creation of the Universal Meals
program to ensure all New Mexico
students had access to high
quality meals each school day.
And with this aim in mind, I
think the question here is what
trends are we seeing in the
number of meals that are being
served since this program is
launched. Figure 2 on page 4
shows the trends over time in
total school breakfasts and
lunches served in New Mexico
from FY19 to FY 24.
So as you'll see the high point
is going to be FY19
pre-pandemic, and then, as you
might imagine, given the uh
pandemic-related school
closures, those numbers are
going to fall off a cliff. Uh,
we are seeing steady growth back
towards that pre-pandemic level
and since students have returned
to the classroom, we have seen
that steady increase. Uh, the
number of meals that we were
served in FY 24. They did remain
below those pre-pandemic levels,
but we are seeing an increase in
total lunches and breakfasts
even as we're seeing declining.
Enrollment in the state.
And so we are seeing more meals
being served in New Mexico, uh,
but the law also made clear that
the students that the meals our
students are eating should be
high quality and healthy. Uh,
and so two sets of regulations,
one state and one federal, will
impact the content and quality
of school meals in New Mexico in
the years ahead. Uh, the rule
establishing meal quality
improvement standards was
adopted by the Public Education
Department on September 12th,
2024, and at a very high level,
the rule establishes the
parameters with which schools
must comply.
To receive full reimbursement
from the state for meal costs
that aren't covered by federal
funds.
Uh, the specifics of that role
will be, uh, gotten into by
Deputy Director Henry Hand, as
well as by myself in tomorrow's
rule review.
OK, sorry, just hit the wrong
button, y'all.
OK. In addition, the US
Department of Agriculture
finalized updates to school meal
nutrition requirements in April
2024. And these requirements
phase in restrictions over the
next few years on sodium and
added sugars in meals. Uh,
figure 3 on page 4 provides a
good example of the sort of
substitutions that a school
could make or might make to
reduce sodium and added sugar
levels in a school breakfast.
So I've thrown a lot of numbers
at you so far, but I think if we
really want to understand how
implementation of this program
has gone in New Mexico. It's
important to talk to the people
that have been doing this work
across the state on the ground.
Uh, and so, uh, shortly after I
joined the LESC staff. Uh, I
began an outreach effort to 8
school food authorities across
New Mexico that represent a
cross section of the diverse
educational context we have in
our state because we know that
students
needs are going to vary across
New Mexico and so the universal
meals implementation experiences
are going to be just as diverse.
But across the state, uh, in
this qualitative analysis you'll
find I wanted to pull out these
common themes that we heard from
folks. And so, number one is
that I want to highlight is
staffing and capacity
challenges. Uh, this is true of
education in general, but
specifically in school
nutrition, staffing has been a
persistent struggle for schools,
uh, since the COVID-19 pandemic.
Uh, nutrition officials have
cited low pay and part-time
status for a lot of positions as
key barriers to that fal staff.
In addition, the need for more
freshly prepared meals per the
law, and scratch cooking
requires additional professional
development for staff.
Number 2, and this is an
important one, feedback from
students and parents. School
nutrition leadership has
indicated in every conversation
I had, that overall there is
broad satisfaction with the
quality of meals being served in
the state, and students are
noticing an improvement in the
quality. Uh, according to those
interviewed, the families in
particular have expressed
enthusiasm for the program
because it takes one, just one
more thing off of their plate.
They don't have to, it reduces
the burden on their personal
finances, especially given high
grocery prices that
We've seen in recent years. And
it's one last thing they have to
worry about.
Uh, however, I do want to note
that the USDA's updated
nutrition standards have
resulted in some student
feedback that characterizes
meals as bland, uh, largely due
to those reduced sodium and the
reduced requirements around
sodium and added sugars. Uh, and
then on top of that, one of the
challenges has been that
students have expressed
resistance to things like whole
grain tortillas or unprocessed
foods because that's not a
common part of their diet
outside of school. So that has
become, that has been a bit of a
challenge, but there are
uh,
outreach campaigns ongoing.
Another part of this is, as we
know, a big focus of the law was
incorporating New Mexico grown
ingredients, uh, and I want to
be clear that every official I
talked to was extremely
supportive and enthusiastic
about locally sourcing
ingredients and supporting local
businesses and local
agricultural operations. Uh, the
logistical challenges, however,
made that quite difficult for a
lot of folks. Uh, I think in
particular, folks I talked to
that that lived in the more arid
Parts of our state where they
had water restrictions or where
it was just hard to find fruits,
uh, fresh fruits and vegetables,
uh, that made it quite difficult
to acquire and incorporate those
ingredients from local
producers. And on top of that, a
lot of those local ingredients
tend to cost more than what you
might buy through a vendor. And
so while they are supportive, it
is that the logistical
challenges have made it pretty
difficult for some schools to
fully embrace New Mexico grown.
Another part of this is #4,
insufficient time for students
to eat. Uh, and this is
something and I'll talk more
about it in the rule review
tomorrow, but this is something
that actually is in both the
statutory language and in uh the
rule from PED, uh, you'll notice
that it will say that it
requires schools to provide up
to 20 minutes of seated
lunchtime for students in K
through 5, and some schools that
I spoke to expressed concern,
uh, that that kind of language.
Up to part of that could present
present an issue where what if a
school already does 30 minutes
of lunch? Are they now required
to lower it back to 20? Are
those sorts of things going to
impact their operations. So just
wanted to flag that and and
another thing with those school
food authorities, they also
expressed concern that
oftentimes how long a lunch is
is not within their purview. It
is more a decision of the school
administration, so it requires a
great deal of buy-in from
administrators, not just.
nutrition officials.
Number 5 is support from the
PED. Uh, school nutrition
officials in every corner of the
state that I talked to, uh,
really had nothing but good
things to say about the
technical knowledge and
responsiveness of the student's
success and wellness Bureau. Uh,
they repeatedly described the
relationship that they had with
the with the department and with
the bureau specifically as a
partnership on implementing
this. Uh, there were site visits
that were discussed. There were
technical, uh, applications of
various grant funding that was
discussed. So, uh.
We heard a lot of positive
feedback in in that regard.
And the last thing I really want
to focus on with the feedback
from LEA is is we heard one
message more than anything else,
which is that we need to give
this program a chance.
Uh, you know, there's been a lot
of studies over the years that
uh universal meals can uh can
improve attendance, can improve
academic outcomes, can reduce
obesity rates even, uh, but it
will take time for us to see
those results in the state, uh,
and so officials in every corner
said, uh, while it will take
that time and they expect there
will be implementation hurdles
as there is with any new program
as we scale up something, uh,
they believe those results
will begin to be realized if we
get if the state gives the
support it needs to this
program.
And now I'm going to talk about
money for a bit. So with the
funding history and fiscal
outlook.
As I'm sure all of you are well
aware, the appropriate funding
for the Healthy universal school
meals program has been a
challenge since its inception.
In both FY 24 and FY 25, the
actual cost of running the
program has outpaced the amount
appropriated by the legislature.
A cost model developed by the
LESC staff projects a total
healthy universal school meals
program cost of at least $48
million for FY 26, depending on
participation increases. If it
holds flat, it would be closer
to 48.
But if it uh if we do as we
expect see in participation
increases continue, that will,
that number will be higher than
that. And so when PED discusses
this, you're going to hear a
higher number and a different
number from us. And so I do just
want to say that obviously this
is an ongoing conversation as we
enter budget season and ahead of
the 2025 session. And so LESE
staff will work with PED to
reconcile cost projection
differences ahead of the
session.
Uh, further information about
the methodology of our uh cost
projection model for LESC is
provided on page 7 of the
report.
So in closing, I would like to
leave this committee with two
clear recommendations to
consider as we enter budget
season and the 2025 legislative
session.
To ensure continued successful
implementation of the Healthy
universal school meals program.
The legislature could consider
appropriating at least $48
million in categorical funding
for the Healthy universal school
meals program in FY 26, and this
funding would be distributed
directly to school food
authorities to support program
operations. Number 2 is ensuring
that the public education
department has the appropriate
internal capacity to effectively
oversee and support
implementation of the Healthy
universal school meals program.
So that's it for me and thank
you for the chance to present on
this topic. Uh, now I will yield
the floor to Deputy Director
Henry Hand to further discuss
PED rulemaking and program
implementation.
All right, good afternoon, uh,
Mr. Chairman. My name is Laura
Henry. I'm the deputy director
with the Student Success and
Wellness Bureau. And today I am
going to be discussing with you.
I'm going to be sharing some
more information with you about
the implementation of the
program, which includes the rule
requirements, the certification
process for the role and
funding, how were the department
is supporting the school
districts, the number of school
districts participating in the
program and the by program
options and meal participations
over the years, um, projections
for FY 25, including our budget
projections for future years.
Um, a lot of this information,
Mr. Hicks.
presented, so it's just going to
be a repeat, um, but.
We're happy to share.
The rule, the new rule, as you
know, there was a a a draft rule
that was presented, um, in July
in May of this year, and the new
rule will be published in 20
September, September 24th. The
department took every public
comment into consideration when
updating the role once the new
changes were released and
received even received emails
and calls from districts, um,
thanking us for the support and
for listening to their
recommendations for change.
in the role. The levels that,
um, you saw previously in the
role, there were two different
levels in the role that were
presented that, um, districts
had to meet criteria, those
levels were removed. There is
only one,
there are the listed
requirements that are now listed
in the role include achieving,
um, certification, meal quality
improvement requirements by July
1 of 2025 and school districts
will have to meet 50, 50% of all
weekly requirement meal
components.
With the exception of milk,
shall be freshly prepared. That
was one of the main main
components of, of the SB 4. And
we also, um, included the to
achieve the lowest level of food
waste, um, utilize New Mexico
grown foods and each school food
authority that operates the
Health Universal school meal
program shall submit to the
department for approval and
annual certification
documentation. So the department
will be working to develop a
certification process on a
yearly.
so that schools can be
certified.
And those that do meet the
certification beginning in
school year 2526 will continue
to receive the funding that
they're currently receiving,
which is full funding for the
Health Universal school meals
and the schools that do not meet
the certification requirements
beginning in school year 2526
will receive the paid meal
reimbursement, which is a lower
reimbursement rate of $3.15 for
this school year.
So in order to ensure a
successful implementation of the
Health Universal school meals
program. The New Mexico
legislature issued $200 million
in school kitchen infrastructure
grant for schools participating
in the national school lunch and
school breakfast program. The
purpose of this grant is for
Project statewide for kitchen
infrastructure, equipment,
renovations, and construction to
encourage the pre the
preparation of school meals that
are scratch cooked and freshly
prepared. So out of the $200.
Um, you see a map here and it is
also at the back of your
handouts so that you can see it
bigger where the money was
allocated and 40 of these
schools, we know that, uh, we
heard this, the voices from the
charter schools that have a
harder time implementing the
requirements of the role. And so
we did set a second grant
application just for charter
schools and 40 of them received
funding out of 87 total schools.
We also allocated $1.7 million
to New Mexico grown funding
which is uh part of the SB4
requirements to continue
supporting schools and providing
quality meals to students across
the state.
Our state is one of 3 states in
the nation that um was looked at
nationally by the Chef An
Foundation and selected to
receive um
Additional training support and
preparing and transitioning and
preparing scratch cooked meals
and so we are working with our
school districts to um apply for
the get school's cooking grant
and also the healthy school food
Pathway Fellowship, which are
both grants that support the
implementation of scratch cooked
meals. One of them is the 3 year
assessment plan that will help
the school develop a strategic
plan to better prepare scratch
meals, and another is the, um,
for food.
Service workers to, to take on
those um actions and actually
learn how to prepare scratch
cooked meals.
We also have hired with the SB4
we received additional funding
to hire staff, so we have a full
kids' kitchen team. We hired a
staff manager. We have two
culinary specialists, a farm to
school, New Mexico grown
coordinator and a food waste
reduction specialist as well.
And so with our team, we're
going to be providing 18
culinary trainings across the
state. Um, in the next year and
continued support. They're also
creating
Sources and tools that are going
to be provided, um, in addition
to conference yearly conferences
that are taking place. Our next
conference is our back to school
conference on October 1st and
2nd.
And we are gonna be having
trainings um that include
scratch cooking, baking from
scratch. We have New Mexico
grown, um, had a court implement
your New Mexico grown items into
your menus and a lot of other
exciting trainings that um that
we're going to be having.
The department would also like
to recognize the work that
schools are doing in order to
improve meal quality and promote
national recognition, and that
includes national recognition as
well. This year, 18 school
districts across New Mexico
received the Golden Chili
Awards, ranging from the seed
sprout, blossom and golden chili
categories. In recognition of
their dedication and outstanding
work in promoting New Mexico
grown initiatives. Schools in
our states are also eligible to
apply for USCA Healthy.
M's incentive grants.
Award, and this grant award has
made improvements to the
nutritional quality for school
meals and also the USDA turn up
the Beats Award recognizing
outstanding summer meal program
sponsors across the nation who
work hard to offer high quality
meals to children that are
appetizing, appealing, and
nutritious during the summer
months.
In this slide, we wanted to show
you again, um, Mr. Hicks
mentioned this in his
presentation, but how the
department is maximizing federal
dollars. So we worked really
hard to transition schools to
CEP, um, in the last school year
before the USDA 25% increase
threshold, lowering the
threshold to 25%, um, we were
able to increase 100, add an
additional 155 school sites to
the CEP program. And then at at
the beginning of the school year
we added an
Another 44 school sites to the
CEP program and therefore, we've
added a total of 199 schools
across the state, bringing us to
one of the highest states in the
nation, um, implementing the CEP
program at 95%.
Again, the participation over
the year, you see another graph
here that we've collected. This
is our internal graph from the 6
year average daily
participation, and we're happy
to say that last year we did
serve more meals than we ever
have in the past. We served over
55 million meals, which is
incredible, and I think that a
lot of that attributes to the
implementation of the Health
Universal school meals and
students being able to access
those meals on a daily basis. So
with that, we are projecting
that we're going to be serving
58 million meals in the in this
current school year for year 25.
And that impacts that, that
means that 191,000 students,
close to 192,000 students are
eating lunch, um, every day and
close to 138,000 students are
having breakfast every day,
which I think is a great
achievement.
Project, uh, program budget
projections. The USDA, um,
releases the the reimbursement
rates on a yearly basis. Uh, we
know that in the beginning it
was a little bit difficult to
try to figure out how much money
this this program was really
going to cost the state of New
Mexico. And so for school year
23, 24, the department requested
over $300 million in health
universal school meals funding
and only received 21.9 million.
During that legislative session,
the Department requested
additional funding and received
$20 million in supplemental
funding in order to, to be able
to continue supporting the
program. With meals being free
to all students, the department
continues to anticipate that
more children are going to be
eating breakfast and lunch every
day and we project about a 5%
increase in male participation
year after year. Increasing, of
course, the cost to the state as
well.
Due to the increase in
participation and USDA rates
increasing, the department will
continue to be under.
So, um, just to give you, I'm
going back. I'm sorry, I skipped
one ahead, um, for the budget
projections for FY 25, we are
projecting $48 million and that
is with a 5% increase and also
the new USDA reimbursement rate
and that actually matches the 4
year 26 projections that Mr.
Connor Hicks presented. I think
it's the same calculation and
formula that we use to determine
that amount. But for year 26,
you know, we will
Continue to we hope to continue
to see an increase in male
participation. And if we add
another 5% increase in meal
participation along with the
increase in the USDA
reimbursement rate, we're
projecting about uh $55 million
cost to the stage for meals if
we continue to see that rise in
meals.
And with that, our legislative
considerations.
Thank you.
Um, Healthy universal school
meals combats food and nutrition
insecurity by providing healthy
school meals that are healthy,
nutritious, and appealing to
students. So we ask that as a
state we are responsible for
providing youth with the tools
they need to succeed, and we
know that having healthy foods
to eat is just as important as
having books to read. So we
asked for continued funding
support for the healthy
universal school meals program.
And with that, I will.
Stand for questions.
Thank you.
Alright. Thank you all. Uh,
first my list, Senator Pinto.
You, Mr. Chair, thank you for
your presentation. I feel like a
burrito at all subs um.
Rayer in Pine Hill, um, why do
you know why they opted out?
They did not provide specific
reasons for why they opted out,
but under the the statute and
the rule, um, tribally
controlled schools and BIEs have
the option to opt out. And so,
you know, in, in the application
process when they go in and
submit their application to
participate in the national
school lunch program. They did
select that they were opting
out, but um we don't know the
reason why.
And Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I'm, I'm hoping it's
not a budgetary issue.
I don't know what I mean it
seems like all this time some of
the things the schools don't
want to do is because they can't
beat it in the budget, um, and I
think this is more of a comment.
We we actually visited one of
the local producers that was uh
working with APS but they had an
issue when there's no school.
So how do you know, we need to
make sure when we're trying to
buy local or create these
relationships with our local
producers that uh we don't put
him in a bind when they do cite
that, you know, make it more
more positive impact than a
negative impact. Um when
school's not in session, and it
seems like that's the case
across the board for anybody
trying to uh stay in the
business, um, but thank you,
thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative Garrett.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. uh, thanks
and, and Connor, I really
appreciated the picture on page
4 because that kind of brings it
home. I can't tell you how many
5th grade classes at my school
studied ingredients and it was
not a happy answer, um, and, uh,
thank you, um.
Ms. Henry Henn, um,
The, the one thing that's not
dealt in here is the logistics
of breakfast at the bill and
what it means because so much of
the time that it takes to do
things depends on the size of
the school. If you have a
charter school of 50 kids, and
then you have the school where I
was working at had 1100 pre-K to
5th graders and everybody had to
go to the cafeteria, get the
food, bring it back, pour the
excess milk, um, you know, then
you.
You know, milk down the drain.
I, I think I don't know how much
uh the, um, agency has dealt
with that. Have you looked at
all those logistic things that
uh we want to feed our kids
right.
And there's these logistical
things. How, how have you dealt
with that?
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
Representative Garrett, we have
worked, we, you know, previously
we had the breakfast after the
bell, and we did a lot of work
in communicating to the schools
that even though we have health
universal school meals, we still
need to be implementing those
practices and so we have
provided training on different
methods and options that schools
can do to implement breakfast
after the bell, whether it's
meeting kids by the bus stop or
where they're getting dropped
off so they can pick up their
meals on the way to the.
Classroom, um, some schools do
breakfast and after the bell,
um, in the classroom that are
not just elementary schools I've
seen even middle schools doing
breakfast in the classroom,
which is a great opportunity for
kids to uh participate in the
program and so we continue to
provide training and support,
uh, when those questions do
arise and working with
individual school districts, um,
to provide the right tools and
guidance for them.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, because
it's, it's, as you know, it's an
issue.
Um, lunch in the cafeteria, kids
lining up, having done cafeteria
duty for 3 years with 2nd and
3rd graders, uh, it's those,
those whole wheat tortillas I
can tell you we're not a hit in
a South Valley school. So it's
like we want to be healthy, but
we also want to make sure kids
actually want to eat the food.
It's not just taste, and then my
other question is, um,
We always sent all wrapped foods
and and milk to um.
Food pantries, is that a
practice being done around the
school so that the food that is
wrapped and hasn't been touched,
gets used.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Garrett, that is
a practice and we're working at
one of our, our staff members
are working with the food waste
reduction and one of those
methods is food donation. Um, we
have some school districts
across the state that have
shared tables that they put out
so that kids can either leave
food that they don't want to eat
and other students can take it
and then some schools also, um,
take those meals that weren't
eaten that school day. They
prepackaged them and then
students are able.
To pick those up at the end of
the day, or they donate them to
the local food pantry or other
organizations in their
community.
So what that is one of the
presentations that we're gonna
be providing and having more
information on how they can
continue to, um, do different
donation methods for their foods
and, uh, Mr. Chair,
Representative Garrett, I do
also just want to note that
Senate Bill 4 does advise for
the use of chair tables, and
that is one of the best
practices uh shared both
nationally and in the state, uh,
and in my conversations with
school food authorities I uh hid
multiple had begun the process
of establishing relationships
with local food pantries.
Um,
Thank you very much and then
just my my final comment is the
irony when I, I taught at the
same school in 1998 and then
from 2012 in 1998, the food was
prepared in the kitchen and then
they went away from that and it
was trucked in, so it's, it's
just ironic how we do things.
Across the country, not just
here, thank you.
Other questions.
All right, I didn't have any
either, but thank you too. I
really appreciate it. We look
forward to the rules update
tomorrow.
Thank you thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman, so you won't be
missing.
I.
Oh yes, sir.
All right.
Or.
Alright folks, because we're a
little bit early, which rarely
happens, um, usually we're a
little bit late, but I do know
that there are some folks here
that are for public comment, um,
we're going to get things ready
and we'll get started with that
in a couple of minutes and as
people come in, if they want to
continue on, that would be
awesome, but there's a sign-in
sheet if you didn't already sign
in for that, if you're
interested, but we're going to
get all that ready. Oh, it's
right here up front if you
haven't signed in and wish to.
All right.
He's probably.
Mhm.
I
All right folks, thanks for your
patience, but again, we're
early, so we may have folks that
are coming in and we have
another sign-in sheet for folks
that would wish to speak, um,
and then we're gonna wait for
folks online since we're a
little bit ahead of time, but we
certainly appreciate those of
you that have been with us, so
we have, um, first, Mackay and
Jordanni.
Please, and as you all come up,
you each have up to 2 minutes to
address us so that we can fit
everybody in during our comment
section.
Mr. Chair, do they get extra
credit for this? I don't know.
You'd have to ask their teacher
or their sponsor.
Good afternoon, gentlemen. Thank
you for joining us. Um, good
afternoon. Thank you for having
us. Yeah. So each of you have up
to 2 minutes, so please.
OK.
All right, well, my name is
Makai Bradford. I am 14 years
old and I'm a freshman at the
Albuquerque Academy, and I'm
also an ambassador for Justice
Code. We are a chapter of ESB
Junior.
That is the National Society of
Black Engineers
and
As a high school student, one of
my largest concerns is safety at
school, especially considering
the fact that there have been
multiple school shootings in the
past few months. I believe that
one major improvement that could
be made is ensuring that schools
look like places where young
minds can learn and not like
prisons. This is because if you
treat people like criminals and
have them in an environment that
looks like one where criminals
are kept for the majority of
their time, then you can expect
them to behave as such. I also
Believe that schools focus on
mental health should be
equivalent to the school's focus
on students' academic
performance. I personally
believe that I would never even
be capable of doing such a thing
because growing up, I've always
been around multiple different
support groups. I do poetry. I'm
in multiple music groups and I'm
a part of the National Society
of Black Engineers. So I grew up
knowing that I have people who I
can talk to if I ever.
Have any struggles with mental
health if I'm ever feeling any
kind of way.
But I think that everybody
should have access to groups
that reassure them and let them
know that they have people they
can go to if they need help.
Great. Thank you, Makai, for
joining us.
Please Giordani, when you have
up to 2 minutes. Thank you.
Hi, my name is Jordanni
Gillette. I am a sophomore at
Manal school, and I'm an officer
for upper school for Justice
Code. To add on to what Mika
said, it feels increasingly more
dangerous, especially with many
schools banning students from
having cellular devices on them
in case of emergency. I think
it's important for students to
have a way to contact help. I
understand it can be a
distraction to some, but it
becomes a huge safety concern
for me and my family when we
have more and more students
bringing weapons to school.
A solution I propose is not to
have a phone ban in the first
place, though I could understand
why this isn't an issue for you.
Another solution, I would like
to present you present to you is
possibly placing emergency
phones around campuses in order
to ensure a way of contact to
help. I myself know that I would
never bring a weapon to school
because growing up, I had a good
support system being enrolled in
robotics as well as athletics.
Since I was young, I like since
I was
Activities like these encourage
discipline as well as keep you
away from bad influences that
might encourage behaviors that
are not acceptable or even
illegal.
Great. Thank you both for
joining us, presenting.
All right. This is the name that
sounds familiar is Miss
Chiquito.
Its Chiquito, I don't see you.
Right.
It
We'll come back.
Uh, Walter.
Bradford?
These 4 are
All right, hi, gentlemen. So you
only each have up to 2 minutes,
so welcome.
Your phone is on. Oh, there you
go. OK, cool. Dear Mr. Chairman
and members of the committee, it
is wonderful to see many of you
again and to be able to talk to
you about my bill.
Uh, for those of you who don't
know me, my name is Walter
Bradford, and I'm a junior at
Valley High School. The issue
I'd like to discuss today is how
we can help our students afford
college. Right now, the cost of
college is high and getting
higher, uh, to help us, there's
free money available, but at all
it takes is $18 a test. In 2026,
there'll be 7580 awards
available with a combined value
of $33 million. In order to
qualify for this free money,
students must take the PSAT
junior year. Currently in New
Mexico.
Public high schools have their
students take the PSAT sophomore
year, which then uh we're not
able to get this free money. So
at Valley High School, which is
a Title I school in Albuquerque,
I personally see and experience
many students who are great
students, but won't be able to
attend college because of their
financial financial situation.
Uh, wins and so that we are
therefore asking the legislator
to help out these uh students.
Um, we're studying for the while
studying for the PSAT my
sophomore year, I noticed in my
in my study guidebook that only
juniors were able to get this
money and be able to qualify for
these scholarships. So
therefore, last year I contacted
my representative,
Representative Hochman V. Hill,
um, to introduce a bill to allow
for New Mexico public high
school students to retake the
PSAT junior year.
To qualify for scholarships. We
presented to the House Education
Committee last session and we
received the unanimous due pass,
but unfortunately, due to the
shorter session, we were not
able to get it through the
Senate Education Committee or
the Appropriations committees,
um.
I, I've also been in talks with
PED and this bill is a line item
for them.
So I'm now here to ask for your
support to successfully get the
bill through during the 2025
session. And we are also looking
for a co-sponsor on the Senate
side.
Um, I have a handout for each of
you, if you'd care to read it.
And now I turn over the uh.
Turn over the
Uh, floor to my colleague
William Bradford, who will speak
on a different aspect of our
bill. Thank you for your time.
You have up to 2 minutes.
Welcome.
Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee. My name is Will
Bradford, and I'm a sophomore at
Valley High School. What are the
what are the students in New
Mexico look like and how does
that help us qualify for
scholarships?
Uh, of the 26,159 students who
took the PSAT last fall, 55%
identify as Hispanic Latino, 7%
identifies as American Indian,
and 2% identifies as African
American.
This is important as we compete
for scholarships, which my
colleague Isaac Garcia will
speak about in a minute.
We plan to stay in New Mexico
for college 38% of students send
their SAT scores to UNM 36 to
NMSU 12 to CNM, and 8 to Eastern
New Mexico.
Of the top 10 schools we sent
our scores to, 6 are in New
Mexico.
Because we stay in New Mexico,
we are the future workforce in
New Mexico.
The 2023 State of Workforce
report by the Department of
Workforce Solutions says that
New Mexicans with bachelor's
degree or higher are the most
likely to be employed. Students
who do not finish high school
are the least likely to be
employed. There we therefore ask
you to help us afford college to
help us and to help New Mexico.
If we can take the PSCT again as
juniors, we can access the
National Merit and other
scholarships which will help us
get into college and stay there.
Thank you. And now yield the
floor to my colleague Jacob
Gomez.
Alright, Jacob, you have up to 2
minutes. Welcome.
Mr. Chairman and members of the
community. I'm Jacob Gomez and
I'm a junior from Valley High
School. According to the
Institute of College Access and
Success across all colleges and
universities in Mexico, the
average dropout rate is 62.9%
since 2021. 38 of which.
Admit to dropping out due to
financial pressure. That is over
half of the dropout students
leaving at the fault of
financial stress. UNM averages a
cost of $30,526 per year,
leaving a total 4-year degree
being a little over $123,000
nearly 1 in 4 children live in
poverty in New Mexico.
Um, being a known total of
115,997 kids in New Mexico. They
have to worry about basic needs
and resources for living.
The UNM Basic needs Project
surveyed a little under 10,000
students across all of New
Mexico just last year and found
that stable housing and getting
nutritious food was already a
challenge for more than half of
all New Mexico's students.
Even if we successfully get
through all 4 years of college,
the estimated average amount of
debt is a little under $21,000.
And we all feel as a group that
it is very important to keep
students in school and giving a
bigger opportunity without
having to be burdened by debt.
I'm not going to yield the floor
to my colleague Isaac Garcia,
and he's gonna address the
National Merit Scholarship
program.
Isaac, welcome. You have up to 2
minutes.
Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee. My name is Isa
Garcia, and I'm uh junior at
Valley High School.
I'm very happy to be discussing
this, or I'm very happy for the
opportunity to be discussing
this matter with you.
This program rewards
academically talented students
by awarding them scholarships
based on their PSAT scores. In
2026, 7580 awards will be
available for a total of $33
million.
These awards range from $5000 to
$10,000 per student.
The awards are separated into
three categories national merit,
corporate sponsored, and college
sponsored. It is important to
note these categories because it
shows that a high score isn't
only viewed by the National
Merit Organization, but also
corporations and individual
colleges.
This allows for multiple
scholarship opportunities across
all three.
A high PSAT score is also a
requirement for students to
qualify for one of the 5,
national recognition programs
which are Hispanic slash Latino,
indigenous slash Native
American, African American,
rural area slash small town and
first generation students. These
recognition programs do not
directly provide money, however,
many colleges and corporations
search for students in these
demographics and offer them
scholarships.
Mcto has a large amount of
students that fit the profile of
the recognition programs,
especially the Hispanic slash
Latino and indigenous slash
Native American.
I myself have been recently
awarded with the National
Hispanic Recognition Award. And
I also know two others that have
received the same award. This is
something I was very excited to
receive because I can share this
uh with colleges and other
programs that grant scholarships
to high achieving Hispanic
students. To sum up, uh, what
you've heard from me and my
colleagues today. Um, we would
like you to help us help Mexican
students to access scholarships
to afford college. We are also
looking for a sponsor on the
Senate side.
Great. Thank you, gentlemen. We
appreciate you being here with
us.
Next we have Owen Brown.
So we'll give it a moment. We
have a couple Academy folks that
will be after Owen. So if you
all would.
Move forward. We have a couple
of academy folks.
Um,
Are you all gonna just hang out
by the stairs or so? We have
seats, but.
I'll be calling folks in order.
All right.
Mr. Brown, please, you have up
to 2 minutes. Welcome.
I
Oh yeah.
Oh, I'm sorry you're
Thank you
Hi
My name is Owen Brown. Thank you
so much for having me. I'm an
educator of 19 years, working
primarily in the South Valley
and West Mesa areas of
Albuquerque.
Almost always entitlement
schools, mostly with
non-tradition traditional
populations. The last 6 years
have had the pleasure of working
at the Academy High School as
well as being the school's union
shop steward.
Before 2010, academy was called
Albuquerque Evening High School.
We are a 111 year old
institution, the oldest
alternative high school in
Albuquerque. ECAT is composed of
two departments, Connected and
Blended. Connected supports 30%
of APS's graduation rate through
online credit recovery. We
specifically also support
non-traditional students fully
independent students who work
full time and do their
coursework at night and on the
weekends. When students hit the
road with the traveling team.
Chasing their D1 dreams, they
come to us to stay current in
their studies. The Blended
department is what I'm here to
discuss. Initially started on
main campus, project-based
learning face to face classes
interlaced with online class
offerings, taught by a highly
trained, cohesive staff tuned
specifically to the needs of
some of our most vulnerable
populations. Blendad was
extremely popular and soon a
West Side campus was requested
and opened.
Opening the West campus was an
easy decision resulting in an
increase in educational
accessibility, creating a high
quality school of choice on the
west side of Albuquerque.
I regret to tell you the 26 days
before the school year began,
blended, both campuses were
closed.
The team of highly trained and
incredibly responsive teachers
were put into cubicles where
they have 0 face to face student
contact.
This is truly an injury to
Albuquerque and then especially
grievous one to the west side.
I stand before you, or I guess I
sit before you. A highly trained
and very concerned citizen. It
is my view that meaningful
educational opportunities should
expand and not contract. Thank
you.
Thank you.
Please, you are the academy
folks, and that's who we have on
the list. If you would just
state your name. Thank you for
being here. Sure, you have, um,
good afternoon, everyone. My
name is Shiloh Carroll, and I'm
a dedicated science teacher who
has been teaching for 24 years,
uh, the last 6 at Academy High
School.
I'd like to briefly explain why
I'm here today, because if you
knew me, you know that I would
probably never do something like
this. How, however, I feel
compelled to do so today.
Academy High School is a magnet
schools of America demonstrating
high school and an APS magnet
school of choice. We service the
APS district by running credit
recovery programs and the
comprehensive high schools via
our connected program. We serve
a population of online learners
over a
1100 students that were part of
our blended independent ed
program. We offer a trade ed
program that allows junior and
senior high students the chance
to take trades classes at CNM
for free.
And we offer a hybrid in-person
online program as part of our
blend ad program. Um, we had a
hybrid program at Academy main
campus, and one on our West Side
campus. You'll notice I said we
had a program. We no longer have
an in-person program at either
campus. So please let me share
how we got here. I am here to
talk about the events that took
place this summer that
fundamentally changed the way
academy functions. APS
leadership felt academy.
needed to be restructured
without giving any good reasons
why, in July, mind you, and in
doing so, APS leadership closed
down our in-person BlendE
program at both campuses. They
closed down and capped our
enrollment and forced a lot of
our students to go back to large
high schools, they didn't want
to go back to and force teachers
to relocate from classrooms to
cubicles. Many of the changes
made this summer have been
reversed because APS didn't
understand how academy operates
and how complex
The school we are. We serve so
many students in so many
different areas that you cannot
just change it at the drop of a
hat. The one change that was not
reversed, however, was our
in-person blended program that
remains closed. Thank you, Mr.
Carroll. That was 2 minutes.
Thank you for being here.
Hm
Um, my name's Berna Padaca and
I'd like to thank all of you for
taking the time to listen to
what I have to say.
When it comes to teaching, I
feel as though many of us get in
the profession for a myriad of
reasons. Yeah, in the end, it
all comes down to student
success. As teacher was entering
his 10th year, I feel as though
I'm well versed in student
success and student engagement
at our Blended program on the
west side, it was apparent that
students are both learning and
applying learned skills.
I know we've all seen the memes
about what should be taught in
school and how the mitochondria
is the powerhouse of the cell,
while humorous and, and actually
it's not true. We did teach the
the skills needed for taxes and
whatnot.
I know we as a West Side team
took these accusations to heart.
We decide as a team, we would
immerse the students into real
world situations and teach them
real world applications. We had
a job shadow program that put
the students in real careers for
a day. In fact, some of the
upper administration might have
seen this last year.
As we as we did tour the APS
City Center. I personally taught
the students history behind
behind food. Then following that
unit, we took the students to a
grocery store to see the inner
workings of the grocery, the
grocery business, at which time
the students were able to do a
real shop with a budget and
create their dishes to share.
Yet it was not just I who was
working with the students at
this, we as a group taught the
same basic basic lesson, food.
We had oats to food happening in
our English courses. We had
mathematical games over food
being taught in math and
science.
the science of cooking.
All of which culminate together
as a massive unit in a brick and
mortar school, we would call
that horizontal articulation,
something that is highly sought
after by school administrators
or so I'm told.
In addition, we also offered
field trips into the community,
field trips that showed
students, the community they
will be emerging into as adults.
We spent 5 hours playing mahjong
at the senior center, experience
that both students and the
seniors were happy with. The
kids formed a bond with the
older generation and vice versa.
We also did community cleanup
with Cottonwood Gulch.
These were a way to get kids
unplugged and in with nature.
Here students both clean the
bossy and learn how to take
water samples. Kids got to get
into nature and sketch their
feelings, which really brought a
huge component of the SEL
services we as a school district
are trying to bring into our
classrooms. Thank you, Mr.
Apodaca. That was 2 minutes.
Thank you. and former Aha
teacher. We came in together as
teachers, new teachers.
Cool. We hear from our students.
Does this one work? should I
speak into this one? Yeah, you
have up to 2 minutes. Welcome.
Sounds good.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, my name is Daniel
Lentz, and I'm a junior at
Academy High School. Thank you
so much for your time and
consideration as I advocate for
the reinstatement of the blended
program at E Academy.
The cancellation of the blended
program was detrimental to all
the students involved. Many of
my peers attended Bunded E
because they were struggling at
the district school were victims
of bullying or had disabilities.
I myself joined because of the
pandemic. Y Ky was the only
school that could satisfy our
health concerns. But after 3
years of solitude. The blended
program was my way out. The
first day I arrived, I could
barely speak, look anyone in the
eye.
My confidence was broken by the
pandemic.
Blended helped me get it back.
The discontinuation of this
program is detrimental to so
many students who found their
path to graduation through this
pro program for those like me
looking for any ounce of
socialization that could be
blocked by this program and
others who couldn't engage in an
in-person school setting.
I understand that the amount of
students at that school seem
small and I can understand why
this program was cut because of
worris of budgets. But
That does not excuse.
Taking away this opportunity for
students to re-enter society
after what could be years of
solitude. Our program had so
much heart.
So much dedication from the
teachers and the students.
I loved every day. I got to go
to Blended West.
And I'm sure that not only all
the other students there at the
West Side campus, on the east
side to felt this way.
Our teachers took money out of
their own pockets and took their
own resources to provide the
experience we all engaged in.
And I assure you that every
penny put into their work went
10 times as far. That's my time.
Thank you so much for your time
and consideration. Thank you for
being here.
Please, you have up to 2
minutes. Welcome. Alright,
hello, thank you. My name is
Alejandro Abeta. I am sitting
here before you to tell you of
my amazing experience at the
Academy. I was a student of the
West Side for 2 years.
It was nothing but good. We were
always hands on. We were always
learning.
Not just learning, but using
useful things like how to pay
your bills, grocery shops, all
behind the scenes. We also did
community service. It was
amazing. I have nothing but good
things to say about it.
Persely
I don't think just a low
percentage of the schools should
make it get shut down. I think
what should have happened is we
should have reached out to more
of the students or had a bigger
budget to expand more. The West
Side campus was 6 portables,
just 6. And I believe roughly
there was 50 students. And I
know if they could be here, they
would support it.
All the way. They loved it.
Personally
I wish for you to take into your
heart, not just here, but listen
to please give it back because
it was nothing but good.
And that's all I have to say.
Thank you so much.
Great. Thank you all for being
here. I appreciate it.
No.
Let's go to Milli Chiquito.
Miss Chiquito.
I didn't know that I needed to
register, so I, I didn't
register as a speaker. Please,
if you would please give your
name and then you have up to 2
minutes. Hi, my name is Nathan
Nick. I'm the math teacher at
the program formerly known as
BlendE. I'm now a mass cubicle
instructor who has the option to
work from home, so I am choosing
to use that because I don't want
to be in a cubicle. Um, I, I
just want to throw out a few
ideas that here's some concepts,
but jobs January.
Food and familia February.
Mindfulness march.
Armed Forces April and
miscellaneous May
Those were the thematic units
that we as a school and a
collaborative team of teachers
came up with where the
instruction in our classes all.
Fit
our respective subjects, but
Had that in as a theme. So for
example, Food and Familia
February, we did a family
history. We did food, we did
board games about food. We did
the history of different foods
and their cultures and
everything that we did in
February.
Revolved around food and
familia. The same thing happened
with Mindfulness March, we did
meditation, we did good things
for the brain. We did brain
studies and sciences and what
happens in your brain and, and,
and with all within the realm of
our particular
Subjects. These kids received.
The most unique and interesting
educational experience that I, I
would have
Just dreamed for when I was
growing up. Um, when, when we
went to the senior center and
played cards, and there was a
multi-generational experience
that I had never even had myself
as a 40 year old adult.
Um, we met daily for lunch,
collaborated about these kids
and uh the things that we were
going to do with them and we
just popcorned ideas of of
things that we wanted to do and
we were so excited for every
single year to come up with
different things to do with
these munchkins.
And it was shut down 2.5 weeks
before school started.
It didn't 2 minutes. Thank you
so much. We appreciate you all
being here, Represent Garrett,
you have something to say. Thank
you, my husband taught at the
academies. I'm very familiar. I
suggest that you take the story
to the online news services in
the journal, write these up and
get more attention to it like
Cesk.com. Searchlight New Mexico
City desk is right here in
Albuquerque.
Um, so CityDesk.com and and the
journal because the story needs
to be told at a time when we're
trying to engage our youth.
Thank you all for being here.
Thank you. Thank you for being
here.
All right, Milli Chiquito one
last.
Time
Right,
Jess, I believe that's everybody
on the list. We're good, OK? We
don't have anybody online by the
time it takes me to make these
announcements, we'll see if
anybody else comes back or comes
to speak, um, I just want to
announce that we're going to
have a reception at Sawmill
Market, um, for committee
members, 5:30, um, Glen, our
former director will be there,
um,
so staff members, please be
advised, um.
And then finally we're going to
start tomorrow at 8 o'clock. And
lastly, I do want to say my mom
is in the back, which she rarely
rarely gets to make these
meetings because when I'm here
working with you all. She's my
sub, so she never gets to make
the legislative session. She
never gets to make the interim
committees, but since we're here
at school that I teach at, she's
been in class all day. So thank
you, mom.
All right, so we'll see
everybody at a sawmill this
evening or tomorrow in the
morning.
8 o'clock.
