Good morning, everyone.
I think we're about ready to
start the 8:15 meeting
We had actually rescheduled it
for 8:45, but
Had no way of letting the world
at large know that, so.
I hope it wasn't too big an
inconvenience to get here a half
hour early.
And um
It's a crucial meeting, uh,
because we'll hear some of the
budget requests that have been
going in. We're eager to do
that.
Um
Representative Chavez has to
step out. She's on a Zoom. She's
giving a report on a Zoom
meeting, but she'll be right
back in.
And I think
I thought I saw, you know,
there's Senator Hickey's back
there too. So we've got it.
And the
committee members here to get
started. I think a few others
will be, uh, joining us today.
This is the 4th, uh, 4-day
series of meetings, so people
that may be feeling a little.
Worn down.
And um
And uh
You know, have other meetings
that they may have to go to as
well. But with all of that being
said, let's get started and, uh,
first item this morning is the
budget request from the HCA and
Eric Chenier, the principal
analyst for the LFC who works
with HCA on this. So go ahead,
Eric, we'll, we'll, I think, I
think what we'll do is we'll,
we'll, we'll have committee
questions after each one of your
individual presentations? Well,
they combined them all.
OK, well, then we'll do that
then we'll, we'll hear all three
of yours and then we'll, we'll,
uh, and then the, the, the, um,
and then the workforce update
we'll do separately. So the, the
this will work fine. All three
of you go ahead and give your
reports and we'll have committee
questions on all three.
All right, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee.
Again, my name is Eric Sheer.
I'm the LFC analyst for the
healthcare authority.
Um, one thing I just wanted to
talk about before I get into the
report that you have in front of
you that looks like this, um,
each of the three of our
reports, they're pretty similar,
they're formatted pretty
similar, and so you'll see it's
kind of a rhythm as we go, uh.
From me to uh my colleagues
here.
Um
We're doing this, uh, we
typically do these budget
previews in front of LFC so the
LFC knows um what the agencies
asked for, um, we're not going
over today, we're not going to
be talking about the LFC
recommendation that's not, um,
you know, that doesn't, we don't
finish that up until January,
and so that's not even a thing
yet but um the.
The request we do this for LFC,
um, but this year, you know, you
guys asked us, um, you know, we
added 3 staff to LFC. We've been
trying to work much closer with
LHHS and get a little more uh
integrated into your committee
and make sure that you guys get
uh a lot of the same information
when it comes to um health care,
uh, you know, health and human
services issues, um, and so we
wanted to uh.
Uh
You know, kind of bring this to
the forefront, what the request
is for, uh, your committee so
that, um, there's kind of a
little more equality there, um.
So today we'll be going over the
healthcare authority and then
the Department of Health and
then uh we'll finish it up with
the Children, Youth and Families
department.
you get started, let me just
ask.
And I think, will we still have
an opportunity to appear at an
LFC meeting with the committees,
uh, priorities. Is that still in
the works? I, I think so, Mr.
Sherman.
OK, good. All right.
Yeah, yeah, and then.
healthcare affordability funds
from the Office of Super.
uh, over to the authority.
The authority is requesting to
make that fund its own separate
program this year.
Um, with these and other changes
and the significant amount of
funding the authority receives
from the federal government the
authority is by far the largest
um budget in state government
at, uh, in FY 25 that was about
12.2 billion.
Uh, this year, the request is
for a total budget, um, that's
federal, you know, and other
state funds and general fund of
15.5 billion.
Um
And budget growth is expected in
the next few years, um, given
the uh.
The HDAA, um, healthcare
delivery and Access Act, uh,
which.
Uh, levies, uh, um.
A fee on the hospitals or
surcharge on the hospitals and
then we take that match it with,
uh, Medicaid and send it back to
the hospitals in the form of
about 1.1 to $1.3 billion and so
that's uh that's coming up
that'll be um.
Starting towards the end of FY
25, so, um.
Or maybe beginning of FY 26.
Uh, much of the reason for the
creation of the authority was to
improve the accessibility,
coverage and oversight of
healthcare in the state.
To improve access over the last
several years.
The legislature prioritized
physical and behavioral health
care by creating the authority.
Injecting non-recurring funding
into capacity building efforts
and significantly increasing,
uh, Medicaid rates paid to
Medicaid providers for maternal
and child health, physical
health, behavioral health,
developmental disability
providers and several other
provider types to either uh
create great competitiveness or
to ensure provider, uh,
viability with the ultimate goal
of increasing.
Excuse me, sorry.
Ultimate goal of increasing
provider capacity through better
recruitment and retention.
Uh, the federal Medicaid
spending and budget growth, um,
I'm on page two here and I just
wanted to, this is just a, you
have a chart here, and this is
basically holding everything
else steady.
Um
And
All we're factoring in here is,
um,
Healthcare inflation, which runs
at just below about 3%, uh, you
know, 2.8% we're projecting out
over the next 5 years or so.
And then there's also, you guys
are probably familiar with the
federal medical assistance
percentage, the FMAP, um, as New
Mexico's economy is improving in
comparison to other states that
FMAP is slowly decreasing every
single year and so last year was
our, we kind of got a, a pretty
big hit on that FMAP, um, well,
for FY 25, the current year that
we're in, we've kind of got a
pretty big hit on the FMAP.
Um, I believe it's around $70
million.
Uh, the next few years going
forward, we're not expecting to
have quite as big of a hit, uh,
because our economy in relation
to the other states isn't quite
growing quite as fast.
Um, so we're expecting that, uh.
You know, it's we're expecting
that to be around 56 $7 million.
The big driver of cost though is
medical inflation, so, you know,
uh, that 2.8%, um, that equates
to about, you know, just under
$80 million a year, so that's.
That's a pretty big hit every
year that we're gonna be taking
on, um.
On, uh
Medicaid every year.
Um
And then, uh, I also have on
table on page 2.
A
recent and upcoming provider
rate adjustments, and this is
just to kind of show you this
just kind of breaking out
Medicaid provider rate
adjustments that we've done
between FY 24 and FY 26, you'll
see that FY 26 1. Well, we
haven't done the appropriation
for that yet, that's that, um,
that's the bill that we passed
last year for the hospitals
there.
Um, and those rates just on
their own, and this doesn't even
include uh DD waiver that's
about $2.1 billion.
Um, I'm gonna actually skip
ahead on this a little bit. I
just wanted to kind of talk over
and going to page 4 here, this,
this chart here.
This just kind of gives us a
history of uh growth.
Um, that you will have that
we've seen over the past few
years in Medicaid, you'll see
that it's, um.
You know, it's.
Been moving up quite a bit the
last few years. One thing I did
want to point you to though is
the uh enrollment in Medicaid.
You'll see that.
Uh, towards the end of FY 23
there, we were peeking out. We
actually, I think, you know,
this is, these are always taken
kind of um a shot in time,
right? But I think we peaked out
at around a million, uh,
enrollees in Medicaid, um, that
dipped down quite a bit.
I think we've added about 20,000
enrollees recently and now we're
at about 911,000 somewhere
around there, um, enrollees, uh,
in Medicaid and, uh, our
projections, um.
We're projecting it to be pretty
flat, uh, from here on out, uh,
we're not expecting a lot more
enrollment and into Medicaid,
uh, given.
You know, not assuming any kind
of policy changes or anything
like that.
Um
Moving on, I'm going to move to
page 6 in the.
Uh, thing here, I put a table at
the bottom, um, so now we're
gonna get into the actual
request that.
The department or that the
authority made.
Um, and you'll see the
non-recurring funding requests
there at the very bottom.
They've requested about 173
million in total, um, in
non-recurring uh revenue and
some of this is for, uh, one of
the, one kind of thing in here
is the certified community
Behavioral Health clinics.
So we did, um, 15 million in the
grow last year for those, uh,
and the department is projecting
that they may have um the
authority is projecting that
they may have uh
You know, that they may actually
spend through most of that, and
then we'll need an extra 3.3
million on top of that for those
for those behavioral health
clinics, um.
What's another one I wanted to
point out, um, they also asked
for 46 million for developmental
disability rate adjustments.
Now
The one issue with this is that
this is a non-recurring request,
um, and it wasn't requested in
their recurring uh budget which
we'll talk about here in a
second and so, um, you know, and
it's, it's, it is a recurring
expense, you know, if you do a
rate increase, you can't take it
back, you guys have been talking
about that all week, um, so
that's something we need to, you
know, we'll, we'll have to have
more discussions with the
department on um how we deal
with that moving forward.
Um, moving on to page 7, so this
is the high level, um.
This is our LFC members, you
know, they're all very uh used
to looking at these, um, so I'll
I'll spend a second orienting
you to these, um.
My colleagues here, they both
have a similar one in their
packet too, and they'll kind of,
you know, talk you through it,
but I'll, I'll spend a second to
orient you. So if you look at,
um, for example, you'll see the
the box at the top there it has
this um the label there says
medical assistance division and
then on line 2, you'll see that
each line is uh numbered there.
It has a number on both sides,
um, line two there you'll see
that we're starting off with the
prior year.
budget. So when we say prior
year that means FY 25, uh, so
that's the year that we're
currently uh moving through,
right? And then lines 3 through
14 there. We either add or
subtract items, and subtracted
item is is in a um is in
parentheses.
Um, and so this is, this is the
HCA's request.
Uh, so you'll see, um, on online
3 there.
The continue half year rate
adjustments from FY 25.
So last year we, we took, um, we
built in.
To House Bill 2 flexibility for
the department to raise.
Rates for maternal and child
health and other services.
Up to 150% of.
Of Medicare rates, you know, the
benchmark rates, um, with
Medicare.
Uh
The department decided to go all
the way up to 150% and um.
That wasn't enough for the full
year because those rates aren't
going to go into effect until
January, and so now the
department is coming back and
asking for the 49.5 million to
take us through the, the rest of
the fiscal year, um.
You know, on an annual,
annualized basis.
Um, health care inflation and
rebasing again, I was just
talking about uh inflation that
was at $39.9 million there on
line four.
Um, the department is
projecting.
Um, continued enrollment growth,
uh, of about 23.1 million, um,
LFC is not projecting quite that
much enrollment growth, if any
enrollment growth.
Um, line 6 there, uh, they want
to fill some vacancies in the in
the um program, um, they have
17.4 million there for the
federal medical assistance
percentage, um, reduction so
that would increase the amount
of general fund that we have to
spend, spend because the federal
funds are.
are decreasing
Um,
line 8 we have the county
supported Medicaid, uh, the
department.
Uh is projecting that county
supported Medicaid will
decrease, however, we've been
seeing, um, increases and LFC
through its economic um
forecasts has actually been
seeing that that this is tied to
the uh grocer seats tax, uh,
those grocer seats taxes are
actually increasing and so we're
not.
Um, projecting actually that
there will be a a decrease in
the county supported Medicaid,
um.
Funding
Um
tobacco settlement revenue, uh,
let's see here, and then they
did ask for two new rate
adjustments and that's for the
pace, you, you've probably heard
of it called Pace before, but
it's, um, the acronym stands for
the program for all-inclusive
care rates.
Then on line 12 there you'll see
that they've also asked for
assisted living facility rate
adjustments and that's for about
$5 million there.
Mr. Chair, I'm just wondering
on, um, line 9, the fact that
there's no request, that means
status quo, that doesn't mean
they're zeroing out the program.
OK, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Right.
It's just maintaining it.
Um
And then
On line 13 there they asked for
a lot of money for starting to
operate the, you know, we've had
this very, it's been a project I
think they received their first
appropriations in 2015.
So it's almost 10 years old now,
the Medicaid management
information system replacement
project that's the it's also
known as the miser.
Um
They're expecting and they have
brought on a few of the modules
now, they're expecting a few,
uh, modules to be up and
running, uh, in FY 26 and so a
lot of that there is to actually
operate that on an ongoing basis
and then there's some
contractual stuff in there too.
Um
Then I'll, I'll move down to the
next program.
Uh, developmental disability
support program, um.
The department's projecting
about 30 million and increased
utilization and so that's when
we say utilization that's it's
each individual in the program
is using more services, um, you
know, and that can be OT or PT
or or this um supported living
that sort of thing.
Um, line 21, they're projecting
about $4 million in enrollment
growth and we're kind of
projecting out uh into the
future, um, that we have
probably about $4 million in
enrollment growth every year now
that we've um for the most part.
eliminated the wait list, so
this is just kind of keeping up
with um.
Uh, not growing that wait list,
uh, more than probably out for
more than about a year or so.
Um, and actually while I'm on
that, I wanted to kind of
mention.
Uh, that
LFC, there's an upcoming LFC
evaluation, and I think there'll
be probably wanting to try and
get on your guys' calendar in
November, um.
On the development
developmental disabilities, uh
support waiver, and so, um, you
guys can look forward to that,
um, that'll be a good report for
you guys.
Uh, moving on in Medicaid
behavioral health, uh, the
department requested and I'm on
line 29 here, um, another $5.8
million in, uh, rate adjustments
for behavioral health providers,
and that's on top of the 7
million that we did last year
and we also did 7 million the
prior year.
Um, and so that's injecting
quite a bit more money into the,
um, the system there and then
they're projecting a decrease in
opioid revenue, um, and we're
kind of working on that with
them right now to get a better
understanding of why they're
projecting that, but, uh, we're
at about.
5.6 million there.
Um, I'm gonna actually move on.
Down to
Uh, well, actually, so line 35
there, you can see we kind of.
put all those Medicaid programs
together, so Medicaid behavioral
health.
Um, medical assistant division
and uh developmental disability
support and we add them together
and the total request for those
3 programs is about, uh,
$2 billion down there on line 38
and it's that amounts to about a
12.8% increase, which is a
pretty big, pretty hefty, uh,
request.
Um,
I'm gonna skip down to line 47,
that's income support, um, the
department is requesting.
Uh
49 million, uh, or 16.4 million,
I'm sorry, on line 49 $16.4
million.
For, um, salary adjustments,
that's where most of the staff
in uh the healthcare authority
are located, um, and they're
requesting to raise salaries,
uh, quite significantly in
there.
Um, moving on.
I'm just gonna take you straight
down to the bottom. There's not
a lot of other kind of notable
pieces in there unless you guys
have specific questions on
those.
The total department request is
for 2.2 billion in uh general
fund revenue and that's about a
12.8% total, uh, request
increase in general fund
revenue.
And then I just want to orient
you to the rest of the pieces
that we have in here. I'm not
gonna go over them, but we've
got the LFC report cards, so
they're both for the healthcare
authority as a whole, and then
we have a separate one for the
behavioral health, uh,
collaborative.
And then on like, uh, page 14,
you'll see the beginning of the
Department of Health with that,
Mr. Chairman.
I'll go ahead and pass it off to
my colleague here.
can introduce herself.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, Kelly
Klund from the Legislative
Finance Committee. I'm the
principal analyst for the
Department of Health. I also
have early childhood department,
aging long term services,
veteran services, uh, medical
board, board of nursing, um.
And I'm forgetting. Oh, MLK and
O AAA. So, um, in the future,
I'm not presenting on those, but
in the future if you have any
questions regarding those
departments, I'm your person.
So with that, we'll start with
the Department of Health and
you're going to see in your
packet that starts on page 14,
and it's the same format as
Eric's format, so there is a
small two-page brief and then
there is a general fund high
level following it and the
agencies quarter 4 report card
from the fiscal year that just
closed.
So for the Department of Health,
I'm just going to say DOH for
the rest of the presentation
because it's easier, um, a lot
of the driving factors are
mostly for continued operations
of the things that we're already
doing, not necessarily a lot of
growth of new things, um, a lot
of the cost drivers are about
the facilities, the hospitals
that the department runs. Many
of you know them, they're
sequoia, turquoise lodge, uh,
the Behavioral Health Institute,
Roswell.
um, and a couple others, so
those are hospitals that you
know are statewide.
There quite expensive for us
right now, and there's a few
reasons that this is going on,
um, we are far below our
capacity for licensed beds of
actual people in the facilities,
so you'll see on page 14,
there's a little chart with bars
and you can see the percentage
of uh facilities occupied
licensed beds and where we were
for an average of all of those
facilities. So for instance, we
were close to 60%.
occupancy of licensed beds and
FY 21, and then that had been
ticking down for the last few
years, I will say we, the
department is working really
hard on this, um, and we are
seeing an uptick, so, um, we're
getting closer to where we were
in FY 21, but you can see where
that red line of the target is,
is what we hope them to be
filled at, which is at 80% at
least and so we still have a lot
of work to do to get people who
need those services.
the facilities to receive those
services, and what happens when
you have um license occupied bed
license beds that are
unoccupied, you're not bringing
in revenue for those services
and so and then we get into this
very complicated financial
issues of you're not bringing in
the revenues, um, and they're
not necessarily as flexible as a
private hospitals where they can
take staff and say you're not
gonna be on the schedule this
week because we don't need you.
These are state employees, um,
So it's a little bit harder to
manage the uh personnel
operations when you're not
bringing in the financial piece
of that.
And so I will say DH has made
some improvements in this when I
started working with DOH a
couple of years ago, there was
no centralized reporting to the
office of the Secretary really
that was consistent, um, or
reliable on how many people were
in these facilities every day.
They they just really didn't
know. And that has been remedied
and now there is a centralized
reporting and I am getting the
LFC for the first time is
getting that reporting shared
with us almost every other week,
so I'm able to see every other
week, um, where we're taking up
and down in those facilities so
that may not seem like a huge
improvement, but it actually is
so that we know where the
problems are lying, so I'm
seeing obviously some
improvements in some facilities
are really like LLCP is almost
completely at capacity.
ity um, and we're seeing an
uptake in turquoise lodge, but
Roswell is really ticking down
and that's really helpful both
for me to know so that I can
share that information with you
all so that we're not just
making decisions on the average,
but we're making decisions by
facilities, and that's also
helped the department in making
um more reliable projections
financially. Historically we've
seen some really unstable
projections where we've seen the
department asks for deficiency,
saying they
We're going to overspend and
then by the close of the fiscal
year, they were actually
reverting and that was because
that centralized information
wasn't really flowing through to
make really stable projections.
So those base things are
starting to get fixed so that
we're able to kind of get a
better handle on what is
financially happening in these
facilities, and we're also now
meeting quarterly with the
department on their financial
projections, which had never
really happened before, so I do
wanna give kudos to the agency
on working.
through some of these really
complicated issues while also
saying like we do have work to
do to fill these facilities that
people get the service to give a
fair comparison of what's
The driving costs and how
complicated and what's going on.
So, um, with that overview, I'm
actually going to turn you to
page 15.
And this is kind of a similar
conversation. There's a bar
chart stacking bar, not stacking
a bar chart on there and it's
just an estimate so you guys can
see over his like a historical
time, how the revenue sources
have changed in facilities, so
you're gonna see um slight
downticks in that bright blue
bar. So for instance in um FY
16, their actual um revenues.
56% of the revenues coming into
facilities was other revenues
which was billing, right, that
bringing in either Medicaid or
private insurance and the
facilities were getting about
43% of their operating budget
from the state general fund.
Now, if you look at the FY 26,
um, request the department would
like 50% of their operations to
come from general fund and 40%
to come from that building, so
that's a shift in how that money
is coming in affecting um.
You know, state revenues and
obviously we would like as much
as we can to bring in insurance,
Medicaid, third party revenues
and reduce, reduce the reliance
on general fund for these
hospitals so that we can have
more general fun for the $2
billion that Medicaid needs. And
so it's a balancing act of
trying to figure out what is the
right general fund mix to make
sure that the department can
run, but also making sure that
they're not coming in with a
solvency problem, so that's kind
of the core.
of what we're constantly working
through at facilities on a
financial level.
Um, if you want to read more
about the census and the
veteran's home. There's some
detail, but I won't go over that
since we've talked about it a
little bit. I will draw your
attention to page 16.
Page 16 is your general fund
high level rack up of the
department's request and like I
said, most of this is for things
that we're doing right now, so
you'll see there's very similar
requests in each one of the
programs regarding like
utilities, um, reducing the
vacancy rate, pay, um, so those
general operating costs, the
things that are not that are
kind of new stuff that is in
this, um, for instance, um,
Online.
19, they asked for 1.1 million
to start a climate health
program that's new, um.
Online
38, they've asked for an
expansion to start a new
program, which is, uh, it says
Samuel County substance use
program. It would serve more
than like if you were.
In another county and wanted to
come to this program, you don't
have to be a resident of San
Miguel County. It's just located
there, um.
And most of the requests other
than that is for things that are
already going on. There's,
they've asked for funding for
their hotline. We've put some
money into that and especially
in the last few years to keep
that going. They've asked for
operational costs for the APCD,
um, they've asked.
For, you know, some costs for
operations and facilities for
LLCP and BHI, I will note that
um BHI in particular is a
different funding structure than
necessarily the other hospitals
because a chunk of what BHI has
to serve, there is no billing
for insurance for those clients,
those kind of have to be general
fund clients, not the whole
facility, but for, for those
highest restrictive, most high
need clients at BHI that
That's not Medicaid billable for
the most part, or, um, and these
people don't necessarily have
private insurance, but for the
long-term care center and some
of the IOP there is, um, filling
possibilities that are a little
bit under leveraged at this
point.
And so that's kind of a high
level of what's going on at the
Department of Health financially
and so overall, you'll see at
the very bottom that their
request was a 21.3% increase
above the current operating
budget. So that's pretty
significant general fund request
for additional dollars.
And the next couple pages are
the report card that I'll let
you peruse at your
Um, own pace, and with that, I
will turn it over to my
colleague.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, um, my
name is Doctor Rachel Garcia.
I'm the LFC analyst for CYFD,
um, I also, uh, have the, uh,
Office of Family Representation
and advocacy budget, um, and
then I also have a few agencies
that are related to workforce,
uh, workforce solutions and
workers' comp. So, um, if you
have, uh, I won't talk about
those. I'll be focused on CYFT
today, but I'm your LFC analyst
for kind of those different
areas.
Um, kind of just like Kelly and
Eric, I'm gonna walk you through
both a brief that summarizes the
CYFD budget request as well as
that, um, high level overview,
um, and, uh, I encourage you if
you want to separate your
packet, um, because it might
actually help you, um, hear what
I'm saying in the brief and then
look at the spreadsheet. So
encourage you if you want to
separate those two things.
Um, I'm gonna start with a
little bit of background and
context about CYFD's current
budget before I talk about, um,
their request for FY 26. Um,
So, uh, you all may have
experienced some kind of
cognitive dissonance, uh, over
the interim hearing both CYFD
doesn't have enough money and
also they have some funds that
are unspent. So if you look at
the background section of this
brief, we walk you through a
little bit about what has
happened with CYFD's operating
budget over the last few years.
Um, between FY20 and FY 24, the
general fund appropriation to
CYFD grew by 49 million. That's
about 20.
4%. Uh, and if you look at the,
the chart, um, kind of at the
top of the brief. That's the
general fund history over time,
um, you'll see that increase. At
the same time during that
period, we didn't see spending
keep pace with that level. So if
you look in that background
paragraph, we walk you through a
little that a little bit and FY
23 CYFD's operating budget was
346 million. Well actual
expenditures were 326 million,
so a gap of about 20 million,
um, in.
FY 24 going into last fiscal
year, the agencies operating
budget was 384.5 million, um,
and in those prior years they'd
had some larger versions and so
for that reason during the 2024
legislative session, the
legislature kept CYFD's
operating budget relatively
flat.
But made some significant
investments in the grow or those
kind of 3 year pilot, um,
appropriations that were
targeted for specific purposes.
Um, that last year, uh, totaled
about 18.6 million and those
funds were really intended to
address systemic challenges
within the child welfare system.
Those were the appropriations
for things like workforce
development incentivizing
master's level, um, social
workers, um, some funds to
support the recruitment and
retention of both uh resource,
home or foster care providers
and treatment foster care
providers, as well as a, uh, as
well as um implementing
evidence-based prevention and
early intervention programs.
I call that out because those
were 3 year appropriations and
so those grow funds are for
those kind of specific purposes
are already we're already
included in last year's House
bill too, um, and we'll continue
in FY 26 and 27.
Um
Following the 2024 legislative
session, CYFT shared that
protective services, um, was
experiencing a significant
decrease, uh, in the drawdown of
federal Title IVE funds. So
essentially what has federal
Title 40 of the Social Security
Act is the section, um, uh, uh,
the Social Security Act that
provides states with some
reimbursement for the delivery
of foster care and associated
administrative costs.
Essentially what we have seen,
um, starting in FY
22, but especially in 23 and 24
is the budget for federal Title
IVE went up.
They projected an increase while
the actual collected revenue
went down and so there is a gap
there in federal funding within
the agency's budget. And so for
that reason, when we look at FY
24, um, total spending at CYFD,
um, this is the unaudited
number, um, is 347.9 million.
That's well below the agency's
operating budget of 384.5
million, but it will include a
deficit.
Um, we look at the numbers
roughly 9.5 million, and that's
because of the Federal revenue
coming in at a level that's
significantly below what was
budgeted.
So that kind of sets the stage
for what the agency requested,
um, for FY 26 and um their
request tends to fall into 3
buckets or categories, and I'll
walk you through what those are.
So overall, CYFD's budget
request totals 412.7 million.
That's a 6.1% overall budget
increase, but a 14.5% budget
increase within the general
fund, um, in part to
backfill some of that federal
revenue that has not been coming
in at the level budgeted.
of the three categories that I,
I, I, I, um, might put COFD's
budget request into our one
backfilling that federal revenue
that I mentioned in Federal
Title IVE.
To, um,
Funding a reorganization of the
department. So moving funds
between programs to create and
carve out a new division of
family services division, um, to
house, uh, prevention and
intervention services.
Historically that has been part
of protective services. So
second category that you'll see
in the budget request is a
reorganization of both budget
and people FTE within the
aency's budget. And then the
third category is some increases
within
protective services. Um, so with
that, I'll kind of walk you
through the high level and point
out what some of those things
are. So CYFT has had 4 P codes
or programs, those are those,
those big buckets, um, where we
find um agencies they have are
program support juvenile
justice, protective services,
um, and behavioral health
services, and then you'll see
here COFD proposing that
additional program family
services division.
Um
Uh, starting kind of at the top
with program support, really
the, the big change occurring
here is the movement from
contracts into personnel, um,
and you'll see both that
negative and then the positive.
They also have some increases
for things like GST rates, those
are liability insurance,
vehicles, uh, IT as well as, uh,
Filling a couple of positions um
related to Kevin S specifically
um related to data and
reporting.
Uh, moving down, you'll see
juvenile justice facilities, um.
You'll see, we included a graph
for you, um, within your packet
that shows juvenile justice
services within CYFD has
actually implemented really
evidence-based programs over the
last decade or so, we've seen a
significant decline over time in
the secure population within
CYFD's juvenile justice, um
facilities that's ticked up a
little bit in the last year, um,
but historically juvenile
justice has actually had quite a
bit of vacancy savings. One of
the things that you'll see.
She proposed for FY 26 is moving
um within the general fund, half
a million from juvenile justice
to the proposed, um, family
services division and then
you'll also see some of those
GST rate increases. Those are
the things that are related to
liability insurance vehicles and
do it.
Then protective services, this
is probably one of the areas
within their budget that has uh
some of the most movement. So
the first thing you'll see is
CYFT is proposing moving um.
Funds and uh FTE out of
protective services and into the
family services division that
includes, um, about 18 million
in TANF, which is primarily
right now supporting some of
their prevention and
intervention programs, as well
as 18.8 million from general
fund, um, that would move a
total of 146 positions as well
as that 18.8 million out of
protective services and into the
proposed family services
division.
Then you'll see to requested 13
million in general fund to
backfill that decline in federal
Title IVE revenue, um, they
requested 1.3 million um for GST
rate increases, that is, uh, in
part that increase in liability
insurance. The agency is
experiencing as well as a few
other things.
And then probably the 2nd big uh
request from the agency is the 7
million you'll see here to fill
an additional 101 caseworker
positions within protective
services to meet, um, Kevin S as
well as best practice standards
around caseloads. Um, when you
look at CYFD's caseloads
overall, if you just take the
number of cases divided by the
number of case workers, things
tend to look OK, but when you
look at the county level, you'll
see some really large caseloads
and so that is what that money
is intended to do. Um, you'll
also see some operating expenses
for those positions. CYFD is
requesting 3.4 million um to
fund the two group homes that
the the agency has created, um.
Those programs and homes are not
eligible for federal funding
either Medicaid or Title IVE,
and so that's what that general
fund request is, um, they're
also requesting some funding for
cultural activities for youth
and some filling up some, uh,
positions related to Kevin S,
um, they're asking for, um,
money associated with staffing
24 hours a day, the receiving
center, that's essentially the
costs incurred related to office
days as well as 3 million, um,
To establish a partnership with
New Mexico Highlands to create a
child welfare training academy.
So, uh, protective services is
where a lot of the kind of
budget requested movement is
happening in CYFD.
Uh, if you keep going down the
list, you'll see the family
services division, and you'll
see, um, lines 41 through 43.
That is money moving in, um, but
not necessarily a net overall
CFD budget increase. It is the
movement, um, of money from
other programs into the family
services division and then
you'll see some additional, uh,
requests, um, within that
category. I'll call your
attention to, for example, CYFD
will experience a decrease in
federal funds associated with.
RAPA funding go away and they've
requested 3 million to backfill
for domestic violence programs.
Um, and then going down the
list, you'll see behavioral
health services looks like a
significant decrease, and that
is because CYFD is proposing
moving 6 16.5 million, um, in
funding from the behavioral
health services division to the
Family Services division, a big
part of that is moving domestic
violence programming out of
behavioral health and into the
proposed family services
division.
Overall you'll see that bottom
line number. So you have is
requesting a $37.75 million
general fund increase, um, and
that's the, the 14th.5, 14.5%.
So that is sort of the overview
of the CYFT budget request and
just like Eric and Kelly, you'll
see in your packet, um, the LFC
uh report card that provides
performance data related to the
agency.
With that, we stand for
questions.
Lots of lots of information,
lots of questions, I'm sure.
Um, why don't we start with you,
Representative, uh, Thompson
will go this way and then around
this way, we, we like to do
different variations.
Some call it the weed.
And, and I, and I'm told that uh
Marla Schultz, I don't see her
here though. She, she's back is
gonna is arranging for coffee
for us, which
You know, moves her right to the
top of all the lobbyists.
Thank you, Merlin.
So Representative Thompson,
thank you, Mr. Chair, that,
that, that is a lot.
Um, so,
I can't, there was something,
and, and I, I didn't write down
the page about boarding homes,
money for boarding homes is that
to, um, oversee the what we're
trying to do to make them safer
or what is that for? Uh, Mr.
Chairman and Madam Vice Chair,
so my understanding on that and
again we're still kind of in
these conversations about what
they've actually asked for my
understanding is that this is
more meant for um.
Uh, helping to fix those
boarding homes, it's, it's less
for for the actual oversight,
um, activities and more for that
kind of thing. OK, thank you for
that to bring them up to code um
and.
Uh
Just, just to follow up on that
that's HCA asking for that and
isn't, aren't the boarding homes
under?
Uh, well, Mr. Chair, when we
moved, um.
The DHI the division of Health
Improvement over
To HCA.
Yes, yup, and, and we did give
them operating funding uh a
couple of years ago, uh, to do
the actual oversight of boarding
homes.
Well, I, I, I don't mean to, to
keep, but, but it just seems
like.
We only have 2 licensed boarding
homes.
This will be $2 million for each
of them,
or I mean, what
I, I believe they're trying to
bring, uh, more boarding homes
into being actually at to to the
point to where they can be
licensed and that's bringing up
to code, um.
But we lack an incentive program
for them to want to be licensed
is my do you have some thought
about that? Somebody from DOH
or, uh, from HCA or wherever
you're from.
Yes, uh
Good morning, Chair, Vice Chair
Representative Thompson, the $5
million request for the HCA for
boarding home development, uh,
you are correct, there are only
2 licensed boarding homes in the
state, and we estimate there
could be between 16 to 90 that
are not licensed.
Um, a major challenge to
licensure is that these boarding
homes lack the necessary funding
to get up to code like Eric was
saying. And so the $5 million in
general fund is to allow us to
give money that these unlicensed
facilities need so that they
could become licensed facilities
in the state. We're trying to
increase the total number of
licensed boarding homes, so that
they
can be
Um, more safe, um.
Uh, facilities for these folks
to live in. Does that help?
It still leaves the, the, the
underlying issue is there's no
reason for them to become
licensed.
Many of them would like to
become licensed, um, Mr. Chair,
it's just they lack the funding
to invest in the, you know, for
example, um, the installation of
sprinkler systems or other
infrastructure and so our intent
is to do, um, on RFA and on RFP,
some sort of application process
where we invite them to submit
their plans and proposals of how
they intend to use.
funding to meet those safety
codes.
I mean, I think it's excellent
that you're trying to get them
to upgrade the, the, the, the
issue though remains that
there's no reason, they don't
get any more money if they
upgrade. If they're, if they, if
they're unlicensed, they get
whatever they're charging the
people for rent. If they're
licensed, they get whatever
they're charging the people for
rent. And there's no extra.
Financial benefit to them for
becoming licensed. And so that's
why we had suggested last year
an incentive program in which
the department
When they release somebody from
behavioral health institute or
from UNMy could
Give a boarding home that was
licensed an extra monthly
stipend of a
A couple 100 bucks, 300 bucks,
something that would add an
incentive
because as it is now, I mean,
these, these people are, are
using their SSI check, paying
their rent with SSI check, and
that's it. Uh, you know, there's
no real state.
We have no hook on that, so
that's, I was just, I'm just
urging you to think of that as,
as a possible way we had a bill
to that effect. It didn't pass
last year. We might introduce it
again, and I would love for the
department to take a look at
that and see if it, if it makes
sense to try to give you some
extra
Charit. Mhm. I mean, you don't
even have a whip right now, but
at least a carrot might induce
them to, to get licensed, uh,
that was the thought behind
that.
Um, thank you, chair. That's a
really good idea. Um, we're in
the very early stages of it, and
I neglected to introduce myself.
I'm Alex Castillo Smith. I'm one
of the deputy secretaries. I'll
be up in just a minute to talk
about Stay there for one second,
um, so I was gonna ask you to
introduce yourself. So what is
the capacity of those two
licensed boarding homes. How
many beds? Uh, chair
Representative Thompson, that is
a good question. I do not know,
but I can find that out. OK,
thank you for that. OK, and
then, um
On page 14, your, your, um,
The chart about like the
occupied beds.
Do you know how much of that is
workforce.
Or is it lack of um.
Lack of patients who need the
services, which I doubt.
Morning, Mr. Chair, Madam Vice
Chair Patrick Allen, secretary
of the Department of Health. Um,
it's a little bit of workforce
and it's a little bit of the
cost of cost of the workforce.
By and large, we lose money on
every occupied bed across our
facilities and so, and you can
see that most clearly
demonstrated when you look at
Los Lunas where we are in fact
full, uh, and we have a
persistent significant financial
shortfall in those facilities
and so what we're trying to
juggle is what's the demand,
which is changing, um, and then
how can we afford
to fill the beds and by and
large in our facilities if we,
if we filled them all, we would
be coming with a significant
budget gap across our
facilities.
you for that.
And then my final question, you
talked about.
The state overall looks like
we've got enough workers in, uh,
I don't even know what
department that was. Um, CYFD, I
think.
Are we talking about
Um, but, but you said some
caseworkers are severely
overburdened, so does that mean
that other case workers, and I
know this is not true, are
severely under burdened. Um, is
there some kind of a, you know,
Karonine County may have, you
know, 5 workers and, you know,
20 cases whereas Donana County
might have, you know, 50 workers
and 3000 cases. uh, Mr. Chair,
uh, vice chair, essentially what
in the data that
we have received from CYFD, we
see a couple of things. One,
there are the caseload
standards, um, which just
establish the kind of the
minimum number of, well, sorry,
that's not the right thing to
say. Um, the caseload standards
basically say you can have, um,
within investigation, something
like 10 to 11 cases per
caseworker that doesn't take
into account to your point
acuity of cases. It is just sort
of what is the standard, um,
CYFD's data suggests that they
would
need. Um, they estimated in
their request about 101
additional caseworker positions
filled to meet those caseload
standards, and it's in part
because they're distributed
across the state and so they
could likely speak to there are,
there are in the data we do see
some counties where there are
greater stresses than others,
but overall they were projecting
they would need about 100 and
more, 101 more positions filled
to meet the standards.
Oh, it's red? OK. Um, good
morning, Teresa Casados, cabinet
secretary at CYFD, um, just to
clarify that the 101 positions
are in addition to some of the
vacant positions that we
currently have. So we do not
have enough caseworkers
currently and we're still
recruiting within, I think we
have 1049 vacant positions in
protective services that we're
trying to fill this 101 is in
addition to that. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Representative Ferrari,
you're next.
Mr. Chair, I've no questions.
Representative Chavez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So, um, I don't even know where
to start, um.
So in terms of one of the things
that sparked my interest was the
reorganization.
Um, this is for CYFD.
Um, in terms of moving.
No, I can't find my notes. Oh,
family services, oh, moving, uh,
prevention and intervention
under family services taking
those out of protective
services.
Um, and I'm assuming that.
Part of the intervention piece
would be intensive, um,
intervention for children who
the department is trying to
maintain it at home, is that
right?
Uh, Mr. Chair, um,
Representative Chavez, yes, that
is correct. So is there, can you
sort of describe what that looks
like, um, in terms of the kinds
of services those families are
receiving.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative
Chavez, yes, so once they have
moved out of the investigations
or protective services when
we're looking at a safe plan to
maintain at home, um, then it is
wraparound services depending on
the case plan that has put been
put together for that specific
family, um, so they would go in
and do an assessment with the
family to determine what the
needs are that would enable the
child to be back at home safely.
And that could vary from very
different um types of services
that are needed and then they
worked directly with our um
community providers and partners
to ensure that those services
are available and that they are
engaging.
So then the other question that
I have is around the, the
increased number of positions,
um, are you, are those positions
throughout um CYFD to include
prevention and intervention or
just where are you going to
focus those additional positions
on in terms of the kind of work
that needs to be done. Is it
investigations? Is it, um.
Uh, it used to be called
treatment. I don't remember what
you guys are calling it now,
but, um, so those kinds of like
who are you targeting?
Um, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Chavez, are you referring to the
101 new OK, so those are not new
positions, those are positions
that currently exist within
CYFD. We haven't asked for any
additional FTE. It is just
funding for those positions. So
those positions with that 101
number are all within protective
services, none of those are in
family services.
Why weren't they funded, Mr.
Chair?
Uh, so, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Chavez, um, one
of the things that you'll see if
you look at page 22, uh, of your
brief. One of the trends that we
have seen over time with CYFD is
making increased appropriations
for personnel, but the agency
not getting anywhere close to
filling all of those positions.
I think that's thing one. Thing
two is several years ago, um, we
took FTE out of House Bill 2.
And so I would say there's also
sort of be a disconnect between
uh the sort of the number of FTE
on the books, um, it's sort of
like a little bit less connected
to
Uh, the funding level that has
been true. So, um, those are
probably the two trends. It is
true that they do not have
sufficient funding to fill all
of the positions that they're
projecting and at the same time,
if you look at the chart,
they've also really struggled to
get even close to their total
funding level in recent years
because of turnover.
And then I just have 11 quick
ask, can I, I would love to see
an organization with chart of
CYFD so that visually I can see
where everybody in all these
programs said.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative
Chavez, we can make that
available. I know that we
submitted one with our budget,
kind of a high level, but we
have them broken down by
department, um, which is really
extensive, but we can, we can
get that to you electronically
would probably be the best way
for you to look at that. I would
appreciate it. Thank you. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Silvio Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, this
is really helpful of, of getting
this. One thing that I've been
asking for and I just have not
been able to get it is how much
funding overall, do we spend on
alcohol prevention, treatment,
recovery, and the way that it's
presented to us, we just don't,
we don't
because it's in so many
different pots of money, it's
impossible to, to get that or it
it it has not been possible.
Would it be possible to get
that?
Uh, Mr. Chair.
Uh, representative or I'm sorry,
Senator, um.
So, honestly, this is, this has
been a a big um push from us to,
right, uh, as far as
Really wanting to be able to dig
into the.
Types of services that we have
available out there and how much
we're actually spending on them.
A lot of the funding that we
have.
Goes into the big pot of
Medicaid.
And
It's very difficult for us
because we don't have a great
way of breaking out and saying
like, this is exactly how much
we've spent within Medicaid on
AUD alcohol use disorder, right?
Um, we do have
You know, we, you know, kind of
responded to you the other day
in an email and and kind of, you
know, sent you like here's what
we have overall in behavioral
health, you know, we can break
out some of the pieces of SUD we
can break out a lot of the
non Medicaid stuff for you, um,
but yeah, it's, it gets a little
bit complicated with, with just
digging into $1 type of thing.
All right, thank you. And then
with regard to um the increase
for, um, I'm so happy that CYFD
is asking for the increase in
funding for those positions, um,
did CYFD ask for, um, those
positions to be, well, I know
that they were gonna do a salary
study because one of the, uh,
one of the pieces of feedback I
get is that social worker, the
pay scale for social workers,
um, is, isn't, doesn't recognize
their education, their
licensing, um, as compared to
other people doing the same
work, and I understand the
concept of doing the same work,
but don't have the same
criteria, and it comes out in
two ways. One, in lawsuits
against CYFD, which, you know,
where the attorney shows how
The lack of qualifications by a
person who made a decision and
then in um satisfaction or
dissatisfaction with salaries by
those people who are licensed,
um.
So is that happening in this?
Sure
Sorry.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Sidillo Lopez, um, yes, we did
do a study and did increases for
frontline workers over the last
year, um, in addition to that,
what we've recently done, um,
for that exact reason, because
we have positions that some of
them are licensed social
workers, some of them are not,
um, we have done a TSI so that
if any employees in the
department that are frontline
workers or working within
protective services have a
license. We've done a TSI for
those individuals, so
there is an increase in their
pay from their peers that do
not.
What's a temporary salary
increase. OK,
um, so temporary
What is, um, um, so it gives us
the ability to do a salary
increase for those individuals,
and then, um, we can look at it,
I believe it's every 6 months,
and if they are still
maintaining that license and
it's valid, we would continue
that increase. That's temporary
meant by that. And so Senator,
your time is up. OK. Well,
Thank you, we can talk. I just
heard other people saying I'm
gonna ignore the clock, and so I
thought, no, we can't start that
pattern. So sorry I'm so sorry.
I can't hear it even though it's
loud, but I just, yeah, no,
that's OK. That's right, you'll
have to sit next to me from now
on. That's OK. Turn your mic
off, please. That's OK, teacher.
Representative Martinez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um, the
first couple of questions I have
or for Kelly.
Um, I'm wondering what the plans
are for the old main buildings
at the Veteran's home in Tier C.
Now that they're moving into the
new homes.
Uh, I'll have the secretary
answer this.
And, and while the Secretary's
coming up. I'm wondering what
type of marketing plans.
They're following or having
place to
Promote the veterans home. Yeah,
thanks, Mr. Chair
Representative. Um, I, I can't
tell you a whole lot with
respect to Old Maine. It's the
general services department that
owns that building and controls
what its future use is. We're
now, uh, we're now fully out of
that building, uh, and so it's
available for whatever those
alternative uses might be, but
we're just now out of it, so I
think it's a little premature,
um, in terms of, of the vet's
home, uh, we're actively
marketing and that's actually
one of our, uh one of our great
success stories are, uh, in
terms of census, our census
there.
Um, uh, was down into the 30s, I
think, um, uh, in the worst of
the pandemic and we're up if we
haven't crossed over 100, we're
just about to cross over 100
residents or break even is about
120 residents, uh, and we expect
to be able to get to that
sometime during, uh during the
next 12 months and, and so, uh,
we're doing a great job
marketing and being able to fill
those beds on a, on a kind of a
week by week basis. Who, who are
you targeting on your marketing?
For the veterans organizations,
is it towns, is it?
The VA hospital. Yeah, so it's
it's a, it's a kind of an all of
the above and particularly
families of veterans would be,
I, I think the most, uh, the
most specific targeted audience
that we're looking for and and
training and the new homes that
are there, um, I think are just
a they're huge value, um,
particularly marketing to
families, um, who are concerned
about what's the environment
that their loved one is going to
be in, um, and then we, you
know, we market through
facilities, veteran service
organizations, those kinds of
things to
to try to cast a pretty wide net
and it's been pretty successful.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
Secretary, I did have a chance
to just make a quick drive
through and, and, uh.
Well, what a difference those
buildings are beautiful. Uh, my
next question is for CYFD, I, I
think Rachel could probably
answer this.
Um, what's the funded positions
vacancy rate. I understand that
the 1001 are not funded, but the
actual funded positions, do you
know what the vacancy rate is
currently? Um, Mr. Chair, um,
minator, I would need to
actually go, um, and pull up
some data and follow up with
you. CYFD may um be able to
answer that, um, right off the
top of their head, um, what I
will say is, you know, we had
done some
analysis at the start of the
fiscal year, it looked like in
protective services in the
current fiscal year, they could
fill about 55-ish more positions
in protective services if two
things were true. Uh, one is,
um, federal revenue came in at
the level budgeted, though we
know it is not, uh, and 2, they
were able to manage, um,
overtime costs. So if they
continue to spend overtime at
the level that they have in the
last couple of years, it
inhibits.
The ability to fill positions.
Um, COFD could may know off the
top of their head kind of their
current funded, unfunded vacancy
rate. If not, I can follow up
with you.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
Representative Martinez,
currently our
What they call our forced
vacancy rate would, has
typically been about 20%. We're
at 29% vacancy rate right now.
However, as was pointed out
earlier in protective services
we are running at a deficit. Um,
so every position that we fill
continues to add to that
deficit. We have not stopped
hiring. We're still continuing
to do so, knowing that we're not
recognizing those federal
revenues and I just wanna say
because it sounds like we're
just not drawing down funds, um.
We brought in an expert in 4E
funding to do an analysis, um,
Dan Whitstead, who worked for
the federal government and then
with Casey Family Programs. He's
still currently doing that, but
we met with him.
We are drawing down every
available dollar right now
that's available to us. So what
has happened is when we've
increased federal state revenue.
We made an assumption that we
would be able to draw down
additional federal dollars and
not every child that comes into
our care is fore eligible, and
so that the cost, the budgeted
amount for federal funds kept
rising as we increased general
fund. In the last 4.5 or 5
years.
we have not drawn down the
expected federal revenue. So
that's, um, not something that's
new right now just to follow up
on that in I think August we had
a, a report on this very
situation, uh, Rachel, I think
you made it, maybe it was in
September, and the issue was
documenting the status of the
child that if the kid is brought
into care, somebody needs to
identify the fact that this
child is from 4E eligible
family.
And, and many of the 4 eligible
children simply weren't being
documented. Is that what did I
misunderstand that, Mr. Chair,
that is a part of what could
contribute, um, I think we do
not have the ability to kind of
go in and figure out exactly
what CYFD could claim for or
not. That is the analysis, um,
that they sought the technical
assistance to figure out what
could be contributing to um what
they're seeing in Title 4E and
are there opportunities to
reimburse for more that
as a state or not realizing. So,
um, what you're referencing is
it could be contributing, but we
couldn't say that that is
something particularly
contributing. I guess that's
what this fellow study is going
to, uh, help you figure it out,
yes, that is correct, and that
is something that he is looking
at in all of the instances, um,
I've asked that his report be
finished, you know, before the
end of the year, and I'd be
happy to have him come and
answer any questions with
respect, it would probably be
virtual because he's out of
state, but to be able.
to answer any questions that you
might have on, you know, are we
leaving money on the table? Are
we appropriately drawing down or
where are opportunities that
maybe we're missing, um, and
give that presentation to this
group if you'd like.
OK
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, panel. Um, by the way, I
want to thank Secretary Casados
for taking the time to meet with
me a couple of months ago. I
hope to.
continue that conversation. Uh,
thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Hickey.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, uh.
Marla and Blue Cross for
bringing in the coffee, um.
The uh first question I have,
uh, goes to the Medicaid
expenditures for providers, um,
right now we're kicking in at
150% for primary care, maternal
child and, and behavioral health
and that's certainly an
improvement. However, it doesn't
come close to the following fact
that um
We're, we're not still gonna be
near competitive, nor are we
paying specialists other than
100% of B&M codes, which is not
much, and you can't get a
specialist appointment in most
specialties for 6 months to up
to a year now, um, I just got
this, uh, note from a
constituent. I've been out
canvassing and literally now
this is the top issue before
they find out I'm a doctor,
Crime was number
one, but here's a typical
question just sent to me. What
are you going to do to keep
doctors in New Mexico in the
last 3 years, I have gone
through 5 PCPs because they
leave the state. And so there's
a huge problem here, 150% isn't
even close, and uh we're gonna
have to raise commercial to
raise the Medicaid maximization
formula, um, you know, we're.
We so much.
Unlike any other state where the
with 25% commercial, whereas
most other states are 60%
commercial or higher, uh, 18%
Medicare, we almost lead the
nation. Medicare is the worst
payer of all, um, the, uh,
Medicaid probably 46, 47%. So
it's got to come through
Medicaid. I mean, there really
is, you can't go to the
commercial. It's not there to do
the cost shift to pay.
So, uh, this will come up at
other discussions, but I'm just
giving you a heads up. This is a
major issue that the legislature
must face because you are not
going to have doctors and many
of you know that you can't even
get in the back door anymore.
Um, so I just want to be sure
that we're focusing on that.
Secondly, uh, I'm not sure why
we're paying the collaborative
my last, uh, recollection is no
one even knew if the
collaborative was still meeting.
don't know what it is, and I
would appreciate it if LFC would
do a review of that, uh, I don't
have time, but I'll find some
other place to get into the cost
of the data warehouse, $670,000
is a pittance, a pittance to pay
for that type of activity, and
later I will ask with the
security costs so that LFC can
put the security in place. Thank
you.
Um,
Representative Ferrari, you've
decided you do have a question.
Yes, thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I
wanted to look through to make
sure I wasn't missing something,
um, but, uh, Department of
Health, uh, the report, um,
emphasizes, um, uh, tobacco, I'm
sorry, page 17, um, the, uh,
tobacco cessation and uh
reduction by increasing the
price of tobacco products, which
we hope to do, um.
Uh, bring up the nicotine, uh,
cost of nicotine products, um,
so that it will have the same
impact, uh, that we've seen for
raising, um, a cigarette, uh,
taxes, but I don't find anything
about, um, and there's a lot of
drug harms, but nothing about
alcohol and I was wondering
because alcohol, um,
Uh, use is impacting so many of
the things that we're trying to
Um, impacts such as suicides and
domestic violence and guns and
gun violence. It's in almost all
of those, um, almost 50% and so
I'm not sure if I'm missing
something or is there something
within the Department of Health
that um we're trying to uh
reduce by increasing the alcohol
tax like we did have
successfully done with tobacco.
products increase tax.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I have a small
comment and then I think Eric
has a more comprehensive
comment, but I do want to say
that the public health offices,
um, have started to now, um.
Um
Deliver Matt Medicaid assisted
treatments for substance use
disorders including alcohol in a
majority of their public health
offices. This is new. This is
something we've been asking of
the public health offices for
many years and it's very
exciting that it's starting to
roll out. Um, it's probably too
early to give you any type of
performance data on that, and I
also would like uh.
I think Eric
department would like to
comment.
And, uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, we have Nick
Buccas here from the um.
Healthcare authority, he's the
director of the uh.
We have services division
anyway, you, your question, I
think was around um why don't
you see anything in the requests
around alcohol use disorder.
Right.
Good morning, Mr. Chair.
Representative Ferrari, thank
you for the question. So, uh, as
part of our programming, we do
have the medication assisted
treatment that was um
appropriated to us last year and
that has been a partnership
we're expanding that as part of
telehealth. We're also doing
more outreach to providers on
alcohol treatment and to um
bring that as an awareness to
them, um.
I think it, it's in part with
providers, much of it is, uh,
how can we kind of give them
more of the treatment options
and make that available, um, but
we've also expanded the Sper,
which is the screening and brief
intervention tools.
Um, and part of that program is
to target primary care
physicians and doing that and
then referring people to
treatment and this past year,
um, we did.
Uh, spend close to $2 million in
additional trainings for primary
care physicians and primary
clinics, and we're working also
to create a program in which uh
school-based health centers can
also do that uh with their
clinicians, so, um, we can try
to target also earlier
treatment, um, in, in the life
span.
Does that include increasing the
health councils and their being
able to help with the prevention
programs and um
Culturally adept, um, or adapted
programs in their own
communities.
Uh, we have not, uh, Mr. Chair
Representative Ferrari, thank
you. um, we have not
specifically targeted, um,
health councils, but we have
partnered with a few and I think
we can expand that and look into
how we can uh make that more
effective.
Thank you. Thank you.
Represent
oh did
30 seconds. I just, I really
want to make a plug for this is
that um DOH has demine response
program, and we used to get a
lot some frequent papers out of
them about said alcohol use, and
we haven't seen that in a few
years and so I would, um, plug
to the agency and to you to help
us get more reports out of a
really robust program that has
epidemiologists to kind of feed
better information publicly
about, you know, what's going on
on this issue.
Would you repeat what that is
again the epidemiology and
response program at the
Department of Health. Oh, yes.
Very good. Thank you,
Representative Ferrari.
Representative Herndon.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Would
you turn off your microphone?
So, uh, Mr. Buccas, maybe you'd
like to come back. One of the
questions that I have, it
follows up with uh with Senator
Martin Hickey. And so yesterday
when I visited my doctor, he
informed me that he's leaving
and when I specifically asked
why are you leaving? He said,
because you all are just not
paying us enough money here. And
so how do we know if we
absolutely increase Medicaid
reimbursement rates by 150%,
200%, that the money
he's going to go into the
pockets of the providers and not
into the corporate shareholders.
Yeah
Yes, I'm expecting you to have
an answer.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Herndon, um, thank you for the
easy one.
Um
I, I think that this is
something in which we're
continuing to make sure as part
of the oversight, I mean, we, I,
I believe it was in Portalis,
one of the questions was about
um.
Uh, CPSWs and making sure that
they're getting paid that
amount. Um, we do not really
have that direct oversight as to
what the salary structure is, so
when it does get reimbursed, um,
we're ensuring that it is
getting paid. We're working with
the MCOs to make sure that there
is that accountability, um, but
the individual salary structures
that is not something that we
get reports on and have that
level of detail to see how much
of that is being passed through.
Thank you, Mr. Buca, and perhaps
we can work on that together.
Uh, the other question that I
have is with respect to uh the
fact that yesterday we visited
the a birthing center. And one
of the things that we found out
is that they are not being
reimbursed at the same rate as
hospitals are, and they're doing
the same type of work. And what
can we do to make sure that that
happens and is that a policy
initiative or where does that
come from with that
reimbursement rate is not the
same.
Well, I
I want the people who are
putting out the money to explain
to us why that isn't happening.
OK, we'll release you, Mr.
Lucas.
And thank you. And then one last
quick question is to Kelly. Uh,
Kelly, at the beginning of your,
uh, uh, introduction, you said
that if you also represented
African American performing Arts
Center and, and uh all of those,
the Office of African American
Affairs. So those organizations
are right there in one whole
building, uh, along with the
Martin Luther King Junior
commission. Like, I'm wondering,
uh, why don't we have them under
one budget as a department. And
is that something you're
thinking about, uh, along with
those people who help you
make that decision.
Uh, Mr. Chair, sweetie, so, um,
nobody has requested that, but
it is definitely conversations
that has happened in my history
several times, and if that is
something that this body or the
legislature as a whole would
like to put forward as a
proposal, you know, we can
assist you with what that would
look like on a budgetary.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh,
Senator Lopez.
Uh, thank you, um, Mr. Chair. I
appreciate the information that
was shared, um, by each of you
and definitely 3 minutes is not
going to be enough, but, um, I
just have one caveat to mention
since we have um LFC members
here in front of us. There was a
presentation earlier this week.
Senator Jarami Los Cumbres and
such, talking about an
oversight.
From early child for ECECD,
right, that's a big thing for,
you know, a lot of words, um,
with regards to a budget request
for the fit providers, right?
So
they gave money but couldn't do
anymore because there was no
money in the budget.
So a concern is is how do we
make sure that we're taking care
of those providers um who need
additional funding, that's one,
Mr. Chair.
Second, um, on your, uh, on the
page 6, and this is with under
healthcare authority looking
under developmental disabilities
rate adjustments, there's 46
million.
So a question, Mr. Chair, is
money comes in, then how is it
distributed appropriately and
timely, um, with regards for,
you know, for increasing um the
rate that we pay for those
providers. So I know it's not
necessarily
see who does that, but it goes
back to the department to make
sure that those monies um are
timely for persons who need the
money. So,
I just wanted to highlight those
two, they are concerned. I think
there's some ways we can do and
work with the ECCD issue, but
maybe we can talk offline about
that. Um, we do have things, Mr.
Chair, that we've done in the
past, working with the
administration, the finance
committees, and such, and both
sides, you know, both House and
Senate and getting a bill
upstairs that could possibly be
signed with an emergency clause
to put funding that could help,
especially the FIT program.
Um, that's hurting right now. So
thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator Lopez.
Senator Pinto, any questions?
No, no questions, more of a
comment that um thank you for
the work you do, but I hope
we're not creating such a large
department that it gets out of
control.
Um, so that we still are
effective in, you know,
splitting the two and that, um,
Could we move things along.
If you get too big, then it
seems like to make adjustments
seems to be too, too far, too
far to, to, to catch up on and I
hope we're working on
transparency too, especially if
we're talking about state money,
so thank you Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator, uh,
Representative Cates, do you
have any questions?
Uh
No thank you, uh.
Not at this time.
Senator Pope, how about you?
Thank you, Mister Chair. I, I
want to refer to page 23.
Um, the juvenile justice
services.
Um, reading this looks like
there's an overall decrease.
It mentions at the end that
Uh, actual spending, um.
You know, was lower and it kind
of justifies why we're going in
that direction.
Um
I just have concerns and I think
others here on this committee,
we saw what happened in one of
our juvenile facilities in
Albuquerque.
Um, is there a reason why this
money wasn't being spent as far
as workforce and staff, um, it
just seems like, uh, this is
something that we should
probably be increasing and not
reducing. So could you explain
that a little bit?
Um, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator Pope,
um, one note is, uh, these are
the juvenile justice facilities
operated at the state level by
CYFD CYFD is actually really
implemented evidence-based
programs over time, um, and we
have as a state have seen really
positive outcomes, um, probably
over the last 15 years, though
we are seeing an uptick in both
referrals, um, and the secure
population within the state
facilities.
Um, that's what you see, uh, in
the chart on that page, um, one
of the things we have seen
because the state has done a lot
of this kind of uh reform over
time, um, the state has moved to
do things like clothes
facilities, LFC issued a report
about a year ago that did
highlight, you know, we may
actually have some overstaffing
in the state facilities, um, and
that is why, for example, you
will see in the last few years,
um, the actuals within the
juvenile justice services
program.
fall below budgeted levels.
So when we talk about state
facilities, the one is the John
Paul Taylor down in Las Cruces,
that's OK, we made, we had a
visit there and, and talked with
um.
Some of the youth down there.
Um, appreciate that. Is there,
is there any discussion on what
we do about, uh, from a state
standpoint, some of these other
facilities are just.
I just wondering how, I know
that's not in your wheelhouse,
but.
Um
I guess kind of improve those
facilities as well and get them
up to a standard workforce or
deal with a lot of the issues
that we're seeing.
Um, Mr. Chair.
Senator Pope, so the state meets
with the departments you know
that we meet with the counties
on a regular basis to ensure
that we have, you know, capacity
that they're maintaining
training. We do do reviews of
those facilities and make
recommendations if we see areas
that need improvement. We've
been working really closely with
Bernalillo on their staffing
issues. They've been really
short staffed there, which, you
know, has led over the last year
to not being able to detain
individuals that have been
recommended for that, um, so
there is a task force that's
been put.
Together we used to meet on a
weekly basis and then it went
down to every other week. Um, I
still have staff engaging with
them on a monthly basis. You
know, there is conversation
about, you know, do we need one
more facility in the state, um,
and that in, you know, we want
to make sure that we're doing
everything we can so that kids
are not being incarcerated and
detained and providing programs.
Um, one of the things that we've
really been pushing in juvenile
justice in it's part of the
reason we have the reversion is
we don't have the number of
continuums that.
We've had in the past, which are
locally um run continuums that
provide services for prevention
and intervention early and so
we're really pushing to increase
those across the state so that
we can ensure that we're getting
to those um juveniles early and
really trying to keep them out
of the system.
Thank you, Madam Secretary, and
thank you, Mr. Chair. Um.
And really the question, you
know, I really want to emphasize
it was about the resources and
making sure, you know, we're
doing our job, but I'm glad to
hear that it's about the
prevention and getting out there
early and support and systems
to.
kind of make sure
We lead our youth in a different
direction. So thank you Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Senator, and just a
red flag for us all in the
morning paper, the, the, um,
DA is proposing some pretty
drastic changes in the
Children's code that could very
well increase the the need for,
uh, incarcerating juveniles, uh.
Uh
I think I, I would hope that the
legislature would take a real
close look at that and, and not
just, uh, you know, uh, rubber
stamp some of his proposals
because they, the, the
consequences for our facilities
for our, uh, efforts at keeping
kids, uh,
Before their brains are fully
formed of keeping them, you
know, in, in healthy
environments rather than putting
them into prison and giving up
on them for the rest of their
lives, uh.
That's something that we, we, we
really need to see the
consequences in these budget
matters as well as
And while, while I've got to
make then I, I'm going to ask a
couple of questions. I'm very
concerned about
Um
The um
The census in our, in our state
facilities, and I noticed that,
that on page 4 we're talking
about, um, under non-recurring
Medicaid funding.
Um,
Including the Epiduan Regional
recovery Center in San Miguel
County. That's the facility
right across the street from
the uh Behavioral Health
Institute, and, um,
Is that going to become a state
operated facility? Is that the
is that the plan there?
Yeah, Mr. Chair, again, Patrick
Allen, secretary of the
Department of Health. That's
the, that's the proposal. It's
San Miguel County has basically
acquired and, and is fitting out
the facility, and we've been in
conversations with them as
operating it as an integral part
of BHI which helps meet their
desire for a regional alcohol
and drug facility and allows us
to provide more complete care
for people with co-occurring
disorders, which is not
something we do very thoroughly
at BHI now and haven't, uh,
haven't historically.
So, so the county won't be
running it, it'll be the state.
And, and two summers ago we, we
were up in Las Vegas and you
had, or at least the, uh, Tim, I
forget his last name Shields
the, the superintendent there
had indicated that they were
thinking of, of trying to get
certified for drug and alcohol,
this would be in lieu of that or
as a part of that is maybe a,
maybe a better way to think
about it, but yes.
And then, and then the other
facilities, you had indicated
earlier this summer that
turquoise lodge, um.
Operated consistently below its
license capacity because of the
need for additional space in the
facility at the Gateway Center.
Have you begun working with the
county or the city to the city
to get more, uh, space, uh, and,
and, and increase it because I
know there's always a waiting
list for turquoise lodge.
Actually, there's not at the
moment uh uh a waiting list
we're able to admit as people
are, are, are presenting
themselves, which is a little
bit what I was making um a
reference to in terms of demand
changing. Yes, we're having
conversations with the city. We
think right now our effective
maximum capacity is about 30
patients, uh, at turquoise Lodge
versus the licensed.
40, I think it is, and we're
sitting uh last I checked about
25 or 26 patients, so we're
actually getting up close to
that, uh, functional capacity,
we may be able to add a little
bit to that, um, uh, in terms of
space, the city may have
elsewhere in the building.
Probably not all the way back up
to that 40 level, but, but
potentially more than we than we
have now.
You know, it's, it's just hard,
it, it's hard to square the.
We hear when we go around the
state, the need for more
facilities, more beds with the.
Low census in our state operated
facilities. Yeah, I mean, it's
it's it's interesting, I have
found over time that
Problems are sticky in people's
minds, and they remember them
for a really long time, even if
circumstances have changed, uh,
you know, when I, when I first
got here, you can never get into
turquoise Lodge was, you know,
kind of the, kind of the mantra
and I've looked at the day by
day, the admissions and the, and
the circumstances, and I think
that was true, uh, 2345 years
ago, I think it's.
Pretty much not true now, but
the problem sticks and so when
you go talk to a constituent,
they'll they'll remember the
thing that was a that was a burr
under their saddle for a lot
longer than than it turns out to
be real and so that's, that's
really the trick is to figure
out what's real versus what do
people, as Will Rogers said, no,
that's true, that just ain't so.
Well, and I, and I think that
there is a certain.
Carryover effect in 4 years ago,
you made a referral and they
said, well, I'm sorry, we have a
two-year waiting list. You stop
making referrals. That's what I,
I believe that's what's happened
at Sequoia, the district court
children's court judges simply
don't even think of sequoia as a
resource anymore because over
the last several years, they may
have sent kids there and got
The kid was denied the facility
had the authority to say, I'm
sorry, the judge may want you
here, but we don't, and sent him
back, uh, and so you stopped
making those referrals, you just
write that resource off your
list of potential places for for
sending a kid, um, a couple of
other questions, um.
On that same page there's the,
the mention of a hospital in Qua
County. Is that the, the
regional, um,
Which I'm sorry, which page are
you on?
The page 4, that, that, that's
for the, that's for the
healthcare authority, that,
that, that's the regional
behavioral health facility
they're talking about.
Uh, Mr. Chair, I I believe
that's correct, yeah, and do we
know, are they asking for more
money to finish it because 10
million isn't enough for a
hospital.
Uh, Mr. Chair, I haven't heard
of any, uh, further requests for
that. OK. OK.
That's 10 million sitting out
there's like you can get a great
architectural design for 10
million.
Um
Then, um, on the, on the CYFD
budget. The
I, I think it's a great idea to,
to create the Family Services
division to move in that
direction. I'm a little
concerned that one of the ways
of financing it is to move money
from contracts.
To which contracts will we be
losing?
It says on, on page 24 line.
5
Reducing contractual services
and the other category 4.4
million,
Mr. Chair, that's within the
program support category, um,
essentially what happens when,
when the state does a salary
increase, the comment section of
the bill provides general fund
to agencies to provide that
compensation increase. When
agencies have positions that are
primarily, for example, funded
by federal grants, um, they
don't necessarily.
get a federal revenue increase
to provide that, um, uh,
compensation increase. And so
what CYFT has had to do over
time is move from contracts into
personnel to ensure that they
were able to provide um those
increases and so that's kind of
what you see the movement there.
I'll let the secretary talk
about if in it's in program
support, um, if there are, is
going to be an impact to the
contracts that run through
program support.
Um, Mr. Chair, we are working
diligently to make sure that
we're not reducing any contract
dollars, but in program support,
if we're moving programs out in
individuals, if there's money,
as she said, that's allocated
from the federal government for
those specific.
Programs that people are working
on, then that money will follow
them, um.
And go with them to be able to
provide it in other areas.
So, so none of the existing
contracts for services is
anticipated would be, would be
changed or reduced. We're not
reducing any contracts.
Because I, I mean, you know,
some of the, some of the more
promising things going on around
the state right now, our
contracts through your
department for and AA Institute
and some of those family
resource center kind of
contracts, all of those look
very promising and I would hate
to see those reduced, but.
Um, Mr. Chairman, I agree, um,
we're looking closely at
contracts to ensure that we're
not cutting them, but that we're
actually really looking to see
what the um ROI is on each of
those contracts that were, um,
providing.
OK, well thank you. Yeah, follow
up.
Kind of a follow up, Madam
Secretary, so when people leave
your department, do you do an
exit interview or have an
outside reviewer like do so we
can figure out what the heck is
happening.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative
Thompson, yes, we do do exit
interviews. Um, I don't believe
it's every single um employee,
um, it's optional for them if
they want to participate in that
we have talked about having it
be an outside person just so
they can feel like they can be
more open and honest about what
they're saying about the
department because I believe
that's the only way we're really
going to identify what the
challenges are to be able to
provide change.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Totally
agreed. And if you need support,
I'd be happy to support an
outside reviewer. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And members, I think you, you,
we all received also in
addition, uh, a brief on child
welfare workforce that Rachel
supplied for us. Did you want to
go over that a little bit with
us, Rachel, Mr. Chair, that's a
brief that LFC staff put
together for the Senate Memorial
5 Task Force, uh, Representative
Chavez, you are a member of that
group, Senator Lopez is as well
and sponsored the memorial. This
was just a summary of
information about what we know
about the child welfare
workforce. It includes some of
the compensation data, um, that
comes from.
Uh, the comparison that Deloitte
did last year and in the
benchmarking study, and it also
has some of the data around
numbers of social workers in the
state and the investments made,
um, in the schools of social
work. I knew that I come up,
yeah, yesterday as an interest
for you also so brought that
brief so you had some of that
information.
Very good. Thank you. Anything
else, Representative Johnson,
did you have any questions? OK.
Representative Chasey, you're
OK?
Well, thank you all very much.
This, this is good inform a lot
to digest.
We probably have indigestion for
a while and, and, and have to
get back to you till our next
meeting, Mr. Chair, we'll stick
around for 30 more minutes if
members want to talk to us
independently. Great. That's
good to know. Thank you.
Thank you, Kelly, uh, OK, so now
we'll go to, um,
The uh HSA healthcare workforce
update and here we have Alex
Castillo Smith.
The deputy secretary of HCA and
Alisa Reddy, the senior manager
of the primary care, primary
care innovation.
But
there's,
is that, is that your real
title? is senior.
planning. OK.
All right, good.
So whenever you're ready, uh,
you can go ahead and get
started.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee vice chair, um,
As I said, my name is Alex
Castillo Smith. I'm one of the
deputy secretaries of the
Healthcare Authority and as my
colleague Alisa Reed shared, she
is the strategic planning
director for the healthcare
Authority. She was in a former
position leading our primary
care innovations work, um, but
has since changed her position.
Um,
I appreciate your comments and
questions and reflections this
morning and we'll try and do our
best to answer any additional
questions we have
in Senator Hickey, I think
you're
Sort of meta question of like,
what are we doing to try and
keep doctors in the state.
We'll try our best to address
things that we're doing at the
healthcare authority.
That, um,
You know, that are our, that's
part of our strategy to help in
answering that question.
So you all should have packets,
um, if you go to page number 2,
just a very quick land
acknowledgement. We do this
before all of our presentations,
um, just acknowledging the, the
ancestral land of the Pueblo
Apache and Dana people who are
still here today, um, and whose
ancestors remain, um very
grateful to be living in New
Mexico and doing this work here,
um.
Alongside all of you.
On page 3, you can see the
mission vision and goals of the
new healthcare authority that as
was previously mentioned,
formally launched this July.
Um, as we think about
Supporting the workforce,
helping to keep doctors and
other healthcare providers in
New Mexico. The healthcare
authority, the goal that you see
at the top left, you know,
leveraging purchasing power and
partnerships, um, that improved
the health and well-being of New
Mexicans in the workforce, um,
that I think is a goal that most
directly connects.
To this work supporting the
workforce, um, also relatedly
achieving health equity by
addressing some of these
structural blockers, um.
The health and well-being.
On page 4, you'll have um both
Alisa and myself are phone
number and our email address
should you want to reach out to
us, you're welcome to anytime.
We'll talk a little bit about
healthcare workforce
development, uh, and the rural
healthcare delivery fund that is
a program that Alisa is leading
the implementation of, um, and
then the healthcare delivery
andes Act and a little bit of
just a an update on the Medicaid
program, the many
things that team is working on
to improve the benefits and
services that um New Mexicans
enrolled in the program
received, including the
workforce, the folks who care
for those folks.
So if you go to slide 6,
You know, when we're thinking
about how do we keep physicians,
other healthcare providers in
the state of New Mexico.
Uh, there are many different
partners who play a role in
this, and I know that, you know,
you all are intimately familiar
of this. For example, at the
higher education department,
they have the health
professional loan repayment
program.
Uh, UNM, the healthcare
workforce Committee just
released its annual report on
workforce capacity. I know they
have spoken to you all in the
past when that report comes out,
it outlines the current capacity
of um different healthcare
professionals, uh, the one
entity that's not listed here is
also to the Department of
Workforce Solution. They have a
lot of data on them, um,
projected healthcare workforce
demand.
Why and so if you are looking
for additional data and
information related to that,
they would be a good partner to
speak to the New Mexico Hospital
Association is also working with
folks in the community to
develop an online dashboard of
the healthcare workforce, so
that there's a place online
where we can go and see.
The capacity of the workforce
and
Um, what would be needed. So
I'll talk a little bit.
About this more in detail, um,
the Medicare provider rate
increases. I know that
Representative Herndon had a
question about that.
Um, and there were comments
about the miser, um, Medicaid
management information system
replacement project, uh, we
launched a new customer facing
portal where folks can apply for
benefits in real time, just a
few weeks ago that is, um,
mobile friendly, app friendly,
um, and then we have a new
provider portal launching at the
end of October. Um, we're also
la un ch ing our own data
services module related to the
miser project this month as
well.
But you skipped over.
The single most important thing
you could do to make the
legislature happy.
The single provider
credentialing with Medicaid.
I was going to get to that in
just a moment,
yeah
thank you so your lunch date is
exactly one month after I leave
the legislature, which I, which
is unfortunate because I've been
asking for that from day one.
Yes, I know you've been asking
for that, Mr. Chair. Um, that is
launching in January 25th, and
it's referenced in another
slide. I just didn't want to
read everything on every slide,
um, but I appreciate your
enthusiasm for that, um.
As well as the provider. So on
slide 7,
Um, and I know the LFC staff had
mentioned this in some detail,
but I just wanted to, this is a
table that outlines, um, some of
the rate increases and
expansions that we have
undertaken in the Medicaid
program.
Um, for example, you may not be
aware of that beginning in
January of 25, New Mexican
adults over 21 who need vision
benefits like contacts or
glasses, they'll finally be able
to get that. That was not a
covered benefit for those adults
in Medicaid prior, and so we
thank you all for your support
with that.
Um, also in January next year,
uh, the 20 smallest hospitals in
New Mexico will receive $11
million in an additional
directed payment to support
them.
Um, in October of this month,
uh, we've, um, passed through
additional rate increases for
federally qualified health
centers, um, to, I know she's
oh, representative Herndon, your
question about how do we ensure
that these rate increases to
150% of Medicare for primary
care behavioral health or the
other rate increases to 100%.
Um
We, what we do so that they can
actually reach the provider at
that level in our contract
negotiations with the managed
care organizations, we've
instructed them that the floor
of that payment.
is 100% or 150% depending on the
rate. So for example, they are
required contractually to pay
the provider, um, a minimum of
that, um, percentage of Medicare
increase for that service, um,
in the past, it had been
Um, not set as the floor, which
is, which resulted in some of
that discrepancy, but that is a
contractual oversight change
that we have made with turquoise
care that launched in July.
Um, on slide 8 in
And also thinking about how we
help keep healthcare workers and
providers here in New Mexico.
You know, I mentioned a little
bit about the Medicaid rate
increases and trying to provide
more funding to providers in New
Mexico, um, I know you all are
also familiar with this, but
another way that we try to help
support the workforce is through
the expansion of new programs
that help to address provider
burnout, um, ease of provider
patient experience.
We've, we've talked at length
about the communi the certified
community behavioral health
clinics, um, that is sort of an
entry point for behavioral
healthcare for New Mexicans, and
we'll launch in January, I
believe Secretary of the Army
spoke about this to you all
earlier in the week, um,
Community health workers are now
eligible for Medicaid
reimbursement. This also
includes community health
representatives who work in
tribal communities. So expanding
the types of providers who are
eligible for Medicaid
reimbursement.
Uh, and then, you know, we're
also working to implement uh
services prior to release from
incarceration.
Uh, for Medicaid reimbursable
services for folks leaving
incarceration.
On page 9, just a little bit
additional information about how
we are trying to expand the
behavioral health network. We
have 4 crisis triage centers in
the state that are open and
receiving Medicaid
reimbursement to crisis
stabilization programs. My
colleague Nick Bugez also spoke
just a few moments ago about how
we are working with DOH to
support um medication assisted
treatment in Department of
Health.
offices.
So with that, I'm going to turn
over to my colleague Lisa, who
will speak to the next few
slides beginning on slide 11
about the rural healthcare
delivery fund, as well as the
work we are doing related to
primary care residency
expansion.
Hi, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I'm very excited to
share some of the initial
outcomes we've had from the
Royal Healthcare Delivery Fund
and just on behalf of all of
these organizations, thank you
for this funding. It's really
made a huge difference in
communities and for these small
independent, um.
Private, uh, providers to be
able to expand and do the work
that they're doing even more in
communities. So we've seen, um,
that we have just in the first
about 6 months through, uh,
June.
78,721 patient encounters
attributed to this funding, and
that represents over 23,000
individuals that we've been able
to serve.
And
395, uh, and 0.76 uh people
hired. And so some of those, uh,
health positions include
physicians, but there it's also
those administrative staff,
community health workers, social
workers, and others who support
the healthcare system, and I
want to give you just a couple
of examples from Gallup of how
this is not only supporting to
expand services in this way, uh,
that are very much needed, but
they're also supporting.
Uh, providers and keeping them
in these communities and
attracting folks to their
clinics. So, family medicine
Associates, um, we have Doctor
Um, Andrette, who has purchased
an ultrasound machine for OB.
And was able to diversify. He
trained himself to use this
machine. So if you got the
training and is now able to get
an additional revenue source in
his primary care clinic, and
it's providing those ultrasound
services that they're very much
needed in Gallup, and so that's
helping him be able to be
sustainable with his business
and his practice.
I also want to highlight um
Gallup Community Health, that
not only has created a really
great environment for folks to
work, um, and because of how
they've been able to expand.
They were able to attract a
young lady who just graduated as
a new MP. She left Gallup to get
her education and was then
attracted back to Gallup to
practice in her own community.
So I think those are the kinds
of successes that we're seeing.
part of this funding, uh, that
are not only supporting um that
expansion of service in the
community, but also um with the
workforce.
I want to also turn your
attention to the next page.
Sorry, these are not numbered.
Page 12.
Um, and just share with you the
diversity.
Uh, um, across the whole state
of the provider types and
funding, um, that we're able to
provide. So you can see that not
only do we have primary care,
behavioral health, um,
Maternal child health, but also
we're helping with
transportation, um, optometry
and other specialty care, and
that's happening across the
state.
We do have an additional $46
million. Uh, we just closed the
first, um, or we just closed the
application period for that. So
we are now uh in that review
period to choose who will be the
next group of um providers
receiving this funding. So we'll
have that announced, uh,
October, November.
Next I want to talk about our
Primary care and psychiatry
residency expansion.
So we do have 3 new accredited
primary care role residency
programs that have opened in New
Mexico. And the map, uh, sorry,
it's small, we can send you a
larger if you'd like.
Um, those are both those new
programs and programs that are
being developed.
So we hope to have, uh, or we,
we have increased 100 from 142
residents in training to 191.
Uh, we also have an average of
59% retention rate of those
residents who are graduating
from those programs, staying in
New Mexico after 3 years, which
is a huge success.
Uh, we are developing an
additional 5 residency programs
were actively participating and
supporting those programs in
their development.
And uh we hope to grow the
number of positions for
residents to 230, which is a 70%
increase by 2030.
And I'm gonna turn it back over
to Alex.
OK. Thank you, Lisa. So if we go
to page 15, um.
The LFC staff also talked about
the healthcare delivery and
Access Act, uh, briefly, but as
you all know, the legislation,
um.
Allowing for this program passed
in this session this year, and
we anticipate that there will be
$1.5 billion in new revenue for
these hospitals, um, the first
set of payments, um, the
estimated payment dates
dependent on us getting approval
to do this by CMS, um, could be.
March or May of next year, um,
40% of the revenue will be
linked to clinical quality
outcomes, performance, you can
see some of those measures on
the right hand side. Hospitals
will have to report annually to
the healthcare authority, um,
that they are spending at least
75% of this new funding in the
state, so supporting their
hospital operation cost,
workforce recruitment,
retention, staff.
provider compensation increases,
uh, precepting incentives, the
creation or expansion of
additional services, community
benefit activities, those are
just some of the examples of the
ways that will require those
hospitals to use those dollars.
Um, we'll be tracking the
quality performance, um,
stratified on the hospital
types, so whether they're acute
care hospital, a long-term care
hospital or an inpatient rehab
facility.
And then on page 17. I'm gonna
talk a little bit about what the
Medicaid team does.
Um
About what the Medicaid team
does internally to further
support the workforce and to
further support um member
services and care, um, you will
see on the left hand side, a
series of what we call
internally LODs and their
respective numbers. Those are
letters of direction.
Mediate letters of direction are
issued by the Medicaid director,
and they, uh, it's the Medicaid
director directing the Medicaid
managed care organizations to
carry out certain specific
actions. So, um, let's see, the
first one at the top related to
comprehensive addiction, the
recovery Act program. We posted
that in October, directing the
MCOs to play a greater role in
care coordination services.
for pregnant Medicaid members
who have substance use disorder
services and require that
wraparound care, um, we issued
another letter of direction, um,
in October, directing the MCOs
to support gender-affirming
healthcare, uh, comprehensive
well child checks for children
in state custody, um, also to,
um,
Allow for
Allow for Medicaid members to
receive chiropractic services,
covered with Medicaid benefits,
um, I'll point your attention to
LOD's 17 and 16.
This is a new benefit that's
covered in the Medicaid program,
Silver diamine fluoride, um,
this is now a Medicaid covered
um service, silver dynamine
fluoride is provided, um,
In dental offices for
populations of folks who are
unable to get regular access to
dental care. Um, many of the
individuals who receive silver
diamine fluoride could be those
with individual or developmental
disabilities, and it helps, it's
evidence-based treatment to
prevent tooth decay.
And so this is something that
our families on the DD waiver
program have requested for quite
a while, and now they'll be able
to have this service.
And then on page 18, we wanted
to just share with you other
things on the horizon in the
Medicaid program. I think there
could be an entire presentation
on this one slide alone. So I
say that admitting that we tried
our very best to
There's a lot of content here,
um, we'd be happy to come back
and tell you more about what is
here, but we just wanted to
illustrate the breadth of the
program and what we're trying to
do. I think I will take a minute
to just let you all know, um,
you will see this wasn't
discussed in our
In the previous budget request
presentation, but you will see
in our FY 26 budget requests and
ask for additional staff for the
Medicaid program.
As our LFC colleagues shared,
you know, the Medicaid program
in New Mexico serves the highest
percentage of state residents in
the country.
Get the New Mexico Medicaid
program is one of the smallest
staffed.
Medicaid programs in the
country. So the ability for us
to administer this program and
to have effective oversight of
the managed care organizations
is highly dependent on having a
really good team on the Medicaid
program, who are doing all of
this work that you see here on
slide 18.
Um, a few that I will just
highlight on the left-hand side,
you'll see a reference to a
beneficiary advisory committee.
Um, I wanted to bring this to
your attention because in July
2025, um, our Medicaid program
will launch a, will launch this
committee. And so it is composed
of Medicaid members, um, and you
know, we have not started it, it
is not launched yet. It is new.
Um, and if you
have suggestions or
recommendations about Medicaid
members who you think would be
um good members for this
committee. We welcome them. Um,
if they're constituents that
want to get more involved and
help shape Medicaid policy and
programming. This could be an
opportunity for them to do that.
Um,
you may have heard, um, just
about a week ago that we
received approval for
traditional healthcare
practices, um, to have those
reimbursed by the Medicaid
program.
Um, so we are excited about
that, um, mental health parity.
We, we want to help ensure that
Medicaid members have equal
access to behavioral healthcare
just as they have to physical
healthcare, so eliminating those
administrative barriers, any
prior authorization requirements
that may stand in the way of
getting that behavioral
healthcare.
Um,
we will be submitting in July of
next year, a waiver renewal.
What we call the 1915 C waiver
renewal. Um, we'll submit that
to CMS next summer. We're doing
active stakeholder feedback with
the DD community providers,
members on how we can improve
the medically fragile covered
services, services, support
waiver services if you have
feedback that you think we
should be incorporating into
that waiver renewal. We would be
happy to hear that also.
And then just a couple other
things I'll mention, um, single
credentialing is launching in
January, um, across all the
Medicaid managed care
organizations and we're in
active development for a closely
referral system that I believe
Secretary Armio also talked
about earlier this week.
So
With that, I'd be happy to take
any additional comments or
questions, and thank you for
your time.
Before we go to the committee, I
just want to get clarification.
You, you said you were going to
be asking for additional staff.
Um, Senator Ty Pino, yes, we
intend to not new positions
filling vacancies filling
vacancies because yeah because
you have in the in in uh.
Mr. Shanini's
Analysis, he, he mentioned
filling vacancies, but he didn't
say anything about additional.
Yeah, I'm sorry, Mr. Chair, it's
funding for existing positions.
2 million, but then that gets
matched fifty-fifty.
So really a $4 million how many
positions are you thinking is,
Mr. Chair, I believe the
Medicaid team is asking for
funding for 20 positions. OK.
All right, let's go to the
committee then and let's see, we
started here. Let's start with
you, uh, Representative Herndon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and uh
thank you presenters, and I
would like to go back to page 15
if we might for just a moment,
where we talk about healthcare
delivery and access and tracking
quality performance, but I'd
like to know is how does
Rehoboth Hospital fit into that?
And is it a part of something
that you're looking at?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Vice Chair, and
Representative Herndon, yes, I
believe uh the hospital, um,
In McKinley County Rehoboth will
be part of that program.
Um, we're still in the
programmatic design phase, you
know, the rural and frontier
hospitals in New Mexico, well,
so all the hospitals who will
participate will pay an
assessment that allows us to
leverage additional federal
funding. That's how we're able
to bring 1.5 billion in new
revenue to these hospitals, um,
rural and frontier hospitals
will pay about 20% of that
assessment, but they will
41% of all the revenue that we
receive, um, with the federal
revenue that we received. So
we're designing this in a way to
be intentional, to, to benefit
those role in frontier hospitals
that are experiencing, um, I,
um, a greater need for funding.
Thank you. And then along that
line, there are no births that
are happening uh at Rehoboth.
And one of the things that I'm
really concerned about is that
we do have a birthing center
here in Albuquerque and um, and
I don't know if you are able to
answer the question which I
raised earlier about the
reimbursement cost to the
birthing centers that are equal
to those of a hospital and is
that something that you all, I,
I'm still trying to determine is
that a policy.
is that something that can be
changed just.
Uh, through something that
you're working on and thank you.
Uh, chair, vice chair of
Representative Herndon, um.
My apologies, I didn't answer
your question earlier. I'd like
to follow up with you offline
just to get more details about
that specific facility, because
that will help me in the
Medicaid team to determine why
that birthing center is not
getting paid the same as a
hospital, um, I did neglect to
mention though that is part of
the reforms that we're doing
with turquoise care, and we did
receive additional general fund
from the legislature um to
initiate.
pay parity for providers, so
I'll give you an example. If
there's a nurse practitioner
that is performing the same
service as a physician, they
should get paid the same amount,
um, previously under the
Medicaid program that was not
the case, um, but with the
additional refund, with the
additional funding that we
received in fiscal year 25 were
able to do that. And so my
question that I'll need to think
about.
And I'll talk to the team is
Um, does that, how does that pay
parity apply in the birthing
center that you're talking about
in the other hospitals. All
right, and, and thank you and
just one more comment on that.
The fact that the women in
Gallup, New Mexico have to go
all the way to to Grants as the
closest hospital or location for
birthing. um, I, it would be
really great to look at a
birthing center in Gallup,
which, and I think that the
midwives are a huge uh um asset
to the community there.
And thank you for that
consideration and thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Herndon, uh, Senator Pinto.
think Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, thank you for your
presentation.
And again, I think it's more of
a comment because I don't think
you'll have an answer for me
today, but modernizing the way
we pay, um,
The payment system.
Because
there's still problems with it
and there's, there's some, um,
literature out there talking
about better ways to pay the
rural hospitals, um, because if
I figured we're still doing
business the same way we got
into this predicament.
So I think there there's has to
be some research in there or
some leeway to move that
forward, um, especially if we've
been doing this the same old way
all these years, um, when we
talk about budget requests,
especially when we talk about
labor and delivery.
Because one of the things with
the
The area in Gallup, we do have
the IHS hospital, which is very,
very old, and
I don't think we're gonna have
the new IHS facility built in
time.
Where some of these services are
gonna be, won't be there because
the facility is just gonna be
too outdated or there's gonna be
some kind of issue, um, with the
current hospital because it's so
old.
So even having RMCH and having
the same current, um.
place that's there uh and I'm
I'm not sure if that facility is
still adequate how much of an
investment has to be made. I
know they made quite a bit of an
investment there to upgrade it,
but.
Um, with all these new
technologies that are in the
requirements to have it there
seems like we might not be able
to support it or even bring it
into the area, um, but thank
you, thank you for the work you
do and maybe discussion offline
too. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator, uh,
Representative Kate, thank you,
chair, and thank you very much
for your presentation. There's a
a lot of um information to
digest, so I'm sure we'll
continue our conversation past
my 3 minutes, um, but not today,
um, uh, just a couple of quick
questions, uh, the waiver
renewals, which are in 2025, are
they based on the uh the latest
um.
are as the request gonna be
based on the latest costing.
A chair, vice chair,
Representative Kates, uh, we,
there is an RFP out right now
that my colleagues at the
Delopmental Disability Service
Division have released, um, to
have a vendor support a 2025
rate study. It's the intention
to have the results of that rate
study helped inform the waiver
renewal.
So Mr. Chair, just so that I can
understand, um, so you have a
request for an RFP.
To get information.
That you will be able to analyze
that will reform your request
for July of 2025.
A chair, vice chair,
Representative Kates, that's my
understanding, but I'll, I'll
speak to my colleagues, um, at
the department and follow up
with you with
All right, thank you very much.
I, I have and it's kind of like
off the, like, not quite, it's
somewhat related.
But I've been brought to my
attention by several of my um
constituents, and then I had
some uh conversations yesterday.
Can you tell me the disparaging
of Medicaid payments for nursing
homes opposed to assisted living
programs what we learned
yesterday is there is an
Uh
There's an uh a larger number of
individuals under 40 in nursing
homes than we've ever had
before. Most of them are from
severe damage to substance
abuse, they're needing the
higher rate of services, but
what I'm also hearing is that
once they are stabilized, they
either don't have a behavioral
health bed to transition them to
and they can't, they have to
have a bed to transition them to
and that the Medicaid rates are.
So low for assistant living
programs, they're not being
transferred to just assisted
living programs causing issue
with um some of our beds needed
in ourhearsing, um, can you kind
of educate me on how that those
Medicaid rates are so different.
Thank you.
A chair, vice chair of
Representative Kate, I'm going
to ask my colleague Alisa Walker
Moran, to join me. She's the CFO
for the Medicaid program and is
more versed in this.
Uh, Mr. Chair, um, I'll be happy
to send you more information on
how the differences with the
NIFs and the ALFs, they're both
part of the healthcare quality
surcharge program. So when that
was implemented a few years ago,
they all received rate
increases, um, one of the issues
with that program is we are, um,
there's an upper payment limit
on how high we can go in those
rates, uh, but we actually do
have in our request.
A rate increase proposed for
ALFs in the coming fiscal year
206 budget.
So.
Thank you, thank you very much.
uh, Representative Johnson,
we'll go to you and then we'll
come back this way.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and good
afternoon colleagues. Is it
afternoon or still morning.
Thank you for your presentation.
I wanted to dovetail your
question representative Herndon,
and let you know that.
RMCHCS is doing very well.
They are working very hard on
their trajectory to provide
quality health care services and
some great changes have occurred
and are working very closely
with GIMC next door, and then
Doctor Wrangler Wangler's, um,
community healthcare services.
So I think we could visit
offline and maybe we could
invite RMCH to come and present
to us, and they could
talk about their plans for the
birthing center and uh the other
good news is, uh, doctors and
providers uh have returned to
gallop to RMCH because they love
the community and providing
services to our rural community
patients. So that's good news
there. I have a question page.
I saw a note for what's on the
horizon regarding autism.
Can you, uh, tell us a little
bit about that. Autism
intervention on page 17.
Uh, chair, vice chair,
Representative Johnson, um, I
actually would need to check
with my colleagues to get more
information about the autism
service expansion that we're
planning. So I'll send them a
note now and see if they can
tell me more during the hearing.
If not, I can follow with you
through email.
Thank you.
OK, thank you. I'm very, very
concerned about our students on
the spectrum in Northwest New
Mexico and the services and care
provided to them as far as um
personal healthcare and then
their experience in the
education system.
As that as they have that
situation. So please keep me in
the loop. And then if you could
just maybe resend us page 9, so
that we could be more clear
about um who's where on the map.
Thank you. That's all I have,
Mr. Chair.
Um, I just mentioned, we, we
didn't highlight it, but there
is an appendix, uh, starting on
page 2.
I think
You know, starting on page 21,
although 21 and and um.
22 are identical. So, uh, that
gives you this, and this came up
yesterday with a request for who
got the rural healthcare grants.
And this is an itemization of
who got them. And for McKinley
on page 2.
6, there's 3 separate or 2
separate, uh, maternal health
grants that were awarded.
60,000 to the i of Family Health
Center for something in Gallup.
Or McKinley County maybe not
and uh 15,000 to Family Medicine
Associates, so that looks like
to be maybe for the equipment
maybe that's the doctor that got
the, uh, the, um.
So what do you call it
ultrasound machine maybe that
was it and Mr. Chair, yes,
that's correct.
So, so you can track down now,
it's a little awkward in that
if, if one organization serves
multiple counties. It repeats
the dollar total in each county,
so it looks like um Frontera
Health got um.
553,000 in about 10 different
places, but it was just 1
$553,000 grant.
That is correct. So we wanted to
make sure you knew who was
serving which counties, but it's
not a duplicate payment, it's
just that they're serving more
than one county.
OK good. Could Mr. Chair, could
I make a request that, um.
Like jumpstart, which is an
autism services. It looks like
they got a, I, I looked at
Catron County. It's like they
got a million dollars to serve
the, uh, 3 3579 people in Karon
County. So if you could somehow
break it out, I mean, I don't
even know if that's possible,
but even on the side, say, you
know, this is for serving 16
counties because it's very
alarming to see all that money
under Katrin County. Thank you,
Mr.
Senator Hickey.
Oh yeah.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I'm 3
minutes doesn't even begin to
give me the opportunity to ask
lots of questions. So, uh, Alex,
I'd like to meet with you
afterwards. I'll give you a list
and we can have a meeting. And,
um, because I think there are
some things that, um, some
observations that, that would
help, uh.
In your progress, uh, the first
point I want to make is you're
focused on rural, and I know
rural is bad.
Albuquerque.
is just as bad.
You cannot get access to care.
You heard my comments earlier.
You're going to have to focus on
the entire state. Number 2,
point in general, um, you're
making progress, but I don't
know against what.
Um, is it a thimble in a bucket
or maybe it's a cup in a bucket,
but the problem is, is you
haven't to find the bucket and
the bucket is what are the needs
for providers in the state. That
is not real hard to do, and I
can meet with you, show you how
to get to what the needs are
with the baby boom coming in and
all the care, the demand, and so
we have to plan for what our
needs are, and don't use federal
or national averages, they're
all way off. None of that, none
have.
built that in. Um, the, uh, uh,
number 2, or I'm sorry, the next
point is.
The, uh, how do we, how do we
know the hospitals are spending
the money on physicians'
salaries. I met with three of
the CEOs and their medical
group, uh.
Medical directors, um, they all
said, oh, you know, we can't
file the money and, and it is
true, it's very complicated. So
I said, how about we have this
measure. It's about turnover. If
you have more than 5 to 10%
turnover, we should build this
into an amendment on the uh
bill, the healthcare delivery of
a a penalty because it's, yes,
it's pay.
But it's, and that's why they're
leaving because every other
state in the country is paying
better than we are, but it is
also the, I, I call it the slave
ship mentality of why so many
people leave because they're
being overworked and um 15
minutes we've heard about it. So
we've got to address, uh, that,
but, uh, and I will be meeting
with the hospitals again to
refine that measure, um, it's
great you're gonna have all
these residents, but I have no
idea where you're going to get.
preceptors, they don't exist,
um, the 75% of revenue being
spent in New Mexico. I can with
a algebra education.
Fool you completely that I'm
spending all that money in New
Mexico. It's a matter of how you
hide it and what buckets. It's,
it's not rocket science. We need
to, we need to uh make that much
more important. And then lastly,
uh, hopefully Gallup will 638
like Tuba City because Tuba City
now has about 110 doctors. They
served the entire community in
Flagstaff. They're a competitor
because they're operating
outside the confines of the
in Helser. They get that same
money, but they can bill and
take care of anyone. And Gallup
should pursue that and that
would help take care. I
understand Rehoboth maybe is
doing a little bit better, but
it's been a chronic issue. Thank
you. Sorry I went over.
Very close. Thank you. Uh, but
isn't it the tribe that has to
do the 638.
It is the tribe that has to do
the 638 for Defiance is also
done that, and they are doing
spectacularly well, um, in
serving the window rock and,
and, uh, the Arizona community.
So 6:38 is probably the answer
to Gallup's issues and they can
build a huge medical center and
probably because it's quite a
bit bigger than Tuba City,
attract 2 to 300 doctors, which
could then also go out and
clinics around the
area and staff those. They pay
very well. That's why they get
the doctors.
OK. Representative Martinez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'll be
Brief, um.
Deputy Secretary, I'm just, I'm
curious about the status of the
behavioral health collaborative
or you.
Gonna revive that? Are you going
to get rid of it.
Um
You know, when it worked it
worked wonderfully.
Um, and I'm just wondering.
Where we're at on that.
A chair I chair, um.
Representative, is a
representing Martinez. Thank
you. um.
Yes, that, the behavioral health
collaborative director position
has been vacant since March of
2023 and we're exploring.
next steps for that. I
acknowledge that that has been
quite some time. I think part of
our thinking is that when the
statute establishing the
collaborative was passed. It was
before the Affordable Care Act
where funding for behavioral
health was very siloed and
spread out across the healthcare
and social services system, um,
now I as the LFC analyst shared
previously.
About 75% of all behavioral
health care is paid for with the
Medicaid program and the
Affordable Care Act allows for,
you know, improved integration
and so as we're thinking about
the next steps of the
collaborative, we're trying to
Sort of we're thinking about how
we structure that CEO position.
Um, with this new landscape that
we're in with the Affordable
Care Act. There are the local
collaboratives, and there are
the behavioral health planning
councils, they continue to meet
and my colleague Nick Bocas
could tell you more about the
activities of those planning
councils and the local
behavioral health
collaboratives. They continue to
meet and the healthcare
authority continues to support
them in their operations.
So it sounds to me like you're
just gonna let it die on the
vine and
Let the local.
councils handle.
Their areas?
Chair, vice chair,
Representative Martinez, no, I
I'm not, no, I, that's
We're, we have not decided and
I, I think it's we're talking to
the other agencies, we're
talking to the governor's office
about, um,
About what to do next.
Um, I don't, I.
I don't wanna
We, we, we just have not
decided.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
uh, deputy secretary.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Savia Lopez.
Thank you so much for this, uh,
um, information I the
transparency is really great.
Um, I, my
Um
On page
7. The Medicaid rate increases
and expansions. I think those
are fabulous and great, and I'm
looking forward to seeing how
they, uh,
You know, how they move the
needle once they're implemented
in terms of expanding services,
but the issue that I always ran
into um when I was the
Of executive director of Elase
Communitario is is immigrants
lack of access, and, um,
Medicaid, of course, they're not
eligible for Medicaid services,
so they have to be paid out of
uh general funds. How does that
work? I don't, I don't see it in
the budget, you know, I love the
bilingual differential, for
example, and, but how does all
of that work with ensuring that
they have access because it's
not good for the community to
have a group of people who
are cut out of access.
A chair, vice chair centers Dio
Lopez, um, as you know, the
federal regulations governing
Medicaid don't allow
undocumented um.
Individuals to receive Medicaid,
uh, services unless in it in and
limited situations, for example,
perhaps a pregnant person
needing a delivery services, um,
one of the great things about
the Healthcare Authority that I
did not touch on this morning is
that
Now that we are working with the
Healthcare Affordability Fund,
um, that's now the healthcare
authority was previously at the
office of the Superintendent of
Insurance, uh, that team has
been working on a coverage
expansion program for people who
are ineligible for Medicaid
services and do not have access
to private coverage. Um, this
coverage expansion program.
is being supported with other
state dollars that come from the
healthcare affordability Fund.
Um, we're working with the New
Mexico Medical Insurance pool on
designing this program, but
that's one of the, the vehicles
we're looking at the healthcare
authority to support that kind
of healthcare coverage for those
individuals. We're hoping to
launch this program.
Um, sometime in calendar year
2025.
Excellent. Uh, that is such
great news. So launching it, um,
because the outreach is going to
be very important in that
because it's just, um.
It's horrifying to see what
happens to these individuals, so
I'm, I'm just thrilled and if I
can help with anything in the
launch, let me know.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, uh, Senator
Representative Chavez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, first,
I want to ditto what Senator
Hickey said about, um,
Knowing whether or not all of
the money is being spent in New
Mexico. I think that's a very
important point and one that we
really need to.
Keep track of and figure out how
we're gonna do that. So my
question is about the um the
recipients.
Um, so I noticed that like I was
looking at Cibola County and
there are.
3 entities who are gonna be
providing some form of
behavioral health care.
Um, and that and in Catron
County the same thing there are.
4
So my question is, when you
determine who was going to be
receiving these grants.
Was there a discussion around
what services were already there
and what services needed to fill
in the gaps.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Chavez, thanks for your
question. Um, we had limited,
uh, data last year when we were
making these decisions, um, we
did do our very best to spread
the um types of services that
were being provided knowing that
behavioral health is a needed
area across every county, um,
this year we do have Medicaid
data that specifically tells us
what those gaps are and so in
our decisions.
for this next round of funding,
we are going to be very specific
about um what those service gap
areas are.
Who's filling them and where, so
that we're not duplicating.
OK, and then my next question is
with regard to hospital Services
Corporation and American Medical
Response.
I is that ambulance service?
Uh
Chair and representative Chavez,
that is a behavioral health
transportation service that they
are developing so that we can
move those behavioral health
patients to the places that they
need to go.
Okey dokey.
Hm
All right.
I guess the same question, do
we, I mean, in terms of how much
they're getting and and the
population, it's kind of along
the lines that the question that
representative Thompson raised,
um,
how are we, I mean, sort of how
was that determination made in
terms of that's how much they
needed based on the number of
patients that needed to be
served.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Chavez, we have very detailed
budgets and budget requests from
each and every organization. We
do very thorough, um, budgets
with them and we are um making
sure that those the funds that
they are needing for those
services match up with what
they're providing. Uh, we also
track the amount of revenue that
they're receiving from these
services.
So that those revenues come out,
uh, before those payments are
made.
Um
I hope that answers your
question. Yeah, thank you, and
maybe just a quick follow up.
Would we
I, I would be very interested to
know because I'm not familiar
with all of these, um, agencies
or organizations. I would really
like to know how many of them
are out of state, if you could
provide that information, not
now, but maybe later.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair,
Representative Chavez. Every
organization it is located in
New Mexico.
So as far as with the services
that they're providing there in
New Mexico. I'm, I'm talking
about the parent corporation.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Chavez, I don't have that
information right here, but I
can uh do some research and get
back to you would be great.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Chavez. Representative Ferrari,
do you have any questions? No,
I'm sorry.
Uh, Representative Tom Thompson.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So just
real quickly, um, on page 9, if
we could get a list of who the
new CC uh BHCs are in which
county that would be helpful.
Um, and then on page 13 I just
had a question.
Um
Let me get to the page.
I've lost page numbers.
Um, so I, I can't find the page.
Let's see, 9.
and lingering stuff. OK.
Yeah, the numbers stop. Oh, so I
don't know what number this is.
It's right in front of
Healthcare Delivery Access Act,
like under ship rocket, you
know, where you're talking about
resident primary care
residencies, family medicine.
2-2-2. What are the 2s mean?
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Vice Chair
Thompson, thanks for your
question. The 2-22, that's the
number of residents each year,
so 2 residents for each year. So
total once the program is
started, um, we'll just have
22nd year they would have 4 and
then once they're fully, um,
with their students, they would
have a total of 6, so 2 each
um and then on page 15, um,
Maybe I'm, maybe I'm really off
base here, but it seems like 40
this is the.
care delivery and access Act,
only 40% of the revenue is
linked to quality performance. I
would love to see that higher,
um, just, it, it's like we, we
need to start getting what we
pay for and 40% doesn't seem,
uh,
Like high enough number and then
finally, it's not a question,
but um.
I'm going to say again, we need
to be tougher on our MCOs. May I
feel like they're driving the
boat sometimes that I mean you
look at the, the legislative
council report cards and, you
know, the, the, the
The goal is 40% or 38% and, and
I asked about it and it's, well,
you know, we negotiate with
them. They are, are we, we are
contracting with them. We should
be able to say.
If you want the contract, this
is what you're gonna do, not,
not, oh well, you know, we'll
let you only have, you know, 20%
fall reduction when we really
want 95, so just, just my
soapbox again to put in that we
really need to have more control
over, over our provider, I mean,
over our MCOs because I feel
like they frequently take
advantage of us. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Representative, um,
and I had a, a couple of
questions we just heard from uh
the secretary of uh
Uh, Health
That
They lose money on every
hospitalization, which I'm, I'm
still scratching my head trying
to figure out how that could
possibly be, but the, so that's
why they reduced the census
cause they, they don't want to
lose so much money, but serving
more people. Um.
On page 7, you have the Medicaid
rate increases in expansions,
but those don't, would those
actually impact the state
operated facilities?
If somebody is, is, is it
turquoise lodge, for example.
Would that, would turquoise
sludge have gotten an increase
based on that?
Yeah, Chair Ortizy Pino, yes, it
should if the service that's
being provided is reimbursable
for Medicaid. I think, um, one
of the LFC analysts, um, oh, hi
Kelly. Did you want to, do you
have some insight on that,
Kelly? That would be helpful,
yes, when the Medicaid rates
changes, but like for DD it
helps LCP or if they're, you
know, billing Medicaid also, I
believe last year in the
Medicaid, um, budget, there was
money for state hospital rates.
It was like 700,000 to match
with federal funds. So you
heard, you heard the secretary's
testimony, did that make any
sense at all to you?
Uh, no, I don't want to put you
on the. Can you explain why I'm
so confused by his answer,
you know, I think that is
something that we are constantly
trying to delve into together,
um, the fact that you know other
hospitals don't have state
general fund and our surviving,
um, there's, there's, it's a
complicated, you know, some of
them, some of their services are
not billable anywhere, and that
is the thing and um.
You know, they do have to deal
with state employee pay bands
and um Para and other costs that
are different than so it's a
very complex issue, but we have
talked extensively and should
talk again about, uh, including
more possibly for state hospital
rates to leverage that federal
peace, but I don't necessarily.
align with that totally.
You, you're scratching your head
as well, right?
OK, thank you. Then, um, but,
but in connection with that then
on page 15.
Where we had the
The the
Where is it?
Maybe it's not 15, yeah, page
15, um.
The um
The primary in psychiatry
residency that's residency
expansion.
Where's the other one? Here it
is.
Under the healthcare delivery
and Access Act. That's the new
one that we put in the text.
State hospitals don't
participate in that one though,
do they?
Uh chair Ortizy Pino, I'm going
to look over my colleague Lisa.
Alisa
she's the state, state hospitals
state facilities eligible for
the healthcare delivery and
Access Act, where they did we
write them out of that
expressly. You must have read my
mind, Mr. Chairman. Um,
actually, turquoise Calog is not
part of HDAA. They are not
participating, so they will not
receive a rate increase. I'm
sorry, what was that?
I was talking about turquoise
lodge and some of the other
facilities, they are not
participating in HDA so they
will not benefit from the but
they went from a regular
Medicaid, uh, increase
reimbursement rate increase
outside of HDA just for
hospitals, yes, of course.
OK.
Yeah, I guess, I guess the
theory was, or maybe there's a
federal restriction on taxing
yourself to jump up your
reimbursement.
But maybe that's, maybe that's
the issue. I don't know. OK, uh,
then one last question on page
17, where you have your, um,
Recent letters of direction.
We heard yesterday from
chiropractors.
And I see you had a, a recent
letter.
About chiropractic services uh
letter of
Direction number 18 and.
What was that about? Did, did we
expand the way Medicaid can
reimburse chiropractors, or what
was that about?
Mhm
Uh
Chair Ortizy Pino, uh.
Yes, uh chiropractic services
are now an eligible Medicaid
reimbursable of service for
members. So I believe we started
with a pilot or a smaller
implementation of it, but now
we're expanding it to um other
members who need that service.
is it, is it a service that,
that somebody can walk into a
chiropractor's office and get it
and if they're Medicaid eligible
to get it, or do they have to go
to a MD uh primary.
care provider and get a referral
for me for chiropractic.
How does it work?
Um, er Ty Pino, I don't think a
referral from a primary care
physician is needed if a
Medicaid member needs those
chiropractic services. I think
they could just go to um
You know, um, it's about, it
ties back to the code that is
the reimbursable code. So any
provider that he was qualified
to provide that service if they
bill to that code will get that
Medicaid reimbursement.
Yesterday, the, the
There are the chiropractic
Association, um,
There are some dissidents, but,
but basically they were asking
to be made fully uh accepted as
primary care providers.
It sounds like you may have
already done that. If you're
reimb if, if, if you're able to
reimburse them for care that
they provide to Medicaid
eligible client without having
to be first referred by a
Another primary care provider.
In effect, you've made them
primary care providers already,
haven't you?
Um, chair or TZP. Yes, I don't
believe that referral is
required. I don't know if the
chiropractor association's
concerned is tied specifically
to like a referral requirement
or perhaps uh just an increase
overall and their rate
reimbursement, expanded
formulary was what they were
really talking about that they
would be able to to expand the
things that they could do under
under their practice. OK. Yeah,
the drugs they could prescribe
and the procedures they could
bill for.
OK. OK.
All right, well thank you so
much.
This is great information. We're
delighted with the, the
transparency of, of how you all
are operating. It's very
helpful. And unless anybody has
any other comments or
Issues
Thank you so much.
And members, we, we have lunch
provided. So we're gonna stay
right here in our little, you
know, little seats instead of
vacating the premises as we did
yesterday.
Um, thank you, thank you all
from the LFC and you're welcome
to grab a lunch. Uh, JD
Bullington provided the lunches.
He provided 30 of them, and
there are only about 15.
Committee and staff members, so
help yourselves. Um, we are
gonna take some public comment
if there's anybody here who has
a public comment.
Anybody want to do a public
comment now. We could do that.
No? OK. Anybody online? Yeah,
uh, Nat Dean first. OK. We have
Nat Dean online, uh, with the
public comment, anybody else?
Karen Kushner.
OK, so, we'll start with you,
Nat. Go ahead with your public
comment.
Um,
this is
Mr. Chair, can you please
indicate if you can hear me. I'm
relying on the captioning.
Yes, we can hear you just fine
that.
Thank you very much, uh, Mr.
Chair. Uh, Madam Vice Chair,
members of the committee, uh,
I'll try to go fast. Um,
Uh, boy, not everyone is
eligible for me uh my name is
Nat Dean. I am a disability
advocate. I'm not a lobbyist,
and I am a person with multiple
disabilities. So I have
identified myself. um, not all
individuals are eligible for
Medicaid.
Many individuals are only
eligible for Medicare and many
individuals may not yet be
eligible for Medicare nor
Medicaid. Um, I took the
comments that uh Representative
Cates made with great uh
interest and seriousness, and
I'm gonna go
Kind of back, kind of far here
is that
In 2006, money follows the
person in New Mexico Act was
passed under Governor
Richardson.
Um, there are then was uh from
CMS a grant, Centers for
Medicaid and Medicare Services,
there was a grant in the amount
of $595,000
in 2011 to study money follows
the person as an avenue to move
out of a nursing home and into
the community and then funding
was received from CMS to run
from 2012 to 2016 in the amount
of 23
$724,000 in grant funds
explicitly designated to move
individuals from nursing
facilities into homes and
communities in that transitional
care, and the median age, even
back then in nursing homes was
44.
And it wasn't just from
substance abuse. It was a lot of
other uh disability issues. So
it tends to be quite surprising,
but the only way to have
long-term care or the
transitional care.
Uh, or acute care in a skilled
nursing facility, also known as
a SNIP SNF.
is to go under Medicaid
institutional living, and that
means that all of your assets
need to be gone that could
potentially be applied. I'm
going long and I'm getting into
some complex uh information, but
this was attempted to be
implemented.
And for the memorial, which was
sponsored by Senator Linda
Lopez. I'm sorry, she's not in
the room, was the Senate Joint
Memorial 9 in 2012 to ask that
the implementation of grant
moneys we utilized for this
purpose, but the money was
returned to CMS.
During the transition to create
Centennial care under Governor
Susanna Martinez and the money
was returned. CMO underground
has a long memory. When the
state gives back.
An amount of
$23,724,360. It will be a long
time before we see those kinds
of phones. So thank you, Mr.
Chairman and Vice Chair, I will
offer to be a resource to
explore some of these options,
but I'm very passionate about
this because these are the
really tough cases that come my
way, so that I can problem solve
and social workers may not have
all of the tools and experience,
but a well seasoned social
worker that's been in the field
for a long.
time May and I am not a social
worker, nor have I ever played
one on television, but I
certainly enjoy being a resource
to social worker so that we can
achieve the best outcomes
possible for everyone who has
any unmet need at any age, at
any point with any level of
resource. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
Madam Vice Chair, members of the
committee.
Thank you.
Um, and then we have a second
public comment online from Karen
Kushner.
Hello, Mr. Chair. Madam Vice
Chair, members of committee.
Thank you so much for allowing
me to speak today. I do want to
bring to your attention how
difficult it has been to make
public comment um in your
committee here so locally to me,
um, it's, it's an access issue
that I would hope that members
would take that up so that those
in the online community watching
would be able to participate
simply as well as those in
person. Uh,
I am a adult living with spina
bifida. I am part of the spina
bifida Patient alliance that
helps from diagnosis day to
adulthood with connecting people
to services. Um, many of these
people that are referred to me
have been turned away by
agencies because they are not
disabled enough to qualify for
waiver. They are not disabled
enough to qualify for IDDD, so I
would respectfully ask that you
please remember that there are
people
Out there that do not qualify
for regular services under all
of the programs that we have in
this state, but we definitely
need them to be considered and,
and get that bit of help that
they need. The other thing I'd
like to say is thank you Rep
Herndon for bringing up the
issue with your physician. Thank
you, Senator Hickey for bringing
up the issues with physicians.
Uh, this has been affecting the
disability community for several
years, where we just have not
been able to keep
Our primary care physicians
because we're too complicated.
Uh, they don't want to take care
of us. Um, I still, uh, Senator
or Tipino, I still don't have an
appointment with a neurologist,
um, because they just don't have
any general neurologists
available that wanna take on
somebody with SB. It's, it's a
problem. We don't have enough
specialty providers, and the
reason we don't have the
specialty providers is exactly
what Senator Hickey is telling
you.
I can tell you with great
assurance that my husband is a
physician in this state.
He works here because he uh
believes in the mission, we
believe in the mission, but it
is very difficult because these
providers are not always getting
the money that is promised for
raises, um, the money is also,
and I'm not anyway speaking up
for him personally, for us
personally, I'm just simply
saying that there is a revolving
door of providers that we, we
get them here, they stay for a
couple years. They aren't
getting those.
raises as they should and they
move on to somewhere else, and
it's a huge loss because we've
invested so much in those
doctors, and it leaves our
community, our most vulnerable
in the community with medical
fragile issues without the
service. And the last thing I'd
like to ask for is wrap around
care, um, I would hope that you
would
One day consider making massage
therapy, uh, on, on the table
for insurances to cover, um, I
hate David Lang is a massage
therapist in the state that
works with medically fragile and
he is no longer able to work
with those kids because he's
just not being paid for it and,
and the services he provides for
palliative care, end of life,
are so, so needed.
ative s also massage therapy,
physical therapy, occupational
therapy is what keeps a lot of
us with disabilities moving and
out of an emergency room and,
and healthy. And so I thank you
for the time. Um, I thank you
for your attention. Um, and I
hope that the rest of the
meeting goes well. Thank you so
much. Thank you. Thanks so much
for your comment.
Um
Anybody else? That's it.
So that concludes the public
comment, and I see we have, I
believe, uh, are you all from
Right Way Healthcare? Great. Uh,
we're gonna take maybe 10
minutes.
For people to finish their lunch
at 15 minutes shortly after
noon, we'll we'll resume and
we'll go right into your
presentation at that time.
