a little bit more and then we'll
start with our interview. Thank
you.
All right, folks, so you should
have 3 envelopes, which each
One for each of um
The applicants for director in
there, you should have um on
top.
For each, the 5 questions.
For the candidates, if you
wouldn't mind looking over those
questions, I would like to have,
um,
Each member volunteered to ask
one of those questions, um, so
in the course of me explaining
the rest of the packet, if you
wouldn't mind looking over those
questions and if you feel
compelled to volunteer,
You ask one of those, please do.
Um,
We have each of the folders in
alphabetical order.
So we will be going in
alphabetical order for our
interviews, and again, you have
their letter, their resumes
along with their answers to the
question.
Um,
That we have posed to them.
Um
So please make sure our members
that you have those.
And that information before you
question and represent your mom.
Do
OK. Um, is there any problem
with herpes and almoa? Nobody
else wanted it. OK. So 2
represented Mirabel Moa. Thank
you.
I appreciate that. Other
members.
you get volunt told
you get voluntold
you get volunt told
if no, and I'm good at cold
calling.
Representative Garrett are we
on? Oh, it doesn't matter. I
just was taking requests.
Or, so Representative Saana.
Question 4.3.
Question 3.
Uh-huh. Yeah.
OK, number 5. Would that be OK,
Senator Stewart? Thank you.
And then that leaves question
number one.
OK.
Thank you. Yup. And then we'll
listen to the answers, so please
note on um your question sheet,
there's space for you to write
in answers for using for you to
remember things that were said
for that answer. Um, that's why
I tried to leave space there.
for you all, um.
Each handed it and I'll explain
this again as they come in.
We'll have half an hour to
answer questions, so we'll be
given no more than half an hour,
but not limited to like the half
hour, so if they go under,
that's fine. Um, but we will
stick at half hour for each of
the interviews and these 5
questions.
And again, alphabetical order.
Questions from committee
representative.
No, they have not been given
these questions beforehand.
Any other questions from members
before we get started?
All right.
So
Lonzo, if you wouldn't mind.
All right. Welcome, Ms. Cole.
So, um, before we go ahead and
get started, we have members,
um,
We have 5 questions for you.
And each candidate, you will
have 30 minutes to answer the 5
questions. All right? So use as
much time as you need, but not
in excess of 30 minutes. OK, and
I'll try to give you
time indicators as we go through
some of those questions. OK, and
please stick to the question. We
appreciate it. All right, so
first question we have
representative Herrera.
Thank you, Ms. Cole. Good to see
you. Good to have you here
today. Thank you. And we'll
begin the series of questions
and number one is, uh, what do
you see as the role of the
various entities responsible for
addressing the issues named in
the Martinez in Yazi
Consolidated lawsuit.
Ms. Cole, I'm sorry to
interrupt. Would you mind if
your microphone is on, please,
so we can get it on webcast and
the folks here can see listen.
Thank you, Representative
Herrera. Um, that is a very
important question and um I just
first would like to say thank
you to each of you, um, on this
committee. Your job is so very
important in the state as you
set direction, um, for
education, and so it's an honor
for me to be here. I'm a native
New Mexican. Um, I've spent 29
years in education.
Uh, you probably have a copy of
my resume, so I won't go through
all of that, but um it, it is
quite an honor for me to be here
today. So, um, as I was
preparing for this interview,
um, I was reflecting on
Um
The, the questions that I
anticipated you might ask, and
one theme that came up over and
over again was connections.
And connectivity, and I believe
That, um, it is critical for our
um agencies across the state to
connect and work together to
address the concerns in
Um, Yazi Martinez.
Um, I believe that
You all have already.
done a very good job in laying
that foundation.
For educators in the state, um,
to address the issues.
So, uh, the first thing I would
say is that we have an adopted
multi-layer system of support
framework.
And through that framework, uh,
we as school district entities
should be uh ensuring that all
of our students have access to
high quality curriculum.
Evidence-based curriculum, high
quality instruction.
And I would say that next steps
for that would be ensuring that
layer 2 and layer 3 also have
that evidence-based curriculum,
high quality instruction.
Um, and everything that we do.
In education should go into that
framework. All of our other all
of our other frameworks that we
work with, community schools,
um, positive behavior
intervention supports all of
them should fit inside that
framework. And by doing that, we
can better address the needs of
our most at-risk students. Uh,
the second thing I would say
that has um happened that has
just been, uh, in my opinion,
one of the best things to
address the needs of our, our
at-risk students as the
legislation on structured
literacy.
I am so um thrilled with the
results that we're getting in
our district with with
structured literacy.
Um, and, and
When I talk about that.
We have to remember that, um.
We get very set in our ways as
educators. And as education
entities. And so we have to
think about the science of
de-implementation, and the
science of implementation. Um,
and so it was a process to do
that. We, I had written a
striving readers' grants in
Roswell and um we were able to
use the tail ends of those funds
to start onboarding our
teachers, um, to be trained in
structured literacy.
I also, um, leveraged funding
from ITEA to hire a certified
academic language therapist, a
cult, is a dyslexia therapist.
And that was a critical move in
in shifting toward uh structured
literacy in our district. So
what has happened since then is
we have leveraged, leveraged
partnerships, um, with
nonprofits, and we have a cohort
of teachers who are working to
become
Hops, certified academic
language practitioners. So it's
a different level, not that
therapist level, but they're
learning, they're collaborating
together, and what we are doing
now is placing them in our
students, in our schools that
have the highest percentage of
those at-risk students.
And so we, uh, we developed a
We, we looked at the numbers, we
developed an application
process. They interviewed and
now they're serving those
at-risk learners in those
schools, um, and so that has
been critical and we are already
seeing the results. We're using
a new data system or we're using
Lexia in addition to iStation,
to regular, regularly review our
data.
Um, the other
The other
I'm gonna circle back to MLSS
and um
Talk about our special education
students.
And uh we know that we were over
identifying.
Students in special education in
the state.
And so part of it was lack of
access to the high quality
curriculum, um,
And so by um
Implementing that framework and
really uh paying attention to
the needs of those, those
special education students. Um,
I think that we'll see that
start to shift. I know that
there will be a report coming
out in December of 2024. I'm
anxious to see that.
Um, the other thing that's
critical for our at-risk
learners is the social-emotional
component. Again, that goes into
the framework.
And um our students.
have needs and behavioral and
mental health.
And so when I talk about
connecting systems, I'm also
talking about connecting those
behavioral and mental health
systems. So,
It takes all of that.
Connecting the systems and it
takes working with our partner
agencies or nonprofits, our, um,
you know, other agencies in the
state to address to truly
address the needs of those
at-risk learners.
Represented me of Moya.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Mrs. Cole. Um, my question is,
what do you think the role of
LESC director and staff is in
the New Mexico legislature.
Thank you, Representative Moya
for that question. Um,
So
The role of the LESC director.
is to serve each of you.
This is a, uh
Uh, bipartisan bicameral
committee and
That position serves you.
And
Um, you,
need the information to make the
very best decisions to set
direction for education in this
state. It's the most important
work that happens.
In my opinion, the most
important work that happens in
the state is the the uh
A policy that, that you develop
and support, um, for education,
so
Oh
That's what I believe the role
would be.
Right, you still have 22
minutes. Our Representative
Garrett.
Um
Good afternoon, uh, question is,
what would be your priorities
and strategies for managing the
legislative education Study
Committee for the upcoming 2
months, 2025 legislative session
and the upcoming interim
sessions.
So my priorities would be uh
really
Getting to know each of the
members and understanding the
priorities of the committee.
Um
Learning about um each of the
policy analysts and the work
that they do and have done, and
to really streamline um that
work coming into the, the uh
position.
Uh, I believe that collaboration
is incredibly important,
communications incredibly
important and so um that
You know, ongoing communication
setting goals, um, and then
Um, meeting regularly to um
To determine whether or not
we're meeting goals or whether
we need to shift, if we need to
pivot directions, but um it's
It's work and it takes time and
commitment and communication.
me, uh, representative Sarana.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms.
Cole, how would you as director
of LSC LSC go about organizing
an interim research project
focused on improving statewide
map instruction and student
outcomes.
That's a great question. Thank
you, uh, Representative. I, um,
I have reviewed the scores in
math across the state, and of
course, we all know that there's
a deficit there.
Um
I would look at the work that is
already happening. I went
through the the work plan that
has occurred during the interim,
and see that there's some um
incredible work that's already
happening, but I believe that
Um, setting direction is really
about
Changing teacher perceptions
about themselves as math
educators. That's part of it.
Uh, I, I, I, I believe, um,
having worked with teachers for
a really long time that many
teachers believe that they are
not math educators. I also
believe in the, the relevancy
and importance, importance of um
connecting math to the real
world. So looking at project
project-based learning, and
really moving those kinds of
initiatives forward. I also
think that there's an important
um
Aspect and steam, and
integrating the standards
through
Steam instruction, particularly
arts. I think that that we've
Uh, maybe missed the boat a
little bit and um not
integrating math through arts,
but um certainly there's a lot
of so much potential, um, for
math instruction in the state
and I think it's just following
through with the work plan
that's already been set, and
continuing to look at the data
and build on that data.
I might add that my daughter, my
youngest daughter is a math
major at New Mexico Tech, so
very proud of her and she had
some great math teachers, um, to
help her get into that place.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator
Stewart.
Good afternoon, Miss Cole.
What are the priority
considerations. When trying to
build a budget.
That directs funding for
programs and interventions to
improve student college career
and civic readiness.
So there are, uh, so good
afternoon, uh, Senator Prote
Stewart, um, thank you for the
question. Uh.
I will say that first of all,
uh, college and career readiness
is certainly one of my passions.
Um, I was in middle school
principal for 10 years at um uh
low socioeconomic school and um
I
I, uh
I, I'm sorry, I apologize. I'm
just thinking about the
connectivity again.
To those college and careers and
how many of my students just
Couldn't envision their future,
because they didn't have the
models.
For those for for that future.
And so really getting a career
exploration into the classrooms
was significant for me since
I've been assistant
superintendent and I stepped
into this role, uh, right as we
went into shut down for COVID,
um, so it's been quite
challenging, but also very
rewarding. We had 4 viable
college and career pathways in
my district, when I started. We
now have 30.
And so we were able to to build
those through funding with
Perkins, with NextGen. Um,
And uh also with, with Esther's
funds, and so we looked at our,
our state's industry data, and
we're part of Region 5 through
Perkins, and so we looked at our
regional industry data.
And we as a team, my department,
built the budget, we included
principles in that and uh took
into consideration, um,
Sustainability and the long-term
projections for the industry,
uh, in building that budget.
So we've uh actually have built
career pathways, um, K through
12. Now we have my uh elementary
counselors, uh, put together a a
Career exploration.
Uh module and they actually
present it nationally at the
Southern Regional Education
Board conference, so very proud
of the work that that they've
done under my leadership and um
in our middle schools, we've
purchased deco labs, we have Rip
and STEM labs, uh, in all of
our, our middle schools. And so
to bring it back to the budget,
Certainly, it's not as complex
as the district level as it is
at your level. I understand
that, but
You know, one of, one of the
pieces of my job is to watch
what is happening here, um, in
your, your committee and watch
what happens in legislature and
then what's signed, and to begin
preparing my team for that. Um,
and so I have each of my team
members create initiative
inventories.
So we have a strategic plan that
we've developed, we develop our
mission, our vision, have a
strategic plan, and when they
develop their initiative
inventories, they tie everything
that they do back to that
strategic plan.
And we set short-term and
long-term goals, and we look at
the funding sources, so we're
looking at Title 1, Title 2,
Title II, Title 4, Perkins, um,
rural low-income schools as a
funding source for us. It's
federally funded. Uh, we look at
potential appropriations from
legislature and how we can
leverage those funds and then
sustain in the end. And so we
meet regularly, we go through
budget regularly, um, the other
part of that is working with um
the business office.
To ensure that we're following,
uh, procurement laws and the
processes that they have in
place and also that they
understand the program side and
what it is that we want to
accomplish, uh, so that our
students can be successful. Um,
the other place that we leverage
funding is through partnerships
with foundations, um, and
nonprofits, and so it's a lot of
work, but really going back to
that strategic plan and those
initiative inventories.
Helps us keep everything aligned
and ensure that we're all moving
in the same direction and
accomplishing our goals.
Great. Well, those are our
questions. We certainly
appreciate you being here and
being willing to uh apply to be
our next director. Thank you so
much. Thank you.
All right, Mr. Frostadt,
welcome.
So, we have 5 questions from
different members that they'll
ask you, you'll have a half hour
in total to give your responses
to these 5 questions, um, and
then between questions, I'll try
to give you a heads up on what
time you do have, OK?
And if you would stay on the
question, that would be awesome.
Representative Herrera, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Welcome,
Mr. Frosted. Good to see you.
And this is your first question
from the committee. Um, what do
you see as the roles of the
various entities responsible for
addressing the issues, uh, named
in the uh Martinez and Yazi
Consolidated lawsuit.
Mr.
Mr. Chairman and Representative,
uh, thank you very much for the
opportunity to be here today. It
is an honor to be selected as a
finalist and to be able to
interview for, for your
director's position. Um,
I, I have been in front of this
committee a number of times, uh,
and it is, uh,
It's wonderful to be here today
to be able to tell you a little
bit more about myself and about,
uh, my understanding of issues
such as the Martinez Yazi
lawsuit.
So
the Martinez Yazi lawsuit is a
state lawsuit, so the, the main
entities that are involved in
that lawsuit are the
The legislature, the executive,
and
Even though it's from the school
districts, the school districts
are critical to
Implementing the initiatives
that the legislature pays for
and that the executive is trying
to implement.
It's
What the responsibilities are,
it's a little up in the air
right now, as uh the state has
received a new motion and um the
Attorney General has not
contested demotion, we haven't
yet heard from the court, but
that motion.
Suggests that uh that this
committee would be responsible
for drafting um a remediation
plan by May 1st of this year,
which is an aggressive timeline,
and um after receiving feedback
from the plaintiffs, uh, to
which that remediation plan
would be submitted would then
need to submit by July 1st, the
uh amended plan incorporating
feedback from the plaintiffs.
It's unclear whether or not um
the court will accept that
motion and will uh assign that
Uh, responsibility to this
committee.
Of the
The legislature otherwise is
responsible for making sure that
funding is available to address
the learning gaps that are
evident in our student
populations, the for student
populations that are identified
in the Martinez Yazi lawsuit.
And um
The executive then is
responsible for
Taking, uh, using that funding
to implement
And monitor.
Implementation of initiatives
across the state to increase
academic achievement generally,
but in particular to close those
learning gaps for the, for
Uh, student groups identified in
Martinez Yazi, and this is the
Martinez Yazi lawsuit is an
education sufficiency lawsuit
similar to others that um
That have happened around the
nation, and uh we've been
dealing with the lawsuit for
some time, and
Um, again, I'd like to say that
districts, though.
Districts are not
Called out in the lawsuits, um,
it's not the, the lawsuit is not
against school districts, the
lawsuit is against the state,
but it's very difficult for the
state to
Implement education initiatives
without schools uh being on
board. And that's one of the
frustrations that um the
legislature and the executive
have seen when trying to
implement the changes necessary
to see the academic growth, uh,
in order to, to end the lawsuit.
Um, and, and that
Frustration has been evident
from the, the chair of the
legislative Finance Committee in
open hearings saying, you know,
we should sue the school
districts because we're actually
providing the funding, we are
working on implementing the
initiatives, but the school
districts are not following
suit. Um.
Thank you.
Represent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Mr. Fossett. Um, my question is,
what do you think the role of
the LESC director and staff is
in the New Mexico legislature.
Mr. Chairman and Representative,
uh,
The role of the LESC is to set
education policy for the state
of New Mexico. Um,
They, the, the role of the
director is to work with the
experts on staff to make sure
that this committee has the
information and the tools needed
in order to make the best
policies possible for education
for New Mexico's for the
improvement of educational
outcomes for New Mexico
students.
The
Committee is
Um
Unfortunately does not have as
much control over
The budget for education, uh,
and so that's why it's very
important for the staff and the
committee to be working closely
with the legislative Finance
Committee to make sure that the
education policies of the, of
this committee are, are able to
be implemented, um, budget is
policy and um
And it's really important for
this committee, being the
experts in education and setting
the education policy to be able
to have that influence with the
legislative Finance Committee as
well.
Um
The, it's also the
responsibility of the staff.
To make sure that relationships
are held not only with the
Legislative Finance Committee,
but also across the street and
with other stakeholders around
the state to make sure that you
all have um clear feedback from
the field and have an
understanding of how the
programs that you are funding
are being implemented by the
executive.
Thank you.
Representative.
Hi. Um, what would be your
priorities and your strategies
for managing the IOC for the
upcoming 60 day session and the
upcoming interim sessions.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative.
My, if, if I were selected to be
your director, my priorities
would be first and foremost, to
talk with the leadership in this
committee, as well as the
members to make sure I
understood what your priorities
are.
Again, I, I look at the
responsibility of the director
in making sure that you have the
tools and the information that
you need in order to set
education policy.
And so finding out what your
priorities are, what you are
hearing from your constituents,
um, and, and also working with
Constituents, uh, across the
state to gather input and
provide feedback to you would be
um would be my priority.
Uh, as
It's
Also, again, really
relationships are really
important, and um in in order to
make sure that the best
Educational um policies are able
to be um
Set and implemented because
they're, they're
There is the work that is done
here in setting the education
policies and then the work in
the executive to make sure that
it's implemented in a way that
aligns with um
With the legislature's vision
for
Or the project or the
initiative. And so, again,
fostering those relationships,
uh, across the street, um, is
how we typically talk about that
from when we're on the PED side,
um, because the agency is
literally across the street, um,
Is, is also an important aspect
to make sure that we can work
together with the executive.
It's no secret over the last
year and a half that there have
been strained relations. It's
been published in the media that
there are um strained relations
at times between the executive
and the legislature, um, and
presenting in front of this
committee, I have experienced
some of that, um, myself and um
And I think it is, it's
incumbent on the director to to
foster positive relationships to
make sure that um not only do
you have the information that
you need to make good decisions,
but that they are implemented um
in the executive in the way that
you're envisioning.
Thank you.
Representative.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
welcome, Mr. Frostadt.
How would you as director of
LESC go about organizing an
interim research project focused
on improving statewide math
instruction and student
outcomes.
Mr. Chairman and Representative.
So
Looking at um
Mm
One of the things that we're
able to see.
From the initiatives that we've
been implementing. So the, the
state has had a really strong
focus on structured literacy
and, and reading strategies and
um the
Unprecedented funding that you
all have provided for that has
started to see the growth in the
state that we need. Um, we're,
we're definitely not there yet,
but, uh, over this last year,
we, um, over the last couple of
years, we have seen an increase
in statewide reading scores and
from the uh
The summer reading program when
we typically see a summer slide,
we have seen that students who
participated did not experience
that same summer slide, as has
been experienced in the past,
um, or that is experienced by
other students, uh, who aren't
participating in or who didn't
participate in that program.
Conversely, in uh in math, we
are seeing stagnated scores, uh,
statewide, and the investments
have not been significant and in
fact for this current year,
there is no, um, below the line
funding, um, or even there
there's no
Legislative funding that was
identified specifically to
support math or STEM.
And
And so
I think it would be really
important to consider how, uh,
How important is math? Do we
want to invest in math in the
same way that we have invested
in in reading. Um, and do we
want to have statewide
initiatives in the same way that
we have statewide initiatives
for reading some of the
statutory
Um
Some statutory provisions that
could be implemented, um,
similar to reading would be um a
statewide math screener, um,
that is something that we don't
currently have, but could have,
um, a requirement for math, um,
professional development plans
in the same way that we have
professional development plans
that are required for reading.
Um, and then professional
development opportunities again,
we have
Uh, we have letters and for, for
reading, but we do not have uh a
statewide professional
development, um, requirements in
the area of math, and I think
that that, again, um,
Doing all of those things could
help support um
Math instruction statewide is um
and
It, it really would be um great.
We know that our math scores are
lower than our reading scores,
and to have some
Um, to have some focus to, and
to make some progress in that
area would really be great as
well.
Thank you.
Senator Stewart.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good
afternoon, Mr. Frosted.
What are the priority
considerations when trying to
build a budget.
That directs funding for
programs and intervention to
improve student college career
and civic re.
Mr. Chairman and Madam
President,
Huh
There are so building a budget
is a very complicated task. I
have had the opportunity to
build the public school support
request over the last two
sessions and um we are getting
very near ready to submit uh our
agency budget requests for the
public school support request,
Um, and, yeah, hopefully by
Friday. Hopefully in 2 days. Um,
And as part of that, we, we
balance, so we balance a lot of
as is required by the executive
and the legislature, we balanced
many different considerations.
One,
How much can we increase the
Um, recurring general fund
appropriations. Are there, um,
has the, the perf, the public
education reform fund has that,
is there additional money in
there that can be tapped.
Um, do we want to put items in
the new growth fund will, is
this something that we want to
study for the next 3 years to
decide whether or not it's going
to be effective and continue
that into the future. Um, and,
and I know that there's
consideration now of doing
something similar with the
public education reform Fund as
well, um, to, to really use
that, uh, for
Making sure that we have a
strong evaluation program for uh
the items that we are, that are
new, that we want to study and
to see whether or not they're
effective and we want to
continue into the future.
In terms of specifically, how do
we want to address the budget
for college and career readiness
or for, um, and, and I would
include
In in college and career
readiness, there is a lot of
civic mindedness as well, um,
and
It is
Being college and career ready
means being ready to, to be a
productive citizen when one
graduates and um we have
Um
Uh, we have another
consideration, um, that has not
Um
That that we haven't run into
any problems recently, but it is
always something that we
consider the maintenance of
efforts, um, because we do get
federal funding from Perkins,
that's another consideration we
have to maintain, are is the
state reducing its funding in
the area of college and career
readiness and if so, um,
Will we see a decrease then in
federal funds we could, we did
not meet our maintenance of
effort.
The the state required
maintenance of effort for state
funding.
Um
The
Some of the areas in which we
look at funding for college and
career readiness, we definitely
are looking at work-based
learning, how can we support
work-based learning to get our
students into um
Into the community to support
the community, to get paid and
realize the
The benefits of education and
the benefits of employment. Uh,
we look at innovation zones, how
are, what can we do differently
in our schools? How can we
innovate, um, in order to um to
make sure that we're meeting
student needs in this new world
that we're living in, it's not,
uh, school is not the same and
the workplace is not the same as
when we went to school and we
need to make sure that there are
spaces where innovation can
happen and students, um,
can benefit from that.
There is also the traditional
CTE that we have, um, in schools
and that we pay for, uh, again,
using federal funds, the Perkins
funds as well as our state funds
to um to have those really
exciting programs that that this
committee has seen in Hobbs and
in Carlsbad, um, and had those,
those opportunities to see
students learning skills, um,
that are not just academic, but
that are transferable.
to um uh direct clear, uh,
direct career implementation as
well.
Um, and those
Um
Those are some of the
considerations and again, uh, I,
I'm lucky in that I really only
have to look at the education
budget, not like you all were um
the governor's office who have
to consider
Um
The budget over the entirety of
the state and all of the all of
the departments, but, uh, when
looking at education
specifically, these are some of
the the of the issues that um
that we have to consider when
we're building the, the public
school support request.
Those were our questions. Thank
you so much, Mr. Frosthead.
Thank you. I appreciate it.
All right, Mr. Sinna, welcome.
So,
Um
We have 5 committee members with
different questions. You're
going to have a half hour in
total to answer those 5
questions, and I'll try to
remember to give you some time
cues as we go along for that,
all right?
So our first question comes from
Representative Ver good to have
you here.
So here's the first question.
What do you see as the rules of
the various entities responsible
for addressing the issues named
in the Martinez Eazi
Consolidated.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Can, can you
repeat that for was it the
rolls? What do you see as the
roles of the various entities
that are responsible for
addressing the issues named in
the uh Martinezinazi
Consolidated lawsuit.
That's really the roles of the
various entities.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Um,
That's a really good question.
Something we've been thinking a
lot about uh over the last few
years and something I've been
thinking a lot, I've had the
opportunity, I guess, uh, since,
since the lawsuit was
Um
Since the court actually made
its decision in 2018.
Uh, I've been a principal.
And I've been a legislative
analyst and policy director at
the state agency and and now
been working for you all for a
few years. And um
One, I think it's important to
say, first of all that
All of the entities have
different roles to play, but
they have to be connected to one
another in some way to ensure
that.
How they decide to fulfill those
roles are actually connected and
aligned in a sort of
comprehensive effort for the
state, because I think it's
important and there's been a lot
of conversations, um.
About who's actually responsible
for responding to the lawsuit.
And um we hear different
responses about whether that's
the state agency's job or the
legislature's job, and I think
we're constantly reminded, first
of all, that it's the state's
job.
Um, and so I'll just start there
that I think in order for any of
this to work.
has to be a comprehensive and
intentional effort.
Obviously, the legislature has a
particular role to play.
In funding and creating
I see
To address the lawsuit.
And obviously the legislature
has done some of that already in
responding to the call for
higher quality educators. That
was one of the things the
lawsuit said is every student
needs a high quality teacher and
and the legislature has done a
lot of things.
The department has also
responded to that particular
call in creating different kinds
of programs, which is their job
as an implementer. So I guess in
terms of broad terms, the
agency's job is the implementer
of state policy is really
important at the local level,
having school districts, and I
would say even in this case, uh,
even though they're sort of
state agencies under themselves,
the institutions of higher ed. I
would also argue or a sort of
local agency in this case, that
are also responsible for.
and, and I'm just sticking with
that teacher, uh, example as
one.
Because you have to have
intentional.
Partnerships between the state
agency, IRA, school districts as
well, right? And it can't just
be that one of these entities is
responsible for one part, and if
someone else doesn't do their
job, we get to sort of point
fingers, has to be aligned, um.
So, and then obviously the local
district, I'll say the districts
uh in this case.
Which I think a lot of us would
agree or has been the missing
piece.
That the the local districts.
Work hard every day.
Help students.
But aren't necessarily, I don't
think aware of their crucial
role.
As the on the ground.
You know, folks doing the work
and how that has to be aligned
from the top to the bottom, and
I don't necessarily mean that
from a top to bottom, like we
tell you what to do and you do
it. It has to be reciprocal
relationships.
Um, and so, I guess, broadly
speaking, just to sum up.
The Legislature appropriates
funds for programming.
Ideally based on, you know,
evidence and and good policy and
policy.
The agency is responsible for
that state level implementation
and oversight, which I didn't
mention and I think oversight is
also really important for the
state to like figure out where
their role is in helping
districts do these jobs well
without feeling like it's a
thumb on people all the time.
What does it look like to
provide support, technical
assistance from the agency.
And then obviously at the local
level.
Uh, school districts in this
case, really understanding why
that policy is happening, where
that money is supposed to go.
And, you know, it becomes a game
of telephone often where we
think
At the state level that we've
done something.
And by the time it gets to a
school district or a classroom
level.
That message has been distorted,
um, and sometimes co-opted
honestly by some folks who are
using that for their own
benefit.
And the only way we get around
that is I think by being very
explicit at each of those levels
about how um
So
I hope that answers the
question.
Represent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Mr. Senna. My question for you
is what do you think the role of
the LESC director and staff is
in the New Mexico legislature.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
uh, Representative. That's a
really, uh, really good
question. And it's one I, I
struggle with all the time, to
be honest. Um,
So I'll start with the, with the
role I think.
We kind of know it, as far as uh
LA director and staff. Our job
is to support you, um,
Certainly with interim work in
creating our work plan, ensuring
that the
The presentations that we put in
front of you at every meeting
are meaningful, connected to
what's happening in education
today, both nationally and
locally.
Giving local communities the
opportunity to raise the issues
that they're seeing in their
community, so that you're made
aware of of those things because
obviously you're not living in
all those communities all the
time.
Um, and so it's our job as, as,
uh, staff.
To ensure that we're listening
to communities that we're um
Partnering with our, with the
state agency, with
superintendents, with school
boards. We don't want to operate
in a silo, where we as staff sit
in our offices.
Maybe doing really good work
around research.
And bringing you those ideas in
isolation. They have to be
connected to the issues that
you're responding to on a
regular basis.
Um, and they also have to give
you a path forward. It doesn't
do any good for us as a
committee staff.
To present you with problems.
Without solutions or at least
potential solutions. We think
that's really important, because
otherwise, we end up in this
sort of uh loop or cycle of
Raising problems, and then next
year we raised the same
problems, and the next year we
raised the same problems.
How do we help you all uh with
good information and research
and feedback from your local
communities, um,
In in actually being able to
take action.
on those, on those problems.
That's really important.
Um, the piece where I think it
gets a little bit tricky for us
as staff, um,
I
We're not implementers.
As I would, I would say for us
as staff, and I'm sure some of
you feel this way as well, given
your your professional
experience.
Because of my experience as a
teacher and a principal and a
and a higher ed administrator
and working at an agency.
I always want to do the thing.
I just, I just think if I could
just do the thing, everything
would be OK, right? And I'm sure
we all feel that way sometimes.
So I think it's also really
critical that the staff and the
director recognize.
Both the limitations of that
role.
But also leverage that
particular place in the system.
Right, because in some ways,
when you recognize that it's not
our job.
To do the thing to actually
implement the program.
It frees us up to think more
about, well, how do we make the
system better, so that it's
easier for the people who
actually have to do that job to
do it better, right? And that
includes information for you
all, but also really thinking
critically about that policy, so
that when a superintendent, I
was, you know, I was cramming
before the test, uh, when a
superintendent gets this quick
guide at the after the session.
They actually understand what
that means for their local
communities.
Both because it's been informed
by the work, by the, by the
feedback that they've given us
and that we give to you as
staff.
But also because we have the the
opportunity.
To think about that
implementation, right? To think
about how policies need to play
out over years, and how that's
going to be, um, interpreted and
implemented at the local level.
So, uh there's that.
That research piece that we need
to, we need to do for you as
staff and obviously the
director, um, in communication
with you all and the chairman,
um, get your direction about
what that agenda should be,
right? What our work plan should
be every year.
Um
But also really important that
we continue to listen to
communities.
Um, and understanding how policy
and budget are actually going to
implement, I'm sorry, effect.
The implementation.
Because I could name at least 5
things, probably, and it's no
one's individual fault.
Where we create policy and maybe
we even put a lot of money
behind it.
But if we haven't thought
through the actual implications
for local level implementation.
It doesn't work.
Right? Because we, we didn't ask
the right questions or we didn't
think about how it might affect.
Literally, an individual
teacher's morale and whether or
not they follow through with
some of those things, right? So,
it's critical I think that the
that the director and staff one
listened to you in your
direction for, for our work.
Also important that we provide
you with good information based
on the research again, both
local and national.
But also that we're able to,
because we have such a unique
position in state government,
and I would say nationally as a
as a
You know, education staff to a
to a legislature, that we have
that opportunity to do a lot of
work that other folks, uh.
Frankly just aren't able to do.
and you still have 19 minutes,
representing here.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Cena,
what would be your priorities
and strategies.
For managing the ileus C for the
upcoming 60-day session and
upcoming interim session.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Um,
To to connected but slightly
different things, right? Getting
ready for the 60 day session,
and I would say, um,
I've been fortunate enough, uh,
to, you know, obviously have
been closely involved in the, in
the development of policy
proposals and budget proposals
for you all going into the 60
day session. So I'll speak to
that first.
Um
I think we're, we're all very
proud of staff.
Um, that some of the proposals
that we've brought to you over
the last couple of years have
been based on not, you know,
One interim's worth of work or
one report that we did or one
evaluation, but that we've
worked consistently over months
and, and, and years in the case
of uh graduation requirements,
for instance, as a way to, to
really create good policy,
right? And listen to people and
how that works.
So for this upcoming session, I
would say the SCG revision is,
is critical.
Staff
Uh, have worked really hard to
to put to, again, to get that
feedback from that working group
that some of you participated
in. Um, I think we've done a
good job of putting together
some good estimates for you
about what that.
What that would mean for school
districts.
And it also simultaneously to
the appropriations themselves
are accompanied with policies
that are addressing some of the
key findings in the lawsuit,
right? English learners, for
instance, are called out as a as
a subgroup in the in the
lawsuit.
And the proposal in the SCG for
the stand-alone factor is a
direct response to that.
Both in terms of of of, you
know, fiscal support, financial
support for school districts,
but it's also a philosophical
signal.
That these students matter.
And that school districts need
to pay attention to them, not
that they weren't before.
That they can point to a signal
that the state, this is
important to the state as a
whole, and that they can point
to specific funding and
resources. The same thing is
true with the secondary
increase, we've heard, uh, for
years now about career technical
education, the power of
performing and fine arts in in
um.
In um
Engagement engaging students in
the secondary uh process and
including middle school, we
heard from our middle school
working group this year, uh,
including 6th grade, how
critical it is that we continue
to support uh secondary
students.
And so I would say that that's
a, that's a big priority for our
work in the, in the upcoming
session, in addition to a number
of other um
Proposals that we'll bring to
you as staff um next month.
Those are very critical.
As I said earlier, uh, when we
were talking about teachers, and
at rising and uh grow your own.
And that we'll talk more about
tomorrow in our presentation.
I know that it's been hard for
people to hear.
That over the last 5 years in
response to the lawsuit, we
haven't done anything. Anybody
who's been working in this field
over the last 5 years, knows
that we've actually done a lot
of things.
I think, I hate to steal my own
thunder at this point, cause I'm
going to say some of this stuff
tomorrow too.
I think the missing component
here isn't that, isn't that we
haven't done anything.
It's that, is that it often
feels sort of fragmented.
And that someone's doing
something over here and
someone's doing something
similar over here, and maybe
there's even another person
doing something similar over
there.
And maybe they kind of know
about each other, but they don't
know exactly what's what's going
on, and it may result in, uh,
obviously a lack of
coordination.
Redundant efforts in literally
what they're doing on a daily
basis.
And inefficiencies when it comes
to using state resources if
we're, if we're doing things in
all these disparate ways and not
talking to one another.
And so
My point being, I think that the
next step.
Uh, for the state and, and
something that I think as LESE
staff, uh, with your guidance.
would be important is how do we
start to align those efforts in
a meaningful way.
To meaningful and intentional
metrics and goals.
Right? And, and, um,
I'll just repeat what I've said
in a couple of different
meetings.
Until we can agree what progress
will look like.
We're gonna we're always going
to argue about whether or not
we're making progress.
Because we may have different
benchmarks about what that
should look like.
And um
It isn't necessarily the job of
LESD staff, I'll be quite
honest. I think this goes back
to the previous question about
what is our role and what is the
director's role and what staff's
role.
Um
It's hard to draw that line as
to when you, when you cross over
into something that isn't your
job and, and we would rely on
you all as the committee to
provide that kind of guidance.
But I do think the committee and
its staff is uniquely
positioned, both because of its
expertise and literally because
of the time and resources it has
to do this work.
As policy director at PED.
I would have loved to have done
this, and some of you
participated in the strategic
planning process that I helped
to coordinate at PED when I was
policy director.
It was fine.
We, we had some predetermined
goals of what we wanted to
accomplish as a department. We
hoped that people would agree
with those efforts because we
thought they were good efforts.
Um
But I wasn't going out listening
to communities every day.
I wasn't, you know, listening to
principals and teachers all the
time.
Because I had a job to do. I, I
worked every day as a policy
director, and honestly, I spent
probably, you know, 4 to 6 hours
on Zoom during the pandemic,
doing just
Uh, agency work.
The agency doesn't always have
the capacity to do this kind of,
not just the planning piece, but
the follow through and the
tracking and the research.
And I think to a certain extent,
Uh
Your director and staff.
are more able to do that.
Depending on, on your, on your
priorities, what you, what else
you want them to accomplish.
And so, uh, as far as you know,
what the interim could bring.
I think that, that intentional
planning could be part of that.
All that being said,
It's also up to you, and we work
for you in the legislature as a
whole and, you know.
Well, we'll follow your
direction.
Represented Sarin.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
welcome, Mr. Senna. Um, how
would you as director of LESC,
who about organizing an intern
research project focused on
improving statewide math
instruction and student
outcomes.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, thank
you setting that
representativeana, um.
That's the big question.
I'm just going to say right now
that I've heard this question
asked of a lot of people and no
one's given a very good answer.
So in case I don't give a very
good answer, I won't be the only
one.
He
We, we probably don't have time
for this, but I'm gonna do it
anyway.
Most of you know I was, I was a
reporter.
And uh one of my first big
projects at the Santa Fe, New
Mexican, I was the education
reporter in 20056.
I thought
You know what's really bad in
this state? Math.
And I had all these, like, you
know, I, I started to spend some
time in classrooms and talking
to teachers, and I started to
hear these things about, you
know, elementary school teachers
are scared to teach math.
They don't understand it.
And um high school teachers
would complain about how, you
know, kids would show up to high
school and they weren't prepared
and they couldn't do algebra
one. How are we going to teach
them to do higher level math if
they can't do these things.
20 years later,
Almost literally, we're still
having the same conversation.
Right.
And so
I, I guess if I were to design a
project that would look more
closely at it. It would have to
be very comprehensive, and I
think it's one of those places,
like a lot of things.
Where we have to recognize that.
The effort to study it.
Isn't going to be done in a
summer, and it isn't going to be
wrapped up neatly in in in one
piece, because it's, it's
multifaceted, right?
And the solution
Isn't going to happen overnight
either. So that's, that's more
of an expectation of time.
But
I do think we need to do a
better job of understanding
where elementary school teachers
are both in their training and
and and and comfort in teaching
math.
Because some people feel really
great about it, and they're
doing a great job, others not so
much, and that's one component
of it.
That, that stretches back to to
to teacher prep.
Right? We've, we've met with
some teacher prep folks and some
professional development folks
around math.
And
Representative Merera's
organization at the Lano
Foundation sponsored some math
professional development going
on 20 years too.
We still haven't quite cracked.
One, how we identify the right
people to be teachers, to be
honest.
But then secondly, what that
college prep really needs to
look like in order for them to
be ready.
I think sometimes we, we have
this large focus on content area
expertise, which is important.
Sometimes we focus on the
pedagogical pieces that go along
with delivering math.
Uh, content.
I'm not sure we've made the
connection you heard earlier
from Annie about like the data
connections between educator
prep programs in the larger
institutions, I would argue that
there's a larger disconnect
between Erep and their larger
institutions in general.
Right? Whether or not they're
truly connected to their math
departments, and whether or not
they're talking to each other
about how we truly prepare math
teachers. But that's one piece
of it. That's the, the prep and
and whether or not teachers feel
comfortable.
I think it probably would, would
be a benefit to look at actual
math instruction, curriculum,
and practices.
Um
That's hard to do across the
state with 20,000 teachers. But
I think being able to do that
might help us better understand
the kinds of professional
development that teachers would
need.
Um, and how much that might cost
similar to what we've done with
literacy. Uh, it may not be a, a
letters-like program
necessarily.
But until we identify some
Unifying principles, I think.
And really get a, um, who should
be responsible for helping
teachers understand that.
Right now we have a lot of folks
doing professional development
around math in the state
currently.
Some of those efforts have been
going on for a long time, and we
still haven't made a lot of
progress there. So it really, it
really points to
Regardless of what we think
we've done and how good that's
been, we haven't really
identified the real problem
there.
Um
And then I guess, uh, you know,
I'm, I'm trying to do this whole
sort of continuum of work from
the elementary school, I think
in secondary.
Um
We really get into really
abstract ideas in math.
Right, I
People wouldn't always believe
this, but I thought I wanted to
be an engineer. I loved math.
And, and, um,
And it just, and it just came
naturally to me. I understood
it. And I know now that that
doesn't happen for everybody.
And we, and, and I think there's
still problems with math
practice in middle and high
school where teachers.
are
They just think kids should know
this stuff.
Right? And they provide
assignments and they provide
assignments, and kids do the
assignments and then they take
the test, and sometimes they
pass and sometimes they don't.
It was one of the arguments that
I made personally in removing
the algebra 2 requirement, not
because I don't think algebra 2
is important. I absolutely do.
If, if, if you can do it, and
you need it for your, your
career path.
But I know that most kids were
struggling to get out of algebra
one. And they were definitely
struggling to get out of algebra
2, and most of those kids that
ended up with Cs and D's in
algebra 2, really had no idea
what they were doing, and we
were just passing them on
because they had to graduate.
So I think that secondary piece,
and it is a pedagogical piece, I
think, at the secondary level
because we do, I think, have
stronger content knowledge as
teachers in secondary, but the
pedagogy and how you
How you differentiate the work
and professional development
between elementary school and
secondary is also really
critical, and then identifying
um what sort of resources the
state already has to do some of
that.
In addition to what would, what
needs to be added.
You have 6 minutes, and we have
represented our Senator Stewart,
excuse me.
Good afternoon, Mr. Senna.
For your last question.
What are the priority
considerations when trying to
build a budget.
That directs funding for
programs and interventions to
improve student college career
and civic readiness.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Senator. Um, so I'll just
say first of all, and this is
something that we
Uh, try to, try really hard to
remember, and it's something
that I've, uh, only in the last
few years really been conscious
of, because I always think
education is the most important
thing, and that we should just
spend all the money on it.
Right, but I'll just say that
the first consideration has to
be, and that we've really
thought a lot about internally,
uh, in staff is where education
fits with within the state
budget as a whole.
Right? And I think that's just a
sort of a baseline understanding
that has to occur.
Because otherwise we get caught
up in like, we should fund all
the things, and, and we'd love
to, but I also recognize that
the folks who are really focused
on health care.
I would also love to fund all
their things, right? So like how
we, how we start with that
conversation acknowledging that
while education is important and
makes up the majority of the
budget that it has to fit within
the larger structure of, of
state finances and what's
available. So I'll just say that
as a, as a foundational piece.
I think some of the work that
you've already done as a
legislature has been really
important, right? The the
literacy pieces is crucial, and,
and I'll pair that with early
childhood.
There's, there's just so much
research.
Around the bang for your buck
when it comes to early childhood
education and early literacy.
Efforts and interventions.
Right? And you all have done a
lot of that already, and so I
don't want to disregard it as
like, it doesn't matter, but
you've created a really strong
foundation for that work, in a
way that I don't think we would,
we would step back from it. So
we need to keep our, keep our
foot on the pedal when it comes
to those two things.
But I also feel like the state
has made some
Very big and clear investments
and statements about how
important those two. This is
probably where I reveal my bias
to teachers.
And how important they are.
Um, I, I don't really think you
can understate.
The importance, and I know
research says this too, but
those of you who have spent time
in a classroom, who, who have
spent time in other teachers'
classrooms. Know how important
it is that every kid
have the best teacher possible.
You just can't get around it.
You can't, you can't train
empathy.
You can't train.
Uh, you can train people, the
science of reading,
understanding that and being
being able to implement that is
something else.
Right. And so, um,
I would say my, my personal
feeling about it, and where I
think the state gets its biggest
bang for its buck when it comes
to um
Investing in education is
investing in the people in
education.
And you all have done that,
right? We've, we've brought
teacher salaries up.
We funded residencies, we're
funding affordability
scholarships. We're doing a lot
of things when it comes uh to
investing in the people in
schools.
I, I would go back to the
intentionality around that, and
is that being done in in an
intentional way. That's the
first piece, again, connecting
all those programs.
But the other piece of it is
whether it's, I think this is a
question across the world and
across certainly across our
country is.
How much, I'll just ask the
question.
How much would you pay?
To guarantee that your kid
Your personal student.
Your child at a high quality
teacher in every single
classroom.
Because I bet you if, if I asked
how many of you felt like your
kids or the kids you know right
now.
have that experience, I bet you
none of us could raise our hand.
I have 22 kids, one in middle
school, one in high school, and
he, and they have some really
great teachers.
And to be honest, despite being
on the interwebs.
Not all of them are great.
What would you pay?
Almost guarantee that that was
the case.
Right
And I think that's an
aspirational goal.
But we haven't valued teachers
in the way that we need to.
You all know that it's an
extremely difficult and
challenging job, even under the
best circumstances.
And we've heard over the last
few years about the impacts of
the pandemic. We know that
communities in our state, um,
Struggle with all the impacts of
concentrated poverty, the
increase in special education
rates.
All of the challenges.
And while we have increased pay
for teachers and educators as a
whole.
I think that's a, that's a place
where we still have more work to
do.
And, and I would argue that if
we don't pay teachers,
Enough
To get
A critical mass of high quality
people, well trained, well
prepared.
We pay for it somewhere else.
In remediation, and
interventions.
In incarcerations and literacy
rates, in low educational
attainment overall.
So we can choose to pay the
people now.
Or we can pay for it somewhere
else.
Where that balance is exactly, I
don't know.
Um, especially in the state, uh,
like New Mexico, where salaries
go a little farther than they go
someplace else. I'm sorry,
someplace else, but I think
that's a a really critical piece
where we need to continue to
think about.
The level of investment that you
want to make.
Thank you so much, Mr. Santa. We
appreciate it.
Thank, thanks for the
opportunity. I really appreciate
it.
Right, some members we're going
to go into executive sessions,
so can I have a motion to enter
executive session. All right, so
we have a motion to go into
executive session.
