And members of the committee. So
we really appreciate the, the
opportunity to work closely with
the legislature on a number of
initiatives.
Around the teacher pipeline, and
again, while there are many
factors that influence the
Student learning, the teacher is
the the most influential factor
and so we are really focused on
trying to make sure that we have
teacher vacancies filled and
that we have high quality
educators in the classroom.
There are still too many teacher
vacancies. Uh, we used to rely
on New Mexico State sore report
for teacher vacancy data, but
this is the first year that the
agency has started collecting
its own teacher vacancy data.
And at 120 day data, there were
834 teaching vacancies total
inclusive of special education
and 17% of those or 140 are
special education vacancies. So
with, with only 140 special
education vacancies and 412
positions filled through uh that
were, that were empty and were
filled through these stipends,
um.
We, we definitely feel like this
program has made a uh
Uh, a major impact on um on
vacancy, on teacher vacancies.
Um, and again, we
We appreciate having been able
to work with the legislature on
a number of initiatives around
the educator pipeline, including
teacher residencies, principal
residencies and paid student
teaching and um
Again, with what we're talking
about today as well, the paid,
uh, differentials for special
education teachers, and with
that all handed over to Jessica.
Good afternoon, uh, Mr. Chairman
and members of the committee. My
name is Jessica Dinsmore. I'm
the Assistant deputy director
here in the Office of Special
Education.
I want to begin by grounding
this work in a key point.
The hard to staff pay
differential init initiative is
rooted in the vision and
direction set by the people in
this room.
And for that, I could not be
more thankful to be a part of an
organization who prioritizes the
needs of our students and our
educators across the state.
This initiative in the broader
work of the Office of Special
Education began with the
executive order signed by
Governor Michelle Lujan Grisham
in 2023.
Which officially established the
Office of Special Education.
Following the executive order,
the LESC you all hear.
Held listening sessions across
the state. What emerged from
those conversations was a clear
and consistent theme.
To meet the needs of students
receiving special education,
education services, we must
attract and retain high quality
licensed professionals. And to
do that, compensation must
reflect the critical nature and
demands of this role.
In response, the LESC
recommended a differential
payment.
Not only for special education
teachers, but also for bilingual
teachers. This recommendation
was informed by national
research, which showed that
stipends of $10,000 can be an
effective tool for recruiting
and retaining licensed special
education teachers.
The LSC LESC then convened
working groups to shape this
recommendation. As a result of
the collaborative effort, the
proposal was made to offer
$10,000 stipends for special
education teachers based on the
average teacher's salary and
research-based insights.
Guided by these legislative
priorities and recommendations.
The Office of Special Education
through the New Mexico Public
Education Department launched
the hard to staff differential
initiative, which I'll walk you
through in more detail in the
next section of the.
As we all know, special
education teachers play a
critical role in ensuring that
every student, regardless of
their ability, has access to
high quality and inclusive
education. These professionals
work in some of the most with
some of our most vulnerable
learners often navigating
complex instructional needs,
compliance requirements.
And intensive support demands
for our students. Yet despite
their essential work, special
education roles remain among the
hardest to fill and retain
across our state, but also our
nation.
This initiative was created to
address the challenge directly,
providing financial incentives
for certified special education
teachers to both fill high
turnover or vacant positions and
retain existing educators in the
field.
Funded through House Bill 2 in
20 in the 2024 legislative
session. The state has committed
$5 million per year for fiscal
years 25 to 27. That would equal
out to a total of 5 $15 million
investment.
This is more than just a budget
line. This is a strategic effort
to value and sustain
professionals who ensure
students with disabilities
receive the services and
instruction that they deserve.
In the next section, I'll share
how the Office of Special
Education is putting this vision
into action across New Mexico.
To briefly explain this
initiative and how it is
structured. The Office of
Special Education developed a
phased model to guide how funds
are distributed to eligible
special education teachers and
support staff across the state.
This approach was designed to
ensure accuracy, transparency,
and flexibility as the program
evolved.
In year one, our primary focus
was recruitment. Getting
certified special education
teachers into the hardest to
staff roles.
This phase model allowed us to
collect and verify data in
stages, starting in the fall of
2023.
With local districts and
charters validating teacher
licensure, caseloads and
eligibility. Importantly, this
funding was reserved for
certified special education
teachers actively serving
students with disabilities, not
those exclusively teaching in
gifted roles as data has shown
that those positions are not
hard to fill.
Now in year 2, the focus is
shifting towards retention. We
know that recruiting is only
part of the puzzle.
Supporting and retaining the
educators already in the field
is equally as critical.
The phased approach has allowed
us to adjust our strategy and
target funding based on the
evolving workforce. The Office
of Special Education used a
series of coordinated
communications to share
information about the hard to
staff pay differentials with our
local districts.
The rollout began with an
initial memo in June of 2024,
which outlined the program
expectations. This was
Program expectations,
eligibility requirements in all
other program information.
This was followed by an
application training that was
held virtually on July 25th and
26th, where LEAs received a step
by step guidance on submitting
the application, the data that
would be required in
eligibility.
Following the trainings and
ongoing correspondence and FAQ
document was compiled and
published in July of 2024 on the
OSC website under the Hard to
staff pay differentials button.
Um, this resources was updated
based on common questions from
the field in conversations and
training.
In April of 2025, a progress
update memo was also distributed
to districts to provide an uh an
update on implementation status
and next steps.
Across all communications, the
office consistently included
information about the phased
approach to funding and noted
that stipends would be awarded
based on availability of
funding.
The structure was reinforced in
both written materials and
direct Elier community. Over the
past several weeks, we have
engaged with key stakeholders,
including special education
directors, superintendents,
state union representation and
teachers.
Through a survey and several
focus groups, their input has
been essential in shaping our
approach to the special
education stipend initiative.
Stakeholders emphasized the need
for clear, consistent structure
that is easy for districts to
implement.
While there's an interest in
customizing stipends based on
role or experience. The feedback
pointed to the value of
simplicity and fairness.
We also heard a strong message.
This initiative should not just
focus on recruitment, but also
retention of experienced
teachers. That insight is
shaping our planning as we move
into year 2.
This work is more than just
about stipends.
It's about recognizing the
commitment of special education
professionals and creating
conditions that help them to
stay and succeed in their roles,
to ultimately impact our
students with disabilities.
Across our state.
By grounding this initiative in
real practical feedback from the
field. We are taking a
meaningful step toward building
a stronger and more stable
special education workforce.
We wanted to share some key
quotes from the stakeholder
engagement.
The impact of the hardest staff
pay differential program is best
understood through the
experience of those who it was
designed to support.
Educators and leaders in the
field across rural and remote
districts, stakeholders have
made it clear that these
stipends are doing more than
just filling vacancies.
They're validating the expertise
and commitment required to serve
students with disabilities and
the importance of certified
special education teachers.
Special Education directors have
emphasized that the stipends
helped stabilize staffing, which
directly improves continuing the
quality of services for
students. Teachers have shared
that the financial support
acknowledges the unique
challenges they face, especially
in underserved areas. It makes a
real difference in their ability
to stay in the profession.
Just this morning, I had a phone
call with a recipient of the
stipend, who is a single mother
of two, and truly said that she
felt valued and appreciated by
the state because of this
stipend and her role in special
education and making her want to
continue.
Principals have noted by
helping.
Um, that by helping close those
staffing gaps, the stipends have
created a more stable and
supportive learning environment
for students.
Collectively, their voices show
that this initiative is just not
about recruit. It's just not
about recruitment. It's about
building a system that retains
and values our special education
teachers.
And other support professionals.
We'll continue to lift up the
stakeholder feedback as we
refine and expand this program
in the next 2 years.
would like to take a moment to
share some of the early impacts
that this is initiative is
having um on our state. The hard
to staff pay differential
initiative is now helping to
address the urgent need for
qualified special education
teachers in New Mexico.
Since the program's launched, we
have verified that 412, I want
to say that again, 412 special
education positions have been
filled by certified special
education staff that
certification has been validated
not only by the LEAs by by the
NMPED Licensure Bureau as well.
This number includes hires from
both semester one and semester
2. And I want to mention it's
412 now, but we are still
verifying numbers for um
semester two. So this number is
expected to grow. Um, but 412, I
think is a number that we are
very proud to share with you.
These investments represent more
than just financial figures.
They reflect classrooms across
the state of New Mexico that now
have dedicated
Certified professional
supporting students with
disabilities.
We also recognize that
recruitment is just the first
step. And that's why the Office
of Special Education is
collecting employment history
and feedback from these
recipients to better understand
what brought them to the field,
and more importantly, what will
help them stay.
These insights will directly
inform future phases of the
initiative and help the state
more strategically address
long-term retention challenges.
Mhm
This is uh some of the data and
feedback that we had received
from the survey that was sent to
the, this year's recipients.
Most stipend recipients, over
70% were already working in the
New Mexico education system.
Many transitioned into special
education roles from another
school within the same district
or from another district or
charter.
This shows that this program
helped us build critical special
education vacancies using talent
that was already committed to
serving students across our
state.
Meanwhile, roughly 30% of
recipients entered through a
non-traditional or out of state
pathways. These included
individuals coming from roles
outside of education from higher
education programs and speaking
of the pipeline, um, or after
periods of unemployment.
Some were licensed educators out
of state. This is, this signals
an exciting development. This
sipping is helping us broaden
and diversify the special
education workforce, pulling in
new talent from a variety of
different backgrounds to best
support our students.
When we ask recipients about
their plan for the upcoming
school year, 66% indicated their
intent to stay in their current
role, as promised, this is a
promising sign of stability.
We also ask them what factors
influenced their decision.
The top 5 responses were
telling, administrative support
that was most that was the most
cited factor, followed by
salary, benefits, quality of
school climate and culture and
the stipend itself, including
workload and caseload.
These results reinforce that
while financial incentives like
the stipend are important. This
is only one piece of the puzzle.
Non-monetary supports such as
strong leadership, healthy
school environments, climate,
culture, manageable workloads
are just as critical in keeping
our special education
professionals in their current
role.
These findings will guide our
effort into year 2 and beyond.
As we continue working to build
a stronger, more supported
special education workforce in
New Mexico.
As we move into year 2, the hard
to stop pay differential
initiative, the Office of
Special Education is taking
strategic steps to ensure that
we are building on progress made
during year one.
We have already formed a working
group with the first meeting
scheduled next Tuesday.
Um, this team includes key
stakeholders from across the
state, including special
education directors,
superintendents, state union
representation, um, and teachers
as well.
This will help guide the
planning and implementation for
years to come.
These their perspectives will be
vital in the refining of the
structure of the program and
ensuring it continues to meet
real world needs.
Additionally, a survey has been
sent out to Styen's recipients,
again, collecting their
employment history, current
rules to stay in special
education. This too will provide
essential insight to the program
itself, as well as other
initiatives but um.
Formulated by our office in
years to come.
We're also identifying data
gaps, not just to evaluate the
impact of the initiative over
time, but to uncover additional
opportunities to support special
education professionals. This
includes better understanding of
pipeline trends, case load
demands, and workload workload
conditions.
to address these gaps, we are
actively collaborating with
fellow state agencies, the
legislative committee.
As well as other internal
bureaus within the public
education department.
These partnerships are crucial
for aligning efforts, sharing
data, and creating systems that
support and extend beyond just
this initiative.
These next steps reflect a
continued commitment to
supporting special education
workforce and ensuring that all
New Mexico students, those with
disabilities and those without
are supported and met into a
classroom with a certified
professional that is teaching
them with a commitment to
special education and serving
our students. Thank you.
We are. Thank you. OK, um,
people have questions, please
let me know. I have a couple of
questions to get things started.
How many special ed teachers do
we have currently statewide?
Approximately, no need to know
the exact number.
And secret, welcome. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee to answer your
question, Mr. Chair. Um, as of
May of 2025, we had 4600 special
education teachers.
So help me understand, I mean,
we put $15 million in a 1000 or
$10,000 each, that's about 1500
get covered. What about the
other 3000, you know, we just
hope they're gonna stay around.
Why are they not getting the
money also, how do we prioritize
which ones you get it, which you
don't, cause I can see that just
setting up some concerns or
problems among staffing.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee for that
question. Um, as mentioned in
the presentation, this is a
phased model. So phase one, the
focus was on incentive and
recruitment to fill those
vacancies and moving into year
two, that is where we're going
to be focusing on retention, so
we can get those, those teachers
that tried and true boots on the
ground that have been doing this
work for years, um, to retain
them in their current role.
Thank you and, and I, I
understand none of these things
are easy, but if you're giving
somebody new into the
profession, 10,000 more than
somebody who's been there a
while that causes or can create
resentment among staffing and
things and, and just be very
careful about that. Um,
You're always including hard to
staff. Are there other areas
besides special education that
is part of this bilingual
education, calculus teachers,
you know.
etc. and also very rural areas.
I think about like animus where
there's nothing down there, is
that considered hard to staff
and are they eligible as well?
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, first off, um,
it's a pleasure to be here with
you this afternoon. I apologize
for my tardiness. Uh, today was
actually one of the few days
that I had planned time off with
my family, um, and I had a a
special outing scheduled with my
kids, so I changed things so
then I could come back early and
be here with you today. So
that's why I'm a little bit
late. So please, please forgive
me and uh let you know that uh
uh I'm fun.
ing on less sleep than I
typically have, so, um, just
forgive me for any shortcomings
related to that. Um, so this,
this, uh, was specifically for
special education professionals.
That was the focus of this. Um,
we, there are many other areas
in high need, as you mentioned,
but this particular effort was
really looking at special
education, educators and uh
other sort of uh staff that are
critical for support.
supporting those students. This
is the area within our educated
workforce where we have the
highest number of vacancies and
that we really have an ongoing
challenge to make sure that we
have highly qualified educators
in those classrooms.
Thank you, and then my last
question and we'll let it get on
to some of the others. The
reimbursement or the money for
this, is this paid through the
district and the district is
reimbursed? Is this a stipend
given directly to the teacher.
What is the funding mechanism?
How do they learn about it? Do
they apply? Does somebody just
say, oh, by the way, you're
Here, here's a check.
Congratulations. What's the, the
mechanism?
So Mr. Chair, this does require
partnership with the LEAs, but
we are, um, they have to help um
identify the educators, but, and
we, they work with us to help
make sure that they are
qualified, licensed, special
education educators. So there is
a process in which the LEAs um
support in the application and
then also help us certify that
they are in those positions and
that they hold the proper
licensure.
requirements and qualifications.
So that is a shared um effort.
We had um quite a bit of work
went into the process of how do
we get the money to the
educator, because if it goes to
the LEA we're actually
increasing the amount of um
special education funding that
they receive, so there's an MOE
sort of um
implication there. Um, so we
were, we actually paid the
employees directly after we
certified their time was spent
in the classroom. You want to
elaborate?
that you
really covered a majority, um.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
committees, uh members of the
committee, uh, secretary really
did cover a majority of it, but
yes, this initiative was
specifically designed to ensure
that we did not increase MOE on
the districts, um, the
partnership was alive and
collaborative. We were talking
with them frequently to ensure
they met licensure requirements.
One of the other requirements
for uh eligible recipients is
they had to work at least 70 for
5% of the instructional hours of
each semester. So if you got in
the payment was disseminated in
2.
payments, so for semester one
and semester 2. So for an
individual that was hired August
1st, they would be eligible for
semester 1 and semester 2
payment, but say for a reason,
they got hired in November. They
did not work 75% of that initial
semester, so they did not
qualify for that first payment.
Um, but if they stayed in that
role through the end of the
school year, they would then
qualify for the 2nd semester
$5000 payment.
Thank you. Uh,
on here, it said 30% entered
from non-traditional or out of
state, what non-traditionals
typically don't have the regular
license who are they or do they
have a regular license? Why
would they be non-traditional?
Thank you, Mr. Chair, uh, and
Members of the committee, uh,
that is a great question, and I
can do some additional research
on where those, those
individuals are coming from, but
I can say that all of the
individuals that received this
stipend, their licensure was
verified through the NMPED
licensure Bureau, as well as
through the school districts
themselves. So most of them were
on an alternative licensure
program or they had a background
in education or a teaching
license from a previous
employment.
OK.
Teaching license that's not the
same as a special ed license.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, uh, they were
certified in special education
per the NMPED special education
certification requirements. So
that was a mouthful. Thank you.
And then right below that, and I
promised it would be my last one
we get to other people, 66%
intended to stay in their
current position, what is the
normal attrition of of of
someone in this.
You know, hard to to staff
areas.
I mean, is that an improvement?
I mean, that's still a third of
them are planning on not being
there, which seems pretty high.
Mr. Chair, we don't have that
data today, but that's something
that we really want to
understand. So the fact that we
were able to bring in 400+
special ed, um, educators in the
classrooms is a big deal, but
that doesn't mean necessarily
that they're going to stay. So
part of this is really
understanding what what
motivates teachers to stay in
the classroom.
Cause I think and from what
we're hearing, it is much more
than a stipend. I think stipend
is a is a good motivator, but to
really stay in a special
education classroom, it's much
more complicated, um, and so as
part of this process, we are
working to understand the
complexities of what teachers
really need to stay in those
classrooms.
Thank you. And, you know, that
was
I don't be, I'm not trying to be
critical. I think this is
wonderful, but that we fully
understand how it's working with
everything. I think it is really
important, uh, having been in
special ed, though I was in
gifted, that didn't count other
than I still had to do a lot of
IEPs, uh, having more
administrative support for the
bureaucracy side of special ed
was probably way more important
to me than salary, and I think
for a lot of special ed
teachers, but I'll get another
questions committee members.
Represent aka
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, um, for the
presentation. Now, my, my chem
my comments and my questions
come from the fact that I am a
licensed special education
teacher.
Uh, served special education
students, students on IEP
through the whole spectrum for
more than 20 years. So,
Mr. Chairman, you, you just go,
right? You, you talked about
These kind of um
Informational sessions talking
to teachers, unions, and stuff
like that. Uh, are there other
Sessions are gonna be, you know,
had similar activities
throughout the state. And we're
HR folks also involved in this.
Process and higher ed.
First question.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and um to
answer your question,
Representative Baca.
Excuse me, New Mexico allergies.
Um, that is a great question,
and we have facilitated two
focus groups with those
individuals, uh, and we will
continue to expand these
collaborative efforts with
external stakeholders, um, as I
mentioned, we have our first
stakeholder, our first working
group scheduled for next
Tuesday. Um, I don't know if we
currently have any HR
representative. Yes, but we will
absolutely add them um to
to the working group moving
forward.
Thank you Mr. Chair, and I think
that's an important group
because uh
As somebody who's been
recruiting teachers since 2005.
I can tell you that.
Um, they're, they're like a
unicorn to find a a special
education certified, gone
through traditional pathway. Um.
Mr. Chairman and uh Madam
Secretary. My next question, and
you talked about reasons for
staying, and my question is
gonna kind of flip. What are
some of the reasons for leaving,
OK? Uh, and I, I think that's
gonna be an important part of
that.
Because as the Secretary of
State, it's pay is not going to
fix the answer, and it's not
going to solve the problem. So
can you just briefly tell me
was communicated for some of the
reasons we're leaving.
Mr. Chair Representative Baca,
the things that we, we hear, and
this is an ongoing thing.
Is that, um, you know, caseloads
are a factor, um, professional
development and supports is a
factor just having enough time
to do all of the um the
paperwork, the work associated
with with IEPs, with working
with, with families, all of
those things are very time
consuming. So the time factor is
a big piece of that, and I think
um we this is something that we
need to to work on together and.
Identifying how can we further
support those needs. One of the
things that we are doing at the
department is our efforts to
create the the statewide unified
IEP. If we simplify the day to
day tasks that they have to do
for their students. It really
will have more time. They're
more efficient, it's easier to
implement IEPs. So that is one
of the things that we're doing
at the department. That's an
effort that's been going on for
the last, uh, year and a half or
so.
And uh we'll also be integrated
into our statewide student
information system so that it is
very easy for teachers to be
able to pick up and implement
those those IEPs effectively for
our students.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, one of the other.
Um, areas of concern that has
been communicated to me and
through others is.
Very disruptive students and at
some point, even students who
have extreme behavioral
outbursts.
And I think that's, that's
another thing that
That has caused
Many of our supposed to leave
and and the question is, how do
we address those concerns for
safety of our staff and still
help out our children who need
that help. So I'm that I need to
say that. Um,
The other, um,
Mr. Chairman, I think the other
thing is you talked about
paperwork.
But then we talk about as far
as, you know, one of the fears
that I had when I was working in
those areas and overseeing it as
a supervisor.
was that you were always under
the microscope, right?
Who's the one that gets, you
know, you want to get in a
lawsuit.
Work with money or work in
special education, you're gonna
get due process and the state
complaint. So,
I think as we
Again, I'm all about balance is
we have the parent advocacy and
advocate for those things and we
look to see as far as the number
of state complaints and due
processes because I think that
once we get to a state complaint
to due process, then the
Opportunity for collaboration in
solving at the lowest level
possible, we missed that
opportunity. And so,
As we're looking at this, I
think that we need to get
increased the parent engagement
and involvement at the same
time, the collaboration so that
we do not have. I'd be very
interested to see.
How many state complaints and
due processes that we had
because when I was in charge of
that, I think the most I had was
18, due process complaints in a
year, which each one takes weeks
to prepare for, so, um,
I definitely think that this
scenario, and I agree when we
had uh director Santa talk about
special education being a focus
area, I think that's important.
And I think that it's really
going to be important that we
get input.
From various groups and and and
I think HED has the higher ed
needs to be at the table as
well, because they're gonna be
responsible for the
Teacher prep program, and the
last thing I'm gonna say is when
we talk about CTE we're talking,
you know,
We have the, as far as nurse,
um, pathways we have for
electricians, plumbers or sheet
metal.
I would really like to see as
far as teachers and educators
being part of the CTE and how we
can support those.
Professions
By creating opportunity and
programs in our high schools.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr.
Chair, there are several
wonderful things that
representative Baca mentions, so
if I could just very briefly. So
we do have the educators rising
program, which that is a program
in high schools that identify
and work with high school
students that are interested in
the education profession. So
they have an opportunity to
start that pipeline in high
school, and so those are
programs that are occurring, um,
and we are creating really a
pipeline.
hopefully starting in high
school for our um educators so
that we're supporting them
through programs that are funded
by the state, um, all the way
through and so thinking about
educators rising, educator
fellows, or teacher residency
programs, all of these things
are really creating a really
strong pipeline, and I just
wanna say that I agree with you
completely about working with
our educator prep programs. This
is one of our
Biggest priorities at PED is to
really work with our educator
preparation programs to improve
the quality of education that
are pre-service teachers are
getting across the board, so
they're prepared and ready to,
to start day one and to really
be successful and, and to really
want to stay in the profession
and then regarding the question
about behaviors, that was part
of my uh point about
professional development. It's
not just professional
development for special
education teachers.
It's also about our our
principles for all school staff
so that they are trained and
able to support our students
with those challenging behaviors
and other needs, including our
school board members. So these
are things that we are working
and integrating into our
trainings across the board, as
well as for our families through
things like um, um, the parent
university and other sort of
office hours and opportunities
to really also educate parents
on how to best support their
children as well.
Thank you Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator Stewart.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Jessica. I think this
is your first time, isn't it
before us, so you did very well.
I just have some basic
questions, so
You said that we have 4600
special ed teachers in the
state.
But they're not all working, are
they? Or are they?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, to
answer your question, Senator,
uh, Stewart, sorry, the chairs
in the way. A Senator Stewart.
Uh, that was pulled from Nova,
which is our state data
reporting system in May this
month of 2025. So those are
currently working teachers.
So we have 40
But they're not necessarily in a
special ed classroom, no.
Oh,
there you go.
So, so this year we had about
700 vacancies for teachers, and
how many of those were special?
Her arm I provided 140.
Uh, at 120 days, they were on
140 special education vacancies.
So 140 out of the 700.
I thought it was more than that,
but that's still the biggest
number cause elementary is also
in there, right? It is
absolutely. And how, how many
vacancies in elementary.
Do you have that with you?
Mr. Chair, Madam President, we
will pull that for you and get
it to you.
Uh, I'm just trying to get a
handle on this issue, um.
You know, I'm also a
25 year special ed teacher, so
um.
I miss teaching.
I had one of my students show up
at my office
this year. Strath and young men
working for the uh film
industry, uh telling my staff
how I taught him how to read in
3rd grade.
Well it's really a fun
conversation, uh, but I digress.
Um, so how many of those 10,040,
uh,
Our elementary. What's the
breakdown in the special ed by
grade and and I also kind of
want to know that for your 412.
And where are we making the
biggest differences in what
grade?
So, Mr. Chair, um, Senator
Stewart, I would like to go back
and pull all of that data for
you so that we have all of the
numbers. So you're, you're
wanting vacancies.
By, by grade special ed vacancy,
special ed vacancies by grain
overall vacancies and then uh
elementary and secondary
breakdown as well. Yeah, I, I
just want more information on it
and um yeah when when you can do
that, that would be great. I, I
just, I wanna see more about
this since cause my next
question, which I'm sure you're
anticipating is how many of
those new special education
teachers, um, have had the
professional
development for structured
literacy if they're at the
elementary level.
So that is really crucial for
our special ed students that's
where kids with dyslexia wind
up.
And they need that structured
literacy, so
That's my concern.
So Mr. Chair, um, uh, Madam
President, we are completing the
training of our 5th grade
teachers, uh, currently, and
we're also beginning the
training of our middle school
teachers. So within those
teachers, um, we have trained
since 2019 about 10,000 teachers
and within that includes our
special education teachers.
So, Mr. Chairman, so at least
some of these uh folks will have
had that train.
So because the alternative
licensure, we haven't really
have we trained them also. I
think the answer is yes, but not
as many, Mister Chair, Madam
President, they would have to
still go through letters, even
if they are in the classroom
through alternative licensure.
Um, part of the work that we're
doing with our EPPs, as you
know, is to make sure that um
our pre-service teachers are
getting that before they enter
into the classroom, um, as the,
the teacher of records.
So we want to make sure that
that's also integrated into our
licensure um programs which was
part of our literacy bill this
last session. All right, well,
great. I look forward to that
information. Thank you for your
work. Thank you, Jessica. Thank
you.
Thank you pro tem, uh,
representative.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you and thanks for being here,
Madam Secretary. It's hard to
juggle some special family time,
by the way,
Our Doctor Cage left has her
position been replaced yet as
head of the special education
office.
Mr. Chair Representative
Garrett, um, Doctor Cage has,
has left, um, and we are
currently interviewing, so I've
already started that process.
I've already been interviewing
candidates and so my plan is to
get that position filled um as
quickly as possible.
Thank you so much. Um, I kind of
want to add to um
Senator Stewart's um
differentiation of data, uh,
because what I'd like to know is
in the special education
teachers.
How many are self-contained
teachers, possibly with an EA.
How many are inclusion teachers
that have only one classroom
that their inclusion
responsibilities are in how many
are inclusion teachers juggling
multiple classrooms.
Um
And then sorry to be so
detailed, when we look at um
secondary versus elementary,
what areas are the special
education serving like
Um,
There's life skills, there's
math.
Just the more we see it, I think
it's helpful.
Um, and then my
Another question is on the
pathways to specialized in
special ed licensure, uh, Mr.
Chair,
um,
How, what of the education
fellows program, which we're
investing heavily in
What are the statistics for
those education fellows entering
certification as a special
education teacher. Is that
having an impact.
And then I know it's CNN they
had a special education cohort
or alternative licensure.
And is that the only program
like that? Are there other
teacher prep programs that are
specializing in alternative
special ed licensure or is that
the only one? Do we know?
Um, so I do not have the number
for you, sorry, Mr. Chair
Representative Garrett, I don't
have the number of um educator
fellows that are interested in
special education specific
licensure. So again, something
that we can, we can pull for
you, um, and as far as other
You said
Special alternate advice and
share programs like CNM has had
for the last couple of years.
I don't have that either
represent Garrett. I will get
that for you, and I'm not
expecting you to right now, but
just I think it behooves us to
get that information and then um
My final question is on slide 6.
Talking about who got stipends.
The last two categories are
tiered stipends based on roll or
work environment and other, and
we have just some examples of
what those other are.
Other roles that
Not everybody in our committee
may be aware our roles that
would be appropriate to get a
stipend.
Mr. Chair, um,
And Representative Garrett to
answer your question, uh, so the
other, this was in response to
Or the graph that you're seeing
here is a question that was
asked how we should prioritize
funds um in year two, so you can
see the 50% of majority of the
responses were a tiered stipend
favoring experienced staff, AKA
retention. Um, as for the other,
I don't have that information at
this time, but I could go ahead
and get that over to you as soon
as possible.
Thank you and, and Mr. Chair,
Madam Secretary, my final
comment is thanks for
acknowledging the fact that it's
not just stipends, but it's
leadership.
It's other working conditions,
cases, thank you, cause I think
it's important for people to
realize that money certainly
helpful.
I wish we were all paid to be
legislators, so I feel the pain,
but all those other factors are
vital, so thanks and thanks for
your service.
Thank you, Representative and
Representative Torres Velasquez,
and please introduce yourself.
You were here when we did the
introductions earlier.
Um, yes, thank you, and I'm
sorry for being late. I had a
long-standing dental appointment
that I needed to keep and on the
way in, there was a bad car
accident on Old Santa Fe Trail
that stopped the traffic all the
way down the hill, so it took me
a while to get seated, um, but
thank you for the welcome. Um, I
am representative for House
District 30, that's in the
Northeast heights of
Albuquerque. I am the person who
uh followed the sea of uh
Senator Figuero.
when she was representative and
that area is around the Arroyo
de Loso Golf Course, if you know
Albuquerque, it's um you bank to
the freeway kind of and then San
Antonio to Comanche in some
areas. Um, so thank you.
Um
I have a few questions.
On, um, on page.
Two of the handouts. The 3rd
bullet, um, mentions and, and I,
and so I apologize if I missed.
This part already, but it
mentioned special ed and
bilingual teacher pay
differentials, and so I'm
wondering if um even though this
is um titled for Special
Education staff. I'm wondering
if this initiative is also for
bilingual teachers or if we are
considering it for bilingual
teachers because I know a lot of
bilingual teachers who are
stepping down because of the
demand, and I think this would
be helpful. Um, and in, within
this question.
Or maybe in addition to, I'm
wondering if we're looking at
the number of teachers who have
expertise in special education
and bilingual education for
students who are, um, what we
used to call bilingual special
education. We have a lot of
overlap and intersectionality
with even our plaintiffs in the
Martinez and Yazi lawsuits and
in many cases, you'll have
children who are bilingual who
do have disabilities or who have
disabilities.
who are bilingual, um, in, in
any, um, languages, um, on, on
our tribes, in our tribes, um.
In our communities. And so, um,
that's part of my first
question.
Mr. Chair Representative Todes
Velasquez, um, thank you for
your question. So this, this
round of um the stip stipends
were focused on special
education, educators and not on
bilingual educators. This um
reference on the slide is
pertains to a recommendation
that actually came from the
LESC. This is certainly an area
that I think would warrant us
exploring, um, we can certainly
at the department.
um, can do some of that pre-work
in terms of surveying educators
now, getting a sense about what
the challenges are, what might
motivate them, uh, that would
certainly inform an effort to do
something similar for those
teachers, and then as well as we
really look at the data, the
data, I think to your point
about looking at, um, special
education teachers that are also
bilingual certified would be
really great to have that
information as they do uh serve
a particular
need and expertise. Excellent.
Thank you so very much, Mr.
Chair. Um, I am also wondering,
um, in the title of the
presentation, uh, it is named
for special education staff. So
I'm wondering if this is um
looking at teachers or if we're
also looking at um diags if
we're also looking at SOPs. If
we're also looking at other
staff, um, in particular, I'm
wondering if we are looking at
educational.
assistance for special education
because they make such a
tremendous difference in the
classroom and, and very often
they are the ones that live
right there in the community, so
they know the families and they
know the children and work very
individually with the children
themselves, um, and, and I say
that having been a special ed
teacher and having worked with
many EAs, um, so I was wondering
who is considered staff in, in
this title, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and to
answer your question,
Representative uh Torres
Velasquez.
Uh, so, as discussed in the
presentation, we have a phased
model for this initiative. Phase
one was for incentive and
recruitment of special and
certified. I want a certified
special education teachers,
phase two is retention and then
funding permitted phase 3 would
be for special educational
assistants and other support
staff, which would include the
the individuals that you
mentioned, um, our SLPs, OTs,
PTs, um, those related service
providers that we know are so
integral into in the support for
our.
students with disabilities. Uh,
so it is in the discussion, um,
and through stakeholder
engagement and through our
working sessions, that is
definitely going to be taken
into consideration for further
implementation.
Um, wonderful. And I think as
the last part of that question,
let me see here.
Um, it's the last part of that
question, and I'm wondering if
we're doing, if, if Mr. Chair,
I'm wondering if we have any
initiatives going to recruit
EA's to become teachers in
special education.
Mr. Chair, um, representative
Torres Velasquez. So, um, the
educator, uh, fellows program
really is about bringing our,
our, um, educational assistance
into the teacher pipeline.
That's really the the focus of
that program and with that we
would be addressing special
education.
Mr. Chair, thank you. That is
wonderful to hear.
All right, thank you. Any other
members with questions, Senator?
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much in light of the question
that was just asked by
Representative Velazquez
whenever said bringing those
aides up to fill a position.
I know that I got very
Quite a few concerns from uh
people.
Working with speech.
Where they would not be able to,
they had to go in person to
classes instead of being able to
continue to work some of them
have to.
And they would not be able to.
Leave their job to go take
full-time classes in person. Is
that going to change for these
people?
That was a concern for Samaria,
and I noticed in, well, go ahead
and answer that.
Senator, um, uh, the educator
fellows program is highly
popular because the way it works
is we actually pay for those
EA's while they are still in the
school, so we pay their
salaries, so they are working in
classroom alongside a teacher
while they're working on their
higher education, so there.
In a cohort of peers that get
that support and then we pay
them to continue to work within
schools as they're learning on
the job, but also working on
their education.
I'll tell you what, Mr.
Chairman, I have a letter
upstairs in my office. I'll go
up and get it where you can read
it at your own pleasure and take
a look at what I have been
hearing from those particular
people. That sounds great. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
These representative, go ahead.
Um, thank you, Senator, for
asking that question. It
triggered another question that
I have, um, as we're looking at
these pay raises and
differential or pay
differentials, um, I'm wondering
if we've considered what might
be of the effects of the cuts in
federal funding to Medicare, uh,
Medicaid, sorry, to Medicaid
since speech services in many
districts come from Medicaid.
So, Mr. Chair Representative
Torres Velasquez, and we are
still.
Grappling with the implications
of all of the federal changes,
the things that we're hearing
about cuts and potential cuts,
um, and so, uh, cuts, any cuts
to Medicaid funding would have
dramatic impact on New Mexico,
of all of the federal cuts that
that we may receive, that is the
one that's most concerning and
that I know, um, um, the
healthcare authority is working
very closely and identifying
what those impacts are, and we
as a state.
We'll have to figure out how do
we shore up those funding gaps,
um, when those things happen.
Thank you. Anyone else?
Thank you, and I think we gave
you a whole list of things that
we still want to know. It's
wonderful in this committee that
we have very engaged legislators
who really want to fix problems,
make things right and do right
by all of our kids. And so thank
you for the hard work that you
all put in every day and
certainly the area of special
education, trying to recruit,
retain high quality staff to
work with.
Some of the, the kids that have
most needs within the state is,
is very important, so thank you.
Uh, move on to presentation of
the interim calendar in LES
oops, that's not it.
It's the wrong day. Back up.
Public education department's
strategic plan and secretary,
you're still on.
Behind tab 6 for everybody
paying attention with it.
It was tomorrow.
So Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, we're gonna shift
PowerPoints, I believe.
Um, and the director said, are
you gonna have staff do that or
do you want me to?
Great, OK.
And Secretary, while you're
doing that, we have a couple of
members who have not introduced
themselves, Senator Brent.
For instance,
I think it was German, um,
Senator Craig Brant from Rear
Rancho and I'm one of the lucky
ones that I only have a one town
to represent instead of millions
of places all over the state,
uh, I was on the rear end of
school board before I came into
the Senate, been here for 13
very long deous years, not as
long as some others, but uh I'm,
I'm glad uh and hopefully we can
actually move some things
forward in education, um, you
know, maybe at least teach our
kids how.
read, right?
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator.
I did forget to say go thunder
because
introduce yourself.
Secretary, whenever you're
ready.
OK, Mister Chair, thank you so
much. Members of the committee,
again, it's a pleasure to be
here with you today. Um, and
your first, um,
Meeting of the interim, so, um,
I want to disperse thank you,
Mr. Chair, for your time that
we've spent since the end of
session and talking about um our
shared priorities for this
interim. I'm really looking
forward to collaborating during
the interim, there's, we have a
lot going on, a lot of alignment
in our in our priorities, uh,
director Senna, um, has been
fantastic, um, in terms of also
collaborating and making sure
that
We're able to learn about your
priorities that we can tell you
about the things that we're
working at, working on at the
public education department and
to collaborate as much as we
possibly can, especially as
early as we can, leading into
next session. Um, so today I'll
be talking with you about uh
PEDs, um,
Strategic plan, which we
released publicly at the end of
last year. Um, and this
strategic plan is very focused.
Um, it is intentionally lean and
condensed so that we are very
clear in terms of our priorities
as an agency that are very, very
focused on improving um outcomes
for our students.
Um, the second page.
Count lines, um.
I if I'm doing something wrong.
I just
All the same.
And then do I press this or no?
All right, here we go.
So slight to highlights what we
call our big 5 goals. So we
constantly are talking about our
strategic plan at the department
and everything that we're doing
in all our our um quarterly um
all staff meetings and the work
that we're doing in every
program across the agency, we're
constantly talking about how
each person in the agency is
contributing to our big 5 goals,
and they include accelerate
literacy achievement,
accelerate.
le rate mathematics achievement,
improve student attendance,
increased graduation rates and
foster shared accountability.
Um, we at the department are
really focused on making sure
that our students have the best
education that they possibly
can, that we are doing our part
to make sure that we're
supporting them in schools
around the state and that we are
um very invested in doing this
in collaboration um with our
partners including with, with
the
Legislature.
So, um, goal number one,
accelerating literacy
achievement. Um, as you all
know, um, about 39% of our K
through 8.
An 11th grade students are
proficient or better at grade
level. Um, and we all agree that
that's not good enough, as we've
seen the implementation of
structured literacy really
beginning in 2019 in a real way,
as we've trained our educators,
as I had mentioned earlier,
10,000 educators trained, now
we're really focusing on
implementation through coaching,
focusing on our older students
as we
Still see our students
struggling with their literacy
proficiency in middle school and
beyond, so we're really also
trying to, to prepare and
support those secondary
students, as well as work with
our principals. Our principles
need to also be trained to know
how they, as instructional
leaders of their schools are
able to really support their
teachers to know when they go
into the classroom and do that
observation. What sorts of
things should they be looking
for? What are the
kinds of things that need to
happen at the school level to
really make sure that
implementation is happening and
that we're supporting our
teachers to the best that we
can, and really, um, uh, a gold
star model would be to make sure
your school board is aware as
well, your superintendent and
your school boards are also
aware and informed and know
about the decisions that they
should be making to further
support literacy efforts, and
then also our work, as I
mentioned before with our
educator prep programs.
This is something that we've
been doing for many years, uh,
throughout the state with all of
our programs to make sure that
they are also aligned with
structured literacy and that the
the education that our
pre-service teachers are
receiving really um is of
highest quality and supports
them to be as successful as as
possible. And then, um, high
quality instructional materials.
You'll hear me talk about that,
both with literacy and math.
We need to make sure that in
every classroom teachers are
utilizing high quality
instructional materials and that
they also know how to implement
them effectively.
So I getting next slide, give
you an update on the summer
reading program. So not only do
we need to make sure that
instruction in the classroom
during the academic year is
strong, but that we're also
providing plenty of
opportunities for interventions
and support when students need
that. That needs to occur not
only in the school year, but
when kids aren't in school, so
for a summer reading program,
this is our 2nd year, as you
know, um, last summer, um, we
had just over 60.
700 students actually complete
the program. We had more
register, but they didn't all
complete the program. This
summer, we are um uh striving to
serve 15,000 students. Um, we
are quickly approaching that
number, we expect to hit it. Um,
we will work very hard to make
sure that student that families
understand the expectations
about really staying in the
program, it's important that
they also have good attendance
in the
Summer reading programs so that
their children can really have
that benefit of the high impact
tutoring. Um, we have 177
sessions throughout the state
were encouraging our program
sites that have full day
programming, which works best
for families, and again, really
following that high impact
tutoring model with students
working in small groups with our
instructors, um, the majority of
our instructors are licensed
teachers and our teachers that
are in the classrooms and.
we're really excited about, um,
something that we're adding this
summer, um, is, uh, the use of,
um, on an AI.
Learning tool called a mirror,
and this is a program that's
been successfully used in
numerous states around the
country as well as in several of
our districts here in New
Mexico. And so this is just an,
an added benefit where our
students who participate in the
program will have access to this
program throughout the summer.
So for 3 months, they will have
access to this program, which
they can use not only in our
summer reading program, it'll be
embedded.
But they'll have that program
that they can use at home during
that time to further um boost
their um growth in their
literacy over the summer.
Another thing that we are adding
because I am very concerned
about math, just as I am about
literacy, we are, we have a lot
more work to do there. We have,
we have not really, we barely
kind of scratched the surface
when it comes to math. So we are
um adding a small pilot for our
middle.
School students, so some of our
program sites that are serving
higher numbers of middle school
students were adding um a a math
tutoring platform as well, so
same small group tutoring, um,
where they'll be able to have
this each day where they're in
the program, um, we have
utilized this middle school
math, uh, tutoring program
previously in New Mexico with
really high success. It's been
used during the school year,
this will allow us to embed it.
in our summer reading program,
so we're excited about.
So as I mentioned, accelerating
uh mathematic achievement is um
a big uh driver for us at the
public education department. Um,
we have not had nearly the
investment in this area that we
have in literacy, um, as you all
know, this year PED did not
receive funding to support math
this current fiscal year, but
thanks to actually this
committee in large part, um, and
the work of, of
the public education department,
we have several sort of buckets
of math funding for FY 26 that
we're excited to be able to roll
out through um professional
development of both our uh
elementary and middle school
teachers, as well as working on
um uh our steam efforts as well,
so I'll talk about that in the
next slide.
So we have $5 million a year for
the next 3 years, so this is
part of the perfro funding
appropriation that will allow us
to further um our numeros pilot
program, which is really focused
on uh professional development
for our elementary school
teachers, so kindergarten
through 5th grade teachers, we
had um a small pilot with great
success, and so this next school
year will be uh training an
additional 840 more teachers.
We have an additional program
called Focus on Algebra, that um
we were able to fund mostly with
Esther funds, and we will
utilize this funding to allow us
to grow that training to
additional 150 teachers. Um, we
have the math lab pilot, so a
senator Brand, thank you for um
bringing that to PED's attention
and really pushing to get some
money. We have $6 million to
pilot this statewide.
Um,
so I was able to visit uh a
classroom in elementary school
in Rio Rancho public schools.
Um, they are the first district
to really be, um.
Focusing on this um strategy.
And I have to tell you I was so
impressed. The way this works is
they create a classroom that is
the math lab. It's full of of
learning materials that are very
focused in math and their game
and activity kind of based. And
so I saw a group of of young
students who, I mean, I was
blown away at the type of um
activities and knowledge and
engagement that was happening,
the teacher was phenomenal,
first of all,
was phenomenal, but the kids
were just felt.
Felt competent and an excited
about math, and that is so
incredible because for most
students, if you ask them what
subject they struggle with the
most it's typically math. They
just think I can't do math. I, I
have a mental block. I can't do
math.
And so this program and what
we've seen in Rio Rancho public
schools is really getting kids
to feel like math is for me. I
can be successful and it's fun.
And so, uh, not only did we see,
uh, groups of students rotate
through different activities,
they engaged in singing as they
were doing math. It was the
funnest um class time that I've
had, and I'll in a while. And
then we also got to meet with a
small group of students from
mixed grades.
And again, just really they were
able to articulate so clearly
what math lab has done for them
in terms of their confidence in
math and really helping them
build on the the foundational
skills of math that you need to
really build as they move on in
their education. So we're
excited to get to um expand that
to other um schools around the
state.
We also have um $3 million for
steam initiatives, which will
again help us support our HQIM
implementation, um, as well as,
um,
Let's see, where am I at?
Um, our professional
development, we're entering um a
a curriculum ad adoption year
for science, so a lot of this
work will help us build and
inform that work. We have an
additional $3 million really
thanks to the LESC's advocacy
for a STEM network. So this is a
project that has been um led out
of NMSU which will allow us to
create a regional hubs for STEM
that will allow us to have
better organization
around our efforts in STEM and
look forward to working on that
as well with, with the
legislature, and then the last
thing I'll mention is um we're
looking forward to reintroducing
a math bill this next session,
and I really look forward to the
partnership with LESC with, with
this committee as well as LESC
staff as we really dive into
that. We're working hard to
learn from other states. Most
every other state is kind of in
the same place as we are.
They really went all in in
literacy. They made huge
investments. They, they've moved
towards structured literacy.
They've trained their their
teachers, and now they're
shifting to math, so we're all
kind of doing this together.
There are some states like
Kentucky that are ahead of us.
And so we're learning from them,
we're spending a lot of time
looking at legislation from
other states, but I, I know that
this is a priority of this uh
committee, so look forward to
working on this together over
the.
and coming forward with a really
strong uh math.
Next is attendance, um.
We, um, know that our kids are
not going to learn and see the
growth that we need, if they're
not in school. So, uh, PED we
have already been um focusing on
advocating for funding year over
year to support attendance, um,
Programs, interventions,
campaigns, all of the things
that we think will really make a
difference for our students, um,
our most recent data on chronic
absenteeism shows that we have
made about a 10% improvement on
a chronic absenteeism in one
year. That is significant. We
have a goal that the department
we've joined on to attendance
works, um, cohort of states to
cut absenteeism in half. And so
we feel like
well on our way to achieving
that, um, again, we received uh
money in the Perth growth fund,
so we have $6 million a year
over 3 years to continue to do
the same sort of investments in
terms of in terms of grants to
the school districts where they
can hire staff that's focused on
attendance supports, um, we have
a campaign, a statewide campaign
to make sure that everyone in
our state, every member of our
community really understands.
The importance of of good
attendance and will encourage
our kids to be in school.
Um, we provide technical support
as schools develop their
attendance plans, um, and we are
really focused on engaging
families. We know that we need
our families to help us get our
students in school that they're
encouraging and making that a
priority. There are many needs
and demands that families are
dealing with every day, whether
it's doctor's appointments or
maybe trips or other activities
that are also really important.
But being in school, um, every
to the greatest extent possible,
is really critical to seeing the
outcomes that we want to see.
And for some of our um high
schools that have received
funding uh through our grant
process have already seen some
really great gains, including
the example there with Santa Fe
Public Schools.
And then I'll just say we this
next year we will be um having a
much more robust sort of
approach to family engagement in
general, and really providing
professional development and
supports for our LEAs to think
through how do we best engage
families and also in the work
that we do at the public
education department. We need to
make sure that through every
program, we're making that
family engagement piece, a
critical component of everything
that we're doing.
OK, graduation rates.
Oops.
Advance too soon. Um,
So we have a goal.
To meet the national average for
graduation rates in just a
couple of years. That means that
we need to graduate 2400 more
students to get there.
And we believe that through
partnership with our schools and
with with the legislature with
our families that it's
absolutely achievable. Um, the
national average is 87%. It's
the national graduation rate.
We can absolutely get there and
in short amount of time if we
focus on very specific things,
including programs that we know
that work like CTE, work-based
learning, um, but also make sure
that our students are doing
things like their next step
plans, something that you all
have put in statute that every
student from 8th grade through
12th grade.
Should have a next step plan
done every year. These plans
identify the courses that they
should be taking the interest
that they have in terms of not
only their time as a student,
but, um, post high school, what
is their career, um, and
educational interests. These
plans allow us to really engage
students and families in the
understanding of what they wanna
do, what engages them and also
to make sure they're taking the
correct classes. Um, the public
education department did um a
transcript audit recently of 13
schools that are designated in
need of improvement for
graduation rates. They have very
low graduation rates, so we did
an audit of junior 11th grade
students transcripts, and we
found that 75% of those
transcripts that we reviewed had
errors. They had problems that
could result in that student not
graduating with.
for your cohort.
So by completing next step plans
by schools being proactive and
checking to make sure that
students are taking the correct
courses to graduate on time is
really critical. It seems like a
simple thing, but we have to
really make sure that we're
doing it and so the department
will be working to um make sure
that our school staff and
leaders understand that,
especially this year as we roll
out the new graduation
requirements.
So this entire year, school
year.
We will be working to train
school staff on the new
graduation requirements, making
sure that they're using or
implementing next step plans
that they're having access to
our online platform, which is
called Level all. It's an online
next step plan. That is
incredible. I'd love to do a
demo for you all if you're
interested. Um, this is a tool
that is available to them for
free, that really allows them to
not be doing next step plans on
paper.
that ended in a file that don't
really mean anything, but to use
level law allows the parent, the
student, and their teachers to
have access to really looking at
what is this student's path and
how are we gonna make sure that
they're successful. So these are
all things that we know make a
difference and when we see the
school districts and charter
schools that have higher
graduation rates. These are the
kinds of things that they're on
top of and that they're doing
really well.
Um, and that they're again,
making sure that students are
engaged and that families are
engaged. Um, this last school
year, we utilized uh some of the
funding that we received from
the legislature to focus on um
high school students that were
not on track to graduate.
So we had 2 contractors who were
working with us and with um our
um high schools to identify
students that the school knew
was not on track to graduate
this May.
And so what we did is we came
in, we um got them engaged in
credit recovery.
We got them engaged in
work-based learning where they
were being paid and and getting
credit and opportunity, they
were having mentorship within
the school, there was designated
staff to support them in their
efforts for credit recovery and
to get re-engaged and get back
on track.
And um as a result, um, we think
about 500 seniors who may not
have graduated this May, um,
will have graduated. We're
finishing the collection of that
data, but from what we've seen
in this very targeted approach,
working with students that we
know are struggling, that are
not on track can really have
huge benefit and really be life
changing. If you think about a
student who doesn't graduate in
4 years.
Of course, they can continue the
next year, but the likelihood of
that not happening.
It's something we don't want to
put in front of them. We want to
make sure that they're
successful, and that not only do
they graduate, they have an idea
of what they want to do once
they graduate, whether they want
to go into a certificate
program, they have an interest
in in welding, um, or whatever
that program may be that they
know that they have a
mentorship, they've done it in
school and they have an
opportunity to pursue that once
they graduate. I had an
opportunity to meet with about
it was, I think about 6 students
from around the same.
that participated in this, and
um they were very clear that
they probably would not have
graduated. They were, they said
I was not engaged. I was not
attending school. I did not feel
like school was a place for me.
I did not feel like any staff
person in that school cared
about my success.
And I was, they pretty much had
accepted that they were not
gonna graduate, so for me, this
is very
Profound the outcome of this,
something that I want to
continue to do, and I know will
really allow us to um reach that
goal that I shared with you
earlier.
And we need to do the same thing
with our students, um, in
special education as well
through the same sort of
programs as well as other
programs like uh the stay in
school initiative, and this
slide I won't go into detail
cause you all know the data and
the impact that CTE and uh
work-based learning and
innovation zones have on our
students, um, and so there's a
couple of examples of that there
from Gadsden and from Rio Rancho
Public schools, I had the
opportunity to participate.
in their ribbon cutting recently
of their brand new facility and
a really excited about the
potential there, and then I'll
just highlight the uh Charlie Y.
Brown High School, did not use
CTE as the focus so much, it's
really about creating a a plan
for their students, that is
rooted in data and the needs of
their students and that really
involves their families and
making sure that um the
improvements are made, and then
again, um,
Using our existing programs, uh,
like our career connected
learning programs at PED to make
sure that as we implement the
overall program, we have to also
be very targeted to make sure
that we're supporting all
students, but we have to be
intentional in supporting those
students that are not on track
to graduate and are needing some
extra supports.
And then our last um big 5 goal
is shared accountability. And
for me, this is really
important, as I've talked to you
about.
The responsibility that the
public education department has
to deliver for students. We take
that very seriously and it's
something that's integrated into
our everyday work at the
department.
We are clear that our mission is
to serve the students of our
state.
And to do it as quickly as we
can, but we are clear that we
can't do it alone. We have
shared responsibility with our
legislature, with our schools,
with our families, with our
business leaders and other
community members that it's
really gonna take all of us
working in alignment to make
sure that we get these things
done.
Um
So I want to share a couple of
things we're doing related to
shared accountability.
Um
We are tracking our progress of
our strategic plan, um, on a
really on a daily basis, being
able to be accountable, to
identify our metrics to track
those to celebrate our
successes, but to also know when
we're falling behind or when
maybe some of the things that
we're doing at the department
are not having the results that
we would like to see. So this is
something that um we are in the
process of building and
launching.
Uh, we are also rolling out
this.
Last school year, it was the
first pilot year of our new
school accreditation system and
process. Um, the public
education department by statute
is required to accredit all
schools in the state of New
Mexico. This is something that
we really haven't had a clear
process for doing. So the
department has been working on
this for about 2 years now to
identify um
A clear process that schools can
follow to reach their
accreditation with the
department. And so this
accreditation is really rooted
in the things that they're
already required to do in
statute, but instead of it just
being a kind of a check the box
sort of thing. Yes, you did your
red plan. Yes, you have.
Um, uh, an attendance plan. It's
really about making sure that
all of those things that we have
asked them to do are really
driving student instruction and
um support. And so the 10 areas
within our school accreditation
process include a school board
training, a financial audit.
Program plans.
Um
School enrollment, school
accountability data, attendance
improvement, school safety plan,
post-secondary plans.
Uh, caseloads.
Oh, let's see, and subjects of
instruction and tribal
consultation. So each
Bureau within the department
that oversees each aspect of
this will be responsible for
really getting into those plans
and working alongside our
schools to make sure that we
aren't just riding them, that we
are actually implementing them.
Um, I'll also mention our school
transformation efforts because
um
We are very grateful to the
funding that we have received
from the legislature to support
our schools designated in need
of improvement. We currently
have 68 schools designated as
either more rigorous
intervention, which is an MRI
school or a comprehensive
support and intervention school,
known as the CSI school. So, um,
the department, uh, conducts 3
monitoring visits that are very
collaborative with the schools
or we're getting in and looking.
that student data. We're helping
them develop strategies to
address the areas that they are
most in need of improving, such
as graduation rates. And so it's
really a very hands-on
collaborative coaching sort of
role that the department takes
on with our schools that are
designated most in need of
improvement, and we're already
seeing some strong growth in
those schools. We have 7
schools, um, that were
identified.
as a need of improvement for
graduation rates that will be
exiting that status because of
the improvements that that
they've um made.
Um, let's see.
And then my last slide is to
talk about um the recent
Martinez Yazi ruling that we
received on April twenty-ninth
from Judge Wilson that provided
us um some very specific
direction and so I know that
Jessica reviewed um those
findings with you or that
decision earlier today, so I'm
really grateful for her to have
spent that time with you. Um, so
she did talk to you about
What Judge Wilson's direction is
for the state to complete a
compliance plan this year, as
well as being very specific
about the timeline in which we
have to get that done. Um, it is
incredibly ambitious. It's a lot
to do in this amount of time,
but I'm confident that we can do
it and that we can do it
together, and I will tell you
why. Um, we truly are not
starting from.
0. When this ruling came out in
2019.
Since then, we together have
been doing a tremendous amount
of work, not only within the
public education department and
the higher ed department in the
early childhood department and,
and, and workforce, many
agencies across state government
have been working on this
together. We've worked on it,
collaboratively with the
legislature, increasing funding,
putting in place important
programming. There's so much
that has happened. The work of
our education, um, advisory.
councils under our Education
Acts, then the organizations
around the state that have also
been doing this work in
partnership with us as well as
the work that's happened in our
schools.
Um, I'm confident that we can do
this. Um, we will be hiring by
the July 1st deadline.
Um, our contractors that will be
dedicating their time to be to
work on this every single day,
and that's really the power and
the importance of bringing in a
team of educate um of
contractors of experts in
specific areas that can help us
do this. And so again, this plan
will be very specific to
addressing.
This lawsuit. So it would be
very specific on the findings of
fact and aspects of this lawsuit
that we need to address. Um,
our, uh, team of experts will
include um our legal experts, so
we need experts that can make
sure that we're complying with
the court findings and
directions. Um, we need to have
experts that are going to be
very focused on the stakeholder
engagement to make sure that it
is.
comprehensive that it is
thorough, that we take the time
and do all of the things that we
can in the amount of time that
we have to gather as much input
as as we can to distill that
information to get it into a
format that really makes it um
easier for us to, to integrate
into a plan.
Um, we need to do research, we
need to look at our state
statute, we currently have, what
state statute do we need that we
don't have. There are many
aspects of the work.
That will go into developing
this plan and so what I
envisioned is not having one
expert. This is not the job of
one expert to, but to really
have a team that can be working
concurrently.
In the amount of time that we
have to make sure all of those
things are happening at the same
time that will allow us to have
our draft plan by October 1st.
Um, we have had uh numerous
conversations with LESC staff.
I've had conversations with some
of the members of the
legislature as well regarding
our approach to this, our plan,
um, although, uh, Judge Wilson
was clear that it's the
responsibility of the public
education department. This
really
She has a lawsuit against the
state of New Mexico, and we know
we can't do this without our
legislative partners, um, I've
asked, um,
Both, uh, John and Jessica to
think about how much they're
willing to dedicate in terms of
their time, but I very much
foresee the LESC being a partner
in this from, from the beginning
moving forward, um, we have
already asked for them to
provide us with their list of
recommended experts that they
think we should actually reach
out to and engage and so I'm
looking forward to seeing that
list, uh, coming from the LESC.
Um, we will be putting out a
request for interest.
Um, for experts, people who feel
like they would like to um be
considered as part of a team to
help us get this work done, so
we will be doing that work, but
we will also be reaching out to
folks that we think would be
very helpful for some very
specific aspects of drafting the
plan. And so all of that is
coming together. We've got a, a
scope of work.
Um, being finalized as soon.
Um, so that those experts, those
consultants have a sense of what
we're looking for, the, the work
that needs to be done, including
the timeline and so I look
forward to seeing um those uh
letters or proposals of
interest, including
Who are the individuals who will
be working on this? What are
their qualifications? How much
time do they have? And then what
are their thoughts around the
approach to doing this, whether
it's um the stakeholder
engagement or some other aspect
of this. I'm really interested
in gathering the ideas about
what is the best approach, so
I will thank you in advance for
your support and your
involvement in helping us, um,
Uh, meet the expectations and
requirements of the court, um,
as it pertains to this, this
timeline.
And, and then I'll just say one
less thing about that, Mr.
Chair, I, I was almost done. Um,
Judge Wilson was clear about
wanting to to support us and
moving us to a place where we
have agreements, and this
timeline, although is very
aggressive. I really feel like
it's an opportunity for us to be
focused together and with the
intent to have a clear plan that
then can bring us, um, you know,
potentially to the conclusion of
the lawsuit, um, soon. And so I,
I know that that's exciting.
Uh, for us, I think as it is for
the legislature so that we can
be very focused completely on
the implementation of that work
and on the implementation of not
just the plan, but all of the
things that we need to do to
serve our students in New
Mexico.
Without Mister Chair, I am done,
and I hope that wasn't too long.
I don't even know how long did I
speak for.
Thank you, Madam Secretary. No,
that was, was very good and it's
always a pleasure having you
here and, and getting insight as
to what the department's working
on and, and trying to carry out
both the mission that we often
give you through the legislature
of things, but then also the
things where you want us to be
working on in collaboration with
you to move things forward over
the next in or through the
interim and into the next year.
Uh, we're gonna start with
Representative Baca.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you Secretary. I'll be
brief as always.
Um, so when I'm not brief,
that's kind of worried about it,
right? Uh, Mr. Chairman and
secretary, the, the questions
that I have is more towards the
staff and directing things that
we're gonna be looking for is
assessment and how we're gonna
be measuring success, not only
in the summer, but
Um, throughout the year. And
really the correlation between
the interim and the summit of
assessments, right? Because we
want to make sure that we're
alignment. I, I suspect Mr. uh
Chair and secretary, we talked
about Mississippi and these
other schools that have made
great improvements.
We need to see is what
Uh part did assessment pay and
there was it the same
assessment?
Do we make sure that we are
testing our kids and what we're
trying to get them to you know
with our strategies, which
includes the test analysis. Um,
Mr. Chairman and secretary, we
talked about data, right? And I,
I said this.
We want to see that the data be
kind of disaggregated down so
that we can actually
See different trends and not for
the case of a account, you know,
as far as I got you, but more
directed is targeted funds, OK?
And I'll just give you some
examples.
We talk about the investment
we've made in early childhood. I
want to know how many students
or more students are
kindergarten ready. We want to
talk about how many more
students we talked about the
important age of 3rd grade.
How many students are reading in
3rd grade.
And
Uh, when we go through the,
through this, so I think it's
for targeted funds.
And then Mr. Chairman, Madam
Secretary, uh, talking about
attendance, and I think that we
really need to look about
attendance and even what we
consider.
Because the numbers are not
accurate always because a
student that may be involved in
activities, maybe in athletics,
maybe in band or choir.
The gynapsis is an absence,
right? So they're being counted
in many of these students.
are counted as habitually truant
and in fact,
We know there's one thing I know
in 30 years, kids that are
involved in any activity,
whether it be um 4H AG band,
ROTC, they usually perform in
much higher, so I think we need
to take a look at the, um,
As far as how what we define as
an abstinence, excused or
otherwise, or school-related
because I think it kind of skews
the numbers, it may not give a
very accurate picture, and Mr.
Chairman, Madam Secretary, the
other thing about it is
You know, really about the
engagement, and I'm gonna say
this, you're gonna get tired of
me saying this throughout the
interim, give the kids a reason
to go to school.
And we talked about making an
investment and wanting our kids.
To want to come to school. Only
then would we get our kids
coming to the doors and families
welcome will we ever begin to
address.
The needs of our students. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Senator Dell.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much. I enjoyed your
presentation today.
A couple of things I have as far
as the career and technical.
A lot of these kids is,
everybody in this room knows do
not have the incentive or the
means to be able to go on to
college. They need to get a job.
And whenever we can teach them a
trade in school that gets their
mind going that we'll be there
inin for coming to school, and
we have that going on.
great guns in the Rosville area.
I, I love what's happening down
there.
As far as the Martina showsi
decision.
The compliance plan that Judge
Wilson has put in place, are
y'all going to be able to meet
that deadline?
Mm
Mr. uh, chair, senator is out,
absolutely, we are going to do.
Whatever it takes to meet these
deadlines.
I think the main thing there is
going to be the communication.
And everybody that you're gonna
be working with needs to be
communicating with each other.
It, to me, that's important
because if there's no
communication.
It's gonna be spinning your
wheel. There's one other thing
that I'm gonna ask from you and
maybe it's just me, I don't
know, but I think the majority
of us sitting up here.
understand where I'm gonna go
with this.
I think it's important that our
children learn cursive writing.
If they cannot read nor write
cursive.
They cannot read the
Constitution of the United
States.
I see kids that are in their
30s.
That they're printing looks like
a first grader. You can't hardly
read it.
They need to be taught the right
way to write in cursive.
And to me, that's very
important. I have taught my
children, my sis my older sister
and all my younger brothers, we
all have good handwriting
because our parents and my
grandmother especially cause she
was a school teacher.
Uh
We have good handwriting.
But it seems, I don't know where
it all got lost in the course of
the education system.
But the handwriting of these
young people now is atrocious.
I want them taught.
cur s ive variety.
So Mr. Chairman, that's all I
got. Thank you. Thank you, uh,
Representative Garrett.
Thanks, Mister Chair. Senator,
my husband, who got a minus in
handwriting would fight you on
that.
Just, just saying I have to
speak up to him. I want a happy
marriage, um, so I have, uh, 3
questions. Um, one, Madam
Secretary, I don't know if you
got a chance to talk to Colonel
Megan Cornett.
From the, she's the exact
executive director of the New
Mexico Office of Military-based
Planning and Support.
She, that for me was actually
the most inspiring part of the
Hunt Institute.
And I mentioned that because she
said there's a forum.
Uh, in statute called the New
Mexico Military Interstate
Children's Compact Commission
that the NMPED secretary chairs
that offers an opportunity for
this collaboration, and she just
said with
And I'll, I'll pass you the
text, I'll forward it to you.
Um, because we have had a high
turnover in the secretary's
office, plus we had COVID. She
felt that the efficacy of what
that office can do has has
lagged and it came up because we
were talking about the um
The unified IEP template, that's
something the military has done
because every 2 to 3 years, kids
move, and I promise that I would
tell you all about her, um, I
don't know if any, I think some
people here know her. She's an
amazing person, so committed uh
to the military families and to
New Mexico. So I'll share all
that with you.
And then second of all, um, so,
uh, Mr. Chair, do we now have
the digitalized statewide next
step plan for grades 8 to 12.
Mr. Chair Representative
Garrett, we do. It's called Leon
and like I said, I would love to
do a demo for you. It's, it was
piloted over the course of this
last school year, but it is now
available to every single.
Student, every single high
school and um
Well, middle school, high
school, um, and we are
encouraging them to use it. We
have shared this with our
superintendents and charter
school leaders. It will be part
of our yearlong process as we
roll out the new graduation
requirements and make sure
people understand all of the
resources that are available to
them as well as the things they
need to be doing.
Sure. Thank you for doing that.
Having been an 8th grade adviser
doing um with a little boxes
that you can't fit your cursive
or your printing in. Um, it's
great. So thank you, and if we
could have like a mini
demonstration of that.
Have it sent to us. I was just
Googling it. So that's exciting.
Thank you for doing that. And
then my third thing is, are we
looking at the impact of federal
immigration policies on school
attendance, because all the
schools I've taught at had um
mixed family, um, immigration
status, some were undocumented
and what I'm hearing and my
district.
Leans has many schools that
aren't Title one and some are
title one is that many families
are keeping their kids home out
of fear of having parents
arrested and as we know in other
parts of the country, even
students have been arrested. So
are we tracking that, um, and
it's not just in border areas,
but are we tracking that cause
it's a huge fear factor for many
of our families.
So, Mr. Chair Representative
Garrett, it's a big concern for
us at PED as well. Um, we are
tracking it in mostly in
conversations and check-ins with
our um with their LEAs asking
them what they're seeing, um,
what we've heard initially at
the beginning of this, this
calendar year with the new um
president
um administration, uh, there
were a lot of concerns. There
was a lot of fear.
win
Um, but there was a lot of work
done to really educate families
about um the privacy in terms of
student information that exists
under FERPA, the requirements of
schools to educate all children.
Our school leaders, I give a lot
of kudos to our superintendents
and principals who worked very
closely with uh community
organizations to make sure
that we were supporting
families. Uh, the last thing we
wanted were for our students to
stay home. We've talked about,
um, I think Gadsden again is a
is a great example of having an
a very.
Uh, detailed, uh, strategy
around this that was really
integration of community
organizations, some faith-based
organizations and the schools to
make sure they were supporting
students that that they did not
lose sight of their kids and
that they let them know.
That they were safe on their
campuses. Many, um, school
districts passed resolutions
that made it more difficult for
law enforcement to go on
campuses where they had to
follow a specific process and
procedure that went through the
superintendent's office and
required approval, um, so I can
tell you that I did not hear.
Any particular area where it
was.
Um, sustained concern. I think
some families did keep their
their kids home, particularly
initially, um, but I am very
eager to see what our data tells
us as we look at the uh results
from this last school year. It
was a big concern for me and um
Absolutely, and, and we'll see
that may have an impact on our
attendance. It may um numbers
that may have an impact on a
proficiency levels, but it is
something that we're tracking
and and again I just wanna uh
give uh recognition to the LEAs
that were very, very proactive
and our community organizations
that were also very proactive
and in providing those supports.
And we made a big effort on the
department's side to educate
them about what the law says,
what their requirements were to
provide technical support, um,
but again, they, they really did
the hard work. Thank you so
much.
Thank you Senator Lopez.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Mr. Chair, and good to see you,
Madam Secretary.
Uh, just a couple. I, I
appreciate your presentation on
a strategic plan, and, you know,
one of the areas of
Of concern for all of us, I
guess too is every, every area
that you have.
Um, just a suggestion, and I
appreciate Representative
Garrett bringing up the issue on
schools that have a, a blended,
um group of children, right? You
have mixed status in the
community, and I know that there
were some, uh, that I'm aware of
some students who did stay home
for a while after the initial um
Uh, what I call executive
orders, I guess, and whatever
else was issued by the executive
in DC.
Uh, but I know that there has
been improvement and I did see
information that came over from
the administration, um, at one
school in particular that did
alert families, so at least
there was information being
shared. So I really appreciate
and that was, that was being
done.
Um, one thing I wanted to
mention about attendance, and I
know that in talking with some
parents, you know, the concern
is about bullying.
is happening in our schools.
And if your child is bullied,
it's hard to get them to want to
go to school.
And yeah, it it.
It's an issue that it's not just
in high school, it's in middle
school and even in elementary.
And I think that's something
that not specifically that head.
Um, is charged with, but I think
it's systemic.
of what needs to be done and how
we can look at and and work at
it. You can have a law, laws are
good, but kids don't read laws.
And what is it that we do to as
adults, how can we engage with
our communities and others,
right, to support teachers to
support families, but how we
teach children.
Ray instruct them. What are the,
the guard rails, um, popular
words that we use, guardrail, of
what's acceptable.
Because I know, um, bullying
does have an effect on children.
And it's hard to get a child up
to want to go to school if they
have to deal with that.
So I think that I'm hoping
that's on the radar as to what
we do. It's not that maybe
specifically um they don't want
to, but there's a reason why
behind that.
And I've seen that, um.
With regards to bullying.
So yeah that was just one.
Um, on the students, um,
The schools, the 68 schools, uh,
do you?
I hope at some point you would
share with us, so we maybe have
a map of visual as to where
those are in the state of New
Mexico it's congregated in just
one area. Is it the metro? Is it
across the state in rural versus
urban, um, I think that would be
a good visual uh for us to see
how those 68, and of course, you
know, we have
One specifically in my neck of
the woods that I know has
improved, but Mister Cha I know
there was a lot of money that
was expended to help um Los
Padilla.
And they've done wonderful, but
I think that also shows where
some of our monies need to be
focused and the intensity of
support services that were
offered that was enabling that
school and others to move
forward and rise as the stars of
they are, and Mr. Mr. Chair, I
know we know that, but that's
the focus I think of where um we
talk about community schools and
all the other opportunities.
This is one area that I think
we, we really need to look at.
And then, um,
I, I wanted just to uh mention
with regards to the um lawsuit
issue and with the uh judge's
decision.
What I, I would hope, Madam
Secretary, that's on your radar
is as we talk about those
experts, um, please don't forget
that you also have your
councils, black education,
Hispanic and Indian Education
Act those councils that are
there, you have a lot of experts
that are sitting on those
particular groups that I think
can add value as you look
forward to meeting what the
requirements, um.
Whisping ashe by the judge.
Um, I hope that that you that
they're also on the radar to be
included in the discussion.
Um, and also remember too, it's
not a it's not just the Yazi
Martinez lawsuit. It's a
consolidated. There are still
two separate Yazi had one
directive, Martinez was
inclusive of
Uh, both tribal, um, urban and
rural community schools, right?
So I, I would hope that you're
you and your staff would keep
that in mind cause it's not,
it's a consolidated, but there
are still two separate lawsuits,
um, with, uh, one specifically
Martinez had a more of a
directive looking at special
education.
So I, I would hope that your
staff would please keep that in
mind as we move forward.
And that and um
I think that was it, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative Robo
Caviello.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chair, and
thank you, Madam Secretary. I
am.
I especially um appreciate the
goal too, which is accelerating
mathematics mathematics
achievement. I, um, was a
terrible mathematics student.
Uh, my father had to pay for
Summer school, almost all of my
elementary years, just so that I
could uh make it to the sea that
would pass me from grade to
grade, and it happened every
year. I had a mental block, as
you mentioned.
But um the saving grace in my
life has been that one of the
two sons is a mathematic.
Genius almost, the younger son.
Um, so he made up for all of my
figures in mathematics through
school, so it is very important
and most of it is just the
mental block.
We, we're just conditioned not
to consider mathematics as part
of our everyday living, which it
is. So thank you very much for
that, um.
Concentration or that goal.
Um, I, I do want to focus my my
comments specifically to Yasi
Martinez, Martinez Yazi lawsuit.
Uh
Earlier, um, I was reminded that
you were gonna be here and that
you um would be available to
answer more directly some
questions that I have, um, but
first I'd like to make a couple
of observations that I made
briefly, uh, I'll make them
brief. I need to lengthy or this
earlier today, but um,
Yeah
I think it would be very helpful
for everyone that will be in
your um department handling the
response.
To read carefully the
plaintiff's motion.
The plaintiff's motion was very
specific and offered some really
um clear, um, delineations and
expectations, and as you know in
a legal case,
It is the motions and the
arguments.
That either make or break a
case, win or lose a case or
influence either a jury or the
judge.
And in this case, the arguments
were so compelling.
On behalf of the plaintiff.
That the judge ruled.
Uh, vastly in favor of the
plaintiff.
And I witnessed and watched the
court hearing, and um I wish
everybody could have done that.
It was, it was a, a beautiful
representation of all sites.
Of of the arguments, and it
included our attorneys, uh, both
from, um, I think it was small
deaf and all of our attorneys
that had been involved
throughout since the first
filing.
But I also want you to, to know,
um, Mr. Chair.
That
The findings of fact and the
lengthy, I forget how many pages
of the lawsuit original lawsuit.
Um
We can't address ourselves today
as we did in response to that
first time, because the first
time didn't make it. We didn't
make it. That's why we have um
the subsequent filing of the
motion.
To redress.
Um, what has not been done, and
that continues to be a failure
to comply.
Um, and it's important to read
in between the, and you know
what I'm talking about in
between the lines or read the
sentiment or feel the sentiment.
That's why it's important to sit
and listen sometimes to these um
deliberations because you can
kind of feel um what's going on
and sometimes that's really
important. I appreciate, uh Mr.
Chair, um, Jessica's.
Um, the port this morning, even
more so because she made two
very strong um statements on her
page 4, and I'll just quickly
call your attention, Madam
Secretary to the LESC report
that was given earlier today
because it also captured um very
um succinctly.
What
The plaintiffs arguments were
and what the department's
responses were, and obviously
what led to the judge ruling on
behalf of the plaintiffs.
So there is a bit of tension and
the tensions still exist.
And the tensions exist, Mr.
Chair, because I believe
That there's just a a lack of
understanding of what we're
talking about when we talk about
systemic changes.
Systemic changes don't mean just
changing the language or adding
a template of language.
Um, it doesn't just mean, um,
That's the best way that I can
describe it. It needs to be and
I've mentioned this to you
before in previous discussions
in the committee.
Um, that it needs to be
embedded.
In all that we do as a public
education department and
embedded means that we have to
look at all of our systems.
And
Um
Make changes.
Not just in
Sectioning off a section in our
plans or reports that are titled
Yasi Martinez, whatever remedial
plan. It means
Changing the entire curriculum.
Changing the entire teacher
preparation.
Changing the entire everything
that we do.
To bring our educational system.
To being an equitable system of
education.
I was informed uh recently.
That perhaps all of us need a
lesson on what um
Equity literacy is or what
perhaps a detailed session on
what equitable means when we
talk about it.
In terms of how it's embedded.
And all that we do. I think
there's a lack of understanding
and I agree with that, the point
that was brought to my
attention. So,
It's not just Madam Secretary,
um,
It it's not as detailed or as um
Taking as many steps as you
stated in your report, terms of
contracts, contractors, uh,
specific to finding of facts,
all the experts, all the, all
the things that you said in your
presentation earlier.
If you trust.
That the stakeholders.
That we know exist as experts in
our state, and I mentioned them
earlier. They're uh tribal, um,
the tribal remedy framework
group that transformed New
Mexico are vast number of PhD
scholars, researchers that exist
in the state.
And on and on educators, parent.
Uh, parent educational systems,
everyone that's charged with
delivering education to our
students.
If you trust that these are our
and can accept that these are
our experts.
Then my suggestion in order to
meet the judges.
Uh, expectations.
And his or and be compliant with
his order.
I would suggest that we remove
how we've been doing things in
the past.
Remove the business as usual
approach.
The things that we're used to
doing, which is what you
Described how you were going to
respond in order to meet the
timelines. That's what got us
into trouble.
Subsequent to the initial court
case, and
Not being able to meet the court
order.
Where two program, it's no fault
of our own. We all come up in
the system.
We all are part of the
educational system. We're all
part of every system in our
society.
So it takes a great deal of
resolve.
Mr. Chair,
And commitment to say, I'm gonna
take that bold leap.
And step outside of what I'm
familiar with.
Trust the experts that come from
our state of New Mexico, the
experts that have been
delivering this core
educational, um,
Education to our students,
despite or in spite of PED.
And trust.
That what they said and stated
and presented in the plaintiff's
motion.
is valuable.
And it's something that I'm
willing to do, that I'm willing
to, to
Take the reins and run with, and
I know that you understand. I
know because we, we come from
the same worlds.
So, that brings me to my
question that I asked earlier.
And I'm sorry I put Greg on the
spot this morning and didn't and
uh but you know, it was noted,
yes, it was noted that he's the
one stable thing that
Existed in public education.
requires
so I know he could take it, but
But it's, it is important to
hear from you as well.
So, I, I, I know you're, I'm
sure you're familiar with the
plan, the components that were
presented by the plaintiffs, the
9 components. Those 9 components
are it. They're your
comprehensive plan. They're,
they're your, um,
What is it called? I lost my
train. What is it called when
you writing a paper and you,
you, um, start with your
Outline
Outline
This is the outline.
This is
I'm, I'm embarrassed because of
my, my dissertation and I don't
even remember what I'm supposed
to be starting with, but anyway,
um,
This is, this is your starting
point. These
9 components were integral.
To the
Judges initial order.
I don't know how many years ago
in 2017, 2018. OK, the original
order. So if you just take this
as your starting point, and
don't have to start.
And engaged all of those
individuals that
have been working diligently,
all these years and years
before.
On ensuring that our children
that were covered in the
Martinez Chai lawsuit.
Receive
The education they should, but
couldn't for whatever reasons be
successful. Well, not whatever
reason we know what the reasons
are, but in any event, this is,
this is, this is the beauty of
having had all of this, uh, all
of these groups work so
diligently and, and they
volunteer for the most part of
their time.
So that would be my suggestion
number one, that would eliminate
in my view, putting myself in
myself in your shoes as an
administrator.
This would be a great starting
point. Engagement from day one,
engage all of these groups from
day one, it would be amazing to
you to hear what the value they
bring to the table.
That would be one thing and then
So that was my pointed question,
is that would you be willing
To accept.
These 9 components coming as
from our stakeholders community,
for lack of a better word, but
from our
You know what community I'm
talking about that I just
identified.
Would you accept?
The input them and what they
bring to the table.
As what you described as um
Part of your team. I know you
have to have a team internally.
But from the day one right now,
in order to meet the timeline,
and by the way, uh, Mr. Chair,
the judge was great.
He knew what he was doing when
he gave us a tight timeline.
He knows that this has been
unfolding.
For years.
And that the work has continued
for years. He knows that the
community has the capacity, and
you now are in the position and
have the capacity to meet the
timeline, but in order to do
that,
Yeah
That's the question. Would you
be willing to include them,
involve them, engage them,
except the value of what they
bring in terms of the 9
components, except the
curriculum that they have
developed that addresses all of
these components, except, I
mean, obviously through your due
diligence. I'm not saying
randomly or just superficially,
but it, you know, take what they
have to present to you as being
the first steps in developing
this comprehend.
plan. It may be a hard question
and um but I think it's easy in
the sense that
It
There's a lot of work already
there that you can just take.
Evaluated, assess it, evaluate
it, and see how you're going to
incorporate it into the existing
structures. So that's my first
question.
Mr. Chair Representative of Roy
Caballero, thank you for your
question and for being so
thoughtful and for your wisdom
and guidance and all of this
today and always, um, as you
said, we're not starting from
scratch. We are by no means. We
have been working on this.
Not just since the court ruling
in 2019 but prior, but very
focused as a saint, including
collaboration with a very broad
uh group of stakeholders,
something that I think is
crucial to developing the plan.
And so, um, we, we have so much
already to build upon, which is
why I feel.
That this is doable.
Is it going to be difficult?
Absolutely. We may not even have
all the money we need to do the
work that we need to do in the
short amount of time.
I may be coming back to the
legislature to ask for a little
bit of support there, um, but
I'm, I feel like we can do it.
We're we're positioned as a
state to do it because of all of
the things that you've talked
about. We're not starting from
scratch. A lot of this exists in
plans and recommendations and
wisdom from groups in the work
of the legislature and the work
of agencies in the work of
higher ed, um, research, there's
so much that we will be building
upon and that we already have
access to.
As I mentioned prior.
My plan is really to be do the
most um comprehensive.
Stakeholder engagement we can in
the amount of time that we have.
To the extent that we will have
to have people fully dedicated
to working with our individuals
with organizations with um our
tribal leaders who we work with
on a daily basis really at the
department.
All of these things will be part
of.
The work that will inform the
plan. And so I, I don't know how
else to commit to you that we
are clear about the direction
from the court.
We are clear about um his most
recent, um, we actually got
right, his his final order, so
we're very clear. He's very
clear about um what it is we're
tasked with, and so our plan is
to, to follow that, to implement
it to um the best of our ability
and to put together a plan that
a compliance plan that addresses
this lawsuit, and I look to.
Everyone, all who can help us do
that, because again, this is not
a solution that just the public
education department needs to
develop.
Nor implement. It will require
all of us, and so, um, I
welcome, um,
Anyone and everyone including
yourself, if you would like to
dedicate time and in your
experience and wisdom as well. I
welcome that, of course. So, um,
I hope that answers your
question.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and
And I failed to. I referred to
Jessica's um
Um, statement, but it
It's really important to, um, so
the plaintiffs called for this
in their motion, and they, they
said that the plan needs to
include a detail cost estimates,
clear implementation timelines,
measurable outcomes and policy
recommendations designed to
ensure at-risk students receive
the educational opportunities
guaranteed by the New Mexico
Constitution, and that only a
statewide strategic response can
bring the state into compliance.
with the court's orders. So
that's, that's really in a
nutshell, and I know PED this is
where the point of contention is
because PEDs response was, well,
we're doing it.
We've incorporated um
development of internal
initiatives, um, we've done fund
equity-based funding mechanisms,
um, we've cited, I mean, we've
uh increased um funding, we've
received funding increases and
so there were very various
number of responses.
These responses did not get to
what
has to be
Um, detailed.
The way the judge is expecting
it to be detailed, so that I
think if we put on our
1020, 30 years of where we want
the next 2 or 3 generations of
our children to be and where
their future, and they
identifying, they being part of
this stakeholders, identifying
what they want to see in their
future, right? We have children,
I have grandchildren.
And they're already telling me
our 23 year old and 2 year old
went to the spaceport and they
want to be astronauts. They
would've taken them to the
spaceport because since little
they've been wanting intrigued
with the planets, and they want
to go to see the planets. So
anyway, it's important for us.
This is really our last in my
view.
Our last opportunity.
Because the last thing we want
to see is any type of judicial
or court.
Mandate takeover of our
educational system because we
failed to respond, and the
legislature has to um ask the
tough questions. We can't just
be
I, I appreciate.
And thank you.
Um, and, and I, I hope that I
always offer some sort of
balance. It's not just to rea.
There's no rea
we're all equal in this. So, um,
it's meant to help us work
together in order to uplift our
most affected populations that
were identified who have not
just suffered one or two
generations, but historically,
Generations we can't even count
of a failure. So, thank you. um.
Thank you for being attentive. I
will assist and continue to um
my place has been, and so I'm
transparent to everyone. My
place has been with the
community, um, with the
coalitions with uh all of the
groups that I've identified in
listening, hearing where they're
going, asking questions of how
we can help.
Navigate this to an end, a
positive end for our children.
That's been my place. I, I feel
more centered there. So, but I
am an elected, so I have a
responsibility also on this
other side. So, um, thank you
very much for your invitation.
Thank you for your work. I know
you get it. I know you see it. I
know you can articulate it, and
I know you can do it, so I
appreciate it. Thank you very
much, Mr. Chair.
Representative Torres Velasquez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I, I
do have a, a few questions, but
since the topic had been the
Martinez and Yazi lawsuits. I,
I'd like to start with that and
then I'll go to the other
questions that I have. Um,
First of all, um, I, I really am
very happy to hear, um,
The report that you provided
secretary, and um I, I'm really
very appreciative of the
approach that you're taking in
terms of following the um ruling
as judge.
Wilson provided, um, I, I do
like the judge. I do think he
did an excellent job. I also
watched.
The, the court hearing and um
And so, um, I would like to
start also by saying, um, Mr.
Chair, I'd also like to say that
I appreciate the sentiment of
representative Royal Caballero.
I know that she loves her
community's plural, um, I know
that she has dedicated her life
to equity. Um, I know the fights
that she has fought to some
degree, um, and, and I know the
um
the scholarship that she has put
into the studies she's doing in
her, her dissertation and her
doctoral degree and, and, and
when you get into it that
deeply, it's certainly is.
Um, an effort of great passion.
And so I appreciate that. Um,
and, and I also see the passion
that you bring, Secretary, and I
want to tell you that I so very
much appreciate it. And um,
And so I think representative
Caballero did a wonderful job
advocating for one of the groups
that's involved.
Um, we have
Um, and, and there have been,
uh, a lot of myths that have
been created about the Martinez
and Yazi lawsuits, um, one that
I heard recently that um,
Martinez was about special ed
and Yazi was everything else.
Um, and there's a lot of
misinformation going around that
is easy to confuse because the
media
Protects and provides a lot of
that misinformation. So there it
is in the paper, and everyone
believes it.
There are 2 lawsuits. They
started as two lawsuits, and
they will always be two
lawsuits. They are not
consolidated.
The trial was consolidated.
And I appreciate that you
recognize that.
And I appreciate that you give
space for the Martinez advocates
as well, and that's one thing
that I thought the judge did
brilliantly.
He not only recognized the Yazi
advocates, but he also was
recognizing the Martinez
advocates who have not been
allowed to have a role in any
way.
And the remedies.
And so I appreciate that you are
opening this up to everyone.
I appreciate that you are
inviting us and uh Senator, I
mean, uh, rep.
Representative Ramon Caballero.
Um, I appreciate that the LESC
will not be leading the effort,
but will be supporting the
effort because as the judge
said, he does not have
jurisdiction over the LESC.
And, and so,
I think there's a lot to learn
as we go forward. I think the
timeline is excellent. I think
it's highly appropriate that
this is put in your hands. I see
so many things, many of the
brilliant moves that you have
brought forth today.
That well and are making.
A tremendous difference in the
lives of our students, all of
our students, and the intent of
the Martinez lawsuit when we
invited Yazi to join us was to
help all students. Martinez has
both Hispanic and Native
American plaintiffs, lots of
misinformation about that.
And
We want what's right for our
state in terms of uh sufficient.
Education, and these are also
not to forget, school finance
lawsuits as well in terms of
supporting the districts.
Um, so, so I wanted to say that
I appreciate, um, so this is not
a question, this is a statement,
comment. I appreciate that, that
you understand what the judge
did.
Because we knew all along that
even if we were not, if we were
forbidden and not allowed to
participate.
That in the end
In the end,
Even after, after these plans
are created.
In either the Martinez or the
Yazi plaintiffs are not happy,
then we go back and continue.
Until we, we recognize that the
remedies are going to meet the
in the Martinez case, 176
allegations that we provided.
And so
If some of those allegations
don't fit into those 9, you
know, I understand it's very
important that we look
At both lawsuits.
Um, and so,
That was one thing that the,
that, that have been promised
from the beginning, that's how
lawsuits run.
If the plaintiffs are not happy.
It doesn't mean that the court
is going to overtake the state
education program, but it does
mean that we will have another
chance to provide
Ideas or requests to make things
better.
Um,
So having said that,
Um, I have a question about page
12, where you are looking at
shared accountability and
strategies, and I'm, I'm
wondering if these are all the
strategies, it doesn't seem to
be all the strategies, but in
the Martinez lawsuit, we're the
ones that brought forth the
Indian Education Act, the
Hispanic Education Act, the
bilingual Multicultural
Education Act, and we did not
have the Black Education Act at
the time. So I want to make sure
that we're using all the
strategies and from what I
occurred, we are, but I want to
hear again, since it's not on
page 12.
And Mr. Chair representative,
um, that this is not all
inclusive.
Not even close, but these are um
an outline of some of the
things.
Some of the important things.
Yeah.
Thank you. That is wonderful to
hear, especially when we look at
our Constitution Article 12 in
particular Section 10, um, and
so that leads me to a question
on the school accreditation. I'm
really glad to see that on page
13. I think that's very
exciting, um.
I think that's something that
will bring some equity to
education in the state in a
different way. Um, I do have a
question though, um,
In terms of what you listed, and
this might be covered in one of
those aspects, but there's,
there's a large district in New
Mexico who has goals and
guardrails and they, the
majority of the board decided
that um Latino students who
create, who are 66% of the
student population in that
district that they are not
included in the goals, and they
are not be included in the goals
and guardrails, even when you
take a look at um
Article 12, Section 10, um,
states. Let me pull it up.
Um
So talking about his Spanish
speaking students or students of
Spanish descent are never to be
classed in separate schools and
are to forever enjoy perfect
equality with other children in
all public schools and
educational institutions of the
state. The legislature is
mandate to provide penalties for
violating this section. So that
refers to the role of the
legislators and so I'm glad to
see that you all are looking at
um school accreditation and the
role of the PED to see um
Uh, and, and I'm hoping that
that's something that you can
look at as well because that's,
that's something that concerns
me that any group would be um
Not be included, so.
Um, wondering if that was part
of the accreditation process
that all children are included.
Mr. Chair, uh, representative,
please share whatever
information you have regarding
what you referenced, um, would
very much like to have that so
that we can.
Um, follow up as, as needed. And
so, um,
I
I can get clarification on your
question.
Is your question that as we look
at school accreditation and we
look at all aspects of what
we're doing for students that we
Or intending and will.
Um, be clear that schools serve
all students.
Mr. Chair, yes, ma'am.
Absolutely. Absolutely.
Thank you. Thank you. I think
that's all the questions,
if, if not that concludes us for
today. Thank you, Madam
Secretary, for being here. Uh,
we've lost many of our members
and audience was, I was so,
so focused on this side and then
when I turned, they were all
gone with that we uh will stand
in recess until 9 o'clock
tomorrow. Thank you, Mr. Chair
thank you members of the
committee. I appreciate your
questions.
