have some of our folks present
on the history of land grants
and asseas and, uh, and any
previous writ legislation, um,
and I'll like, you know, let's
go and do introductions. Uh,
let's go ahead and start with
Representative Garcia.
That's
chairman, uh representante
Miguel Garcia.
The uh
I come from um Baa Frisco.
Um
My district includes some of the
more historical.
Um, areas of burning of of
unincorporated area of Borneo
County, and uh the city of
Albuquerque.
I have the old um.
So Broadway community, which was
the enclave of our first
Afro-Americans that moved into
uh the metro area of Albuquerque
and late 1880s across the
railroad tracks, no barrelas.
Established as a villa.
In 1750.
Mainly from uh people from the
uh Crisco land grant and Oldtown
Albuquerque, and we crossed the
Rio Grande where all the trees
go.
Um, my great grandpa to the 9th
hour, first settled the Atrisco
Valley in the 1640s.
And my great grandpa to the 8th
power was granted the Arisco
land grant in 1692.
And I currently live in the
Arisco community.
On my district also includes
some West Central precincts,
mainly blue-collar Chicano
neighborhoods like the Sinson
Tower, the Skyview West.
Uh, in the Alamosa neighborhood.
Um
Uh, Skyview West is basically
the hunting grounds of the
Uh, Unser family, the famous
racing family, they set up their
first garage or first homes
right there on Central and
unserved.
And I'm proud to represent that
area. I'm one of those, I'm the
sole surviving, founding member
of this committee.
Established in 2003.
And uh unfortunately, we won't
be able to go into the history
of the Langran Committee, but um
I did serve as its chair for
16 years.
There was an interruption there
between uh 2015 and 2016, when
the Republicans assumed majority
in the House.
But this committee
Uh, didn't lose a beat.
With the Republican appointee to
the committee who was cere Maest
as Barnes, a land grant heir
herself, and uh her father was
also at that time, um,
President of the Seboeta Land
Grant.
Unfortunately, I'd lost this
chair position in 2000.
Uh, after I filed the ethics
complaint against the Speaker
Ryan Ego.
Or his self-appointment to the
public regulatory commission,
um.
Um,
Appointing committee.
Of which the commission found
was in violation of the
Constitution, and um we've got,
we've had some outstanding
heroes coming out of this
committee.
That are basically laid the
groundwork for all the
accomplishments that we've
accomplished in uh
In our land grant community, but
it's been a partnership.
Of this committee and the land
grants.
And a locking horns and moving
the needle from empty to almost
full.
Today. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. uh,
Representative Cohen. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Representative
Catherine Cullen. I represent,
um,
The northern part of Rio Rancho,
so I do not have plan grants in
my area, but definitely learned
a lot during the session, so I'm
appreciative to be here and I do
apologize that I will be running
between LESC and then this
committee as well, so thank you.
Thank you, Representative Lloyd.
Good morning, Representative
Stephanie Lord and I am the
proud steward of 5 land grants
in my district. I'm very happy
about that. That's why it was my
favorite committee. I love
having the land grants in my
district. Um, I also brought my
district legislative assistant,
uh Mary Young, and I'm very
excited to have her here and
she's going to learn a lot about
land grants learn more than she
ever wanna know. She's gonna go
out to the land grants and see
them very excited about that.
And please.
Excuse me if we step out. We
have our office space finally,
but um we don't have Wi Fi and
our computers don't work. So ya
teamway, thank you.
Thank you, Senator Stefaniks.
Good morning, Madam Chair. um,
Mr. Chair. The Is list ofanics
from Senate District 39
representing parts of Fort
counties, and I have several
land grants in my district, and
I'm very proud to represent
them.
And it's San Miguel, Santa Fe.
Torrents, uh, I will always have
chilili and Valencia. Thank you
very much. Thank you, Senator
Charlie.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Good
morning, everyone. I represent
Senate District 30, and there
are two land grants in my
community, which are Cabero and
Seboera, um, and my in-laws are
actually from Saboera and I
spent a lot of time in both of
those land grants, and so I'm
excited to learn more about the
history and what I can do to
support these communities. Thank
you.
Thank you, Senator. Madam Chair,
thank you so much, Antonio
Maestas, uh, senator from, uh,
the west side of Albuquerque,
100% of my precincts are west of
the river. I'm a
multi-generational Chicano, my
family hails from San Miguel
County.
Uh, northern New Mexico, my
district, um,
Share some of the precincts with
the Representative Garcia, the
old derisco land grant tucked
away, uh, south of central by
the by the Bosque. It's
beautiful, beautiful place, and
uh,
My claim to fame when I was in
law school, and I'm sure, I
organized a.
150th anniversary of the Treaty
of Guadalupeeralgo and dealt
with land grants and studied
land grants under their
professor M. Hall, who was just
was fascinated by land grants,
but the, the co-organizers of
that were uh.
Professor, now professor Moises
Gonzalez and our own Paula
Garcia who's here somewhere, but
they found some photos off the
web and uh and, and it actually
happened. Thanks.
Thank you. I will go down to uh
Senator Gallos.
Thank you chair and thank you
for being here. I'm state
Senator David Galles. I was in
the house for 8 years and my 5th
year in the Senate, um, I come
from Lee County. I live in a
little community called Eunice.
Uh, we don't have land grants in
UNI or in District 41, but I
cover the very southeast side of
the state, uh, Carlsbad to
Lovington.
And I'm originally born in
Holman, raised in Ortiz,
Colorado.
Uh, so we've got a lot of second
time and uh appreciate
everything we've done. Well,
I've been on the committee to
support for the land grants and
the sick and I appreciate the
opportunity to serve you again.
Thank you.
Thank you represented me here.
Um, madam chair.
Um,
I'm alita Mejia represented.
Of District 58, 1st time in the
land grant, so I'm happy to be
here. Thanks.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Torres Velasquez.
We buenos dias, um, I'm Diane
Torres Velasquez from
Albuquerque, House District 30,
if you know Albuquerque, there's
a golf course called the
Arroyoloso Golf Course and my
district is all the area around
it from San Antonio to Comanche
from UBank to the freeway.
Um
I like to say that I bring my
great grandmother with me. She
was Trasaltecan and it's my
understanding from some recent
research by some of my friends
and some of uh the work around
land grants and Aseas that the
class Calteans were here
hundreds of years ago, working
with the Native Americans here
in New Mexico, um, and, uh,
looking at some things around
irrigation, um.
I am also uh the president of
nonprofit called the Latino
Education Task Force and we
started the Martinez lawsuit,
you may have heard of that
lawsuit. It's an education
lawsuit. Um, and on, and I
mentioned that because two of my
dear friends are the ones who
got me interested in land
grants, and that is um Danielle
Bramoerrera and Georgio Royal.
And um, so their love and their
passion and their work.
Over many decades is highly
respected, and they bring that
great respect um to work with
you all here today. Um, I also
have the opportunity to evaluate
uh a curriculum that was created
for children. I think the first
one and it was around the Sea
and land grounds and that was
something very special for me.
Um, and I am also on the LESC
and we are meeting this morning
at the same time, so I also may
step out momentarily.
and then come back.
Represented Montoya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um
Representative Rod Montoya from
San Juan County. We do not have
any asseass or land grants in
San Juan County, but my family
is multi-generational uh Rio
Riva, uh, so my dad was governor
of the my my mom's family
stretched all the way from
Coyote to.
Uh
Chama and throughout the area.
So, um, very, uh, concerned.
Uh, with making sure that our
water and our traditional way of
life is able to continue, uh, in
the north, so I'm glad to be
here. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, uh, Representative
McQueen?
Thank you, ma'am. Chairman
Matthew McQueen, House District
50, um, how to trek 50 used to
look a lot different, and it had
4 land grants, uh, which I
really enjoyed working with. Uh,
it got changed dramatically, and
I lost all 4 of my grants, uh,
picked up a new one, so and that
represents San Antonio de
lasertos.
Um, and I'm in my 11th year, uh,
in the legislature, and I've
been on this committee, uh,
every year.
I've been Lopez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Mr.
Chair, uh, Linda Lopez, state
senator, District 11, which is
the southwest quadrant of
Bernoglio County and the Arisco
is also in my district, a
representative Garcia and I
share uh several precincts um
there in the valley.
And uh been on this committee
for a few years and uh always an
opportunity to learn more about
uh the Historia and who we are.
And uh making sure that we value
support and work with um our
land grants and the Aztecas
because that is part of our
history, and it's something that
our children need to learn,
understand, and continue the
traditions too, so I think we
also have part of that.
That drive and that moved me
into, so thank you.
I
I'm Leo Jaramillo and I
represent New Mexico Senate
District 5, and I'm a Mestizo of
mixed descent, so that's part
native part Hispanos of the
stories of who we are
collectively as Nelvo Mexicanos
and who we are as Nortenos and I
represent several land grants in
my district, which includes Los
Alamos, Ria Riba, Sandoval, and
Santa Fe counties. So it's nice
to be a voice for We gente to be
able to stand up for land,
water, culture and tradition.
And I'm excited to be back on
this committee. Thank you.
chair.
And I'm again chairwoman Linda
Serrado. I proudly represent the
south side of Santa Fe. Uh, my
district used to have, uh, land
grants and historic land grants,
and then it got redistricted and
shuffled around. But I'm very
proud to have worked with many
of you in the past on different
projects, uh, ensuring that we
are protecting, uh, you know,
these traditional ways of, of,
of, of life that we have
uniquely in New Mexico. Um,
we'll talk a little bit more
about these pieces in a moment
as we get into it. I'm going to
hand it back to the former chair
of this committee, um, Miguel
Garcia, uh, just to speak for a
moment, um, on some on some more
recent
deceased champions of this
Madam Chair.
Oh.
I'm sorry, yeah.
Can we also this before that,
can we have the staff introduce
themselves?
Thank you, Madam Chair. My name
is Ian Keller. I'm a staff
attorney with the Legislative
council Service. I'm relatively
new to the council service and
I'm the lead staffer for it and
um also joining me from the
council services Nicole
Wagsback. So this is my first
time staffing in committee. I'm
very excited to learn with you
all. Thank you.
Uh, Representative Garcia.
Thank you Madam chair, um.
Ma'am chair members of the
committee, uh,
I, uh, I'd like to get to, um, a
point of doing a
Um, moment of silence,
for two fallen champions of our
land grant community.
Uh, one is, uh, our beloved, uh,
State Representative, member of
this committee for 16 years.
Uh, Representative Eli Alcon.
Passed away, uh, this past
January.
And he was a quite a guy on this
committee.
And he always uh lived by his
model.
Which was, um,
You can take the kid out of
Mora.
But you can't take the mora out
of the kid.
And uh
and he was um lost his parents
at a real young age of 4 years
old.
And uh moved in with his
grandpa.
Uh
Yeah.
I like one there in the Mora
area.
And he was raised with all the
traditions, customs, and
traditions of a
Additional land-based uh Chicano
land grant community.
Uh, the other individual that we
lost recently this month.
Uh, was, uh, Joseph Padilla, you
have his obituary on your table
there.
Some of you know, Joseph.
He's been coming up here since
2015.
When we first introduced.
The partition land grant
legislation.
The gay political subdivision
status to 45 land grants.
That were left out of that
designation in the original.
Uh, monumental bill of 2004.
That gave land grants, local
subdivision status equal to a
city, county.
School board and servancy
District, etc.
And uh
Joseph, uh, was a former
president of the Los Veillas
land grant.
Which is that land grant north
of Montezuma Castle.
Approximately 3000 acres.
20,700 acres of that land grant
was torched.
To pieces.
By the Caf Canyon Hermits
peakfire.
And uh he currently, uh, his
last post with the borough
trustees was.
Secretary of the Los Vegas land
grant.
Joseph was pivotal.
And keeping that legislation
going.
Moving forward,
And dedicated to fruition.
Even though they experienced 3
beetles.
of that legislation.
2017 vele by Governor Martinez.
Of 2019 Beetle of Governor John
Grisham.
2021 beetle.
Ihan Christian.
And it was finally in 2023.
Thanks.
To
persistence and perseverance.
Uh, the leadership of those
Palia and those 5 partition
grants that we finally got the
governor to sign on to the
legislation.
So I'd like to ask the members
of the committee and the
audience to please stand for a
moment of silence to one of
these two champions.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Uh, now let's go
ahead and, uh, move into the uh
first introduction we'll have
our do that our ourtudo Arleta.
Uh, the program manager for the
land grants Council and
Grantland grant study program at
UNM.
Um, I asked him to do a quick
overview for folks that may be
less familiar with the history
and, and where.
A lot of these conversations
come from.
Before we let you begin Arturo,
um, I did want to mention a few
resources that we do have
available for folks and and make
a notes, uh, New Mexico's
constitution is the only state
constitution that mentions the
Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo,
which also talks about land
grants. So this is uniquely New
Mexico, how we, how this shapes
a lot of what we do. Um, I also
want to mention that in 2004,
The US government had a report
that they put out, uh, on land
grants and their findings and if
the federal government had
honored um their agreement with
the folks that do a job ready,
the Mexicans here. And in 2008,
there was a wonderful response
from the AG's office and that
essentially what stood up a lot
of that office. There's some
great information, I would say
in the response. Um, so if
anybody is interested, Ian does
have the link and he can send it
to the entire committee. It's
about a 200 speed response. Um,
so if you want to have a
printed, absolutely, but you
know.
the trees as I did not remember
them. I, I'm gonna hand it over
to you, uh, Madam Chair, uh,
members of the committee. Again,
my name is Arturo Arleta. I'm
the director of the New Mexico
Land Grant Council and the UNM
and Grant Merced Institute, um,
always a pleasure to come before
this committee, um, you know,
hopefully, everyone's
recuperated from the
Long session that we had. I know
walking into the building, I
even had a little bit of.
Um, but, uh,
I'm excited to to get to work
again for a a new interim
season, uh, and I was asked to
do a presentation on a brief
presentation about 20 minutes.
And so bear with me, I'm gonna,
I'm gonna move quickly, uh,
trying to cover over 300 years
of sort of history and, and make
sure that I capture some
highlight points, um, and then
leaves a little bit of room for,
for any questions you all might
have. So the, in a nutshell, um,
land grant were said history,
uh.
Talk about land grants, um, I
know oftentimes folks, uh, I
just had this happen to me the
other day, um, with some folks
that were visiting, uh, that
were familiar with university
land grants, and I was like,
well, these land grant
universities, what are these
land grants? Um, and what we're
talking about here is, uh, len
Grant me or or Mercedes, um,
that were centuries old
communities that were
established between 1692 and
1854 here in New Mexico. Um, the
reason it's 1854 is, uh, we do
have some land grants.
were established after the
Treaty of Guadal Luvidalgo in
down in uh southern New Mexico
in what became part of the
United States through the Gaston
purchase um back in 1854, and so
when those land grants, um,
communities were incorporated
into the United States through
that treaty. That treaty
actually referenced the treaty
by to be on go and gave all
those rights um that were
recognized in that treaty to
those communities as well.
Um
So
We refer to them as Spanish and
Mexican Latin grants, um, and
That references to the time
period, uh, and the governance
structure that was in place, uh,
when they were actually
established and recognized.
And so the majority, the vast
majority of um Latin grants in
New Mexico were established
during the Spanish period, um,
from uh 1680 through, well 1692
is one of the kind of first ones
were established, uh, all the
way through 1821, and then
during the Mexican period, which
is a a reefer period in our
history between 1821, when
Mexico gained independence uh up
until 18.
48 and then 1854 with those um
lands that came in under the gas
to purchase.
But the
Sometimes it can lead to a bit
of a misnomer in terms of uh the
term Spanish uh land grant
oftentimes folks, um,
Understand that to me that these
square communities that were
populated um by Spaniards, um,
the usual full blooded
Europeans, and that isn't
actually the case, uh.
here in New Mexico, the majority
uh
the land grants, um, that were
granted, uh, particularly the,
those, those were granted to
communities are more than 10 or
more families, um, were
primarily mestizo, uh, or
genisaro, uh, established
communities and so the mestizos
is Senator Harrami pointed out
being individuals who are sort
of mixed descent, uh, mixed
blood between uh indigenous and
European descent, um, and then
he was being, uh, full blood,
uh, indigenous, uh,
Individuals who were
Hispanicized and sort of lost
that sort of tribal designation
they became Catholicize and
Hispanicized, uh, so we do have
sort of, uh, deep roots here in
New Mexico that, that are a
testament to um uh our
indigenous ancestors as well.
common feature among land grant
communities, uh, was common
lands, or land grants were
established, uh, those
communities, um, that were
recognized were given, uh, not
just uh individual lands and
requirements to settle uh
communities with private uh
plots for houses for their homes
as well as, uh, you know,
private individual gardens, but
they were also surrounded by um
Common lands, uh, which were
essentially lands that were
meant to sustain the community
and and allow that community to
grow, um, in those natural
resources from those common
lands were used in a variety of
ways, uh, to sustain those
communities and so in New
Mexico, the
All this grants, um, typically
had around, uh, I think some of
the smaller ones, maybe 10,000
acres, uh.
Common lens, um, all the way up
to towards the end of the
Mexican period, there were some
grants that were in excess of
hundreds of thousands of acres,
um, and that was really as a
result of some of the Mexican
policies um to try to curb.
Some of the threat of the
Western expansion of the United
States and so the
The Later period land grants
ended up a lot larger.
In order to sort of help for uh
population growth.
The,
those lands.
under Spanish and Mexican law,
um, really belonged to the local
communities. They were not uh a
part of the sovereign, uh, of,
of either, either the Spanish
crown or the Mexican government.
They were locally managed by um
the local population, uh, for uh
the use of those communities,
um, that changed, uh, post 1848
with the United States, um,
establishing sovereignty over
what's now the United States
Southwest, uh, and land claims.
Were part of the protections
afforded under the treaty but I
go,
uh, but the treaty itself.
United States interpreted as not
being self-executing, meaning
that they had to establish a
statutes, uh, in order to
adjudicate those claims and
recognize claims that um existed
under the prior sovereign and
that process took place between
1854 and 1904, so it was a 50
year process of trying to
establish um which communities
actually had land, and it was a
mixed bag in terms of the
results uh we had uh.
Tremendous amount of land lost
that took place during that
time, uh, either directly as a
result of
The inadequacies of the
adjudication process and the
recognition.
Um, including some adverse
Supreme Court decisions, uh,
also, uh, just as the results of
land speculators, including US
government officials, um, who
took advantage of that process
in order to uh defraud
communities of their common
lands.
So
Today, um, where there was once,
uh,
hundreds of land grants here in
New Mexico, um, they're only,
only about 3 dozen remain.
Um, that are active, uh, in
organized in some fashion, um,
with a common lands that they
maintain and manage.
And the main reason for that is
that land loss, um, the land
loss not only occurred as a
direct result of the
adjudication process, uh, and
some of the, um,
corruption that took place
during that time, but subsequent
to that also, uh, because of the
way some of the lands were
adjudicated, some of them,
rather than being adjudicated to
the town of Chime, for example,
there was a sort of given to a
municipal corporate entity that
wasn't recognized in American
jurisprudence, but they knew
that there was some kind of a
structure that predated the
United States, um, what happened
uh towards the latter end as
they started giving them as
tendencies in common, and that
was a, a practice by the sort of
attorneys that were represent
land grants as a way to defraud
those communities, so the
attorney would get 1/3 interest,
typically on ivided interest in
the land.
Um, and then, uh, as a tenant in
common, they were super
partition, um, which is
something that, uh, the
partition suit allowing for them
to force the sale of those
lands, was set up by the
territorial legislature, um,
and, and it provided an avenue
for uh some of those uh elected
officials that sort of take
advantage of these communities
uh during that period of time.
And then that's sort of last uh
or the last two sort of major
ways that lens have been lost.
Uh, one was through, uh, the
taxation by the state of New
Mexico. Uh, many of these
communities.
were land rich, cash poor, after
they received their patent, uh,
the state of New Mexico imposed
property taxes on them, and so
you had these communities that
where you really had no true uh
individual owner, um, that now
had the onus of um being uh.
and oftentimes the state would
back tax them all the way to the
point where their patent was
issued. So if their patent was
issued, let's say in 1901.
1920s, 1930s come around in the
state taxes them for all that
period between. So immediately
you have uh delinquent tax
seizures. Um, you also had land
grant, uh, leaders at that time,
um.
Selling lands in order to pay
for selling some of their land
in order to pay for it, um, the
back taxes to.
um, the
You holdings that were most
important to the community,
typically around uh around the
villages.
And so, um, and then the other
sort of
loss was through encroachments
and adverse possession and so
individuals making claims. So
it's one of the early pieces of
legislation that came out of the
territory was uh the fact that
land grants could be adversely
possessed and there was some
pretty Supreme Court rulings in
New Mexico that also sort of uh
Strengthen that notion that
private individuals could
essentially squat on sort of
common lands and um claim those
through adverse possession.
So where there was once millions
of acres today of the 3 dozen
remaining active land grants,
there's approximately 300,000
acres of common lands that are
managed, um, and it varies from
language to language, and we
have some language grants that
have um only several acres and
maybe that includes a community
center, uh, to land grants, uh,
the largest land grants still in
New Mexico is the Anto Chico
land grant, um, that was
originally about 300,000 acre
land grant and it is now, um,
has been reduced to about 1.
4000 acres.
Um
3 dozen land grants, 28 are
currently recognized as
political subdivisions of the
state, um, that's something that
the, this body, the legislature,
um, has recognized 28 of those,
uh, roughly 3 dozen land grants,
uh, as local units of
government. The other land
grants, um, they're organized
under other sections of the law,
um, most of them are, uh,
organized as private
associations, uh, some of them
is uh livestock cooperatives. I
mean these are all sort of
different iterations um that the
communities.
Uh
attempted to maintain their
common lands by taking on these
other sort of organizational
structures, and just because
the, the statues themselves, um,
provided some substance during
the territorial period, but
largely they were uh untouched
during uh the state during
statehood and so land grants
were managed by either those
statutes or
by um court decisions that sort
of made determinations as to how
land grants function and how
they were recognized, which was,
um, it's been sort of a a slow
cumbersome process and a little
bit difficult for communities uh
just because it's again that
what I like to call the squirt
peg round hole effect where you
had like these land grants that
existed and had some legal
authorities and structures under
uh the prior sovereigns and then
the United States has tried to
force them into something that
the that the American
jurisprudence system recognizes,
um, and so that's
Um, the
We've, uh, it's a been a slow
progression of, of, uh, both
common law and statutory law,
um, sort of, uh, create what
languages are today.
Um, and, uh, just those, uh, 28
land grants collectively manage
about 200,000 acres. And as I
mentioned, the Chiko and Gran
has uh a little bit of
half of that. I mean, they are
political subdivision of the
state.
Um
In terms of land grant
governance, uh, as I mentioned,
um,
La Grant, uh, governance really
has been something that uh has a
long history, um, not only do we
have, uh, sort of our
connections, uh, and
relationship to the land based
on uh the indigenous or
indigenous ancestors, but in
terms of actual written laws um
that were formalized, uh, some
of the concepts uh in
authorities granted to land
grants, um, take their origin
and as far back as the 1100s,
uh, during the
Spanish period actually in
Spain, uh, and something known
as the Santa partitas, which was
a qualification of laws that
were based on Justinian coke,
uh, there were Castilian laws,
um, and that's where we sort of
first see this concept of
Local communities having local
governance over um the common
lands that surround those
communities.
The most direct authorities uh
for land grants, um,
In the Spanish and Mexican
period come from the
completely de la de la Reynos de
las India, which was a
compilation of ordinances, uh,
that was published in 1681, uh,
and it was kind of, um,
Uh, as a result of the
A low volt here in New Mexico,
the land tenure pattern changed
dramatically in terms of uh
folks and settlement and how it,
how it occurred after uh 1680
and 1681 this um the list of
India is actually uh was a
played a huge role in terms of
the establishing the laws for um
those settlements as well as the
recognition and protection of uh
lands for the indigenous
populations here, uh, what was
at that time the frontier of New
Spain.
There were also some Mexican
period uh colonization laws, um,
that related to land grant
settlements, um, during that
short period from 1821 to 1848
that um had some impact here in
New Mexico, but because New
Mexico was always a territory,
um, even under the Mexican
period, it was never a state. It
was a territory. So they never
adopted uh any of the Mexican
constitutional laws that states
did um during that sort of
period of uh pre uh
post-independence.
Uh, the United States government
played a role of the federal
government, as I mentioned, um,
you know, as most of you know.
Mexico, um,
It's assumed that the United
States in 1848, uh, does not
obtain statehood until 1912. So
during that period, um, after
1850, uh, with the Organic Act,
we have what is known as the New
Mexico territory.
And essentially territories are
um basically administrative, uh,
Branches of the federal
government. So all of the
elected officials here in New
Mexico, except for the local
legislatures, um, were
appointments, appointees, so the
governor was an appointee of the
federal government. Um, all of
the judges were appointees of
the federal government. They
were essentially an agency of
the federal government, um, the
sort of one exception to that
was the local legislature, so
the legislative bodies were
elected. However, any laws
passed by the territorial
legislature had to go to
Congress for final approval.
Um, and so Congress had the
authority to repeal any, any
acts um when they were reported,
uh, and if they did not repeal
them, then it was essentially a
sort of a stamp.
Uh, of those local authorities,
um, that were adopted at the
territorial period.
Um, and then obviously,
It was during this period that
we had the origins of all land
governance here in New Mexico.
Um, it was, you
if you look at sort of the
history of the way the
legislature played out, um, you
see the struggle, even locally
between uh locally elected
officials who came from those
communities who were uh
indigenous to those communities,
and some of the folks who were
um uh some of those land
speculators who arrived in New
Mexico, and so you see um laws
being passed to allow for
adverse possession and for
partition suit, then you also
see the laws being passed to
protect land threats that they
actually create governance
structures, and so the original
land grants.
statutes being passed as early
as the 1870s where uh you can
see that also in response to
some of what's happening at the
federal level in terms of the
adjudication process. Um, and
initially Langran's governance
statutes were passed land grant
by land grant. So you had over
150 community land grants in New
Mexico, and each individual line
community was going and getting
a law passed specifically for
them, uh, prime example of that,
that should be Langren has one
of the oldest statues on the
books as giving it governance uh
capacity defined by those.
ute s for that specific
community.
Um, the legislature, territorial
legislature realized, I think
that this was a little bit of a
haphazard way to do it towards
the end and they started uh
establishing what became general
provisions, um, and more broad
uh governance, uh.
Government statutes that apply
to multiple land grant
communities, and those today we
know as Article One, the general
provisions in Article 2.
Um, which I
Sort of the two attempts of the
legislature, the territorial
legislature had it, adopting
broad um legislation to affect
land grants that were not
already captured by a separate
individual statute.
laws remain largely unchanged,
uh.
In New Mexico until 2003.
Um, when the legislature through
some of the um leadership of uh
Representative Miguel Garcia and
other um like-minded
legislators.
We're
To actually create an interim
committee to look at the land
grant issue, um, and it was at
that point, um, in 2003 was the
very first sort of interim
committee session, um, that's
started, uh, what we kind of
considered the modern era for
land grant communities.
Um, and it was as a direct
result of that committee uh
work, um, that the
New Mexico Department of
Justice, uh, formerly the
Attorney General's office that
the treat in Guadalupe Agu
division was established to
actually take a look at um the
treaty as being as the, as you
mentioned, um, Madam Chair, uh,
being incorporated into our
constitution, we're very unique
as a state, um, and so that
division is, is very appropriate
to look at um those issues
relating to property, um.
and other rights under the
treaty, um, that are that it's
still a treaty that's in force
and effect.
Um, if you go to the US State
Department, you'll see that it's
still listed as a treaty that's
in force, um, and there's some
provisions that have been
executed and and are completed,
um, and the old, none of the
property provisions, they're all
still in full force and effect.
Uh, and so, um, that division,
um, in the modern years and you
guys will, I'm sure what we're
gonna hear from them during the
session, um, has really grown,
uh, and has really, I think, um,
beginning to embody the spirit
of what the legislature had
originally intended for that
division to be back in 2003.
Um, also in 2004, we had a major
overhaul of the language and
general provisions, um, which
were one of those sort of catch
all um pieces of legislation,
um, and in that, I'm gonna
highlight some of those changes
that this body, um, the not only
the committee has been
instrumental in, but then the
the legislature as a whole.
Um, the first one being
recognition of Landrette's
political subdivisions. We know
that under Spain and Mexico
there was local governance. They
were some of the original, um,
some of the oldest democratic
institutions in our state, um,
during that, uh.
Or history, um, but they
get that recognition under under
the territory um or under
statehood, um, particularly
under statehood as local
governments. Um, they were kind
of caught.
Quantified or classified, I
should say, by the
Um, the courts as being quasi
municipal, so they were
struggling with what, what are
they? They're semi-public,
they're semi-private.
Um, and so, um,
Uh, that was a major change for
us, that recognition of the
local government status that has
now has um since sparked um sort
of a snowball effect of other
changes um that have taken place
in other decisions even at the
court, uh, in the courts, um,
that are really, um,
More protective of land grants
and their common lands and their
communities.
Uh, during 2004, we also got
comprehensive planning and
zoning authority for land
grants, so that was the state
actually saying, hey, we're
gonna take a piece of our
policing authority, and we're
giving it to you.
Uh, these
Uh, local
government entities to make some
self-determination for um those
local communities' needs.
In 2005, land grants were given
the right to match the highest
bidder at delinquent tax auction
on former land at common lands,
so they now have the opportunity
to uh write some of those wrongs
in terms of some of that lost
land base through delinquent
taxes, um, they now have an
opportunity to purchase some of
those lands back, and we have
had some languages that are
successfully utilize that to uh
recoup some of the former common
lands. Um, we also have, uh, the
right of first refusal for any
state-owned lands that are being
disposed of, um, that.
within the boundaries of a, of a
former common as of a of a land
grant.
Uh, we also had, um,
Some changes that were made.
by the legislature in 2007, uh,
that provided for
Uh, really the protection of
land grants against the most
real property suits. So at that
time there was a statute that
really um
repealed some of those early
territorial statutes uh relating
to adverse possession of land
and common land and established
what exactly land grants can be
sued for in terms of adverse
possession and that that goes um
to any suit that was or
potential suit um that perfected
prior to the change in the law
in 2007. Um, so it, it really
limits uh in scope, um, some of
these adverse possessions suits
moving forward and provides some
protection for for those common
lands. Um, also, uh, and the
reason why
I say it's mostly just because
there's another statue, um, uh,
on the books, uh, 42111, that
provides uh general product.
from being named defendants in
real property suits for local
for any um political subdivision
of the state and the state
itself, and so we do have uh as
a political subdivision, we do
have um some of that immunity as
well. Um, and it's still very
specific suits that are allowed
under that statute, um including
this adverse possession prior to
2007.
Um, that, uh, that is still
allowed.
In 2009, the let's say you
created the land grant council,
um, which is, uh, has been a
huge sort of game changer for
Lan Grants in terms of having a
state agency that advocates and
provides uh this essential
mission is to provide a program
of support for land grants, uh,
and to, um, really, uh, sort of
provide them the assistance that
they need to take full advantage
of that political subdivision
status.
In 2019, the legislature created
the community governance
attorney program um which is uh
to hopefully will create a
pipeline of uh of education for
new attorneys, um, to provided
services for not just land
grants, but se and also colonial
communities, um, 2022 was the
establishment of the lands
assistance fund, which is a
guaranteed revenue stream for
land grants, um, here in New
Mexico, uh, they don't have
taxing authority. That was one
thing that the legislature did
not be able to grass was taxing
authority, so, um, prior to the
2022, we had land grants that
were.
with budgets well below $5000.
Um, it was really big sales and
Um, you know, really trying to
function as un government off
of.
big sales and um fundraisers
that they would try to do and so
this, this really has provided
um a basis for land grants to
have a general operating fund
that they can now reinvest in a
community and and maintain um
their their uh facilities, uh,
properly, um.
And then also to be able to sort
of grow what they do and, and
meet all the requirements of
units of government under all
the various statutes.
Um, such as like financial
reporting um to the state.
Uh, in 2003, uh, we began a
period of getting land grants,
um, recognized as being tax
exempt through their status as a
political subdivision, we have a
majority of, of the counties
recognized that as being exempt
under the state constitution,
um.
Section of Article 8 and Article
8 or Article 5, Section 8, I
think it is that uh
Provides for exemption of uh
property taxes for units of
government.
Uh, and we've had several
evaluation protest for decisions
that have reinforced that, that
notion.
Um, uh
La Gran should be tax exempt on
those common lands.
And then the other um sort of
major um
changes in 2004, we established
the Langren Reed Institute, um,
which, uh, is gonna allow for
more cross time collaboration,
uh, we're doing a lot of work
with the UNM School of Law. We
do a lot of work with you and
them, um, school of planning as
it relates to, to planning, so
we're we're putting together
some of those networks to
provide additional support for
land grants. Um, and then the
last, you know, sort of major
change was the naming of land
grants uh in statute, um,
individually,
So whereas before the general
provisions sort of just applied
to the language that it applied
to, and it was like a magic list
that you have to kind of know
you were on or know you were
off, uh, and what we, what the
legislature did by now
specifically leaving land
grants, it makes it clear which
land grants are units of
government, it makes it clear
not just for state and it's the
other state agencies but other
local governments as well as the
federal government in terms of
eligibility for programming so
that um that's been a major help
and accomplishment, uh, and I
know that of those, you know,
remaining.
They have their own specific
statute or organized in some
other fashion, um, there,
there's always uh interest some
that that we received at the
council on finding out more
about political subdivision
status, what does it take, and
we now know what the benchmark
is, that you got to go to the
legislature, go before this
body, uh, and get a bill
sponsored to actually name you
in statute.
So, the, I'm gonna try to wrap
this up real quick now, just the
modern role of land grants, um,
uh, it's changed a bit since
some land grants have lost all
of uh or a vast majority of
their common land, we still
obviously land stewardship,
protection of natural resources
in the watershed is always a top
priority for these communities.
Um, it's part of our way of
life. It's part of our connect
cultural connection and cultural
integrity, uh, to who we are as
people, um, obviously, uh,
growth from that is also
expanded to services for
communities. This includes
community.
centers, uh, senior, uh, and
youth programming, uh, as well
as uh fire protection, um, you
know, we have land grants that
are establishing uh volunteer
fire departments on the common
lands that um have senior meal
sites um that do summer youth
programming, uh, also cultural
preservation, uh including uh
restoration of historic
buildings. We have some land
grants that run museums, uh,
protection of cultural sites,
uh, affordable housing
development seems to be sort of
the next phase that um many land
grants are wanting to move
towards.
And that's being able to provide
uh places for heirs to return to
their homelands and live, uh,
and, and especially in today's
economy with some of the prices
for um real estate kind of going
through the roof. This is uh
been a major sort of shift and
we've seen a lot of land grants
expressing interest in
affordable housing developments,
and we do have some land grants
like Trinity that have already
are probably on the 5th or 6th
affordable housing development
plan, um, that's that they've
done, uh, development and
maintenance of community
infrastructure. This includes
water.
' s wastewater systems, roads,
cemeteries, uh, community and
economic development for their
communities, um, ways to sort of
provide not only jobs but
revenues uh to for reinvestment
into more services for community
members and then also
agricultural production, um, for
example, the Tume Lara, one of
their biggest priorities has
been to acquire some of the
lands that are that are um
agricultural lands to ensure
that those are preserved, uh,
for future production, uh, and
don't just turn into like
subdivision.
and, and, and, um, uh, end up
being housing, uh, and eliminate
that opportunity for future
farming.
And lastly, I'll just end with
some of the current legislative
policy priorities, um, that have
been identified for land grants.
Many of you are familiar with
the land grant and Asia
Infrastructure Fund that we um
attempted to pass the last
legislative session, this would
provide a guaranteed uh funding
source for full projects for
infrastructure projects in land
grant communities. Uh, we also
want to do some tweaks to the
land grant Merced Assistance
Fund, which is that guaranteed
revenue fund for land grants,
um, there's just a couple of
minor clean up things that we
need to do. Uh, we
attempted to do this last
legislative session, but it just
didn't make it through, um,
those changes, uh, ended up just
dying on the Senate floor at the
end of the session, uh,
subdivision authority over the
common lands, as I mentioned, as
land grants are starting to work
on affordable housing. Uh, one
of the challenges that they've
come up against is that they now
land grants have zoning
authority over their common
lands, they can determine that
they want to use them for
affordable housing, um, but, uh,
now they're now sort of hitting
a little bit of a, of a
resistance from the counties,
um, because the subdi
Act, uh, in New Mexico gives the
authority for subdividing lands
to the counties, um, and they,
they, um.
Requirements don't always jive
with the, with the land grants
are trying to do. And so um the
fix for that would be to make
land grants exempt from the
subdivision Act, uh, and provide
them their, their own internal
authority to to do those
subdivisions um on their own.
Uh, it happens for
municipalities now, um, small
municipalities are exempted from
that, um, from that act, and
there's, it's, it's a really a
simple fix, but it's just
something that requires
legislation.
Uh, watershed protection and
rehabilitation as Representative
Garcia mentioned, we've had land
grants that have suffered
devastating losses, um, based on
fire, and is that progresses,
uh, given the uh climate change
and increasing temperatures and
dryness here in our state, um,
that is something that's always
on the mind of our communities
is how do we protect those
common lands and continue to do
remediation projects, um, that
reduce that risk as well as um
rehabilitation of those lands
that have been affected by fire.
Uh traditional use access, and
this is a
Legislative state priorities,
um, access on certain
state-owned properties within
land grant Historic exterior
boundaries, um, the best example
I can give is, uh, the Tierra
Maria land grant, majority of
that land grant was privatized,
um, because of the land
speculation, um, the state of
New Mexico has, uh, 3 game
preserves totaling about 45,000
acres, um, that the local
community has no access to, um,
and, you know, they're very
small limited individuals have
access to hunt throughout the
year, but as those lands are
in resources like fuel wood, for
example, um, I know that working
and partnering with those
communities would be helpful to
allow them access for uh fuel
wood gathering and and other
opportunities. And we do the
same thing at the federal level
and we, we try to work with um
federal agencies that manage
former common lands, uh, and
we've made a lot of strides
there and um I think it's time
we sort of also do some focus on
state-owned lands, uh, increased
funding for the land grant
council, um, for the past 2
years now, we have not received,
uh, any budgetary increase. So,
um, although our costs
increase, um, our ability to
continue to grow um programming,
uh including uh additional
staffing for the council, and
I'll present more on that
throughout the interim when we
do the council's presentation
also increased funding for the
community governance attorney
program, um, right now it
operates about 50% capacity and
um we just need a little bit
more support to grow, uh, and
then also support for culturally
relevant, uh, youth programming
initiatives, um, the council
likes to invest, um, and sort of
land communities in uh providing
educational opportunities for.
youth, it's culturally relevant,
um, and so like this year, for
example, we're partnering with
um uh Trouts Unlimited and
uncivilized Outdoorsmen to
provide a couple of youth fly
fishing camps that are actually
um between land grant community
members, youth and tribal youth,
and sort of helped bringing uh
those communities together and,
and, and get some common um some
find some common um
Some common ground and, and just
some opportunities to to engage
and then learn some skills that
will be valuable for those for
those youth. Um, and in fact, I
would love to maybe do one of
the interim committees, a panel
um where we could have some of
the different, uh, youth service
providers that we've, uh,
Invested uh in and, and that
we've worked with uh to provide
those opportunities, including
like the uncivilized outdoorsmen
in this youth fly fishing, we've
worked with some of the uh soil
and water conservation districts
to do um a YCC projects as well
as with uh a program called
Ancestral Lands, um, that does
programs in both tribal and land
grant communities, and it'd be
great to sort of have a panel
presentation where you all can
hear from some of that work and,
and uh what's needed to continue
to support those programs. Uh,
and with that, Madam Chair, I
will stand for any questions and
apologies.
If I ran over. Thank you, Mr.
Archuleta for fitting 400 years
of history in
about 20 minutes. Uh do you have
any questions?
Um, uh, Representative Torres
Velasquez.
Um
Thank you, Mr. Aleta for that.
Excellent presentation. It's
always very helpful to hear your
knowledge and your wisdom. Um, I
do have a couple of questions
and I'm gonna kind of go
backwards from your
presentation. The last bullet on
the last page, support for
culturally relevant youth
programming initiatives is, as
you know, very important to me.
Um, and I'm wondering if you
have approached anyone from the
Hispanic Education Act Advisory
Council, um, and I'm also
wondering if there
any
members of your council or any
of the advocates you work with
who would be interested in
helping the PED, the public
education department in creating
remedies for the Martinez
lawsuit because as you know,
when we created the Martinez
lawsuit, a lot of the initiative
and motivation came from the
work around the history of the
Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo and
the land grants and so I'm
wondering what is
The best approach to request
your support.
In these initiatives because um
I see Italian, I'm wondering if
you have
Um, mid and steps in um any
additional steps since the last
time we talked in terms of um
In terms of either of those
initiatives.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Torres Velasquez, that's an
excellent question. Uh,
definitely, um, something that,
uh, I'm sure the councils would,
uh,
be interested in like, you know,
me as a director would
definitely be interested in
providing um any support that we
can. I know that the, the
council itself um is supportive
of of those type of initiatives.
Um, we don't have any current
formal uh relationship with, um,
that task force. Uh, we do have,
uh, we have done some work
around providing um curriculum,
as you mentioned earlier through
the Sea and La Grant Education
project through New Mexico
Highlands, uh, the UNM, uh, land
grant studies program, and, and
my colleagues uh Kovo Baca.
who's here with us today, and
Doctor Akovoaka and uh and
Anissa Baca, who's on our staff,
worked closely um with
identifying um communities to
work on developing uh these uh
convenience to develop
curriculum and so that's
something that's been going on,
um, that we hope will sort of
lend towards that opportunity if
these curriculums are developed,
um, but would definitely be
interested and open to engaging
in other um meaningful
opportunities and so if you have
any suggestions, um, for us to
do that, um, more.
willing to to take up those
suggestions and figure out ways
that we can provide additional.
Thank you, I would love to talk
with you more, especially given
the constitutional protections
for Spanish descendants and
Spanish-speaking students in our
state. I think it's very, very
important, um, and, and it has
been a driving force. Um, the
other was just if you could give
us a little more information in
terms of the institutes, um,
like I'm very excited to see
that they started or that you
started that in 2024 and um is
there any
is the best place or what's the
best way to get more
information.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Torres Velasquez, thank you, uh,
for that question. Yeah, Madam
Chair, sorry the, the, um
The, the institute was kind of a
long time coming, so the, it
really has its origins again
with this committee and with
the, the legislature in 2008
created um funding for the land
grant studies program at the
University of New Mexico, uh, in
that program, um, has provided
opportunities for engaging
students um in, in as interns uh
in providing services, uh, doing
work on land grants as well as
um uh doing studies and
different things with land
grants. Uh, we've also
uh, try to focus on doing work
around research, um, a lot.
We've been over the years
collecting a lot of um
historical records, we're still
in the process of getting some
microfilm that we've that we've
acquired digitized, uh, and make
those more accessible, um, and
the sort of jumped from the
program itself, uh, to an
institute was sort of an
evolution of working with the
University of New Mexico, um,
the council is housed at UNM
through an intergovernmental
service agreement.
Uh, and so we're currently kind
of, um, we we're connected
directly with the Office of Vice
President of Research, and then
the land grant studies program
was in a different uh office
under the Southwest Hispanic
Research Institute, um, and
eventually through conversations
it was uh.
Became apparent that there would
needed to be a center
specifically just to to deal
with the land grant issues, um,
and to house both the, the
councils, um, intergovernmental
service agreement work as well
as the studies program, and so,
um, that culminated in 2004 with
the sort of um recognition of,
of the institute, the reports,
it's under the Office of Vice
President of Research, um, what
it is potentially a category 3
center and is a category 3
center, um, the focus is to try
to work across campus
collaborations.
with other departments. And so
what we've kind of in the most
recent years, we've been
focusing on a lot of work with
the UNM School of Law and uh a
clinical law programs to get uh
representation for land grants
as well as do continuing legal
education credits um for
practicing attorneys and judges
on, on issues relating to land
grants as well as law students,
um, and we're now uh beginning
collaborations, as I mentioned
with the school of architecture
and planning, and we've had some
informal uh collaborations in
the past, but we're really
working to try to um
formalize some of those things
and figure out how we can
utilize resources on campus to
provide services to uh those
communities, um, land grant
communities, and so it's part of
not just the research, uh,
mission of UNM but also uh the
community service mission to
provide, um, opportunities for
research, uh, and, and student
engagement with, uh, communities
throughout New Mexico.
No, thank you. And I'm wondering
if you've, um, if, if you're
seeking additional funding for a
conference, um, some type of,
um, week-long or day-long
institute to teach about some of
the things that you are learning
in those collaborations.
Um, me him share, uh,
Representative Torres Velasquez,
uh, yeah, I mean we're always
looking for ways to sort of
expand. The biggest challenge
that we've had is that, um,
we're limited based on our uh
capacity in terms of our
staffing, because our budget has
stayed flat for a couple of
years, um, we're, uh, right now
we're like a
4-person shop, um, that does
most of the work, including all
the sort of work for the council
and advocacy and and uh
technical assistance, uh, as
well as, um, trying to sort of
do some of this um work directly
related to research, uh, and
other opportunities. And so, um,
you know, time is always the
issue and so it's, we hope as we
grow and and expand uh our
budgets we'll be able to sort of
increase some of that capacity
to do more and expand the
services that we offer.
Madam Chair, thank you.
Thank you. um, Mr. Chile, if you
can keep some of the answers a
little very just, uh, to because
we have to kind of move on. I
know there's so much, you're
doing great. I appreciate it.
Representative Lord. Thank you,
Madam Chair and Mr. Vice Chair,
I'll be super brief. Uh, thank
you, Mr. Archuleta for
explaining everything I tried to
explain in the past hour with my
DA
about land grants did a much
better job and my husband also
said, wow, that's super
interesting, so he's at home
listening to, so thank you for
that. I also want to
acknowledge, um, our president
of Chile.
Grant, uh, one sentences for
being here today and I want to
thank you personally for all the
hard work that you do there. I
appreciate you very much. um,
and fly fishing, uh, I think we
need to have a meeting.
About the fly fishing all day in
the water.
About fly fishing. That's what I
think is what a better way to
learn about the, yeah, it's
right, put it on there on the
list. I think we need to spend
the entire day fly fishing to
learn. I mean, what a better way
to learn that in the water,
right, catching fish. Anyways,
that's all I got. Thank you. OK.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Maestas? Thank you,
Madam Chair. the um.
On the, the page entitled Land
Grant Merced History in a
nutshell. So there's 3 dozen
land grants, approximately
300,000 acres.
2 to recognized uh the
recognized
Langgrants that compassed
approximately 200,000 acres.
The, the, the land grants that
are not recognized that
They represent about 100,000
acres.
Is there a desire on their
behalf to become recognized uh.
Is it in their interest to
become recognized?
Um, what's the
Was the political will with
regards to that cause just
unless I learned something
differently, I think it's in.
It's in everyone's interest to
either be recognized or not,
either be a land grant or not,
what would?
What's your take?
Madam chair Senator, my
question, um, it's really mixed,
uh, you know, these communities
have created an identity uh
based on based on their land and
their holdings and and they
really, um, the, the best that
they can to maintain and and
protect those and so they've
shifted uh their organizational
structure over the past century,
uh, to try to accommodate that
goal. Uh, and so, um,
The largest landholders uh part
of the former Sangre de Cristo
land grant. It's known as the
Rio Castilla Livestock
Association, I think they
managed roughly 80,000 acres,
um, and they're able to sort of
manage that, uh, and, and do a
lot of things that land grants
do, uh, in terms of, um,
You know, maintaining the, the
Natural resources as well as
generating revenues, and it
works for them as a livestock
cooperative. So, you know, they
may be groups like that are a
little bit more hesitant. We've
often done presentations for
them to explain the pros and the
cons, um, before when we first
became units of government,
there was a lot more cons than
there were pros, and now there's
a lot more pros than there than
there are cons. Um, so we do
have land grants um that come to
us that are organizing these
different fashions, some of them
as private associations that are
exploring those options, um, and
what they need to do to become
political subdivisions, uh, but
ultimately
ul ti mate ly it'll be up to
their their leadership and their
members to make that
determination and then come
before this body to ask. No,
thank you, Madam Chair. No,
excellent point when I, when I
say it's, and everyone's
interest, I'm not suggesting
they become political
subdivisions, that's up to them,
cause we have to support.
Uh, self-determination without
question. But if we do do laws
in terms of easements, in terms
of other benefits to communal
lands that choose not to be
political subdivisions. We got
to make that clear in statute so
that if they don't want to be
political subdivisions, they
could still benefit from those
other benefits that we grant
those 28. Thank you.
Representative Garcia.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Arturo, for your
presentation.
Uh, I'll be real brief. I think
you touched on one of the
questions I had, Madam Chair.
Which was the Rio Castilla.
Uh, you know that they've been
really reluctant to even kind of
communicate with this community
and rightfully so, they've been
involved in some kind of a
Kind of, um, financial.
Scenarios that have not been to
the benefit of.
The majority of the years up
there.
But
You know, this committee has not
abandoned our
Um
Kind of our friends, our land
grant friends.
Colleagues in southern Colorado.
You know, and historically
Southern Colorado used to be
part of the colony of the
Mexico.
And uh we do have some land
grants that were established
down there.
This committee visited.
The uh the Cristal portion of
The Colorado portion of the
Sangre de Cristo Lara.
which Rio Castilla is part of on
the New Mexico side.
And um
Uh, and they have a lot to offer
to this committee in terms of
how to
Regain
Lost Commons, especially when
the commons are taken over by
private ownership.
And um but that's an $80,000 I
mean, an 80,000 acre land grant.
Uh, it took a 20 year court
battle.
In San Les Valley.
And um
The Langrann heirs have a key to
that ranch.
To run cattle to pull out
gravel, pull out number, pull
out Votas.
Vi, whatever, you know, and
hopefully that's what we'll be
able to have, uh, at some point
in time, with land grants like
the Tierra Maria.
So thank you, madam chair.
Thank you, Mr. Archuleta, for
your presentation. Uh, next,
we're gonna move forward with,
uh, Paula Garcia, who is the um
executive director of the New
Mexico Ase Association. As she
approaches, we do also want to
take a brief moment of silence
also for Ralph Vihill. Uh, I'm
gonna hand it over to Senator
Lopez for a couple of few words
on the, on this instrumental
person to the like yes.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and um,
Many of us have had an
opportunity to meet Mr. V Hill
over the years.
Um, he served as chair of the
New Mexico AseA Commission.
Um, for many times over for as
long as I have been here, Madam
Chair, he was the person who was
always even here with us in
committee with the land grants
and when we were taking tours of
different land grants across the
state, um, Mr. Vihe was always
at some one of the meetings, um,
and he just recently passed away
earlier this month, suddenly,
and is a loss for the community
of both the Merceds but also the
Aseos and northern New Mexico.
So if I could, if I could ask us
to.
to stand in for a few, for a few
moments, um, in his honor.
Thank you, ma'am.
Ms. Garcia.
And thank you, everyone. That's
the wonderful thing about this
committee is it's so rooted in
community and then while we have
these opportunities to honor
those who have given so much.
Buenos the said yes.
Good morning, Madam Chairwoman
and members of the committee. My
name is Paula Garcia, and it's
wonderful to be here. Every time
I come to the Capitol, and my
heart skips a beat, um, I feel
like this is a place where
history is made.
And uh appreciate all your
service. I really enjoyed your
introductions this morning and
I'm always reminded that you're
volunteers and it's, uh, it's
inspiring to me that you
dedicate so much time to this
work and it's so important, so
thank you for
for your service and thank you
for remembering our, um, our
loved ones from our community,
um Representative Valcon and,
and, uh, Mr. Joseph Padilla and
Um, Chairman Ralph Hill, they
were
Very important in our
communities and um
Ralph would probably be here now
and uh in his, in his memory, I
just want to remember his
struggle for the Pecos River,
and he spent the last 10 years
of his life.
Trying to protect his community
from a multinational mining
corporation, and um, and also
was a fantastic farmer.
Uh, for any of you who tasted
his produce, um, he was a
fixture at local farmers'
markets and
Um
I don't think he was in it for
the money. He liked to grow food
and would have given it away if
that was what was needed. Uh, so
thank you for, for being part of
our community and and for your
leadership. Uh, I've been
working with the NMAA for almost
30 years, and um have been to
many interim committee
presentations and my favorite
ones are to this committee. Um,
it's, it's small, smaller, it's
intimate and also like the water
natural resources committee,
which is bigger.
And uh very uh it's a water is
such a huge issue, so it's
really nice to hone in on our
land-based communities and it's
uh it's important. It's and I
really appreciate that you take
time to include a second here.
And um I'm gonna just start by,
by, uh, saying that there's so
much to cover. I, I won't be
able to touch on everything, so
I did prepare some slides and
we'll only get to part of them,
uh, in, in the interest of time.
Uh, but I did want to say that
there's um um a lot happening
with the sick kids and the, the
narrative I want to share with
you today is really about
Um, an arc of history that goes,
uh as parallel to the Langrens,
and we started our, our history
here in New Mexico with
indigenous people who had um
communities from time and
Memorial, uh, the indigenous
people, first peoples, and in
terms of water, that was the the
first um
Um
Method of governance of water
and um you know, the, the
Spanish conquerors would
chronicle that that it appeared
that they worshiped water.
And, um, and I think that that
New Mexico is very unique in
that way and that we have such a
reverence for water and some of
that uh reverence is carried
over from uh indigenous um.
Knowledge keepers to our
communities in in modern times.
And I'm grateful for that.
Um, so this arc of history, we
have a a a a really traditional
land-based view of water that
water is part of the community.
It's a community.
Um, water is a community
resource.
And in that arc goes from that
during the time of indigenous um
This is a place where solely
indigenous people to the Spanish
and Mexican colonial period, and
it stayed communal, just as the
land grants did. You had the
land grant pattern of settlement
with common lands and assecas as
part of that, and the
territorial period, um, the 20th
century being a different time.
Um, I it it was like an
Americanization phase of
statehood. And in that century,
things changed dramatically for
A Seas. And then the 21st
century, um, is another era, and
in my lifetime of service is
straddled those two eras in the
20th century being a time of
Americanization and
commodification of water to
The 21st century with a Sea is
trying to recommunitize water or
to reestablish more local
governance of water that was.
Uh, piecemeal dismantled during
the 20th century. And so the
narrative I want to share with
you today is about that journey
and where we are in that, in
that time frame. And that I
think um because of the
legislation, that's why I say we
make history here, because this
is where those state laws have
changed over the past 30 years.
And it's been profound, and it's
been through thoughtful
deliberation and meetings just
like this. So, um, first of all,
I want to mention that that um.
I work with the New Mexicote
Association. It's a statewide
advocacy, the membership-based
organization, and some of my
team members are here, um, we
have, uh, our director of policy
and planning, uh Vidal Gonzalez,
who is also the uh uncivilized
outdoorsman who has been
mentioned quite a bit.
And also, uh, Monica Rodriguez
is our uh coordinator for Ase
education and outreach. And um
they will be accompanying me to
various interim committee
meetings. So I wanted to
recognize them and thank them
for being here. Um, I wanted to
thank Arturo for his amazing
presentation earlier, um, he's
a, a professor in comma profit
of of of land grant history and
land grant law.
Uh, we also have another entity
that's really important, which
is the Aseki commission, and
that's the governor appointed
commission in state government
attached to DFA and uh the
commission meets monthly and
they're really vital part of
our, our work as well and we're
close collaborators.
Um
There are about 700 aseques in
New Mexico, and they are in 23
different counties.
Um, most of those aresecas date
back to that Spanish and Mexican
era, um, but there are some that
don't originate then, they,
they, uh, came about in the
1800s, some latest, the late
1800s, and um
Uh, including some of the later
land grants like the model land
grant and um and also there are
sekis in San Juan County and
Grant County, and in Lincoln
County. Uh, so they're truly a
statewide um community.
There's a map in your packet and
it shows the relative location
of, of these seculars. They are,
there's 700 of them and they
range in size.
For some serve a small handful
of families.
Um, as, as few as 3 in some
cases, and there are some acas
that serve over 1000 irrigators.
And those largest ones are
actually in San Juan County. Um,
and, and they, uh, much bigger
scale asecas, the ones that are
highlighted in red are areas
that are currently in crisis
from the disasters, starting
from 22 to 24. Um, that includes
the Riochama, the Pecos River,
upper, you know, the Guinas, the
water river, Upper Handelila
River, and Meres River. Uh,
these are areas.
That are downstream from some of
the massive burn scars of the
last 20 years, but especially
the last 3 years that have been
very dramatic.
Uh, but I'm gonna, I'm gonna
take us back to a little bit of
history, not as, not as
extensive as Arturo provided,
but I do want to provide some
historical context and, and just
start by saying that secas and
Mercedes uh started in the same
way here. We have, we're sister
communities we're the same
communities in most places. We
have a shared history.
And the secas were established
as part of the settlement of the
Mercedes, along with the church,
along with, you know, the basics
of survival, uh the Asecas were,
were established during that
time.
Um, over the, the centuries
after initial settlement, uh,
the land grants and the sicks
have become governed by
different statutes. And what we
have today is very different.
Um, the, um,
As I mentioned, you had
irrigation and water harvesting
systems that were here since
time of Memorial with the
indigenous peoples and in the um
Spanish colonial time.
Um, ase is expanded upon that,
and the oldest priority date of
Vase is 15598, but most of the
Aseques have party dates from
the 1700s and the 1800s. And
those were set in place, um,
largely in alignment with the
latest de las India which um
Arturo mentioned earlier, a
priority date refers to the date
that the Aseca was created.
During that time, a, uh, very
much operated in very
autonomous, autonomously because
it was a community-based system
and water was considered a
community resource. The
individual rights or derechos
were part of the land that your
family had. Um, your, your
farmland.
And
The, um, that, that changed uh
dramatically after the US
conquest of of this uh part of
what was Mexico. And after the
Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo.
Um
You saw a vast dispossession of
the common lens of the land
grants.
Um, for the Asecas, it was uh
more, it was a little different.
What happened with the
territorial laws was that um
they codified some of the
ancient Ase customs, one of
which was the election of the
Mardomo.
And the other one was the, the
water sharing customs, which we
call repartimiento. And so
embedded into those early
territorial codes where those
two things.
And any mention of water rights
being individually owned and
severable, and never came up
during the territorial period.
It very much resembled the
Spanish Mexican period.
So while the land grants were
being dispossessed.
The thee stayed intact during
the territorial period, even
though the the sovereign had
changed the legal regime had
changed. Even in 1890 as late as
1898, the territorial water
commission said Aseca should
were were operating good and
just and should not be
disturbed.
They made one small reform, but
not so small, they added the
three-member commission in the
territorial water code.
So that was a different uh new
part of the governance that came
in with the territorial water
water code, um, but the more
dramatic part of, of the change
that happened was in 1907 water
code and um like I said, the
20th century is a time of
Americanization of our water law
and New Mexico took on what was
characteristic of, of the water
law of the western states. And,
and it really reflected like
this manifest destiny type of
approach. And
The 1907 water code adopted the
prior appropriation doctrine,
um, installed the state engineer
as the primary water
administrator. So in this sense,
it changed the local autonomy to
a certain extent.
And uh it made water rights
severable from the land, so
that, that for the first time
you could define a water right.
As a severable uh property from
the land in 1907.
And so for the 20th in the 20th
century, you saw something very
different, where, uh, we've had
adjudication, which determined
ownership and quantity of water
rights. Uh, so where there were,
um, lawsuits of partition
lawsuits for the land grants
like in the 1800s for a second,
it was a slow burn.
the 1860s, there were
adjudications and the
adjudication operates like a
quiet title lawsuit.
It, it's usually the state
versus the parentes individual
land uh landowners. So it's
state versus Aragon at all, you
know, and everybody in
alphabetical order. And can you
imagine being a Spanish speaking
elder in the 1960s and getting a
letter.
Then you're being sued. A lot of
these people, they, they threw
it in the trash or they were
overwhelmed, ignored it. Most of
them didn't even think to get a
lawyer.
It wasn't until the 1800s, I
mean the 1980s.
1980s that some of our, um, you
know, college educated, English
fluent, um, community leaders
started to organize, and they
formed regional aseki
associations.
And they came to the legislature
and they passed a law called the
Asean Community Ditch Fund that
would allow them to hire a
lawyer for their region.
To, to provide some legal
representation. That was one of
the first times that you saw in
the second mobilization, uh,
very in an organized way here at
the legislature. There were
others, uh, for example, the
seconds were made political
subdivisions in 1965.
Uh, which is really interesting.
So that that uh time in history
is very important, and that is
a, a particular a program that
we still um come to the
legislature and advocate for um
an a regular basis because that
adjudication is ongoing. Uh,
most of them are resulting in
negotiated settlements with the
various pueblos and um now we're
looking at settlement
implementation.
Uh, the other major, uh, change
that we saw during that time
frame, um, is that towards the
latter part of the 20th century,
there was more of a
commodification trend towards of
water and uh our leadership um
mobilized by protesting. um
water transfers.
And it was because each transfer
of water right with piecemeal
dismantle the Asekia. And if
enough transfers happened, it
would, it unravel the fabric of
that Asea to where it wouldn't
function anymore. So, um, we
spent the 90s doing a lot of
protests, um, but by the 21st
century, we changed our
strategy.
And became more proactive and at
that point, that's when we
started to propose uh laws that
would, uh, again, recommunicate
water to, to bring some of that
decision making back to the
local level. In 2003, the law
that, that, um,
Enabled the seAs to have the
authority to make decisions over
water transfers was passed. It
was in 2003, it was sponsored by
the late speaker Luhan and um
Senator Carlos Cisneros, and
that
Law is, is one of the most
pivotal laws that ever happened
in our history, because it, it
re-centered a second governance
at the local level, and it, it,
it provided us a measure of
self-determination.
Because the community that has a
say in its water has a say in
its future.
And if we lose that
community-based control will,
will loser.
Control of our future and our
elders knew this, and that's why
they pushed so hard and hard in
2003 to pass that law. Um, so,
so where that gets us to the
present day.
And um since that law was passed
in 2003, there's been a very
strong emphasis on strengthening
Ase governance at the local
level, and for for anime Ace
Park.
A big part uh aspect of our work
is to build capacity within us
that to strengthen the
governance that they have
bylaws, and that those bylaws
are up to date to make sure they
have that language that's
statutory language that allows
them to have that power.
And so a lot of the work we do
now is to um provide technical
assistance on governance, making
sure those bylaws are up to
date, um, and, and there are a
range of other areas where we
provide technical assistance.
And um I'm gonna proceed to tell
you what the, what the role is
of Osekis in our modern
communities. Uh, they have been,
um, the center of agricultural
production for generations, um,
but nowadays, in, in terms of
water scarcity, um, it seconds
are very important stewards at
the local level. Asecas in their
respective basin.
Manage all or most of the
non-Indian surface water rights.
And if you put that into
perspective, um, these volunteer
institutions are managing a
really large swath of our water
in the in the rural communities,
not just for agriculture but a
second provide recharge to the
aquifer and they're, they're
providing a buffer against um uh
unsustainable patterns of growth
and development. The cultural
view of water as a community
resource is all that stands.
Between our community and our
self-determination and local
ability to be uh caretakers of
our water and um
Entities that seek to profit
from development and buying
water rights for that profit
motive.
And it's the cultural view of
water that stands between that
and the the law.
Uh, in our ability to, to say
yes or no to water transfers.
So Iose is unique and governs
water rights on on the farmlands
it serves, um, they have customs
of water sharing and a second is
involved in adjudication, which
are um decades-long legal
proceedings and um hundreds of
asekis are improving their
infrastructure too carry water
more effectively and
efficiently, and like I
mentioned, we have the ability
to um
Regulate water transfers. At its
core, the Asea primary function,
even though we have this big
legal framework, um, at their
most basic level, but a sick
kids do is deliver water.
And you every aseque has
amardoma
everyse has a 3-member
commission, and their primary
concern day to day is making
that water flow through the
Aseca. It's a very hands-on and
very real um experience and um
on top of this practice of our
ancestors, the modern Asea
commissioner like Reo Gonzalez,
but no, cause you're a
commissioner, uh, our execus
have to learn about water
rights. They have to learn about
what it means to be a political.
subdivision, um, they have to
learn about financial
compliance, they have to learn
about Open Meetings Act. All
these things that you hear
about, about the land grants
were having to do with the
secus. All 700 of them.
Um, so if you can imagine that,
that these, this uh community
leaders are very precious to us.
Um, I'm gonna switch gears and
talk a little bit about policy
and the next uh chart I want to
share with you is um this
Blue
Uh, chart that shows programs.
And um in addition to um the
21st century being a time of
trying to reenter community
control of water and governance,
uh, we've also sought to get
more recognition of a seca in
state government.
And that started in the 90s and
now we're going into the 21st
century, um, but this list of
programs, there's 4 here, and
sometimes there's a
misconception, there's like, it
seems confusing. There's
different places where a secus
have money or programs. There's
really not that many. There's 4.
places. Uh, we've been in, we've
been part of New Mexico for over
100 years. And, um, this, and
there's 700 sekis and tens of
thousands of families that
benefit from them. And this is
what's in state government to
serve aEAS. We're very proud of
it. We're very grateful for it.
But it's also somewhat meager in
consideration of the importance
of a second to our communities.
And in my 27 years, never having
missed a session and being here
during the interim and the
session, we have barely moved
the needle.
On these programs.
Um, and that's, that's a longer
story than I have time for
today. But what I do want to say
is that um,
It's progress. And we want to
make more progress. There's an
infrastructure program at ISC
that has 2.5 million in
recurring money. There's the
adjudication program, um, it's
called the Second fund. It tells
the NMDA.
And um it has 800,000 for
adjudication.
Uh, which if you look at what
the cost of lawyers is nowadays,
um, that's pretty small.
Um, the New Mexicose commission.
It's the one entity in state
government that's really
dedicated to a seca.
Um, has 88,000 in recurring
money and um that hasn't gone up
in 27 years since I've been
here.
Um, that's the second
educational technical
assistance. This is something
relatively new, was put in
place, um.
Uh
Maybe in the 2010s, around
22007, and right now there's
49,000 very grateful for that.
Um, and that is the, the funds
that go to DFA and they contract
and that's the, those are the
funds that are nonprofit uses to
provide technical assistance.
And now we have a 16 member team
of people that is working in the
community, doing technical
assistance, leadership
development, and, and youth
education and development.
Uh, one piece that I did not
mention here that's relatively
new, is that a few years ago,
um, we succeeded in getting
50,000 a year in recurring money
to the uh to Highlands
University for a secular grant
education. So I should add that
to the to the uh table. Um, as a
footnote, I also mentioned that
that there's increased staffing
in recent years. Um, ISC now has
5 staff for the AEA Bureau,
which is a huge improvement over
the last 2 years.
The New Mexico Department of
Justice Treaty division has
expanded their staffing, which
has been tremendous for us, and
DHSEM now has a secular liaison
to help with disaster recovery.
Um
The, the remainder of my
presentation gets into the weeds
on a lot of policy things, so I
don't want to take all your
time, maybe we can get into it
during the during the interim,
but I'll just call your
attention to the next two pages
which have 4 policy priorities,
including what Arturo mentioned
the infrastructure fund we
worked on during the last
session. Um, and there's some
others there, and then there's
some, and the second page of
additional priorities that uh
most of them are in alignment
with the land grants and
the community governance Act,
among others.
And um I wanted to take you
through.
A couple of um slides about
infrastructure and disaster
recovery, and not to get into
the weeds too much, but there's
one sheet here about second
infrastructure where I seek to
summarize, um, in a snapshot
what the unmet need is for
infrastructure, and this is by
no means comprehensive.
This is just based on a seconds
that are asking for capital
outlay or coming to the ISC
program for, for a second
funding.
And if you look at um fiscal
year 25 and 26.
Um, capitally requested versus
funded?
Uh, for fiscal year 26.
Caly requested was almost 24
million, the one that was fun
was was funded was about 4
million, leaving an unmet need
of 19 to $20 million.
Um, for the ACDIF, uh, we're
getting much better outcomes
from that program than from
Capital Outlay solely because
there's a programmatic approach.
To, uh, doing projects. And
they're getting a 90% completion
rate within a fiscal year.
And it's because it's a
two-phase program. First year
they get an engineering design,
2nd year, they bring back the
design and apply for the
construction phase. And it's,
uh, right now, it's only funded
at $2.5 million.
And the only reason they can
fund up to 5 or $6 million a
year is because of special
appropriations.
And my hair's gone white trying
to come here and get specials.
That's very hard.
It's, it's uh it's
disproportionate amount of
effort to come here and ask for
a special appropriation. Um, I
still don't know how to do it.
And I've been here for 30 years.
It changes every year.
And the uh disaster. And uh I'm
just gonna talk about one
disaster, this is the 2024
flooding and in the Rio Chama
and Ridoso.
Um
We estimated that there's about.
8080 some million dollars in
damages in the upper Hondo and
the real Chama from that
flooding. Uh, that comes from
the FEMA data that's been
collected through the disaster
inventories.
And each of those projects needs
a 25% cost share.
Uh, the, the hermits peak have
Canyon fire was very unique
because there was a
congressional action that
covered 100%.
But for any other disaster.
There's a 25% cost share no
matter what program you get
into. If it's a small disaster,
state-based disaster, 25% cash
share. If it's a federal
disaster, FEMA will require 25%
NRCS for their emergency wasship
program will require 25%. And
these, uh, and these programs
are, are stuck.
These are sick kids will not get
the help they need unless we
find that 25%.
And um we're not sure where
that's gonna come from. And this
was
Um
24, and we're not, we're in 25
now. We still are not sure, um,
DHSCM is working on getting
federal grants to, to fill that
25%, but in, in the meantime,
we've been in a holding pattern.
And
You know, I think that
From what I've experienced in
the last 3 years, and I'm from
Mora. I lived in the Heron's
Peak Ca Canyon fire.
Um, I think eventually,
disasters are going to hit
everywhere.
And cities aren't immune to it
either.
Because cities are are dependent
on watersheds too.
And
And so I think we really need to
give some attention to how we're
managing disasters. And uh
people have worked really hard,
we have a great working
relationship with DHSEM and and
FEMA, but there's some systemic
issues that really impact uh
limited resource communities.
And um I'm gonna take you to
slide 13, which is the disaster
recovery slide, just to give you
a sense of the scope of how many
Asecas are impacted.
And uh you could see how many
applications for FEMA and NRCS
have been submitted, um, and
what these places look like
after a fire.
And the post-fire flood, and
these post-fire floods happen
again and again and again.
They're called cascading events.
It sounds very nice, cascading
of that sounds like a waterfall.
Like, oh, it's not so bad, um,
and you know what we really need
is some, some solution to the
25% and we appreciate the
legislature created a loan
program, uh, or, you know, the
upfront money, that's really
strategic and very important,
but there is no current solution
to the 25% and it's not just the
seAS, it's counties and small
towns that are gonna struggle
with this. There's a major
Um
Bottleneck with engineering
design.
Um, what we need is a surge.
When there's a disaster, you
need a surge of capacity. We're
just trying to realign already
over extended programs to take
on an additional workload and
quadruple what's on their plate.
And that, and then you end up
with 5, 10 year long disaster
recovery periods and that's a
long time to be out of
commission, you know, to not get
your water. Uh, so there's quite
a bit here about disasters, it
would probably be a good, good
topic for a longer presentation,
and um
And with that, but I just want
to remind you, if you have a
second in your district or if
you, if you know of, um, any
problems that, that we are
providing technical assistance
and um those services are listed
in the last page and you can
always reach out to us and, and,
um, we're currently expanding
our infrastructure disaster
recovery team, and we're hopeful
about being able to be more
responsive and to be of service
in our communities. And uh we
look forward to working with you
during the interim and things.
Come up and we're happy to come
back and provide more
information, um, at your, at
your discretion, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Ms. Garcia, and I, I
do want to mention that we do
have at least in the preliminary
work plan, places where a
seconds will be able to give us
updates so we can have more
discussion and a deeper dive
into some of these issues. But
thank you for the overview. I'm
just looking to see
Uh, I have one question or
sorry, we have a question from
Representative Torres Velasquez.
Um, and I'll, I promise I'll
keep it short, but I, I would
love to ask the same questions
that I was asking, um, Mr.
Sulleta in terms of support, um,
how would I go about who can I
contact you and see if there are
any individuals um that might be
willing to um contribute to
ideas for a curriculum.
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative, by all means,
um, you can contact me
personally. I think we've been
wanting to be more involved and
to to be um supportive and a
collaborator with those efforts,
so absolutely. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you so much, Ms. Garcia.
Uh, we'll go ahead and move into
the next um section, you know,
we're gonna go ahead and combine
the, the next two since he and
Keller our staffer is going to
be introducing it. He's gonna go
over uh.
Would you stay here?
You can stay here, um, he'll go
over the recent legislation we
had during the 2025 um uh
legislative session that and
again, you heard some of this
already in some of the
presentations. And then he'll go
right into the work plan
overview and uh we'll have a
discussion of that as well. Um,
just to note, it's 11:43 right
now. We plan to start the work
plan discussion around 11:30.
We're a little bit behind, not
bad, uh, but we'll keep moving
forward in case I have an eye on
the time, Ian.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So this
is just a cursory overview of
some bills that did not pass
last year that we identified as
relevant to the committee, just
gonna go through these real
quick, but I invite members to
let me know if I'm missing
something or if they feel
there's other things that are
relevant as well, feel free to
email me. So starting first is
House Bill 3:30. This was
introduced by Representative
Garcia, Senator Jaramillo, and,
um, Senator Martin
Representative Martinez. So this
is relating to infrastructure
and enacting the land grant
Merced and the
your infrastructure Act. It's
also creating the land grant
Merced and its infrastructure
Trust Fund, and I believe it
imposes some duties on the
commission as well and it's
creating the land grant Mce uh
infrastructure project fund and
the Eseia infrastructure project
fund and making appropriations.
And this, um, so in the session.
In this session, this last past
the house, and this was last
located in the Senate
Conservation Committee.
And then next up is House Bill
21. So this is introduced by
Representative McQueen and
Senator Stefanis.
Relating to the land grants and
amending the land grant meed
assistance fund to change the
requirement thresholds for fold
and 75% distributions from the
fund and it's also making the
land grant meed assistance fund
non-reverting. So for this one
in the most recent session past
the house in its last location
was the Senate Finance
Committee.
And then the last one I
identified, this is relevant to
what Miss Garcia was just
telling us about, so this is
relating to us as Senate Bill
208. This was introduced by
Senator Campos, Senator Sanchez,
and Representative Herrera. So
this is related to water,
increasing the annual transfer
from the New Mexico Irrigation
Works Construction Fund, which
is now at 2.5 million. We
propose to increase that to 5
million. This is to the Sea and
community ditch infrastructure
fund. This one went less far
during the.
session and it was in a Senate
Conservation Committee last, did
not pass his first house.
And so those are the relevant,
that's the list of relevant
legislation of identified so
far, and again, that's not
exhaustive and I invite members
to let me know if I'm missing
something there with that, I can
go ahead into the work plan
discussion. So I yeah
uh representative, um, thanks.
So, um, send Bill 21, which uh
need some improvements to the
land grant assistance fund
actually was on the 7th floor.
And died on the floor. It passed
through all the committees. It
just never got heard. Um, that
bill got held up a couple times.
First we got an FIR that said it
had like a $2 million fiscal
impact.
Which was simply an error, uh,
that was inaccurate, and then
We started it in the house and
there's so I started in the
house and got past the first
committee quickly and it went to
the House Appropriations.
The appropriations didn't here
because they were working on the
budget.
And so once they sent over the
budget, then they heard and went
over to send it and went to send
finance, and then send finance
in here because they were
working on the budget. So we
were sort of chasing the budget.
We probably should have started
it in the Senate and we probably
could have crossed it over and
heard it in the house faster,
uh, but it was on the floor, um,
and just never got called up.
Senator Jail, thank you, Madam
Chair. I was able to pass Senate
Bill 47, which established the
Santa Cruz de la Cannata land
grant as one of the political
subdivisions of the state. And
that's one of the largest land
grants in my district. And so it
was good to see that get
through. Thank you.
Representative Garcia, Madam
Chair, uh, we also passed into
law House Bill 24.
Which was changes to the
community governance attorney
Act.
And these changes were kind of
crucial in terms of stabilizing
the project.
Um
We kind of uh set a minimum
salary of the attorney.
Hired by the program, uh, to
kind of, uh, not to exceed the
entry level salary rate.
Paid by the legal service
provider. Right now, we had a
base of $50,000.
Another strategic um
Component of legislation was the
definition of eligible legal
service providers.
Where we're now expanding to
include state agencies like uh
local governments, counties, and
more importantly, the Attorney
General's office.
And uh now, the old legislation
basically only applied to
nonprofits.
And uh some other changes that
That puts responsibility on the
advertising on the program, the
students.
Uh, from HEB.
To uh UNM School of Law.
And also selection of students
who participate in the program,
the changes we made were from
HED to the community governance
attorney commission.
Uh, so this is a real strategic
piece of legislation that we had
to modernize and improve mainly
because uh we have budget cuts
with the loan provider for the
program, which was a legal aid.
And so we had to expand the
provider base in order to kind
of really stabilize the program
manager.
Thank you everyone for uh
extending that conversation, one
thing that uh we had discussed,
we really want to be looking at
is as we're looking forward out
of this committee. We know that
we're gonna have likely things
that people are gonna bring
forward to endorse. Uh, and the
reason we want to go over this
legislation that either passed
or didn't pass or was moving or
etc. um, was just to kind of
help understand with the current
landscape of legislation is. So
as legislation comes up on the
last day for new, new members
that typically happens. We get
asked in the last session or,
or, you know, session or two,
hey, and doors.
this legislation that you
haven't really looked at before,
this provides some context, and
I'm hoping that'll kind of help,
um, as you navigate the
different meetings we're gonna
have. Um, so that's why we have
that. Thank you everyone who
added some more color to where
things ended up and what we've
done so far. I'm gonna hand it
back to Ian to go over the work
plan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So on
the topic of the work plan, one
thing I anticipate being on that
kind of relating to the prior
topic because we may seek some
um analysis from the legislative
Finance Committee regarding the
bills that did not pass the
mainly those ones that I
mentioned there. So turning to
the proposed work plan, let me
just get that out here. I
believe I distributed to
everyone the the latest draft of
the proposed plan, and then
included in everyone's file is a
handout. It's a single sheet
says additional proposed topics.
For the land grant committee. So
we'll be going over that also.
So
For the main draft on the work
plan go over just the broader
topics that this will discuss,
so this will be infrastructure
disaster relief, land and
management issues and include a
list of 12 items below that.
Next, one of the broader topics
we'll deal with is governance of
land grants Mercedes and the
secs water rights, and then that
includes an 18 item list of
specific discussion topics
there.
And then Part C on this is
reports from individual land
grant mercedes and the Assea
commission and other related
entities, and that includes
reports from the land grant
Mercedes, land grant Council,
and the Assea commission and the
Asey Association. So then moving
to
The document with the additional
proposed topics. It was proposed
to also add uh regarding
governing structure, what legal
entities are the land grant
Mercedes using to secure capital
and to provide economic growth
for the members. And so it also
asked as the legislator need to
create a legal entity dealing
with common ownership of land
and how should the legislator
model an entity like this. The
next, um,
is proposed to discuss the
United States Bureau of Land
Management and a land grant
heirs panel. So the bureau has
been selling some of its land to
holdings to outside interests,
and these are properties that
were once common lands of
historic land grant Mercedes,
and so that's a proposed
additional topic there. And then
next we have United States
versus Sandoval, so this is a
federal case would be reviewing
that case. It involves tens of
millions of acres of common
lands, much of which when
to the creation of national
forests in northern and central
New Mexico. And then,
It's also proposed to discuss
the Laguna del Campo transfer
from the Department of Game and
Fish to the Tierra Amaria
Laettner said.
So the transfer of this lake has
been going on 7 years of
deliberations. I've been advised
and for the last 5 years, the
committee has heard this issue
without the presence of the main
representative of the Department
of Game and Fish. And so, uh,
the committee has brokered many
issues between state entities
and land grants because of the
mainstay code were present at
these meetings before.
Then last on this proposed
additional topics is a New
Mexico uh congressional
delegation is proposed that they
be asked to speak again. I'm
told that uh for the last 5
years or so, we have not heard
to address.
So that's just the broad
overview of that and with that,
I welcome.
Proposed additional comments or
questions. Thank you so much,
and we'll go through those as
well. I, I do want to point out
that there's a mix of historical
land grants, additional land
grants that are interested in
joining as well. Um, and then we
also have broader issues that
are affecting land land grants
as well, um, a status update
from the um from the where did
we go, the federal funding
stabilization Subcommittee also
getting an update as well
because those changes in federal
grants will affect our land
grants. Um, and also generally
how essential services,
healthcare.
Senior and children's programs
and others are included in their
new technologies, etc. Again, of
course, we know that uh land
grants have their own issues
that are, that are, that are
unique, but they're also
impacted by broader issues that
we're seeing. And so we wanted
to kind of have a more
encompassing view of that as
well. Um, so I'll give folks a
moment to look through it and
then um
And do you want to go through
the locations as well? Great.
And and we'll go through
locations. So if you have any
questions, just get my
attention. I'll go ahead and put
you on. Thank you, Madam Chair,
and then to add this to the very
end there. So, uh, for proposed
meeting schedule, we have this
on the back of the draft
proposed work plan. Obviously,
we're May 30th here in Santa Fe,
but then the next would be
proposed in Taos, that's July
14th and 15th. And so new to
this is there's a proposal to
have the 15th, the 2nd day of
that, uh, 2nd meeting, be at
Hermit's Peak, to be a.
tour of Hermit's Peak, and that
is not finalized yet, but that's
just a proposal for that 2nd day
for the 2nd meeting. Then August
14th through 15th is proposed to
be in Tierra Amaria.
And then September 8th through
9th via the East Mountains, so
either Manzano or Chilui land
grants, and then uh the last
meeting October 7th, we'll be
back here in Santa Fe. Thank
you, Madam chair.
Representative Garcia.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um.
You know, some of these
additional tactics, so.
We're kind of proposed by me,
um, and, um, that have kind of a
long standing.
Um
Issues, uh, that we need to kind
of really bring to the fore in
this in season, uh, especially
the ones, what, uh, like the
United States Bureau of Land
Management.
Um
We kind of uh through the years
in the 20.
22 years existence of this
committee.
I always had uh these ebbs and
flows relationship with the BLM.
Regarding uh
The land that they possess that
were once common lands and um
And in this particular issue,
it's important that we have the
Uh, director of the BLM.
Give us
A
Policy presentation on the
disposition of property of the
BLM.
Um
And uh
Yeah, in the presentation by
director are two particular
Uh, our, our two land grants
that are particularly impacted
by
Uh transaction known as a
diamond tail Ranch.
Santo Domingo BLM transaction on
the San Antonio de las Huertas
land grant.
Um
Again, that transaction entailed
uh
Transaction of
Former commons. The other one is
a full report by the director to
the committee on the Ooinga BLM
transfer.
Um
That one entails um Santa Cruz
de la Canal.
And um
And in these two instances, the
land grant was not notified.
Of what was going on.
And the there are congressional
delegation.
They kept these communities in
the dark in terms of their
involvement with these
transactions. So we're, we're
calling on the land grant heirs
themselves.
Of the Santa Cruz de la Cannada
in San Antoniolas Huertas.
To give their view in terms of
how these transactions
transpired and the role as a
land grant played or didn't play
in the disposition of these
sails.
The other issue is real
significant.
The presentation on the US and
the world.
Face review.
Um
And uh you have a letter before
you that I submitted to the US
Attorney.
Our newly appointed US Attorney
Ryan Ellison.
And I must say that this is an
outstanding gentleman, and I'm
proud to see that President
Trump nominated him to be the
US.
Attorney for the District of New
Mexico.
Because he has a good history of
tackling the tough issues in
dealing with crime here in New
Mexico as an assistant US
attorney.
In particular, he undertaking
the battle with this Chicano
prison gang knows that in the
Nova Mexico.
And he took a lot of those guys.
The court
And extended their sentences
severely.
Or some of the.
Plots to assassinate.
One of our former
Um
Secretary of Corrections.
Um
That is who Ryan Allison is.
And the proposal is to invite
him.
To this committee.
For um a presentation by Narciso
Garcia.
Narciso Garcia is the most
outstanding.
qualified attorney for land
grants in New Mexico.
And our RC so we basically
present the legal questions
surrounding US versus Sandoval.
The 1897 case and hopefully if
the US attorney is present.
We want to make a request of
him.
To intervene and to open up that
case.
US on the while.
was a case
Decision of the Supreme Court.
That basically,
took possession of millions of
acres of 7 land grants.
And converted them to forests.
One in particular is the canon
de Carla and Grand.
Which is now
Tijeras
Cedar Crest
That land grant extended all the
way to the top of the crest, and
what is now cedar crest.
In what is now Tijeras.
The tune of close to 400,000
acres.
And the final confirmation of
that court decision brought
that.
Dan Grant from 4 to 400,000
400,000 acres.
Close to 2000 acres, which were
the farming portions of the land
grant and the private
households. I, uh, took it upon
myself to make a request.
Of the US attorney to be
present.
And his office is currently
deliberating whether this is a
topic that they can or cannot.
Uh, undertake.
And uh so I'll have that
information to the committee and
you, Madam Chair, as soon as I
hear from the, the assistant.
Um
But this is crucial because
These land grants that were
targeted in the US under the
Wilde case.
Are the canyon de carne and
Gran.
And the average close to 350,000
acres and final confirmation of
these land grants.
Ended up with only a measly 1500
to 2500 acres.
And it was
The San Joaquin de Rio Chama
again, a big land grant in
hundreds of thousands of acres.
dwindled down to 2500 acres.
We had the Santa Cruz de la
Cannada.
Similar
Um, and in terms of acreage.
And, and final determination,
uh,
We had the uh
There's some some uh the uh San
Miguel del Bado Lagra, San
Miguel County, somewhat similar.
In terms of 100,000 acres
dwindled down to 2500 acres, the
peaka.
Uh, land grant, Don Fernando de
Tao's land grant, um,
the land grant, which is
non-active.
Uh, have a similar history and
similar story.
The majority of these lands,
Madam Chair, went.
For the buildup of the US
forest.
Under Grover Cleveland.
President of the United States,
and a lot of these lands are in
the hands of the BLM.
And almost entirely in the hands
of the forest service.
This is devastating for these
communities.
Because this is what brought on
poverty.
In our state.
This is what the the populated
some of our land grant
communities.
Because they could not make a
living off of a measly.
2500 acres.
Versus 400,000 acres where they
could
thousands of cattle.
Thousands of sheep.
Produce income through the
forestry products.
etc. etc. etc.
So this is a this is a good
example.
Of how our communities were
turned our land communities were
turned.
From a vibrant, self-sustaining.
Immunity to an impoverished
community.
And um
Uh
And I just want to reflect on
those two issues, man.
The other issue on the Laguna
has come up before.
Uh, but we have never had the
director.
Present why this issue is taking
on for so long.
Resolve. Going on 7 years.
This an issue.
was doing started during the
Martinez administration.
A demon fish.
Um
The Department
Boos members were appointed by
Governor Martinez.
Who overwhelmingly voted to
transfer the Laguna del Campo.
Which is this
Beautiful lake on the Tiro Mario
Langra.
Uh, you know, to.
From the game and fish to the
Terra Maria Langren.
The overwhelmingly voted for it.
It's been under the
administration of Governor Lujan
Grisham, where we've had
The
The bottleneck.
And mainly in particular, the
director himself.
Uh, and, uh,
So having the director here,
hopefully this committee can
help broker and put an end.
That um
Long-standing.
Of uh initiative initiative.
Of doing the final steps to
doing the transfer.
Furniture.
And um
Uh, these are just ongoing
issues that I know that you
manage or not exposed to in our
new staffer.
Uh, I teller, um, also does not
understand that history, but I
thought it'd be imperative and
important to kind of dwell on
the basis of what these issues
mean to our land grant
communities. Now it's important
that we have movement.
On these, on these issues. So
thank you, man.
Thank you.
Are there other additional
comments about the work plan,
uh, uh, Senator Maestas, sorry.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative Garcia I
think um.
I think if the US attorney
doesn't.
Doesn't
presents before us cause I just
have a feeling that he won't
given his role.
We may want to, uh,
You know, we may want to invite
someone from the um
Uh, from the Forest Service. And
as you know, Madam Chair, the
Forest Service is under the
Department of Agriculture, we
may want to speak to someone
from the Bureau of Land
Management, which is under the
Department of Interior, but that
history is very valuable.
Uh, just to, to be better
policymakers in in that in that
respect.
There's two land grants that
that parted ways from
traditional land management
focuses, and that was Toma in
1953.
And the Trisco land grant in
1967.
Uh, which, which formed a
corporation, corporation has a
totally different motive. It's a
profit motive.
Motor modus operandi in law.
And then in 9 in 2007, that
corporation at Trico land grant
sold to a different corporation,
SunCal. They actually sold just
before the banks crashed the
very next year.
And it was an influx of $250
million to, to former uh heirs
who managed to to be remain
shareholders. Anyway, they uh,
it's very, that was a very
hurtful thing as well like as
hurtful I was not, you know, you
can't compare them, but it was
very hurtful, similar to the to
the 1897.
Incident, but it's an example of
that history and if we learn
that history, we can then become
better policymakers. You can't
undo that stuff.
Um, but, um,
But if you're, if you believe in
the principles of
self-determination, uh,
You can, can play either, you
know, thank you. So it'd be good
to hear that history, uh,
because it's kind of a forgotten
history. Theriscoll land grant
is, is in statute out of
respect. It's in statute, even
though uh they own no land.
Thank you, Senator Charlie.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and uh
on the same point with the land
transfers and should we move
forward with full reports on
both the diamond Trail Ranch
involving the Pueblo of Santo
Domingo and a full report on the
Oawingy BLM transfer, um, I
would ask for representation
from both of those tribal
sovereigns as well. Um, it's
important for us to understand
that there is tension to name
that tension.
between communities that have
historic roots in our state and
um be mindful as we're making
policy adjustments based on, um,
any, any information that comes
forward. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Torres Velasquez,
um, I apologize for coming back
and missing part of the
conversation. Um, it, Madam
Chair, it looks like we are, um,
incorporating this into the work
of the committee. Is that
correct? So that's the uh uh
discussion at this moment. OK.
Um, thank you. Uh, I would also
like to suggest, um, that we
have possibly uh someone like
the Mexican American Legal
Defense and Educational Fund.
The attorneys, um, that, um,
In, in whose region we are in,
um,
As guest presenters or some
advice looking at the
protections that we have in the
Constitution. I'm sure that you
have already, um, Madam Chair,
Representative, looked at those
protections, um, but I would
like to make that suggestion.
Thank you. Um, you know, one of
the pieces that we had talked
about it is in
On page 2 line of B8 status
report from the Guadalupe
Hidalgo Treaty division of the
state, uh, Department of
Justice. They typically are
focused primarily on, um, you
know, land grants in particular.
That's why we stood up in the
first place and we had good
conversations with them. Um, I
think again, we could possibly
expand that a bit more as well.
Um, and we could add that in
that aspect as well. My
Uh, one thing I will say was in
terms of the additional proposed
topics. Um, I have a suggestion.
What if we just, the, the, the
bolded sections here, what if we
added those to them? So
governing structure, BLM and
land grants panel, um, and then
broaden uh the next one to be
United States versus Sandoval,
and a three school, essentially
these historical topics, um,
because we don't know what
action the Attorney general may
or may or sorry, the attorney
for New Mexico may or may not
take, so we just broaden those
to more of that perspective
should
Something come of that, you
know, again, we can add that in
as well. Um, inviting the, the
congressional delegation, and
then the possible transfer, uh,
but specifically not naming out
the panel in the work plan, um,
to Senator Charlie's point, you
know, again, we want to make
sure we're including as many
voices as possible, um, so we
have a good well rounded
understanding and really build
on that knowledge. So I just
want to propose that is what we
would add to the work plan, um,
represent the board. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Uh, real quick, do
we have in here anything that
deals with forestry issue
because I'm thinking about last
time we had the
Fires in the north and it took
so long for the fires, uh, the
4th Street.
To move forward to let them get
wood that the wood was rotted by
then, and also the issue we need
and especially in our district,
uh, the ability to thin out the
forest and have a lagrats be
able to go in there and get uh
wood. Is that anywhere on there
because that's something that we
need to make sure.
That we're working on,
especially God forbid we have
another fire and that would just
sat there and rotted. Thank you.
Thank you, thank you, uh, uh
representative. So we believe
that it would fit under the
disaster relief, uh, section of
the, the, um, um work plan. I'm
trying to find where it is in
here. And I also want to make
sure, Madam Chair, that we're
dealing with the issues now for
making sure that we're able to
if you go into my district, we
have got tons of trees that need
to be taken down and or yeah,
it's kind of scary if you wanna
be really scared, take the tram
up in Albuquerque, and the
majority of the trees in there
are dead.
It's frightening. If that ever
catches on fire and out there, I
mean, they've had fires out in
Montana before, so I want to be
more preventative, so there's
I believe that would fit under a
5, which is state and federal
land stewardship and fire uh
Linieto programs. Perfect. Thank
you. I didn't see that. There
was a lot of words on. There's a
ton on here. It's just words.
It's just some words and more
words and they gave up and I
just this is helpful as we as we
write out these panels, um, and,
you know, really start inviting
folks to color out, you know,
who should be included as well.
Resentative Torres Velasquez.
Ma I'm sure, do we have anything
in the plan around creating some
education plan.
Thank you, uh, Representative.
Uh, I did want to mention that
here as well. Uh, we have
I know we haven't.
Is it too.
Oh yeah.
So there's, there's actually two
places worth mention. So on page
3, the, uh, what is it, C2B is
the development of land grant
youth programs but then also,
uh, at the top of page 2, line
10, we know, sorry, 11, an
exploration of the central
services, and that includes
children programs as well, um,
we know that land grants are
filling out a lot of the
essential services in these
rural areas, um, and especially
as we discussed some of the
propositions for the
infrastructure fund and etc.
because they provide so many
services, we
that it's worth it to discuss
what they're already providing
on limited budgets already.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
So with that, does that sound
amenable to the committee that
we take the um growing we keep
the the work plan with the
contributions we've had and add
to it the governing structure
BLM and ARs, uh, Sandoval at
Trisco and other um historic
cases and uh the transfers as
well, and we have that to the
work plan. Does that sound
a great
and the congressional delegation
as well. Thank you for inviting
them. Um.
Yeah
You
need emotion as articulate by
the ship. We have a motion, uh,
from Senator Lais and seconded
by uh vice chair Jarami. Is
there any opposition to this
motion?
Seeing that this is the work
plan in place.
And with that, we did not have
anyone sign up for public
comment. Um, however, please,
uh, you know, please see us as
allies and what we're working on
together and thank you all for
attending, uh, with that, that
ends our meeting today. Thank
you everyone for joining and
participating.
permission.
