2 to 3 minutes for
Individual representatives and
senators to
Ask questions.
I'm sure it's my understanding.
That the interim committee
process.
I designed.
For robust discussions on public
policy free.
From the time constraints of the
legislative session.
Now
Specifically,
Yesterday with with respect to
the
Discussion on the homeless uh
situation in the state.
Uh, there were, there were a
number of good questions asked
and answered.
I had a list that was
interrupted by the horn on your
telephone.
And one of those items on my
list was
That nowhere in our discussion
did we.
Did we talk about the impacts.
Of the hopeless populations on
the communities that they reside
in or
The small business communities
that are impacted by their
presence. Now,
Madam Chair, I certainly
appreciate the prerogative of
the chair.
To
Uh, limit editorial discussion.
And limit the the questions and
answers.
That have already been asked and
answered.
But this was a part, a part of
that topic. It needed to be
addressed and was not now.
I will have traveled 600 miles.
And give up 3 days of my life
to.
To participate.
In these public policy
discussions and I would
respectfully request that that
3-minute rule be revisited.
A particularly in the light.
Of the fact that we eventually
all got all caught up on time.
And
And those
Those arbitrary limitations did
nothing to get us to launch and,
and to quit in time.
At or before.
The agenda
So
Oh
Please, madam chair, I would ask
for
Uh, revisitation of that policy.
And thank you for your
indulgence.
Thank you. Uh, just, and, and I
will revisit that just a
reminder to and folks who have
been on this committee, we have
limitless um topics that we
cover, and if we give everyone
as much time as they want, we
would get through um one issue
per meeting and we only have a
limited number of days. So I
will continue to limit, um,
I understand, but one thing that
is an option is for you to be
able to speak with the, the
secretary, the whoever, because
there's no way that we in this
public meeting where the public
is listening and they don't, you
know, when they think we are
going to have the DD waiver at
9:15. Um, I don't think it's
fair to them and that that's not
a good example because that's
first thing in the morning.
Let's say the DD waiver at 4
o'clock and
When someone tunes in at
4 o'clock, we're still on the
items from the morning, and so
it, it's a, it's a delicate
balance. I understand that. We
did catch up yesterday that I, I
kept saying this is not the
norm, so, so I, I feel as chair,
and it's my duty and my
responsibility to keep us
somewhat in time. We could make
it so that there are fewer
topics per meeting, but then we
would leave out things that
desperately need to be heard and
just to remind
the homeless discussion
yesterday was Santa Fe. It was,
it was only representative of
Santa Fe, so going into um the
bigger New Mexico picture of
homelessness and wasn't the
intent of the meeting. So with
that, I will um
I will go ahead and turn it over
to our presenters of Madam
Secretary, go ahead. Uh, good
morning, Madam Chair and members
of the committee. Thank you so
much for uh the invitation to be
here today. I really appreciate
it. I'm Carrie Armijo. I'm the
cabinet secretary of the
Healthcare Authority, um, and
I'm joined at the table today by
Jennifer Rodriguez, the director
of the Developmental Disability
Supports division, um, there are
also many others from the
healthcare authority in the
audience, the most amazing team
of
People I know, uh, including
staff from our Medicaid, uh,
division and behavioral health
services and uh DDSD, um, before
I begin, I'd like to start by
thanking you all for your
service, uh, to our wonderful
state of New Mexico and for your
interest and um dedication to
healthcare issues and trying to
improve the healthcare system of
our state, and I'm very
passionate about.
Um, moving on to slide 2, just
before we start, uh, on behalf
of our colleagues at the
healthcare Authority, we humbly
acknowledge that we're on the
ancestral lands of the original
peoples of the Pueblo Apache,
and Dana past present and
future, and we're really
grateful, uh, and Pierre
respects to the land, the people
and the communities that
contribute to what is today
known as the great state of New
Mexico, a place I'm very proud
to be uh born and raised from.
On
the next slide, a slide 3, just
a quick overview of the health
care authority's mission, uh,
which is to ensure that New
Mexicans will attain their
highest level of health by
providing whole person cost
effective, accessible, and
high-quality healthcare and
safety net services, and our
vision is that every New Mexican
will have access to affordable
healthcare coverage through a
coordinated and seamless
healthcare systems. That is our
North Star. We're always trying
to march toward that coordinated
system that we know.
Um, it's so fragmented today and
such a challenge.
Um, on slide 4, just a really
quick overview of what I'm going
to talk about today. I'm really
going to go over. I'm gonna
start, I think with uh just an
overview of where we are in
terms of our provider
reimbursement rates. I think
that's something of quite of
interest by the committee, um,
that sort of seems to have been
flagged, you received a letter
from you all asking us about
that, um, and then we're gonna
talk about um some other work
we're doing, particularly, uh,
key initiatives and then our
accomplishments, uh, recently
with the DD waiver program, uh,
and serving individuals with
disabilities.
So, on slide 5, we always like
to anchor uh our discussions
about the healthcare authority
and the services we provide to
real people, uh, these are the
real people we serve and they're
always uh at the top of our mind
as we make decisions and think
through how to best serve them.
So please meet Steven, uh,
Steven is a real healthcare
authority client, uh, his name
and photo are changed, but this
is a real example of someone who
is in need of services through
our agency. Um, he and his
family are new to New Mexico and
applied for the DD.
waiver program. Steven has a
condition that uh results in
frequent trips to the emergency
room. He wants to work when he
graduates from high school, and
Steven selected the media
self-directed waiver because he
wanted control over who his
direct support professionals
would be being new to the waiver
system, Steven was unsure of
what supports he may be eligible
to receive. Uh, and so we're
going to talk a little bit about
the journey of someone on the DD
program today.
Just a quick anchoring to the
numbers. I'm on slide 6,
the DD waivers in New Mexico
serve 8,147 New Mexicans with
intellectual and developmental
disabilities, and you can see
that enrollment by county and
area, um, we do have on our
website at the Healthcare
Authority, uh, an interactive
Medicaid eligibility dashboards.
If you're interested, you can go
into the dashboard and filter
through to see how many
individuals with disabilities
live in your district. You can
see uh what
The uh demographics are and find
out more about um who in your
district um is enrolled with our
program, so please feel free to
go. It's a fully interactive
dashboard and you can.
Mess around with that, so it's
really interesting.
OK, um, I'm gonna start by
talking about provider rate
increases because I know that is
top of mind.
Um, and so on slide 8, just a
little bit of an anchoring, uh,
to the way that the healthcare
authority currently um has a
framework for doing rate
increases through for the DD
programs, um, that accords with
a change in state law that was
made in 2023 through House Bill
395. Um, that bill requires that
the healthcare authority will
conduct a biennial cost study to
be used for recommending
reimbursement rates for all.
service providers that started
in 2024.
It also requires that the
healthcare authority's annual
budget request must include
sufficient funding to continue
serving individuals with
disabilities based on the
reimbursement rates that were
recommended by the most recent
cost study. The executive FY 26
budget request was $28 million
general fund to sustain, provide
a rate increases that were
implemented in fiscal year 25.
Um, so, and I'll talk a little
bit about the cadence that we're
on because it is a little bit
confusing. I want to make sure
folks understand, um, our final
appropriation in House Bill 2 to
sustain FY 26 rate increases was
26.2 million in general fund. So
the agency asked for 28 million.
We received 26.2. We're very
grateful. We're very close, same
ballpark there, uh, to sustain
those rate increases that have
been implemented.
So, on slide 9, I'm just gonna
talk through the cadence of this
because it is, as I said,
somewhat complicated.
But the first rate study that
was completed under the House
House Bill 395 was completed in
FY 24, and that was completed by
the Department of Health because
DDSD at that time was at the
Department of Health, uh, has
since transitioned to the
healthcare authority, but um
this first rate study was
conducted at that agency, um,
they did contract uh with uh an
independent consultant to do
that. They made a comprehensive
rate review with recommendations
that were made in June of 20.
23, that is posted on our
website. You can see all of the
recommendations there.
There were 3 primary components
of the rate study. They did
market salary research, a cost
report from providers, and a
time study from providers.
So, in fiscal, so I was in a
fiscal year 24. In fiscal year
25. The healthcare authority
implemented all of the rate
increases that were recommended
from the ray study.
We also implemented a 5.32% cola
to provider rates and no rates
were reduced. So in the rate
study there were actually some
recommendations to reduce rates.
The agency made a very conscious
decision not to do that. Um, so
everyone got either remained
flat or got an increase, um, the
average rate increase across all
services was over 16%. So that
was across everything, not every
discrete rate got a 16%
increase, but that's the
average.
overall increase. So you can see
in the um timeline on the right.
We're on like every other year
schedule. I just want to be
clear about this. Fiscal year 24
rate study, fiscal year 25
implemented the rate increase.
The school year 26, which we are
about to enter in just a few
days. Another rate study and
then for the agency FY 27 budget
request, that would include uh
consideration for how to
implement the rate study
recommendations for FY 26. So
hopefully that's clear. It is a
little confusing, but that is
that we're on it every other
year sort of schedule.
So, for fiscal year 25.
Um, and I'm on slide 10. We
implemented the rate increases
for the DD waiver and the
medically fragile rate
increases. Those were approved
by our federal regulator and
implemented 7124.
The Mea program, it took a
little longer to get that
approval. Those were implemented
101 of 24.
HCA has initiated the RFP
process now in FY 25 to do the
next rate study and we have just
contracted with HMA Health
Management Associates to do the
next rate study.
So the total computable
expenditures so far for rate
increases that were implemented
in FY 25 was $101 million.
That's the total that has gone
out the door so far.
are projected total expenditure
is about 110 million. We're
pretty close to the end of the
fiscal year, so we're projecting
about 110 million in cost
attributed to those rate
increases that were completed.
The general fund appropriation
for implementing those rate
increases 20.4 million. We also
had some fund balance and we've
seen.
higher utilization, higher
acuity in this population than
anticipated. So those rate
increases were more expensive
than we anticipated. We have
spent a total of about 30
million in general fund to
support those fiscal year 25
rate increases, so that did
require us to spend some of our
fund balance that we got from
the Department of Health, um, 30
million.
I would just add to that because
we have some additional costs
run out related to that higher
utilization, which we all want
to see actually, it's a really
good positive trend, but it is
more expensive to the state.
So, on slide 11, um, just really
quickly I want to talk through
FY 26 and 27, um.
The FY 26 rate study has
started. We kicked that off in
June. Uh, we have a new
consultant. We are looking at
all waiver programs and all
services, uh, for that study.
Um, one of the things that I
feel I've heard feedback on
about the previous rate study is
that maybe there wasn't enough
of a robust process around
stakeholder input, provider
input are really kind of hearing
things out if there were any
flaws in the methodologies, we
are correcting for that, um, and
our
rate study this time will be
more robust with a more robust
provider input process. Uh,
we've established a way to do
that. That rate study will
conclude in November of 2025,
and as I mentioned, our FY 27
budget request will include um a
way to incorporate those great
study recommendations with the
caveat that the amount of that
request will be dependent on
federal on the available
funding, but, um, so we may, you
know, have to make adjustments
depending on what the
Revenue forecast looks like for
the state.
Slide 12 just gives you an
example of um what those rate
study um recommendations were,
uh, we have done previous rate
studies, uh, for the DD program,
but I will say this school year
25 was the first year that the
rate study, the, the
recommendations for the rates
were fully funded. And it was
very exciting for the team to be
able to actually execute the
full recommendation. Um, so we
really are grateful for your
your support and your advocacy
for the program. Um, we do have
a federal requirement that
requires us to do rate reviews
and rate updates every 5 years,
but as I just mentioned New
Mexico's, uh, cadence is more
assertive, uh, with that and
maybe more data driven and
keeping the rates kind of up to
par with what they should be,
but you can see what those rate
increases look like, um, in that
right hand table.
On slide 13, uh, just a reminder
that House Bill 395 also
requires the agency to do robust
data collection and reporting on
the direct service provider
workforce. Um, so we are also
doing that. We do data
collection on the direct support
professional, uh, professionals,
including employee wages,
benefits, full or part-time
status, employment length, and
their demographics, uh, we have
been reporting to uh this body
every year.
uh, and our most recent report
is posted on our website, um, of
the, there's some findings from
that and um that are kind of
interesting, um, which I won't
go through all of those, but
it's really interesting, you
know, you can kind of see from
that data how many of the
agencies, for example, are
offering health insurance
benefits. How many uh employees
are working part time, uh, what
their average wages are, so 60%
of agencies are paying between
12 and $17 an hour, 16% of them
are paying.
$17 to $22 an hour. We hope to
see that the rate increases
result in additional money going
home to the direct support
professionals that do this hard,
hard work, um, and there are a
lot of vacancies across agencies
and so we can see that too, and
that's a concern for us to be
tracking. So I'm really glad to
have this data. It tells us a
lot. Our 2025 report is in
progress.
So, um, just a quick note and
then I'm going to turn things
over to Director Rodriguez, but
um we really are aware of how
funding affects providers. We,
we hear about this a lot. It is
one of the most important tools
for building a good robust
provider workforce, and many of
the caregivers in New Mexico are
themselves um a beneficiaries of
our programs, uh, because they
don't get paid high wages. They
work very, very hard. They might
also qualify for Medicaid.
It might also qualify for staff,
so we really think it's
important to make sure that we
are lifting that group of
people, um, and making sure that
they're adequately paid. So, um,
it's very important we also have
access mandates and are always
kind of really monitoring to
make sure that access to care is
adequate. We know that New
Mexico has really key challenges
in that area, um, and so we are
doing, um, a lot of work in this
area and really excited to have
the rate process set forth.
Happy to answer your questions
and we'll um hand things.
Thank you, Secretary Armijo, and
good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Jennifer Rodriguez from the
Developmental Disability
Supports Division, and I would
love to be able to share a few
of our accomplishments over the
last couple years. Um, so as you
know, and thank you, uh, we were
able to clear a 13+ year waiting
list over the last 3 years. Um,
so we're really proud that we
were able to bring over 3500 new
people into our waiver program.
and so that's a huge
accomplishment, and we thank you
for your commitment to people
with intellectual and
developmental disabilities in
our state. Uh, we also have been
meeting on a quarterly basis
with our providers and
stakeholder groups, advocacy
organizations, um, as a result
of a provider summit that was
held about a year ago, where we
made a variety of commitments
together to collectively improve
the IDD system in New Mexico.
Uh, so that's been going on,
like I said, every quarter.
Uh, with great success and we're
tackling the commitments
together that we uh created back
uh about a year ago.
Additionally, uh, we were able
as as Secretary Armijo
mentioned, the developmental
disabilities supports division,
formerly of the Department of
Health, um, was moved to the
healthcare authority, and part
of that was to create greater
efficiencies and we were very
successful in uh receiving 5
positions from the Medical
Assistance division, uh, into
the developmental.
disabilities, supports division
to work directly to improve uh
communications and uh great and
allow greater efficiencies in
our processes related to our
providers, which was one of the
commitments we made at the
providers summit.
Of course, we continue to
prioritize abuse, neglect, and
exploitation prevention at DDSD,
um, we created a new bureau
solely dedicated to individual
safety and advocacy and risk
management that went live April
of 2024.
With that bureau, we created um
uh criteria that would trigger a
response from us at DDSD in
response to various types of
allegations of abuse, neglect,
and exploitation. So from um
almost the last year, we had 248
cases that triggered that
response out of those 248 cases,
41 were ultimately substantiated
and 177 were unsubstantiated.
and we still have 30 that are
awaiting a disposition. We
collect data on all of DDSD's
actions and all of our
responses, um, and any
recommendations or outside
referrals that are made in order
to continue to keep people
healthy and safe, uh, we are
tracking that.
Additionally, you are probably
acutely familiar with one of our
other strategies, which is uh
what we're calling health and
wellness visits. And what that
looks like is state staff DDSD
and the division of Health
Improvement are visiting every
single one of our waiver
recipients in their homes face
to face 2 times a year. And to
date we've completed over 3100,
excuse me, 31,000 visits.
Um, as a result of our provider
summit, one of the uh areas of
feedback that we received was
related specifically to training
that the state staff receive
when they are um preparing to
conduct the health and wellness
face to face visits. Um, so we
did in the last year create um
and implement a new
comprehensive health and
wellness visit training at DDSD
and all staff who are conducting
our health and wellness visits
are required to take that
training.
We also utilize a predictive
risk model where we look at
certain data points for people
who might end up being at higher
risk of abuse, neglect, and
exploitation, and we prioritize
those visits when we are
conducting our health and
wellness visits. Um, you'll see
that the average amount of
visits we are able to complete
per month are over 1300. We have
well over 100 people at DDSD
that have um uh been deployed.
to conduct these health and
wellness visits. That's a large
portion of our staff's uh time
is making sure we are meeting
our waiver recipients and seeing
them face to face in their
homes, and out of the total that
had been seen thus far, only 41,
um, potential abuse, neglect,
and exploitation reports were
collected, um, as a result of
our health and wellness visits.
So you can see the graph on the
right column will show you the
number of visits that were
conducted over
a 5 month period and how many of
those resulted in a potential
abuse, neglect, and exploitation
situation.
And again, ongoing visits to
date over 31,000 visits have
been completed.
Another really just on, on your
chart on page 18, what is R O R
A. That is a regional office
request for assistance, so it
does not rise to the level of
abuse, neglect, and
exploitation, but it's an area
where our staff felt that they
needed some additional support
to resolve, um, something that
was going on during that visit.
OK
Um, another really great success
in in New Mexico with the
developmental disability
supports division is we are able
to offer, um, through our waiver
programs, a service, uh,
provided by a company called
Station MD, which is specialized
telemedicine services, and we
decided to utilize that as a
strategy to prevent emergency
room visits, uh, which can be
incredibly traumatic and
stressful and lengthy for people
with intellectual and
developmental disabilities.
who tend to have additional
health concerns as well, um, as
Steven in our example, um,
demonstrates. So we offer this,
it is a 24/7 telehealth service
of medical doctors that is
available to any person on our
waiver programs in our state at
any time during the day for any
reason. uh Station MD
clinicians, of course, our board
certified, um, and what's really
neat about this program is that
they are all specially
Trained in working with people
with intellectual and
developmental disabilities. So
again, this is a really great
strategy to reduce hospital
visits for people and really,
you know, person centered, which
is what we strive for in our
waiver programs, uh, which
helped them minimize disruptions
to people's daily activities,
medication schedules, work,
sleep schedules, um, as well as
it also supports our direct
support professionals when
they're managing sometimes 3 to
4 people.
one DSP present.
Um, this also demonstrates our
commitment to the mission of the
healthcare authority, um, and
this is one example of the
coordinated comprehensive health
care system that Secretary
Armijo mentioned earlier.
We also want to thank you again,
um, for your investment in
people with intellectual and
developmental disabilities and
our programs, um, we received
funding in our FY 26 budget to
offer people waiver services as
they apply. So you heard me talk
about um a previous 13 year
waiting list. Um, that has not
only been eliminated, but now
thanks to you all and our
governor, we are now able to
bring people who need services
into services as they apply.
So that is a huge um success
and, and we're really grateful
for your partnership there. Um,
and why is this important? This
is incredibly important for
people with intellectual and
developmental disabilities and
their families, because now they
no longer have to wait for very
beneficial services that they
are um most times very desperate
to receive and get support with.
Um, DDSD no longer has to rely
on whether or not we're going to
receive new annual
appropriations.
Moving forward, so that's really
uh helpful in being able to
plan uh for being able to
support an increased population,
and of course, um, what are the
benefits of people with IDD
receiving waiver programs, um,
it really improves individual
outcomes, family stability is
better, um, we are really
looking out for our direct
support professionals, our
caregivers, um, that helps with
their well-being and of course,
um, health and safety
improvements within the
Program and for these people who
maybe aren't being seen by
anybody outside of their
families, and it allows for
equity and fairness to all New
Mexicans with intellectual and
developmental disabilities.
So with saying that in
conclusion back to Stephen, um,
because we were able to receive
this funding and continuously
allocate people. Steven, um,
waited less than 6 months to not
only apply for services and meet
the eligibility criteria, but
get into services and start
receiving the supports that he
needed. He was able to hire
family members, his cousin and
his older brother to be his
direct support professional, the
staff, and he was able to uh
determine what
He was going to pay them through
the self-directed program and
was able to pay them above
minimum wage because of the rate
increases that were supported by
the legislature in DDSD's FY 25
and 26 budget.
Uh, routine health and wellness
visit from the DDSD staff, uh,
informed Steven that he was able
to utilize Station MD telehealth
services when he experienced his
acute medical episodes, so he
did not have to spend hours
sitting in the emergency room
avoiding highly stressful and
physically difficult situations
for him and his family. And now
Stephen is currently involved in
his high school transition
program, excuse me, and is on
his way to competitive.
Employment upon graduation.
Thank you. That concludes our
presentation. Thank you. OK, um,
All right, so I see.
Um, representative blocks,
Senator Blum, who else over
there?
No, I was just over here. OK,
it's, it's pretty much
everybody. OK, so we will, we
will, um, let's see, how are we
doing on time? Um,
OK, so we'll, we'll start with 3
minutes each. So we'll start
with a representative Chandler.
Come down this way, go back that
way and then go to the front. So
OK, thank you. Um, next we have
Senator Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for the brief, uh, very
good. I'm just gonna ask some
quick questions. There's a lot
more, maybe we can um meet later
cause I I've I've talked to the
secretary numerous times.
Um, first of all, this slide, I
absolutely love. Thank you for
putting a mission, vision and
goals, um, as a retired military
guy, that means a lot to me. And
I, I don't need you to go into
detail, but on your goals here,
how do we know we're doing well?
Are you keeping metrics on these
4 goals, and if so, are they
published on the website? Uh,
Madam Chair, uh, Senator Block,
yes, uh, we have a performance
scorecard on our website. Uh, we
have, uh, and I'll be happy to
send you the link. It's kind of.
to find stuff on our website, so
I'll, we'll send you the link.
It does have buy goal. It has
specific metrics and KPIs for
each school. OK. Thank you. And
um I'm glad Steven's doing well,
by the way. Give, give Stephen
our best.
Um, this chart right here on
slide 6.
What, what type of
Can I assume that these uh rural
counties with uh just a few, uh,
people here with uh DD is that
all home care or is there any
other type of facilities in
those rural counties?
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator Block
all sort of cue that up and then
if a director Rodriguez has
anything to add, um, she can do
that. I, most of these are home
and community based services.
These are, that's really the
intention is to keep people out
of facilities, uh, so that they
are getting services in their
homes, um, and so these are
really common community-based
services that map that you see
there,
um, Madam Chair, thanks for
that. Um, so we have 8,147, and
I assume the cost of that is
rolled up in our
budget of 26 million or whatever
whatever it was that you guys.
Um, ended up receiving. Do you
guys break that out into how
much
Uh, it costs per person.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator Block,
yes, we do, um if you don't have
that number now, that's OK. Just
wanna know if you do that, our
overall budget is much higher.
It's uh OK. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Uh, from 28 million you
request to 26.2, uh, what did
you have to drop out of that?
I'm sorry, uh, Madam Chair,
Senator Block, can you repeat
the question? Uh, yes, Madam
Chair, so your request was 28
million and then you ended up
getting 26.2%. What did you have
to drop out of that?
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator Block,
we're not planning to drop
anything. We think that's close
enough, uh, for us to achieve
sort of the sustainable. Thank
you, Madam Chair,
um, Health Management
Associates, uh, your, your new
consultant, were they the only
bid?
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator Block,
no, it was a competitive. I'm
not sure how many.
Uh, Madam, uh, Madam Secretary,
they from New Mexico? Are they
have New Mexico company Madam
Chair, Senator, no, they're not.
They're a national consulting
firm.
Yeah, I don't like I'll press.
We'll talk after.
And then, um, on the oversight
here for Man chair.
OK, thank you, uh, Madam Chair.
So what, what type of um
requirements, training or
oversight, do we have for like
the people in Steve for Steve
and his family or other family
members that are uh getting paid
to take care of their, their
family, but by the way, home,
home care, in my opinion is
probably better than some
institutional facility care, so
I'm with you on that, but I want
to make sure that we're um
You know, we're transparent,
there's no fraud, waste or abuse
on this. So what type of
oversight training requires for
the family members have to meet,
and I'm done.
Um, thank you, Senator Block and
members of the committee for the
question. Uh, there's a very
comprehensive training
curriculum that all staff need
to complete before working with
people with intellectual and
developmental disabilities, even
if they are family members, um,
caring for their loved ones, um,
oversight and monitoring all of
our waiver programs have a
required service of case
management that does have to be
face to face with every
individual on their caseload, at
a minimum of once a month. They
are the main entity.
That helps to coordinate all of
their services and programs, and
they also have a role in
ensuring that trainings are
complete and by way of
monitoring that in every
provider is employed by a
provider agency who then is
ultimately responsible for
ensuring compliance with all of
the required trainings.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
again, um,
I, I just want to say I, I hope
we can hire New Mexico companies
instead of these out of state,
just people. I, I don't like
them. I like New Mexicans.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, I like
New Mexicans too, actually. I
mean one,
sometimes it's hard to find that
expertise in New Mexico. It can
be kind of challenging, but your
point is well made. I did want
to just, um, kind of call your
attention. You do have this in
your packet today and it does
have those per member costs in
it. Thank you. Thank you for the
extra
time. Thank you and as having
been a family care provider for
my son. Um, the training is
extensive. I mean you do it, it
seemed kind of weird to me that
I
I had to take a two-day training
on giving meds to my son, who
I've been giving meds to for 15
years. By the time I took the
training, but it's very
comprehensive and kind of a pain
in the neck, but
that Madam I'm sure it's good to
hear that because obviously the
safety of the individual is, is
a high priority and um so I
appreciate that. So thank you.
Thank you, Representative Nicole
Chavis.
OK. Representative Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you both for being here. I have
3 minutes, so I'm just going to
go super quick. I have a few
questions I just wrote down, so
I'll be quicker. Uh, have you
asked the federal government for
approval of the current rate
increases, and are they going
into effect July 1st. Uh, Madam
Chair, Representative block, so
the agency's request was to
sustain rate increases that have
already been approved.
Um, there is a source of
confusion around this. I will
say that um uh the agency takes
responsibility for anything that
was not clearly communicated
during session. Our budget
request was for 28 million to
sustain the cost of rate
increases that were implemented
last year in FY 25, um, there
seems to have been some
expectation that we do rate
increases or targeted rate
increases in FY 26. We are
working through that issue with
the LFC, um, as soon as we have
cleared that issue up with the
LFC, we will, if, if we decide.
that there's adequate budget to
proceed with additional rate
increases, which we're not sure
there is right now. Uh, we will
proceed with those. So I, I
definitely don't think uh
there's any, there's not any
additional new rate increases
onto the deck for July 1st, uh,
but we are looking at maybe some
alternatives if there's
additional funding to do some
additional rate increases in
December or January, uh, but
that is dependent on the budget.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Secretary. So
then, how much money are you
projecting to have left over in
FY 25.
To push over to FY 26. Uh, Madam
Chair, Representative block at
this point, we are not
projecting any leftover funding.
In fact, we are running a little
bit short on funding. Um, I told
you about the $20 million
preparation that we received and
the $30 million cost, uh, so
we're a little bit over, we had
some fund balance that we were
able to access that transitioned
over from the Department of
Health and that's how we were
able to sustain those rate
increases, um, but we are a
little bit on the short side.
Uh, so we're working through
that. We want to make sure we
have adequate money.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
unfortunate to hear that there's
a shortfall, but hopefully
that's made up somewhere, uh,
and then another question I had,
let me see. Oh, it was on one of
your pages regarding the
The counties. I know this is not
any counties, I think that's on
page 6, and there's 126 people
who do not have a county. What
does that mean? Can you just go
into that for me?
Uh,
Madam Chair, Representative
block, I'm not actually sure
what that means. I think it may
be that we don't have good data
on those folks. So I will drill
down to that and see if we can
answer that question. It may
just be that we don't have a
clear county or sometimes people
are in um like two counties,
like there's some weird things
in our eligibility system
sometimes where um someone's
kind of commuting between
counties and so it's not clear
as it could be that, but I'll
drill down on that more and we
can get you a follow up answer.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you for that, Madam
Secretary, and sorry for all the
quick questions here, but I have
3 minutes and I still have like
10 seconds left, so I just will
reiterate, I really hope that
the rate increases continue to
go up, because I know people in
my community, you know, they're
hiring a GameStop for like 25
bucks an hour. There's places
like uh Dutch Brothers, you
could be making lattes for $18
an hour, so I just want to make
sure that we're competitive,
because it's probably, I would
think it might be a little
easier to to run a cash register
than to take care of an
individual with developmental
disabilities.
Which we absolutely need. So
thank you both for being here.
Thank you, Madam Madam Chair,
Madam Secretary, and everyone
here. Thank you Representative,
I was ready to congratulate you
for ending right on time and you
just
Gotta watch the block caucus,
uh, Senator Scott.
OK,
uh, Representative Anaya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you Secretary. Um, if you will
flip over to page 17. Um, I have
a couple of questions. One, I'm
really glad that we're
collecting data, um, so we can
start thinking about the way in
which we're trying to prevent
abuse, neglect, and
exploitation, but I have a
couple of questions, um, about
where we find some of this
information. So you have
substantiated unsubstantiated,
um, allegations here, and I'm
imagining that the visa.
Sets that threshold between what
is, uh, Madam Chair
Representative, I'm sorry, I
missed the word that you said
before threshold. Oh, is there a
threshold, um, that is currently
in place that decides between
substantiated and
unsubstantiated, and I'm a magic
in advocacy. Um, Madam Chair,
representative, um, so once uh
there's an allegation of abuse
or neglect, it does go over to
the division of Health
Improvement at our agency for an
investigation. Um, they use, uh,
I believe a
a preponderance of evidence
standard, um, so it's, it's kind
of a preponderance of evidence,
and I can get you the follow-up
information on that unless
anyone in the agency has that.
It's a um it's a threshold
standard, but I believe it's,
it's based on preponderance of
evidence and I think I think,
but we'll get you that answer.
And I, I asked this question,
um, because I'm making some
parallels. I spoke to the
medical board recently, and one
of the things that came up that
was really interesting to me is
that um,
There are folks who do not quite
meet a threshold, but need some
help?
Um, you know, before they get
their license taken away or
something like that. And I'm
wondering for those folks who
haven't quite risen to that
level, but we know that they're
kind of not doing so well. What
do we have in place for those
folks to make sure that we're
tracking them so they're, um,
Improving and, and we're
actually preventing some of the
harm. Madam Chair,
Representative, that's a great
question. I'm going to queue
that up for uh how we are doing
that because I think that's
really important sort of
monitoring risk, um, and kind of
like stratifying that. So I'll
let Director Rodriguez answer.
Yes, we actually have um a
variety of mechanisms in place
for people who don't rise to
that level, but do need some
help. Um, one of the questions
earlier this morning was what is
an RORA, um, that is one
mechanism where it flags subject
matter experts within the
developmental disability
supports division, maybe other
state agencies, whomever, um,
that they need to follow up and
close the loop on something.
That's one mechanism. Uh, we
also monitor by way of our case
management system and our
provider.
agencies. Sometimes if we
recognize that people need some
help, um, maybe it's not abuse,
neglect, and exploitation, but
something that doesn't quite
rise to that level. We do work
with our provider agencies to
ensure follow up and make sure
those issues are being
addressed. Um, so we do have a
variety of ways of of doing that
outside of a strict, you know,
abuse, neglect, and
exploitation. The one other
piece I want to just point or
call out is as we talked about
that comprehensive health and
wellness visit training. Um,
there's a whole section
in that training for our DDSD
staff conducting the visits,
that is called if, if it's not
A&E, then what? And it lists a
variety of resources and
mechanisms to be able to follow
up and make sure different types
of needs are being met.
Thank you, Madam.
And, and my apologies. I am, I'm
always thinking we're behind,
we're not behind. So from here
on in you can have 5 minutes and
if, if, if the folks who want
back here want will come back to
you. I'm sorry. I looked at the,
like I said, I'm, I'm usually
pushing for us to move along, so
we'll start with Representative
Kates with 5 minutes and then
we'll come back, um, to this
side of the table if you have
further questions. And again, my
apologies. Go ahead,
representativeate. Thank you.
Very much, Madam Chair, and, and
thank you secretary for this uh
presentation. Um, I had a bunch
and I'm so happy that we have 5
minutes, um, and so, uh, let me
first talk about HB 357 because
it's not in your report. This
was to change um uh the tax,
what how we're charging tax for
me via providers who are in the
private sector opposed to to
make it more equitable opposed
to where the nonprofit is when
this was.
Signed by the governor on April
7th. When will this uh process
be implemented? How is it being
communicated to our via
providers and what is the date
that they can start billing this
way, Madam Chair Representative
Kate, thank you, uh, and I
apologize that should have been
in our presentation. We should
have had a slide on that, um,
that is going to into effect on
January 1st, um, as we've kind
of proposed or set forth, I will
let director Rodriguez talk
about the actual execution of
that.
Um, good, good morning, uh,
Representative Cason. Thank you
for the question. Yes, we
actually will be um uh
highlighting an article in that
in our next DDSD newsletter that
will be published later, well,
actually next week, July. So,
um, more information, um, I'd be
happy to share that with you. We
are working, um, and making sure
that we are budgeting properly
for that, we are actively
communicating with me via uh
stakeholders. They know that
this is coming as well, and so
we will have uh
additional information come out
with instructions on what they
will need to do in terms of a
change in billing process and
budgeting with their service and
support plan for Armenia waiver
recipients, consultants, etc. in
the next couple months. All
right, thank you very much. So
just to reiterate, um, that we
rolled out for January 1st, you
will be communicating and
training the providers so that
they'll be up and ready before
that January 1st deadline. Thank
you so much. Um, I also have
heard our our our our EV.
programs, I'm hearing you're
going into an open state, is
that correct? Just a reminder,
we have new folks who don't
speak the lingo, so it's so um
these are how um uh providers
are billing um through
electronic verification,
understand that everyone here
has voted on a bill, I believe
through electronic verification
this last session, but um
there's been much discussion
about uh identify.
finding a provider or a system
that everyone must do or having
an open program where everyone
can do whatever they want to do.
I just want clarification on how
the stat is moving forward on
the EBV verification. Thank you.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
cases, we are moving to an open
aggregator model, um, I'm gonna
look over here to my team on
time frame you have
the timing with the great minds
singlelight. Thank you very
much.
I'm so sorry, um, so now let's
go back to HB 395. I know I
really appreciate uh Cabinet
secretary all the time you, you,
you, you've provided for me
offline and and I know that you
and I are looking forward to be
able to discuss that that's
2023's HB 395. 1 of the things
that I don't see in your slides
or I ever see that you uh talk
about really is on page 6 of the
bill, uh, line 21.
It says that uh in the, you will
be providing a report. I'm
gonna, I'm gonna streamline it
here. You're providing port for
the legislature that is not just
showing the workforce vacancies
and how much you're being paid
and who's getting benefits, but
you're providing us a budget of
150% of what the minimum wage
is so that we know as
legislators how much it should
cost. I do see a very
Disappointedly that there are
providers out there who are uh
paying individuals 12 to $17 but
as a legislator, we need to know
how much it should cost if we
believe that these are
professionalized positions at
150% of the minimum wage, and I
don't see that in any of the
reporting. It's probably in
your, in your initial report,
but I just want to make sure
that we clarify that is is as
far as I'm concerned, the meat
and po
of this bill. I also am
concerned that this bill is
considered the cost study, it is
a workforce study. We were, I
mean, the, the, the agency would
like to replace the cost study
that's required by CMAS, um, you
know, every 5 years with this is
fine, but this is a workforce
study so that we can start
moving in professionalizing
these direct care providers.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
representative, so thank you for
the input on the 150% of minimum
wage.
go take a look at that and just
really kind of look for that
issue. So I will kind of take
that one back and make sure that
we kind of address that. Um,
there are two pieces of the
bill. One does require the cost
study to be the basis of the
recommended rates and the other
piece is the data collection on
the workforce. So, you know, we
feel like there's two pieces,
one directing us to do those
rate studies every 2 years, um,
we do feel like that's supposed
to be the basis of the
reimbursement, um, for the
Statute, so, um, you know,
that's really the way we read
that as having two components
that are pretty critical, both
of those, um, so we'll take a
look at that 150%. I will double
check that. I do wanna, I'm
interested in um where things
stand with that. OK.
Thank you. I've never had 5
minutes before, so thank you
very much for that
in 5 minutes sounds like a long
time and then you start and it's
like not very long.
Representative Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, my
questions are kind of along the
same lines in terms of wages,
um, on one of the pages it um
basically breaks down percentage
wise in terms of what the
agencies are paying.
But I don't, um, and those are
for direct um provider, the
direct provider workforce,
right? And so on another page,
it basically says that the um
providers are basically it's up
to their discretion in terms of
whether or not they uh implement
wage increases and how much um
of a wage increase they
implement.
So my uh my two questions. One,
we don't have any information on
what management level CEO, those
kinds of folks are making, and I
think that would also be
important to track, um, and then
the other piece is how do we
know?
Um, that the money that Madam
Chair, the secretary that these
agencies are getting are
actually going, um, to wage
increases if these wages are
still so low. I know that the
wages were low to begin with, so
it's gonna be a lot to try to
catch up, but I think the
question is how do we know what,
what guarantees do we have,
Madam Chair, that they're
actually uh going to wages
because when you look at $12 an
hour, who wants who can work?
For $12 an hour and um, you
know, I think that that's also
something that that creates
turnover in, in this workforce.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative.
I, I agree with everything you
just said. I think, um, first of
all, I think the, the rate study
does tell us sort of the
managerial level versus the
direct care support workers, so
it does give us that discrete
discrete information and we can
make sure that we provide that
uh for you. So that, that is
pulled as part of the agency's
information. There is a federal
rule, uh, right now that
requires, I believe it's 60%,
it's 80%, 8080.
80/20% of the rates actually
will go into the direct
caregiver's wages, but that
doesn't go into effect until
2030, um, that isn't under state
statute today, uh, and so it is
somewhat up to each individual
employer just like it is to my
employer, how much I get paid
every, every, you know, agency
really gets to decide, and this
is true across the healthcare
system. We've getting this
question quite often with the
Medicaid reimbursement
increases.
How much is going to the
doctors, how much is going to
the nurses? We really don't have
direct insight into that across
the healthcare system, and there
is no requirement that those be
passed on, and this is, this is
a policy issue. Um, so, you
know, right now at the federal
level, although maybe subject to
change, uh, in the current
environment, but that
requirement would be going into
effect in a few years, um,
certainly if the legislature,
it's something that you all may
want to think about taking up,
um, I think there's been
proposals around that.
Previously that just haven't
passed, but um certainly happy
to kind of give you any
information that might help you
in that. OK, that would be
great. Um, and then the other
question that I have is I'm not
real familiar with who the M
stakeholders are. So is there
any way um to get a list of them
would give me a sense of sort of
the landscape out there and
who's providing services. Um,
Madam Chair, Representative, of
course, we'll, we'll get you the
list of stakeholders. There are
a list on the DDSD partners on
this.
Um, so those are some of the
stakeholders that um in that
DDSD partners, um, walk, um,
there, but if there are
additional ones, we can
certainly provide that to you.
If there's any missing, that
would be helpful. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you for uh senator,
Senator Stephanics.
Uh
Thank you, man. Oh.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
could you come in? I'm just
gonna ask my questions and then
you can respond. Um, could you
comment on uh any
Projected federal cuts in
relation to this waiver.
Uh, secondly, are the providers
uh allowed to have
differentials.
To accommodate travel time.
For um they provide for their
Direct service individuals, and
I had, I was looking at my
counties and uh
In some of the counties, the
enrollment is low. So if I
encouraged people.
To uh enroll or to submit their
application, are we going to
have enough services?
And especially in the rural
counties. So that's OK,
Madam Chair, Senator Spanics,
I'm writing your questions out.
I just want to make sure I get
them all, but, um, in terms of
I'll start with federal cuts,
um,
Right now there are no direct.
Cuts to the DD waiver services
program.
Being proposed. I think there's
a lot of bipartisan consensus
that individuals with
disabilities are it's, you know,
they're very dependent on
Medicaid program, uh, for to
live, and um, so I think right
now I haven't heard a lot of
cuts. There are some areas where
there could be very direct
impacts, um, one of those ways
in which the federal government
is really looking to shore up
the budget is around what we pay
providers, um, we may be
provider rate reductions, um,
they are really kind of scaling
back and capping what they're
willing to pay through the
Medicaid programs. That is a
very big risk. Right now, I
would say that's probably the
biggest one. Most of the
individuals with disabilities
would be exempt from like the
work requirements that are being
contemplated, the copays, um,
those and by annual verification
checks on eligibility. So I
would anticipate that they would
be exempt, but I think that
those
provider rate reductions could
be a really big hit to New
Mexico's overall health care
economy, um, and to our provider
network. So that's probably the
one that I would caution the
most about for this particular
population, although we're
keeping a very close eye to see,
uh, what other impacts, and
there are certainly federal
reductions being contemplated
with SNAP, uh, that also will
affect this population, uh, and
so I think there are a lot of
dependencies there on our other
programs. Um, I will let, uh,
Director Rodriguez.
Talk about the travel
differential.
Hi, good morning. Yes, we look
at a variety of different
differentials when we build our
rate structure and so that is
all outlined in our most current
uh uh rate study report, which
I'm happy to share with you, um,
but yes, travel is taken into
consideration also when we build
our rates, we have, um,
different rate structures for
what we call, um, like an
incentive rate versus a standard
rate, um, for, uh, areas that
are intended to cover more rural
areas that
require greater travel. They
receive a higher reimbursement
rate to do that. So yes to that
question, and then in terms of
provider capacity, we do have a
provider enrollment unit at the
Developmental Disability Sports
Division, and we watch our
provider capacity, um, every
day, but we certainly are
monitoring that very closely
because yes, as we significantly
increased our population because
of ending the waitlist, um, we
are keenly aware of what our
provider needs are across the
state, and yes, some of our
rural areas are in greater need,
um, but yes, we monitor by
waiver, by service by county.
Thank you to both of you and
thank you, Madam Chair.
OK, uh, vice chair.
Opus.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Just a
couple of questions some of my
other questions were asked, um,
but with regards to page 17.
Um, we have this new bureau of
individual safety and advocacy.
And on the further down the page
it talks about mentions 160
total staff were mobilized to
ensure total waiver, um,
populations are seen every 6
months. So of those 160, where
are they located?
Um, are they based in Santa Fe?
How, how is it distributed,
Madam Chair, uh, vice chair
Lopez, uh, they're all over the
state of New Mexico. So we've
got offices, DDSD offices all
over. OK. Um, so the majority
would be in Albuquerque, Santa
Fe. How was that? Um, Madam
Chair, my chair, I'm not sure
where the majority are, but I
mean we have rural offices, um,
sort of just like we do have
income support division offices.
Many of those.
Communities also have a DDSD
office, uh, so some of them are
in rural communities and the
majority, I don't know. Are they
located, um, a majority in
Albuquerque. The majority being
in Albuquerque.
OK, just based on population,
most likely.
Uh, thank you. And then on page
18, there's another listing on
um
DDSD staff, 108.
Is that the total number of
employees within um
who do
Oversight of the in-person
visits or in other words, how is
the distribution of that 108
again, Madam Chair.
Yeah, excuse me.
Lopez, um, that is the number of
staff that participated in that
time period, so that's a 6 month
time period, although, uh, we
have on the previous slide 160
of our total 169 employees at
DDSD are doing them, um, during
this time period, we only used
108 to complete those visits,
and they are also statewide.
OK, and Madam Chair, so are
these two different pockets of
employees?
Or is it the same group of 160
that you're looking, in other
words, that's where the
breakdown comes in.
Senator Lopez, the 108 is part
of the total 160 staff who are
eligible to do visits. OK,
that's where I needed, Madam
Chair, just to break down what
we're looking at at staff, you
know, state.
A person's and then on page 19,
uh, we talk about telemedicine
services.
Um, where you offer station MDs
and I know town health is very
important, but how many um MDs
participate in this program.
Um, Senator Lopez, I believe
currently there are 5, but I
would like to confirm that.
with my team. OK, and are these
persons based out of UNMH or
where the doctors.
They are also nationwide. They
are not based out of Albuquerque
or UNMH. So this is national.
Right, OK, do we utilize anybody
from New Mexico?
Station MD does not have any,
uh, do not have any physicians,
uh, working for them at this
time.
From New Mexico New Mexico.
OK.
Interesting.
And then, um, I think that's
just it for right now, Madam
Chair. Thank you.
Oh, and then one more thing,
yes, again to duplicate what
senators.
Um, there's gonna be a, there,
there will be an impact, Madam
Chair.
with regards to, I think,
services to be provided also.
Um, I
I envision with what's going on
in DC at this point.
Madam chair, um, by Sharon I
should have, I think that's
right, and I wanna also mention
that there are some very, very
major implications for
administration of these that
will impact the healthcare
authority. So, you know, where
you hear from constituents about
it taking a while to get
eligibility approved or to get
through our full process,
particularly for waiver cases
which are more complicated.
That will also slow down. I do
anticipate that we are looking
at a very heavy workload, um,
because of some of the new
requirements. I should have
mentioned that as well because
it also will slow down the pace
at which the agency.
Thank you. We'll go back to uh
Representative block for, oh,
I'm sorry, Senator Gallegos.
Oh,
hold on one second cause we are,
we are, um
it will take your 12 minutes
down to 5.
Republican.
That's good. Thank you, Madam
Chair, uh, director, just a real
brief question, um, I know on
page 8 you're talking about the
overall rate study, and that's
more
Monetary for staffing. Uh, I had
breakfast with a gentleman from
here in Santa Fe that just this
morning who was asking on the
equipment. Now, do we as a
department look at the equipment
costs, or is that all through
Medicaid?
In their programming. How does
that work as far as the
wheelchairs, the bed lifts, all
the needs for the patient.
Mhm
Madam Chair and Senator
Gallegos, thank you for the
question. It's a combination of
both. Some of the durable
medical equipment can come from
Medicaid and then the waivers
also offer uh a service called
Assistive technology. Um, so
some of that different, they
can't duplicate, but there is a
separate service line for waiver
recipients. So it's a
combination of both, depending
on what they need.
Appreciate that and I'll get
back with him, uh, this
afternoon, but one of the
questions I asked him, and he
did not know, and maybe it's
Worth asking you all, so I know
that as
My insurance at home if we go to
the doctor, go to the hospital,
if we go to Nor and they uh
would do whatever the services
are. If we do a quick pay,
there's a reduction in the cost.
Does that happen anywhere in
state as far as with what you
guys deal with and or with
Medicaid. I'm just wondering if
there's a way to save money in
overall costs.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator
Gallego, so I think you're
asking.
You know, do we expedite
payment? Is that, is that really
what you're asking is because
that seems to lower the, you
know, you've got a standard cost
at the hospital, but if you pay
quickly,
It lowers the cost.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator
Gallegos, we do have expedited
payment requirements and we have
in our contracts and uh there's
timely, there's timely filing of
claims and then our obligation
to pay claims quickly. We are
somewhat dependent on the
provider billing us quickly, uh,
so that is sometimes a barrier.
We don't always get the claims
right away, uh, but we do have
requirements around how quickly
we have to turn around payment,
but it has to be, you know, the
reimbursement has the request
for reimbursement has to come.
timely and then it has to be
done correctly for us to be able
to do that because we are also
paying out quite a bit of uh
state and federal dollars uh
through the programs we want to
make sure that all of those
claims are correct, uh, so we do
have like an adjudication
process on claims, but it's
pretty fast. They don't, there
aren't usually tons of
complaints about claims. Usually
if there are, it's because of a
another underlying issue or
error um related to sort of
administrative processes or
something, but um typically we
pay out pretty quickly.
Thank you for that. I'll try to
relay that some of this
happening. I didn't want to tell
you on federal.
Issues we're having, we have
really good meeting, the Senate
did, with the governor on
specifics that if we did these
items.
We would not have federal
implications. We ignored that,
so I think it's our fault what
happens to your federal funding.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you. Now we will go back
to Representative Block for an
additional 2 minutes if you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, how
generous of you. I'm trying to
be fair. No thank you. I'm just
giving you a hard time. So on
page 18, we're talking about
these wellness visits. And this
is something that I've kind of
wanted to continue to look at
what we're doing specifically
when it comes to wellness
visits. So, are these randomized
so that we can ensure that
they're not tipped off, so to
speak, when they come for the
visit.
And
how do we do that? And is it
something that we follow up like
a day or two randomly after the
first visit, just to make sure
they didn't just throw all the
bad stuff under the bed, so to
speak.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
block, that's a really good
question. I'm typically like
investigations through the
division of Health Improvement
are done unscheduled. We show
up. These are not. There is that
factor, um, and so, uh, we have
had instances where people
wouldn't want us to enter the
home, uh, but typically most
people are compliant and I think
to uh Madam Chair and
Representative Block, I would
just add they used to when they
started, they were unscheduled
and we received
Um, a ton of feedback from
families, um, representative uh
Thompson hosted a listening
session and that was one of the
things that we were, uh, we
compromised with, uh, just to
make these visits a little bit
more accessible to, to families,
so we do schedule them now.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you. And I, I do get that. It's
like a a dance, a balance
between, OK, we don't want to
burden these people, but we also
want to make sure that there's
not any abuse happening. So,
yeah, I guess I'm, I'm all for
unscheduled, but some people
aren't, but we see more and more
people, unfortunately, having
certain circumstances where they
may be harmed or unfortunately
die in some circumstances, this
is actually before you guys with
Mary Molero, but, but still it
was horrifying and we definitely
want to close those gaps. So
thank you both for your
attention to that matter.
Honest. Oh, I didn't have my mic
on. So I have a few questions.
So the rape study, um,
is ongoing or we'll start quick
quickly, correct. Madam sure
it's underway right now. OK, so
what data, what years's data are
they looking at?
Ma I'm sure I'll let Director
Rodriguez answer that question.
Uh, Madam Chair, they will be
looking at the year 2024's data
because we are currently in
2025.
OK, so, so we start off
essentially with them 2 years
behind, I mean, by the time, by
the time we get the rape study,
we're 2 years behind in terms of
inflation, etc. so.
In terms of that, I feel like
we're, we're never gonna catch
up, um, because, um, unless
inflation reverses, um, which
that would be lovely, but not
very practical.
So
That's one of my main concerns
is that we are using old data.
And by the time we get it, it's
older, and by the time it gets
to the legislature.
To request more money, it's even
older, so we're always behind
the curve, and I don't know what
the answer is, but I do think we
need to address it. Um, as I, as
many of you have heard me say,
my son is not easy to care for.
99% of the time he's, he's
wonderful, but that 1% where
he's wiping fecess on the
ceiling or breaking the
windshield out of the van of the
group home or um pulling the
toilet out of the floor, that's
Pretty scary. He's 6'7 strong,
the strongest person I've ever
run across and um and so to
think that we could, you could
work.
With him
And make $12 an hour, $15 an
hour, or you can go to Target
and greet people or stock
shelves with absolutely no
responsibility and no danger.
We're never gonna get the people
and and I know that you all know
this, but I'm putting it out
there that we really need to
start investing in this in, and
if we really do believe that
people with intellectual and
developmental disabilities
deserve the best. We can't
always be um
Trying to trying to make it work
with the cheapest possible. This
is, this is not a good place to
save money and that's my
soapbox. I've been on it for 30
years, and I'll probably die on
it, but, but I'm, I'm throwing
that out there, um.
OK, and then on page 12, I look
at the rates.
Um, like for physical therapy,
um, $27.80 for a 15-minute unit.
Sounds like a lot.
Um, but the average, um, salary
of a PT in New Mexico is about
$98,000. So, so when, if you are
paying the agency $27. They got
to take their cut. You said
there was some differential for
traveling. I didn't travel with
the DD waiver. I did travel with
the fit programs. They gave me
an extra $10 per visit. So I
would drive to Grants, no
mileage.
No time in the car for an extra
$10. I, when I did my taxes, I
realized I was actually losing
money.
by providing these services. We
need these services for our
people, and if we're not gonna
pay for them, we're not gonna
get them. I mean, it's, I, I
would love to do the work, but I
also have to pay bills and
everyone else is like that. So
we need to stop nickel and
diming this program to death,
and I'm not putting it on you. I
know it's a, it's the state
government, it's the whole
issue, but we're never gonna
move forward. New Mexico.
At one point was really known
for how good our DD programs
were and they still are to a
certain extent, but we are, we
are cheapening them to where
it's, and of course you're gonna
get um A&Es because people are
not, the turnover at my son's
group home, we picked him up
every Sunday. It's wonderful
when we see the same person. Um,
and so the training that goes
into one of these employees and
if they turn over after 3.
weeks and you have to train
again. We didn't save any money
and we also didn't provide good
services to the client.
Um, and then the waiting list,
you know, we have ended the
waiting list, we all know,
anybody who is honest will say
there are not adequate services.
There were not adequate services
when the waiting list was 13
years, there are still not
adequate services. So you get
off one waying list and you go
into a.
Purgatory, I don't know. I mean,
they're just there are not,
there are not enough living
places, there are not enough
therapists, there are not enough
behavior support consultants
there as far as I know, there's
not enough of anything and a
large part of that is because we
don't pay people and we don't
respect them.
Um
To the and then I will say
station MD is wonderful. I have
to thank you for doing that. My
son has, you know, he, he, he,
he lives in a group home that
specializes in folks with um
difficult behaviors and so he
gets attacked by roommates. Um,
he breaks windows. He never gets
cut. He's broken windows his
whole life. He's had two cuts. I
don't know what his magic is,
but um, but so, so the fact or
he gets a rash and taking him to
the ER.
even to a doctor's visit is.
Hell for him and for anyone
providing for him. So the fact
that they can call up an MD and
show him the rash, show them the
the cut, show them the whatever,
and he doesn't have to go
through that. It's, it's
wonderful. Thank you for doing
that. Um, and I wish it was more
New Mexico centric, but.
We, we take what we can get, you
know, I mean that we, that just
that service isn't available
just like the, the great study,
and there isn't anybody in New
Mexico who does it. Um, and then
for the committee, um, A&E,
it's, it sounds really scary,
but a lot of A&E is minor minor,
minor. Like I will get a report
from my son's group home that
they were on an outing, he was
supposed to take his medication.
He dropped it and it spoiled, so
he
couldn't take the medication. So
that is reported as, as, um
A neglect because he didn't get
it, so all of these are not
welts and beatings and sexual
assaults that mine, you know, if
the, if the battery and smoke
alarm is not working. That can
be one of these. So, so please,
when you see these numbers,
don't think, oh my God, you
know, this many people have been
physically or sexually abused
because that's not what it looks
like at all. Um, we did do HB
131 this year, which um which
At some disqualifications for
care providers. We do have a
list of, of things um
convictions that will disqualify
you from being a care provider.
We've added a few more to try
and keep, try and keep our folks
safe, um, and, uh, talking about
the agencies, like I said, Eric
breaks windows, he does all
kinds of things and
The in the situation he's living
in now, they have to eat that
damage out of their budget. So
people say, you know, all these
agencies are getting rich, if
they've got erris or people like
Eric, um, they're having to pay,
so to say, you know, oh we're
giving them this and 70% should
go to the providers or to the
direct care providers, that's
true, but we also aren't looking
at all the other things that
that the, the companies that
provide these services have to
cover.
Um, we do cover the broken
windows out of his Social
Security money, um, and it's
about one a month. Um, and
luckily, you know, we're able to
afford that, um, just, this is
an aside, the occupational
therapists were being paid 22%
less than physical and speech
and language pathologists, has
that been corrected? Uh, Madam
Chair, as of right now, we have
not corrected it partially
because um we don't necessarily
have funding. We've got a
projected
shortfall, I think for sure we
will take a very close look at
this during the session, the
neck this rate study that's
underway, um, cause we've met
with the occupational therapist.
We're really trying to get at
whether the agency, whether
there was a flaw in the
methodology, the basic
methodology, which then I think
we will correct if we, if we
need to correct going back, we
will do that. Um, right now we
haven't identified that there
was a fly. I think it's more
around in their request has
really been around.
with the PT rates, which I think
is an absolutely normal thing. I
was like traditionally how it
works in Medicaid, so, um, but
you know, because the rates were
based on the rate study, um,
that didn't happen this time
around, so we're working through
those issues. If there's
something we can do to correct.
I mean, if we can find some
additional funding to try to
address the OT rates. I think
we're open to that, um, we're
just looking at solutions right
now or potential solutions.
And this again comes back to
the, the problems with rate
studies. There's an error.
You know, based on whatever and
we don't correct it right away.
We have to wait for the next
rate study, so, so the occup I
mean in occupational therapy for
those of you who don't know, is
crucial to some of these people
in terms of feeding, in terms of
um dressing in terms of a lot of
those things, so it saddens me
to think, well, you know, maybe
we made a mistake, but we
weren't aren't even gonna look
at it for years, which, um, you
know, it, it's, and I know
that's not exactly what you
said, but
With the funding and all that,
so I think that's something that
we need to stay, um, we need to
stay on top of, just out of
curiosity, um, and I know you do
this by regions of, of how many
slots are available, let's say
for physical therapy or for, for
um
A group home, um.
So how many, what percentage of
your agencies for living for
therapies are on moratorium.
Which means that they are so
full that they cannot take new
clients.
Uh, Madam Chair, I don't have
that on me today, but I'm happy
to share a statewide report with
you, OK. Um, and, and, and in
the past it's been shared as,
you know, that they, they, there
are, um, there is a provider in
Piddalgo County for OT um, you
know, it, it may be that there
are 10 people who need it and
that, that provider has one slot
open, so I would like to see it
broken down into how many
requests there are versus how
many providers.
There are, um, and then just the
final thing, you know, we're
doing all this on the wellness
visits. That is not gonna fix
our problems. I mean, it's a,
it's a snapshot twice a year,
you go in and, and
It, uh, along with
Representative Block, it would
be nice if they could be
unannounced, but that we, we
representative Kates and I did
do a listening session. It just
doesn't work. I mean, um, you
know, people would be out.
At a movie with and someone will
call and say we're here to do
your visit. Well, you've got a
kid with autism, you take him to
a movie. You're not gonna take
them out in the middle of the
movie or you're gonna have World
War 3, so it just makes it
easier for families and for even
for even for um the providers,
you know, they do outings, they,
they have work, they all those
kind of things. It's, it's a
scheduling thing. So I wanna
thank you for your
presentations. We have a lot of
issues to work on representative
cases, did you have something?
I'm so sorry, ma'am.
But we do have 5 minutes. Can I
have one of those minutes, um,
uh, secretary, you said you have
a a projected shortfall coming
up and and can you tell me how
much that projected for
shortfalls. Uh, Madam Chairs
representative, um, we have a
projected shortfall of 13
million
and is that and is that just in
the waiver program or is it an
HCA? OK, yeah, so on your slide
10, and I'm sorry, this is my.
You say that for total FY 25
general fund is 30 million.
Where all my reports show that
LFC is provided 46 million. So
where's the 16?
Madam Chair, that this is for
fiscal year 25, so fiscal year
26 is the 46, right? So we thank
you for that clarification
higher,
so as you implement rate
increases, they're kind of like
this ramp up that happens in
terms of increased utilization,
um, and so sometimes it's a
little lower the first year and
so for fiscal year 20 million
impact. Thank you so much for
your clarification and thank you
for your indulgence. Thank you
so much for all of you being
here and for the work that you
do and uh.
We'll stay in touch, no doubt,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, I just wanna say
thank you and I really
appreciate all of your good
questions, and that was really
rapid fire for a while there. So
I really liked it. I will say on
the rate study I thought you
raised some very valid points,
Madam Chair, about the
timeliness. I'm wondering if we
can maybe add inflation or some
kind of CPI adjustment when we
do those that might really make
a lot of sense. So thank you for
that suggestion. Thank you. That
would be wonderful. Thank you.
OK, so, um, we will move on to.
Um, the opioid settlement update
with Nick Bucas.
Whenever you're ready.
Good Morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. It's
wonderful to be here with you
today. My name is Nick Buggas,
and I have the honor to serve as
the director of Behavioral
Health Services at the
Healthcare Authority. Um, and
we're just going to go over a
little bit about the opioid
settlement dollars and what
allocations we received that.
At the healthcare authority
specific to the um.
DHSD. Madam Chair, if I can just
indulge for just two moments.
Um, the first is I would like to
just kind of put a face with the
name and introduce uh Christy
Brooks, who was recently hired
to help us with SB 3, which um
did have some uh bipartisan
support this last session and um
caused me a little bit more on
the hairline, so thank you for
that. But uh Christy comes to us
with a wealth of experience, and
we really look forward to
working with her.
And what she is doing, um, you
didn't meet uh Esperanza Lucero,
so this is Esperanza's
counterpart on our part, uh, at
the healthcare authority. And
for the um benefit of
Representative Kate. I just
wanted to give you an open beds
number. Um, and so we have a
total of 277 beds that are
available throughout the state
of New Mexico. This is
self-reported across all
agencies across the entire um
with that, uh, I'll take you
into our slide.
Um
And also note that it is a
little tough to follow a cabinet
secretary and then this is true,
this is true. Um, since, uh, we
do work at the same agency, I'm
gonna just take you to slide 5
and skip over our um
Mission Vision and values, and
uh have you meet James. James is
a fictitious name, but it is a
real client, um, who was
Um, experiencing homelessness
for a period of 3 years has had
a constant battle with
addiction, uh.
Mental and emotional health
struggles that has left him,
he's an older fellow.
Um, he's alert, he's intuitive.
But when we've learned about his
deep loneliness that he endured
on the streets, um, there was an
uncertainty about his future and
how he's able to take care of
himself and be a productive part
of society. So we have placed
James into what we call the
Fresh Start program and for the
first time in years, James has
an opportunity to sleep in a
warm, safe place on his own.
And not worry about shelter
environments or sleeping on the
street or uh under a bridge or
overpass. Um, so let's just talk
a little bit about this, um, the
healthcare authority,
specifically BHSD received
appropriations from the opioid
settlement dollars, um, which,
as you know, goes to is an
appropriation to us, and we
received it specific to two
programs, and we're going to
talk about those today. The
first one is the Fresh Start
rental assistance program.
If I can take you to slide 7.
You'll see that this is a new
program that we started in the
state fiscal year 2024.
And this program received at
that time $1.2 million and then
in fiscal year 25, a total of
$1.8 million. Uh, I would just,
uh, draw your attention to the
side, uh, the right side of the
slide, which kind of shows where
that went, um, and we have folks
that receive what we referred to
as rental assistance, as well as
stipends, and what that
basically means is the
eligibility criteria for this
program.
him, is that someone has to have
uh what we call an OUD or an
opioid use disorder.
They have to be homeless or
precariously.
Uh, housed, which means that
they are at high risk for losing
housing.
And they have to be active and
behavioral health or recovery
support services, and that's a
key component of this.
Um, lastly, their average, I'm
sorry, their area medium income
has to be um at or below 60%,
depending on the county in which
they they reside or are
currently occupying.
What these folks receive is
depending on the rent and what
their eligibility is between 6
and 9 months of rental
assistance or $10,000 whichever
comes first.
We also provide them with a
stipend of up to $1000 if they
are eligible, which can be used
for furniture or other basic
necessities.
To have day to day.
Um, supports. So this could be
frying pans. This could be um a
bed. There are limits on what
they can buy. They're not going
out and buying reclining beds
and power.
Uh, chairs and anything like
that. This is basic necessities
that have been pre-approved
between them, the landlord, and
the uh organization that is
providing these services.
We currently have providers
throughout the state, um, and
for the benefit of uh Senator
Block, um, 8 of these providers
are nonprofits.
Um, we do try to find nonprofit
organizations that can do this
because they do have good roots
within the community, and they
have those support systems. We
also work closely with um what's
known as VASH, which is the
veteran affairs supported of
housing. So if someone does not
qualify under veterans, uh,
veteran affairs. They can be
referred to one of these
providers, and we will work with
them to make sure that our, our
veterans are taken care of.
Um, because obviously we got
yours as well. So thank you,
Senator. So, um, as you can look
here, you know, again, on that
chart on the right hand side,
um, the blue bars represent
unduplicated clients.
And I do want to just note also
that we refer to as a client,
this also could be a family. So
when we say that one of those
340 might be somebody that has a
child or a spouse.
Um, but they are considered a
client.
OK.
The other part of that is on the
orange part, those are the
numbers of folks in the last two
fiscal years that have received
those stipends, whether it's for
furniture or other basic life
necessities.
So, um,
We did have, you know, smaller
numbers in FY 24, but again, I
would just caution as you look
at that, that this is something
that we started in FY 24, so we
had to identify providers and
then get them started and as
well as do the advertising to do
the program itself.
As I take you to slide 8.
Uh, again, in FY 24, we received
$1.2 million which we're very
grateful. Um,
Much of that money went to
initial startup costs for the
providers themselves.
So that they can have the
infrastructure hire the staff so
that they can properly maintain
this program, and there was a
lot of that initial um
advertising recruitment of
landlords, so forth that needed
to be done. So you're gonna
notice that there was fewer
dollars that were going towards
the rent being paid out. But now
if you look at FY 25.
One thing I will note is that
we've brought on more providers
in FY 25, and we're in Moore
counties, but we're also making
sure that that money is getting
out for the rental assistance
program.
And the idea is for us to
continue to see that change, so
that the blue bar continues to
go up and the orange bar will go
down as we bring on these
providers, they should need less
and less support.
Um
So, right now we do have 9
providers. We're serving 13
counties and on the bottom of
your slide, you'll see a
footnote there that shows not
only who the providers are, but
what counties they are serving.
Um
We did, uh, one of the things
that we did do is kind of look
at our linkages program, which
is another one of our housing
programs that we do have and uh
for clarity's sake, um, you
know, the behavioral health
services division has close to
10 programs that do housing in
different shapes and forms.
Um,
So we are looking at doing
voucher style as opposed to
having the open fun pool, um,
And the reason we want to do
that is because we find that in
linkages, when we have a
provider who may have difficulty
getting the vouchers out, we're
able to reallocate that to
another county that may need it.
So for example, I'm gonna use,
um,
Is the Lifehouse.
OK, Down in Eddy County, there
are really good example of this.
And uh they advertise this
program very, very well, and
they do some really great work
and sometimes they run out of
the funding early. So if we know
that another provider is not
going to be able to use that. We
will reallocate that down so
that the monies do not get
reverted back to state general
fund because I would rather have
someone utilizing that then to
revert it and give it back to
you all.
And I say that with so with our
housing programs, as I
mentioned, you know, we're very
uh proud of this. One of the
things that we did do was an
economic impact report that this
is not part of your slide
presentation, but I did want to
just kind of highlight what this
program does, um, and just with
when we look at housing and when
we invest in housing, um, in FY
25, the projected spending at
the time of the report.
Was just slightly over $11
million 11.284, if we want to be
exact.
Uh, that was for all supportive
housing programs, and we
estimate that that generates
$16.45 million in economic
impact and helped us create 108
jobs in New Mexico.
Um, the way that, and I am not
an accountant or statistician,
so please forgive me, but the
way that this is calculated is
that we do know that when
someone is able to have an
address, they're able to put
that on an application.
And get work, and we do track
these types of things because we
wanted to move folks from the
program into a more sustainable
style of housing, whether it's
one of our other programs or if
they're working completely on
their own, but the first part of
that is for them to address some
of the social determinants of
health and one of the key
factors there is that they have
to have housing stability.
Especially for their child if
they have to try and figure out
how to get their child to and
from school, where are we going
to do this? How are we going to
live? How do we even take a
shower so that we can show up to
work.
Those were all the things that
we're trying to refocus. Um, we
do notice also that the economic
impact uh affects organizations
and businesses not only for the
landlord that is renting.
This site locally, um, because
all of these homes happen to be
owned by New Mexicans.
But it also shows that these are
folks that uh number one are
going into areas like um.
It's helping the industries like
real estate, accommodations,
hotels and motels, um, food in
local areas, not only are they
eligible to work at the
supermarket, but and that's
decreasing some of the public
assistance that they need long
term.
So this is one of those programs
that we find has a direct link
to economic stability, not only
for the individual, but for the
community in which this is
happening.
But we're just like, so that's
the first program um that we
received an allocation for. We
also received $1 million to do
uh medication, opioid use
disorder, and um.
for telehealth and uh what we
did for the healthcare authority
is we partnered with um the
Department of Health.
Um, and don't mean to raise some
eyebrows there, but the state
agencies do talk to each other,
um,
And one of the things that we
did uh want to do is as they
were trying to expand their
telehealth services and public
health offices. We had some
funding. How can we do that? And
so we contracted with uh Doctor
Liederman, who is a state, I'm
sorry, a subject matter expert
within New Mexico.
Um, he's based in Albuquerque
and he did trainings for the
clinical network in the
Department of Health and help
stand up.
Um
Some of these telehealth sites.
Now, I, I will, uh, note that.
The public health officers, what
they were able to do then is
call in prescriptions for folks
that need it MOUD services. They
weren't dispensing it.
Um, but this was that critical
gap, because this was able to
impact 32 of the 33 counties,
um, and expand this so that
anyone can walk into a public
health office and try to get
those services coupled with
their harm reduction services,
so that it was a one stop shop
and we can try to get them in um
as they see as they see fit.
Um, the training itself.
Was uh 2 days long. It was
completed at all public health
offices and uh some of that
money also did go to us having
um uh advertising or
recruitment, if you will, for
folks to be aware of that. Um,
This also kind of helped us work
with our FQHCs, or CCBHCs to
kind of get people out from the
public health office into an
appropriate level of care that
can follow them along.
Um, on the right hand side, I
just want to point out something
that we found very interesting,
um, and I want to, uh, just
acknowledge that this is some of
the information that we did get
from LFC and from Eric, so thank
you, Eric.
Um
61% of Americans don't know that
primary care physicians can
prescribe addiction treatment.
Um, which is a, a, a
staggeringly high number and we
can do better on that. I fully
acknowledge that and I take
responsibility for that.
I do want to share it though
that um and this was something
that was shared at LFC on
Wednesday.
Um, that in the state of New
Mexico for those that were
prescribing.
Um, behavioral health-related
prescriptions.
Uh, and we counted that, but
well, I should say George
Washington University counted
that again, they don't trust me
with that I.
barely can work in abacus.
Um, over 10 behavioral health
prescriptions per year.
Um, 752 of them came from family
medicine practitioners.
Uh, 288 came from internal
medicine practitioners.
1,338 came from nurse
practitioners in 851 were from
other physicians.
And 182 from pediatricians. So
in the state of New Mexico,
again, this is all data that
George Washington University
pulled for the state of New
Mexico.
Um, we really are working hard.
To raise awareness for primary
care, internal care, and other
specialties not just behavioral
health practitioners.
To be able to dispense this and
have a comfortable conversation
with their patient when they
have them there.
If I can move you to slide 11.
I just wanted to show you the
map here of where we are, 33 of
the 42 public health officers
are currently participating in
this 2 additional sites will be
going online this year, so
that'll be 35 of the 42 public
health uh offices, um, we, again
provided funding for we call it
the buy in of um the public
health offices and what we mean
by that is for them to kind of
help go out and spread the word
and bring people in.
So I don't want to make it sound
like employees were hesitant to
do this. This was for them to
kind of actually be the
advocates to go out and talk
about this when there are
community health fairs when
they're reaching out to folks in
other areas, how do we get them
back in and say, here's some of
the things that we offer, and um
and as I mentioned before, the
telehealth services include
e-prescribing, um, they're not
doing dispensing, but this is
what we can try to get as fast
as we can out the door.
Because we know that.
Even one person that is not
getting this medications as one
person, too many, and we want to
make sure that we're.
So where is James today?
Um, it's been 4 months. James
has successfully transitioned
out of the Fresh Start program
and into stable housing.
Um, through the program, we got
him into other supportive
services, including MOUD is now
a well-groomed older man with a
confident presence, a presence,
and he has stopped by to say
hello. Um, it was, uh,
incredible as the provider had
told us that they didn't even
recognize him.
Uh, not only has he maintained
his stability, but he has begun
a new chapter as an
entrepreneur. He's currently
working to start a small
business using his love for dogs
and his experience to give back
to the community.
Um, we sometimes are not aware
of the impacts of these efforts,
but this is a success story that
we wanted to share because the
provider brought it back to us,
um, and just kind of goes back
to when we can support folks
with the social determinants of
health that there are positive
outcomes, and I say that not
only as a dog lover.
With that, Madam Chair, I'll
stand for questions.
Right. Thank you so much. Let's
see.
We have um quite a few minutes,
so, um, is there anyone who
doesn't want to, OK, so, um, OK.
Uh, wait, are you?
Asking or not asking, hands up
if you're not asking. OK, OK, so
we'll start with 5 minutes. Um,
since it looks like there are a
number of people and we will
start in the front row with
Senator Gallegos.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for the report. I did have a
real quick question on James.
So, and I like that you made it
personal, uh, for James to
qualify.
What's it take? Does he have to
be on, uh, I, I know he's
homeless. I know he's old, uh,
but does he have to be on a drug
rehab program. What's it take
for him to be a part?
part of this process.
Madam Chair and Senator
Gallego's, uh, thank you for the
question. For this particular
program.
Yes, they do have to be active
in behavioral health services,
which can include, uh, recovery.
It it also requires that they
have um
That they are number one,
homeless or precariously
Um, housed, so again, this is
somebody who may be literally
within 2 months of losing their
housing. Um, and then they have
to be uh at or below 60% of the
area. Yeah, I appreciate that,
uh, reason I was wanting
clarification. My wife runs low
income housing.
In two different communities,
and I know it's hard to get into
those programs.
But you're looking for rentals
that you guys set up for them.
It's not going through.
Class A or the regional housing
authorities. You guys are
preparing these houses for rent.
Is that what I understand? Uh,
so these are folks that uh we're
working with landlords, um, but
we do have other programs, as I
mentioned before, we have a
total of 8 programs, so there
are different types of programs
for communities, um, most of
them are funded through state
general fund. This one specific
is uh was an appropriation using
the state opioid.
um settlement dollars.
Um, but we do have other
programs that work through state
general fund I'm happy to kind
of uh work with you offline on
some of those if you like.
I wouldn't have got your card,
uh, I was trying to figure out
how my wife, cause she gets a
lot of insight to this, how she
would make that connection to
Department of Health to be able
to get them.
Looked at to be qualified, so I
appreciate it. Yes, and Center
for the clarification she should
call me at the healthcare
authority, not the Department of
Health. We, we like them, but
different offices a little bit.
OK, thank you. Thank you, madam
chair.
Thank you, Representative
Chandler, you had no questions,
Senator Block.
These men here, uh, Nick, thank
you, appreciate all the work you
do here. Um, rapid fire again,
so.
Uh, slide 7. Do I, I want to
make sure I understand this uh
program. This is also part of
that nationwide opioid
settlement.
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator,
yes, this is OK.
So, uh, Madam Chair, Nick, we
From what I remember as a county
commissioner in Sandoval, there
was money that was coming out
from the state to the counties,
is that, is that correct? That,
uh, Madam Chair and Senator,
that is correct. So 50% of the
dollars went to counties and
high-risk areas, 50% stayed with
the state and then those dollars
are appropriated to us through
you all, um, as Grow funds, and
this is the portion that BHSB
received.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. So,
uh, sir, when does that money
run out on the opioid
settlement.
Um
I'm, honestly, I'm not sure of
the exact, that's fine. Can you,
can you find that out and just
shoot me an email. Perfect. So,
um, manager, uh, Nick, I mean,
this, this chart here it on
slide 7.
Yes, sir.
It's just too early to tell and
if we're doing good or not, I
think it's gonna take a little
bit of time to really get some
uh trends and analysis to see
where we're making impacts.
Um, but one of the things, uh,
Madam Chair, Nick, I, I really
want to make sure that we're
doing is the, the oversight and
the transparency in this, like
this $1000 that we're giving
them. How, what type of controls
or mechanisms are we doing to
make sure that these, these
clients are spending the money
appropriately.
Certainly, so, um, Madam Chair
and Senator Block. That's a
great question. Um, when we
contract with and if we can just
use the example of Carlsbad
Lighthouse again, not to
continually pick on them.
But when we use uh these
providers, they are required to
give us um quarterly reports,
they have to do site visits to
make sure that there's no damage
to the home. They also have to
make sure that any of those
dollars are going more specific
items.
So if it's, for example, a bed,
this is what they're allowed to
buy. They work with the provider
to make sure that they're buying
that bed and they're not going
back and then we have to say how
do we reimburse?
Something out of that. So there
are pretty tight controls around
this, um, in the past year,
we've only had to put one
provider on a corrective action
plan.
Um, and that was more of an
administrative issue than it was
a mis uh misallocation of
funding. OK. Thank you, Madam
Chair. So sir, can I assume that
um you, your organization or
somebody does um periodic audits
to make sure that this is uh
staying above board.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator Block,
yes, we do, we do audits. Yep,
good. Um, Madam Chair, uh, Nick,
and when it comes to dividing
the money between the states and
the counties.
I remember talking about this,
uh, in my previous uh gig.
Um, but we, we have 14 tribes
and Pueblos in Sandoval County,
uh, are the counties
coordinating with the tribes of
pueblos or is that the state or
is it a, a hybrid of both.
Um, Madam Chair and Senator, to
my knowledge, it's a hybrid of
growth when we do these
programs, we do consult with our
tribal partners, um, but I
cannot speak fully for the
counties.
OK. Uh, thank you, uh, Madam
Chair. On the bottom of the
slide 8, unless I'm missing
here, Sandoval County, uh, is
that missing?
Do you know why?
Um, Madam Chair, and uh
Senator. So we don't have a
provider that's based there that
doesn't mean that they cannot
provide services there.
So if we had a provider, these
are where these folks are, are
based and what they're serving.
Um.
So if we had a provider in
Sandoval County, we would be
more than happy to engage with
them. I will say that in our
other housing programs, we do
have sand evolve.
Specific providers.
Thank you Madam Chair. Thank
you. That, that leads me to my
next question on this chart
here. Um, so the great, the
grayed out areas just because
the county is grayed out, that
doesn't mean the treatment is,
is unavailable, correct to
people? uh, Madam Chair and
Senator Block, that is correct.
And um, Madam sure.
That's how much time I have left
and start my watch, um, but, uh,
how, how do we know we're doing
good?
So, um, Madam Chair, Senator
Locke, I think that's a great
question, and I think this is
something that came up in LFC.
I, I.
We're, we're always measuring.
How and what we're doing, um,
not only by diagnosis codes, um,
but we're also looking at
How people are accessing
services. People, more people
accessing services, in my
opinion, is a good thing.
Um, it's because we're trying to
break down stigma.
And I would say that, you know,
since 2022, we've seen a
reduction in our suicide rate in
the state of New Mexico by 9%.
42%
I, I want to be really clear on
this. 42% decrease in women
dying by suicide. 43% decrease
in Native Americans dying by
suicide. We've seen a 17%
reduction in alcohol-related
deaths since 2021.
So a lot of this is based on
prevention programs, but it goes
hand in hand with our treatment
programs, and that's why you'll
always hear me say that it's not
one size fits all.
We do need to make sure that
we're engaging not only
providers, nonprofits,
government entities to have
those conversations to be out in
the communities and say, what
the heck is going on? So I think
when we look at that, and if we
want to be even more specific,
McKinley County saw a 38% drop
in alcohol-related deaths since
that time.
I would say that that's a good
measure of, of that. Now, if we
want to talk prevalence, that's
a different conversation. I'm
happy to have that conversation.
The actual numbers of New
Mexicans getting better.
We're improving. We're actually
ranked 16th in behavioral health
access.
In the nation.
Um, which, you know, the
secretary had mentioned earlier,
and she's not here so I can't
give her props. Please let her
know I gave her. Thank you. Um,
she still is my boss, you know,
but the secretary made a really
good point that, you know, we
frequently hear about us being
in the bottom 3.
16th isn't great.
But it's a heck of a lot better
than being in the bottom three,
and we, it doesn't mean that
we're going to give up. We're
going to keep shooting for
single digits.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I just
want to say, um,
I think that's great news and
that's a great story to tell,
and, and listen, I'm a big
supporter of, uh, as you know,
of mental health and, and, um,
substance abuse from some
personal issues, uh, my family
and I, the last thing, Madam
Chair, I would ask you to do is
when you're uh vetting these
nonprofits, they're all local
New Mexico companies, right?
Yes, sir. OK, cause if they're
not, I'm gonna come back and
talk to you.
And, and I would welcome the
conversation. All right. Thank
you, Nick. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Representative Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Director. He asked a list,
but do we have a wait list or is
everybody that applied and
Representative Chavez, that's a
great question. Uh, for this
particular program, we do not
have a waitlist for some of our
other programs, as I mentioned
before, we try to move the
vouchers around to make sure
that there isn't a wait list,
but we do monitor this. OK. Um,
my second question is regarding
these numbers of people in the
program. Does this include maybe
somebody that was in the
program.
off because we know we have
those issues, back to drugs and
then came back, does that
include the same members maybe
in these numbers. Madam Chair
and Representative, these are
unduplicated numbers. So if
somebody did exit the program
and come back, we're not
counting them twice in the
interest of fairness. Um, we do
have other programs which they
might move into.
So we'll see a drop and then I
so but the numbers that are
represented here are
unduplicated.
Do we have numbers of duplicated
members that may have come in
and gone out and come back in
Madam Chair and representative.
I know it's a small number, but
I don't have that offhand, but I
would be happy to follow up with
you. Yeah, I would love to look
at that. Thank you so much. And
then, is there a time period
limit on this program or for
exploration, like we, you can be
in this program, but we're
really going to work with you to
try to get out of it in a set
number of time.
So, Madam Chair and
Representative Chavez, yes, so
for this program, it maxes out
at 9 months. OK, so if we can
get someone moved into another
program or whatever that might
look like. Um, that's the first
priority. A part of this is for
them to be in services and the
services should include
You know, motivational
interviewing so that we know
where do we want to take this
individual. So like in James's
cases, I want to start a
business.
How are we gonna
You know, motivational
interviewing so that we know
where do we want to take this
individual. So like in James's
cases, I want to start a
business. How are we going,
what is the outreach or do you
do outreach to UNMH or APD in
Vernna Leo County just because
they see a lot of individuals
that have opioid addiction
issues that may could really use
this program.
Um, uh, Madam Chair and
Representative Chavez, we do a
lot of outreach, a lot of it is
done locally through the
provider and we do learning
communities, uh, where folks can
come, learn about what the
programs are available to them.
We also work with the coalition
and Homelessness, so that we can
have a broader reach and
stakeholders that we might not
normally have access to.
OK, um, I guess I would love to
get with you.
Of outside of this meeting, so I
don't take up your time just to
ask about that outreach, because
if it's provider-driven, a lot
of times we want the people that
never get to a provider and
that's the big issue that we're
having is they're not getting to
that provider. They may be in
and out of UNMH or APD's picking
him up and then letting him back
out on the streets and they
never get to the provider to
know that there's help
available, um, and they may not,
you know, have that outreach
with the coalition and
homelessness either. It just
depends on
some of their addiction issues.
So I would, I would love to meet
with you. Those are all the
questions I have. Thank you.
Thank you.
Um, so a representative block,
did you have questions? OK.
Representative Vinaya
a quick clarifying question,
when you opened up with the
number of beds that you have,
um, were you talking about 277
open beds within the Fresh Start
program.
Specifically,
Uh, I'm sorry, uh, Madam Chair
Representative Anaya, uh, no,
those are beds for um behavioral
health uh issues. OK, that's
what I thought when you opened
up, um, so then I do have a
couple of questions about that
as well. Um, what is, um, what's
considered a bed? I've heard
rumors that um jail beds are
also considered beds, and so I
would like to just clarify what
is the bed.
Uh, represented, uh, Madam Chair
and Representative Anaya. So a
bed is basically a service. We
do not count corrections, uh,
within this. We do count, for
example, um, the New Mexico
Behavioral Health Institute,
turquoise Lodge, but also
individual providers. So this
includes um psychiatric
inpatient. This will include
recovery housing, this includes
our crisis triage centers. So
for example, Santa Fe Recovery,
um, I triage ball.
They and I again, I will clarify
that this is self-reported, so
at the time that they put their
data in, if they say we have 8
open beds. This goes into the
system and then other providers
can look to see if they have to
do referrals, where does that
go?
So a bed could be a service or a
physical literal bed step down
service thank you can I
interrupt? So does that mean
staffed beds? I mean, when we
visited the behavioral health
institute, and they had beds,
but they didn't have staff. So
are these staffed beds, um,
Madam Chair, yes, that is
correct. These are staff beds,
they have to be able to.
actually see somebody not tell
us what's got a very nice cobweb
on it and I did pause your time.
That's OK, Madam Chair, because
that was my next question. So
I'm good. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
OK, thank you, Representative
Kate. Uh, thank you, Madam
Chair, and, and thank you
Director, um, uh, a, a, a couple
of things. Let's just piggyback
off that the 277. They are not
currently open, that is all the
beds that are available that are
staffed within the state, or are
they the ones that are open.
Open beds, OK. And then I would
just suggest um.
Director, I'd love to have a
slide of, you need to brag more.
I want to see all our reductions
and self-harm and suicide, and I
appreciate uh tribal and and
women and uh statistics,
alcohol-related deaths. I also,
if you have them, LGBTQIA
community and veterans
community, let's stare down
there. Let's get it on a slide
and let's start talking about
it. Um, I very much appreciate.
I understand that you're here to
present two of your programs and
that might be a result of all of
your programs, but let us not
pass up an opportunity to let us
know that our investments are
moving the needle in the right
way. Thank you so much. Um, I'll
go back to um my respected
colleague from Sandoval or team
Sandoval, um, uh, so I'm looking
for these questions to be
answered kind of in a different
way, the $1000.
get. Um, so I have to have a
provider.
And the provider helped me cause
I understand we're gonna order a
bed, but I need hot pads and a
broom and cleaning, so I need
like a lot of little stuff. So
are they paying for that and
then showing you the receipt and
getting reimbursed, how does it
logistically happen for the
individual receiving that. Thank
you. So, uh, Madam Chair
Representative Cates, thank you
for that. Um, and I would just
say that I, I'm always happy to
brag. I, I say that I have the,
the
best team in state government,
um, to your question though, uh,
and I want to clarify when we
call them a provider, it's not a
clinician. We, we call, you
know, it's a vendor if you will,
uh, this nonprofit, and so, yes,
we do reimburse them on that,
and we do go over the receipts
to ensure that there is basic
necessities are met.
So that could be cleaning
supplies that could be the bed,
that could be a kitchen table.
Um, or, you know, pots and pans.
We made it so that it's what
does somebody need on a day to
day basis.
It's the money is fronted and
then we um when they submit
their receipt. Um, we have a
commitment to pay them back
within 2 weeks. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and thank you. I'm just
trying to clarify and I do
appreciate that you're you're
telling me the categories that
are eligible and and I agree
with that. It's because I've run
housing programs too far. It's
I need $50 for the dollar store.
Are these vendors.
Escorting the individual to the
dollar store to buy all the
stuff, do they have to come up
with the money, you see what I
mean and I understand that maybe
at your level, we don't concern
ourselves so that we just see
the receipts they're eligible
and we pay them back. But how do
you believe that the vendors are
made and ensuring that they're
getting all this stuff, the
bigger items are actually easier
than all the little items that
you need for day to day living,
and so that's that's I know I'm
down.
the weeds here, but they're
gonna ask me, so Representative
Cates,
uh, usually when they're setting
somebody up is when they do that
initial.
If you will, shopping list with
them.
And then, um, so they are
assisted with that and somebody
from the nonprofit or the
community uh group will work
with them on making that happen,
and whether they personally
escort them or how they have
that relationship. I.
That part I can't answer off the
top, but I can find that out for
you. Thank you very much and
thank you, Madam Chair, thank
you, Director on um slide 7,
I'll go back to the senator's
question as well. When you say
you give your eligibility and
you say um uh
uh must be in recovery support
services. How am I proving that
I'm in recovery support
services, am I
Having a piece of paper signed
at my 12 step meeting. Am I only
enrolled in a uh detox center
and I how am I proving that I'm
participating.
Um, Madam Chair, Representative
Cates, it is a verification
system, so they have to tell us.
Who they are getting services
from. There is a verification
that they've attended their
appointments, kept their
appointments.
And are actively participating
and not just showing up reading
Time Magazine. Well, thank you
very much and sometimes as we
thank you ruins, I understand. I
want to just thank you, uh, we
can't address our behavioral
health issues with, uh, in an
unhoused environment and so I
very much appreciate
Representative Chavis. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Um, I, I only
have a couple of questions. I
mean many of my questions have
already been asked, but one of
them is
In terms of the numbers of
Of um
Books you are gonna be able to
serve with this money.
Do you have an idea of how many
that might be.
Um, Madam Chair, Representative
Chavez, uh, that's a great
question and it's a little tough
for us to estimate that because
one of the things that we're
trying to do is reach more of
the rural understandably rents
are different from, you know,
Santa Fe versus Lee County are
gonna be wildly different or
ernna Leo versus Union County.
So it's a little tough for us to
kind of look at that. Um, I
think with the additional
funding that we received, you
know, currently we're uh
We have 340 people with just
this money.
Um, with the additional dollars
we're estimating that we'll be.
And then the other question that
I have is, so they can go, they
can get it up to 9 months of
rental assistance.
What plans are in place for
after that because I mean that
may not they they're obviously
gonna need help.
Beyond that
So what kinds of programs are in
place, Madam Chair?
Um, Madam Chair Representative
Chavez, uh, so some of the
things that these providers are
working with them on number one
is they partner with Workforce
Solutions to try and get them in
full employment.
Um, give them some of the
resources that they might need.
They're working with their,
their medical provider uh on
addressing some of their mental
and behavioral health needs. But
the other part of that is
We're also checking in with the
provider that's doing the
housing, to see, do we need to
transition them to one of our
other aid programs that you
provide housing that might have
longer term. And when we say
longer term, and we're talking
about an additional year. This
isn't like an endless.
We're gonna pay your rent
forever.
So they do kind of work with
them in a, in a fashion that
says, how are we going to meet
their needs based on what their
individual condition is, as
opposed to, you have uh a
substance use disorder, and we
expect you to be in recovery
fully within 6 months, which we
know is not realistic.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, uh, senator.
Shannon, Senator Bino, Senator
Sidil Lopez.
Thank you, Mountain share, um,
this is a great use of the
opioid um settlement funds, the
rental assistance and the MOUD
approach, um, and thank you for
this pre this inspiring
presentation, um, but I'm
actually, uh, gonna ask about
how, you know, as you mentioned
SP3, um, how are you
coordinating with SB3s planning
process to continue programs
like this and expand and also
2nd, 2nd to that is how are you
coordinating with them to ensure
that more than justice involved
individuals are served with the
planning process.
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator
Lopez, um, so that's a great
question. Uh, my colleague who I
think just stepped out, uh,
Christie, her office is about
75 ft away from mine, um, and I
do have the privilege of serving
on that committee as well. I
think one of the things that we
want to ensure is that number
one, as communities are doing
this planning that they're not
just looking at it from a
justice lens. I think that's
really important.
Um, we need to break the stigma
down. I know I keep using that
word stigma, forgive me, but it
really is stigmatic for someone
to think that.
Because they're unhoused or they
have a substance use issue or
they had a suicidal ideation
that this is a justice thing.
And nothing could be further
from the truth.
Um, so I just want to put that
out. Um.
But I think as we're giving our
data to the community so that
they can do their regional
priorities, we need to make sure
that they understand what the
full scope of that is, and we're
also giving them the provider
directories to say this is
what's available in your
community. These are the folks
that are doing housing. These
are the folks that are doing SUD
treatments.
Alcohol treatment, because
there's a lot of things that I
think a lot of times people in
communities don't realize that
they have.
And it's one of those things, if
you're not looking for it, you
don't see it.
So I think
go ahead so I assume like
treatment for um your services
for domestic violence victims,
sexual assault victims, and all
that will be folded in to, to
the analysis that they
ultimately come come with Madam
Chair and Senator Lopez, um,
yes, again, these are regionally
driven plans.
Uh, we would be encouraging that
and want to make sure that they
realize what it is they don't
want to.
Overstep in SB 3. The intent was
for this to be bottom up.
So it's we don't want to tell
them.
This is
Nice what you suggested, but we
think you need. I think the
intent of the bill.
was to do it the other way
around and and highlight this
is, these are the programs.
You need assistance setting up
one of these programs, we can do
that with SB3 require an
identification of gaps.
And you, I think you're, you're
a better positioned.
To be able to inform the
committee about where, where you
see the gaps and who's who's not
getting the services. So I'm
really glad you're
participating. I wanted sort of
squeezing that in to um luckily
she's not saying that I'm
outside the scope. And then um
focusing on
On um
On the the fresh start
assistance programs.
Um, when
How, OK. One of the problems
with, for me as a nonprofit when
the former nonprofit director is
um
is these one shot grants that
you don't have expectations of
continuing, um, you just really
have to look for, well, what are
the other sources I'm gonna get
to fill the gap and, and
whatever. So I'm always um
concerned about continuity and
And since these are one time
settlement funds, what is the
plan for when these funds run
out and, and how you um
addressing that both as an
agency and for the nonprofits,
you, you're contracting with.
Uh, Madam Chair and, uh,
Senator, that's a great
question. Um, so our plan is, we
firmly believe in this program.
We've already seen success and
to Senator B Locke's point, we
want to see what the trends
remain and that it's not just
the um.
But as we see this program grow
and the feedback that we're
getting, we would like to move
this from road funding, make it
part of the base budget.
Um, so we have to kind of figure
that part out as to what is it
going to take to sustain it.
There's not a lot of um money
that's in in this compared to
the overall state budget. Um,
but we are always at the
healthcare authority looking at
how do we best
address the social determinants
of health. The second part of
your question, whenever we put
out any of our scopes of work,
we do ask that folks look at it
on the sustainable
sustainability um aspect and
what we can we do so that
they're not looking at it as a
one and done. OK. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Vice Chair Lopez.
Oh thank you, Madam Chair, and I
appreciate the presentation this
morning.
Um, and I guess just to follow
up, um, senatoredil Lopez had
similar questions as I did with
Senate Bill 3 and the
interaction, um, to make sure
that you're participating in
that mapping, the Sims mapping
um process too. Um, but what I
wanted to ask, Madam Chair, is
there an age breakdown on those
who are participating within
your existing program.
And I asked this, Madam Chair,
because I'd like to see uh for
younger generations, right?
Those were maybe in their
twenties.
Um, because we know that there
are um issues with um
Those who are younger people,
younger persons with some of
Madam Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
uh, we do collect that data. I
did not have available, uh, with
me, but I would be happy to
follow up with you as to what
the age breakdowns are across
all the programs if you would
like.
I would appreciate that. Um, and
also, Madam Chair, and I know I
think I did hear I think Senator
Block asked a question with
regards to tribal communities,
are they participating? Um, is
there any participation within
this?
chunk of change available, um.
For the madam chair. I just
didn't hear that answer.
Um, Madam Chair, Madam Vice
Chair, uh, for this program. Uh,
we do not have tribal specific
providers, we continue to have
it open, so if there are ones
that want to participate,
they're more than welcome to
apply.
Um, but currently we do not have
one that is tribal specific.
We do have um
Uh, um
Dreamree, which is based in
Taos, and they work closely with
the Taos Pueblo, but it's not
specific to the talus problem.
Thank you, Madam Chair, so the
other question is, are you doing
outreach?
Two tribal communities.
Or you're expecting them to
contact you.
Um
Uh, Madam Chair, Madam Vice
Chair, um, we have done some
outreach with them through the
Native American technical
Advisory Committee, we've done
presentations to them as well as
the uh Native American
subcommittee, which are both
parts of the uh behavioral
Health Planning Council.
Um, so we do have those groups,
um, but we do try to work with
our, our, um, the Native
American, uh, tribal behavioral
health Providers Association,
um, and have them kind of like
also push this out to those
providers to see if there are
folks that are in there.
Have we made individual phone
calls, the answer to that would
be no, but we have done some
outreaching, well, I would, I
would hope that there would be
maybe some more targeted
outreach.
Um, because Madam Chair, I know
in in my side of town in
Albuquerque, um, we have many of
um.
Persons who are on the street.
That are, I know, um, I believe
that our tribal members.
That I believe maybe could
benefit for some assistance and
some intervention.
Um, I know there's, there's a
whole other uh context as to how
um we work with tribal
communities, but I, I do believe
that there could be some.
Maybe more some concerted effort
through outreach um within our
tribal communities.
And then, uh, just as a
highlight, Madam Chair.
You know, Santa Fe County is not
listed on here, so I'm, I'm
curious. Sandoval County and of
course um we have the former
commissioner here, McKinley
County, um.
I know, I think, Madam Chair,
there are providers, um, but
again, how is the outreach done
from your point of view. Again,
do they have to come forward and
make the application. It's, it's
just thank you, Madam Chair,
Madam Vice Chair, I, I just want
to clarify that um this program
is brand new. We have 8 other
programs that do housing, um,
and they cover pretty much all
of the states, so we do have
housing providers within Santa
Fe.
Um, McKinley, San Juan County,
um.
So we do have a wide spread.
It's this program specifically.
Does not have a provider in
Santa Fe, yeah.
So there are housing options for
folks to utilize, um, so for
example, like our, our linkages
program, which leads to
permanent supportive housing
that's funded by state general
fund and also in part by
Medicaid and um that's.
Go about 355 people that are not
just in these counties that are.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I just
do this also so the public,
whoever's watching this too can
also have some more information,
um, because sometimes what we
have here is very limited and it
doesn't give the full expense of
what may be available. Thank
you. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you so much for your
presentation. I do have a couple
of questions. So looking at page
11, and you may not be able to
answer this, and do you know why
the public health offices in
those counties are not um
providing MOUD.
So, uh, Madam Chair, it's, uh,
you know, I, I would hate to
speak for another department,
but I will say that some of
these counties also don't have
full-time officers. Um, so if
you look, for example, um, you
know, Harding County with the
population of 700 people does
not have an office. Um, Union
County has an office that
serviced 2 days a week, so they
don't have a full time nurse
there. And I think that may be
part of the staffing part,
again, that would be for the
Torrance County, I would assume
has, but uh, I'm just throwing
it out to the universe that, you
know, just because you live in a
lowly populated county doesn't
mean you don't, you don't have
folks who need help, so, um, and
then in terms of of like
Furnishing your home and this
may sound like a really dumb
question, but I think sometimes
as a steak we get so um caught
up in receipts, etc. you know, I
can go to the thrift store and
buy unmatched plates, you know,
and get a for police setting
for, you know, 5 bucks where if
I go somewhere else, it's gonna
cost $25 if it's in the box with
the receipt. Do you know, is
there a way that we can
Cash in on that essentially, uh
that, you know, you may get a
receipt from a thrift store that
just says dishes or just says
housewares, do we have a way
that that folks can leverage
their dollars by buying at the
cheapest place possible.
Uh, so, Madam Chair, we do put
caps on what they can purchase,
so for example, um, we would not
approve something that said they
spent $500 on plates, um.
You know, uh, I think that most
of the providers are very
cognizant of the dollars
themselves and that.
You know, this isn't funny
money, um, but we have not
looked at like a provider that
can do solely that
that thinking about $500 plates.
I'm thinking about $30 plates as
opposed to, you know, $5 just,
just throwing it out there and
then some years ago, Burleyo
County, I know, had a project to
look at um what they call
frequent flyers, people who
particularly show up in the
emergency department. Sometimes
an average of more than once a
day, and they were targeting
those folks because they are
very expensive and they
obviously are having
difficulties in many air is are
any of the programs and I know
you're just talking about a few
of them, are any of your
programs specifically targeting
those so-called frequent flyers.
So, um, Madam Chair, that's a
great question and a lot of our
programs do look at that. One of
the things as we're expanding
with our crisis triage centers
is to look at if we have an
individual that has gone, let's
just say 3 times in a week or 3
times in a month.
How are we linking them into
other services so that they're
not rely um if they're homeless
and or precariously unhoused,
what are the services that they
need so that we can reduce that.
I think one of the things when
we look at, for example, 988.
Um, we're seeing that there is a
correlation to the number of
folks that are calling 911 and
to sit there and say, how do we
kind of make that correlation so
they're not going to the
emergency room. We want to see
that across all programs. I
think it's a little tough for us
to measure that right now. Um,
but that is something that we
continue to look at is, are we
seeing other service utility and
it's just a little tough for us
to make that correlation. Thank
you. And then, um, I'm assuming
that this happens, but I'm just
gonna again put
out there, folks are assisted to
apply for benefits, whether they
be Social Security or Medicare,
Medicaid, whatever. So that's
part of your programming is that
to get people as self-sufficient
as they can to apply for
benefits that they, they qualify
for. Yes, ma'am. OK, thank you.
I wanna thank you and your team
for your presentation and for
your hard work and uh thank you
for being here.
And we will go to public
comments, so if you are on Zoom
and would like to make public
comment, please raise your hand.
We will do in-person public
comment first and then we'll
come back to you. So you have a
few minutes to raise your hand.
So, uh, in person, I have Tim
Gardner.
Ellen Pines with the question
mark, Are you a yes or a no?
OK. Um, and Jim Copeland and
Robert Cagle. So I will give you
3 minutes each. So go ahead and
come up, Tim.
And hello.
Members of the committee, Madam
Chair, thank you. Um, I'm gonna
make most of my comments about
yourself, please.
That's a great idea. I'm my name
is Tim Gardner. I am the legal
director with Disability Rights
New Mexico. We are a nonprofit
legal rights agency that
advocates for people with
disabilities. We do a lot of
work in the space of the DD
waiver. So my comments are gonna
primarily focus there. I'm also
going to touch on.
The um
opioid use treatment briefly in
my 3 minutes.
Um, I want to recognize the
presentation from Secretary Miho
and Director Rodriguez, um, and
you all, if you're not fully
aware of this, you really need
to be. We did great work in the
last few years, but we, I mean,
ACA, but the, but the
legislature in about dealing
with the waitlist for the DD
waiver. It was really an
extraordinary achievement of
what had been great shame, and
uh the, the, and it was
mentioned that we eradicated the
13 plus it was 14, more than 14
in some areas, your waitlist,
um, also.
Uh, not building up a new one
because that was a lingering
concern. I appreciate the
secretary and Director
Rodriguez. Um, I also want to
highlight the biannual rate
study that, that they've
committed to, um, but there, I
do want to bring some more light
on this problem around current
rates, um, obviously, there was
some selective highlighting in
page 8 of the secretary's
presentation, um, but
It was mentioned in there that
the need to serve additional
persons eligible, HB 2 had very
specific language about the $26
million to raise rates and it's
not been done. And I just
So you're all aware of the
impact of this. If you, and it,
it's available to the public,
the freedom of choice of.
Uh, which services people can
choose, some of you know this
better than others. But right
now, for the standard supported
living service, they're 15 of
New Mexico's 33 counties that
have zero providers available.
You can't look up Senator
Stefaniks was asking about this,
Representative Thompson, you
can't look up who's on
moratorium, but you can look up
who's not available, and that's
everyone is not, no one is
available in 15 of the state's
32 counties, 9 other counties
have exactly 1 provider
available, which makes.
uh, uh, a mockery of choice, if
there's no actual choices. So we
only have 9 of the state's 33
counties with more than one
provider available or the most
basic supported living service
and that is directly relevant to
The rates that are being
provided and not provided, uh,
and there, and I, I want to
highlight something or
representative Eleanor Chavez
said, um, about the need to get
this money before the 80%
requirement in 2030, um, need to
get money that goes to providers
into the pockets of direct
service providers. That is
something the department could
do and has failed. That is
something the legislature could
do. So there, I'm, I'm, I'm
encouraging to accept this call
to action to ensure
that provider rates are
increased and that that money
gets to the service providers so
that, so that the folks we are.
Trying to take care of in this
system are done so safely and
with consistency. Um, OK, that's
my rant on that. I do want to
mention I was uh I was in other
things and could not be here
yesterday or, or listening. Um,
but I really appreciate the
presentation from the Bay Health
Services division about uses of
oath wage settlement and the um
and I think the focus there is
to um avoid folks getting into
detention and needing service
there, but you also got a, a
presentation.
Yasu from Santa Fe County, uh,
discipline rights in New Mexico
in 2022 sued the state
corrections department, um, and,
and then
Senate Bill 425 was passed in 23
that requires this treatment to
be provided in all the counties,
the New Mexico Association of
Counties is hiding behind an
unfunded mandate, which
obviously Santa Fe County
doesn't have a problem with, but
it is a requirement.
And, and I encourage legislature
to ensure that the counties are
doing what the 8th Amendment of
the US Constitution requires
what the Americans with
Disabilities Act requires and
what Senate Bill 425 requires.
Thank you.
Thank you. And I will take that
opportunity to say once again
that we as a legislature have
Limited powers in our oversight
abilities, um, things happen or
don't happen and we as the
legislature don't have a lot of
ways to uh
Correct that short of our
strongly worded letters which
don't seem to be really scary
anymore. So, so representative
Pine's go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Ellen Pines
representing the Disability
Coalition. I'd like to start my
remarks by once again thanking
this committee and the
legislature for your support on
the DD waiver, um, we've made
great progress as you discussed
at some length this morning.
There's still a lot of work to
do, but you have made great
progress in
We appreciate your role in
making that happen. But what I
want to talk to you about this
morning is what I might call the
other waiver, um, only a few of
you, I think, have been around
long enough that you would
remember what I'm talking about
when I refer to the disabled and
elderly, whatever, which was a
um home and community-based
services waiver for frail
seniors and people with
disabilities who needed um
supports in the community so
that they could remain in their
homes and communities rather
than going into
facilities, nursing facilities.
And um live independent lives
like we all want to do. Um.
When we moved to the 11:15
waiver in Centennial care more
than 10 years ago, it's now
turquoise care and it's 3rd
incarnation, uh, the DNA waiver
and some other programs were
replaced with the community
benefit, which provides home and
community-based services,
long-term services and supports
to those seniors and people with
disabilities so they can live
independently in their
communities by providing the
assistance they need. Uh, I
would strongly encourage this
committee.
To have um some discussion, this
interim have have presentations
and discussion, um, so that you
can learn more about this
program because many of you are
new and I think that even those
of you who have been around
longer probably are not
particularly aware, and it would
be
helpful for you to learn more
about the program, who
qualifies, what services are
available, what services are
being used and which ones are
being underused in that program.
There are two components to that
program. One of the big advances
in centennial care was that you
didn't need a waiver slot to get
that full array of waiver
services in your home and
community. If you qualified for
Medicaid. So for example, if you
already are eligible for
Medicaid through the adult
expansion under the Afford.
Care Act, you could get those
services. You didn't need a
waiver slot, but if you don't
already qualify for Medicaid,
you need a waiver slot to get
those services, and while we've
eliminated the waitlist for the
DD waiver, we have, I don't know
the current number, but 1,000s
of people on the list for the
community benefit waiver and the
wait can be very long for those
services. I was recently
informed that even expedited
allocations which were supposed
to respond to to.
Um, urgent.
Or even emergency situations are
now up to a weight of a year and
a half, and for an exit that's
not expedited. I'm sorry, it may
be faster than something else,
but it is not expedited. So I'd
really encourage you um to have
that discussion during the
interim and learn more about
this program, which is so
important to um New Mexico's
seniors and people with
disabilities, and I almost made
it right on time, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Thank you. And Xander
has made a note for us to uh try
some shoehorn that in.
Those of you who are on this
committee know how uh previously
know how many subject areas we
have to cover. Um, Jim Copeland.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. We
started this morning. It is now
this afternoon. Uh, I'm Jim
Copeland, executive director of
the Association of Developmental
Disabilities Community
Providers, and we would like to
support any possible increases
to my knowledge currently being
investigated for services that
did not receive a recommended
rate increase in the 2023 rate
study.
Those services are typically the
living support services and the
day program services for the
traditional DD waiver. These
services are currently
reimbursed. Hold on to your
seats at the 2019 rates.
Providers of these services have
absorbed healthy New Mexico
Workplace Act costs increased
minimum wage and all increased
COVID related costs with no
increase in their reimbursement.
These are the core services in
the DD waiver that provide
individuals with community
integration and full lives of
their choosing.
We appreciate the health care
authority and developmental
disability supports division
considering rate increases for
these services and in response
to Madam Chair's comments, there
are typically inflation factors
listed in each rate study that's
done to provide appropriate rate
in inflation increases uh for
future years.
Uh, while not in effect, the
2023 uh rate study did include a
factor for increasing or con uh
considering the direct support
professionals value at 150% of
the minimum wage was included in
the 2023 rate study, it resulted
in about a $5.5 million dollar
increased cost to that waiver to
fund our direct support
professionals at 150% of the
minimum wage, and I am done.
Thank you for your time.
in continued support, I beat the
clock.
You had a minute 20 left. OK,
um, Robert Cagle. Oh.
Good Morning, Madam Chairman,
members of the committee. I'm
Robert Cagle. I'm considering
founding the Nemesis Foundation.
Um, I had a couple of points,
but we've seen here this morning
coming from uh the healthcare
authority is a catastrophic
inability for an agency to talk
to itself.
When we have an agency that was
upside down, and I either the
number was 2 million or 13
million that they're in the, in
the red.
At the end of this year, they
told LSC that they were asking
for substantially less money.
The governor's budget didn't
reflect the fact that they were
upside down that far. Uh, so the
governor's office apparently
didn't know, uh, and LFC didn't
know, um.
So
when they say, well, the 26
million for rate increases were
based in last year. They're not,
they don't even know what
physical year they're operating
under. Uh, they have to file
quarterly with centers for
Medicaid on their expenditures,
how they could not know what was
going out the door is beyond
belief.
Um, the 219 rate study included
inflation factors every 5 years
at 3.7%. That hasn't happened.
If you add it up, we're way
behind that. There I gave you
guys all a sheet, uh, on
Wednesday that had a piece of
the rate study in there that
laid it out. They're supposed to
be one due July of 204, 25, 26,
and 27 at 3.7. That's the rate
study we're operating under.
If you don't do the inflation
increases according to a rate
study that is a rate cut.
Simply stated, if you don't keep
up with inflation, you're
expecting people to do something
that they can't do. Now they've
cut salaries, their major
expense down to the bone as my
son's representative there in
Almogordo has stated, everywhere
in Alma Gordo offers more than
the rate is, which is 15 bucks
an hour when you take out the
illegal subcontractor scam they
tried to pull.
The update on that is that we're
US Department of Labor has
pretty much gone through all of
the providers down in the
southern part of the state that
we're doing it and made them all
pay overtime, which means
they're all employees.
They asked in this rate study
now they want burns and
associates or people who've been
around a while know who they
are, to make the determination
who supposed to prevent that or
taxation and revenue is supposed
to bust him for not withholding
taxes. My son's agency got
busted many years ago, and they
can't do it because knowingly do
it, they would have to commit a
felony to carry out that raid.
That's a felony knowing not
withholding federal taxes.
It's, this is ridiculous. Um.
And, uh, Madam Chairman and
Senator Lopez to your question
about the regional offices and
how many we have. There's 5
regional offices.
So if you want to do a uh go see
somebody in Silver City, they're
gonna have to drive out of Las
Cruces. And with my kids'
agency, they call them, they
give them a bunch of days'
notice and they'll make sure
everything's polished and
everything and all the carpets
are cleaned, and we're all good
to go, which is
Ridiculous that we're having
people in DDSD who should be
fixing stuff like these rates,
and, and uh understanding what's
going on, running around and,
you know, spending, Lord knows
how much gas burning stuff up to
find nothing's happening. Thank,
thank you, Robert. I wanted to
make one more point about
quickly, about 395 is supposed
to give us the average rate of a
direct service personnel of what
they're being paid. We've got
the data. This is the 2nd year
in a row, they refused to give
us the.
A number. It says in here the
number they're going to give us
is 60% of them are paying
between $12.17 dollars an hour.
That tells you absolutely
nothing, and you can't come out
with 150% of what we're doing
and how we're going to work that
out with without real numbers
and it's just, it's
unbelievable. Thank you. Thank
you, Robert. Grace, do we have
anyone online?
OK. All right, so we will break
for lunch, um, and lunch today
is pizza, sponsored by Larry
Rand, Bianca Gutierrez and Aerie
consulting Vanessa Allery. So
thank you all for being here. We
will take a break until, um, let
me look at my agenda.
till one o'clock and and so be
