So
Skis are her favorite. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
All right, Happy birthday,
Natasha.
All right. So
We have our math presentations,
uh, Jessica Merritt.
Please, when you all are ready.
Uh, good afternoon, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee for the next hour or
so, we're going to be discussing
math with a particular focus on
actions that you all can
consider as a legislative body
on this.
So I'm joined by my colleague
Merrett Andrews, who's actually
our math lead, um, all of the
on, um, this work, as well as
fellow panelists from the public
education department Shafiq
Choudhury, who is director of
the Math and Science Bureau and
folks from the New Mexico
Partnership for Math and Science
Education, Patricia Carden and
Zachary Leonard. They'll all
introduce themselves a little
bit more, but we're actually
going to start with a staff
presentation of a policy brief
first before we pass it to them.
So go ahead and turn to tab 4 in
your binders, and we're going to
start with a brief um titled
Solving the Math Puzzle. State
policy for student success.
So as you can see on page one,
figure one of your brief, our
statewide proficiency is low in
math. And this isn't new, uh,
new news to all of you. We've
been assessing math as a
committee for about 2 years now.
Um, but it is important to
restate that math in particular
is the main academic subject
that we're seeing that
consistently lowest rates of
proficiency in.
Only about 25% of students
overall in New Mexico are
demonstrating proficiency in
math as of last spring.
And I really want to single out
math in that because sometimes
we talk about math in the
context of STEM or STEM
education. But if you look at
that same figure, the
proficiency rates are actually
very different for science and
math.
We have an overall proficiency
rates of 33% for science
compared with 24% for math.
So this low proficiency matters
as a fundamental equity concern,
but also because as we write at
the top of page 11 of the
findings in the Martinez Yazzi
lawsuit was low proficiency in
math, as well as persistent
achievement gaps in academic
outcomes.
Turning now to page 2 of your
brief, um, we're going.
To transition to a landscape of
math education in the context of
state policy.
I we write on page 2 of the
brief, there has been concern
about math outcomes, not just in
New Mexico, but really
nationally for years now. So
we've known as a nation that the
US falls behind on international
assessments, notably the program
for international assessment,
better known as PISA, which
tests representative groups of
15 year olds across the entire
globe to see how they're doing
in academic subjects.
For the 2022 administration of
the PISA, which is the most
recent available.
The US scored 26th among the 81
countries that participated. For
comparison, the US ranked 6th in
reading skills in 10th in
science skills, again affirming
what we're finding on our own
assessments in state about math
in particular.
As students across the country
have fallen behind in math on
those international assessments.
There's been a steady wave of
deliberate conversation about
policy options at all levels.
Federal, state, and local to
address these concerns.
The state policy conversation
has largely been centered around
options to support math
instruction that mirrors what
we're seeing with literacy
across the country.
What is complicated this,
however, is that there is a lack
of universal consensus from math
experts on a quote unquote
science of math that is
completely analogous to science
of reading approaches.
That said, we have found in our
research that there is a
substantial body of research
supporting effective
mathematics, teaching and
learning. For example, the
National Council of Teachers of
Mathematics Principles to
actions.
Which we actually, members, you
all have a copy of that, um,
where you all are sitting.
So there may not be consensus on
that quote unquote science of
math.
Because math requires a really
complex interaction of core
numeracy skills, mastery of
concepts in a linear and
sequential way, and
interventions to address
deficits that recognize the
complexity inherent in teaching
math.
At the same time, math is also
inquiry-based, meaning that it
requires contextualization, um,
investigation of real world
problems and real engagement in
the learning process for those
concepts to stick.
Simply put, um, while there is
substantial research on best
practices, um, we haven't found
necessarily the, uh, clear,
analogous way to approach math
in a policy lens, um, because we
have to address how students are
learning math but also address
math identity in all of this for
both educators and students.
That's different from literacy.
We also have to figure out how
to best bolster our educator
workforce to really genuinely
develop their math skills and
the interaction of all of that
is complex.
The next part of your brief, um
starting on the middle of page 2
and flowing into page 3 includes
more assessment data for your
reference.
So on page 3, we've included a
breakdown of proficiency by
grade, by race and ethnicity, by
gender, and also displayed for
you the achievement gaps for
students named in the Martinez
Yazzi lawsuit.
So I will draw your attention
actually back to page 2 briefly
for a moment. So in New Mexico
we actually see a peak in
proficiency in 5th grade at 34%.
But by 11th grade, proficiency
sits at 15%.
What's interesting here is that
we're actually making progress
and raising proficiency rates
through elementary school
through 5th grade, um, before we
begin to see them drop in middle
school.
When Merritt and I actually met
with some math experts from UCLA
and Stanford just last week.
They actually told us this is
something worth capitalizing on.
As many other states actually
see the peak at about 3rd grade
and then the drop. So this is
good momentum. We want to flag
for you all.
Turning now to page 3, back to
page 3 if you already were
there.
Again, you have these charts and
figures for your reference, but
I'll draw your attention to
figure 5, which shows those
achievement gaps that are also
cited in the court rulings.
So in this figure, you see
proficiency rates for students
inside certain student groups
named in the lawsuit and the gap
between, um, students who are in
those groups and students who
are not. So for example,
economically disadvantaged
students show proficiency rate
of 14% in math compared with 32%
for those who are not
economically disadvantaged,
which leads to an almost 18%
point gap.
Turning now to page 4 of your
brief, I will close my part
before turning it to merit.
With discussing the role of
state policy in supporting math
and a summary of changes that
we're starting to see nationally
around this.
So as you all know, the
legislature is really just one
actor in addressing math.
Other entities and individuals
are also really key. For
example, your public education
department, educators
themselves, organizations
offering learning, higher
education institutions, numerous
folks are really, um, critical
in this.
That said, the role of state
legislative policy in supporting
math is oriented around 4
primary actions. The first is
allocating funding and
resources.
The second is an ensuring
well-developed methods to
improve instructional materials.
The 3rd is in directing
professional learning and
development that's expected of
educators and the 4th is
providing mechanisms to drive
interventions and supports.
So through these actions, the
role of state policy then is to
focus on improving the quality
of instruction.
Aligning state systems for a
cohesive approach?
Providing for assessment and
intervention tactics that really
support students.
Or um providing resources, so of
note for fiscal year 25, there
was no appropriation for steam
made to the public education
department. Although the fiscal
year 25 LESC recommendation, um,
did include $100 million for
this.
Just as you all are,
policymakers across the nation
are also searching for options
to support math outcomes.
So this has led to a wave of
legislation in the last couple
of years. We'll go through some
of those in a moment, but what's
important to know is that these
actions really vary, which
reflects that there's not a
total consensus on that clear
science of math at a policy
level.
So a state policy scan that we
reference on page 4 from the
Education Commission of the
States, um, indicates that 8
states, Alabama,
Arkansas, Colorado, Florida,
Kentucky, Tennessee, Virginia,
and West Virginia have enacted
legislation related to math
instruction and supports between
2022 and 2024.
Figure 6 shows a sample of state
policy options in West Virginia,
Colorado, and Alabama.
Again, as compiled by the
Education Commission of the
state. So in Colorado, our
neighbor to the north, for
example, the legislature there
is now requiring its Department
of Education to annually publish
an update, a list of
evidence-informed curricula and
assessment options, in consult
with math experts and educators.
Another example in West
Virginia, the legislature passed
a law to require its State Board
of Education to establish an
approved list of screeners and
to elevate a multi-tiered system
of support for intervention.
Um, on your brief, um, you can
see actions in Arkansas,
Florida, and Virginia. Um, and
again, these vary widely, but
they include everything from
convening groups of stakeholders
to advise the legislature
requiring monitoring and
monitoring and intervention
plans for students, requiring
state education secretaries to
engage with experts in early
numeracy as some examples. So
we'll be watching these as staff
to you all, um, to understand
the outcomes that actually come
from these legislative actions,
but that's a summary of what
we're seeing at a state policy
level.
And I'll turn it to merit to
cover the rest of our brief.
Thank you, Jess. Now, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, I will
pick up at the top of page 5,
proposed framework for New
Mexico.
Throughout the interim, LSC
staff have worked with
stakeholder partners to identify
the following potential policy
interventions to increase
teacher effectiveness and
student learning in mathematics.
We'll begin with educator
preparation and professional
learning.
Teachers play a fundamental role
in building and cementing math
skills for students. However,
the National Council on Teacher
Quality reports many elementary
teachers do not feel confident
in their own math skills.
This is important because math
knowledge is highly cumulative,
as Jessica mentioned. So
students struggle with
foundational math skills,
they're much more likely to
struggle later on.
Because of this, ensuring
elementary teachers own
competence in math is a critical
route to improving student
outcomes in mathematics.
In New Mexico, traditional
undergraduate teacher
preparation programs require 6
hours of math content and 3
hours of math methods for
pre-service teachers. However,
there is no requirement for
alternatively alternative
licensure programs to require
mathematics content, nor math
methods. Additionally,
mathematics methods courses may
not be aligned with national
standards and best practices.
This means many new teachers in
New Mexico entered the.
classroom without the
foundational maths skills or
professional knowledge and
practices needed to ensure that
all students are successful in
math.
Professional learning is an
important lever to improve
teacher practice and ensure
instructional practices are
research-based. Many math
teachers in New Mexico are still
teaching math in the same way
they learned math in school, um,
which means that they're often
not teaching in ways aligned
with the New Mexico math
framework.
PD will talk later on in this
presentation about their work to
develop microcredentials in
partnership with the New Mexico
State University's MC squared
and feedback from teacher
leaders.
Now moving to page 6.
Research shows high quality and
structural materials boosted
achievement and reduced
variability in the quality of
instruction and are a low cost,
high return, educational
investment.
In New Mexico, and selection of
instructional materials is a
local decision, but staff at PED
VE core instructional materials
on a six-year cycle, releasing
an adoption list that school
districts and charter schools
can use as a guide when
selecting instructional
materials, although they do not
have to.
Well, all schools are allocated
funding for instructional
materials through the state
equalization guarantee. Money
does not have to be bent on
high-quality instructional
materials.
Now moving on to student
interventions.
Evidence-based student
interventions are an effective
way to address learning gaps or
misconceptions, as well as to
build student understanding.
There are many out of school
time and nonprofit organizations
that provide student
intervention services, often in
concert with teacher
professional learning. Behind
this brief in your binder, you
will see Appendix one, New
Mexico Math and STEM Support
organizations which provides an
overview of organizations
statewide that provide
professional learning
opportunities to support teacher
and student learning.
The last area of focus at the
bottom of page 6 and going on to
page 7 is assessment.
Statewide assessment systems are
a powerful lever for influencing
what is taught in schools by
signaling what the state or
district believes is important.
As mentioned earlier, New Mexico
begins testing students in math
in 3rd grade, using its
statewide summative assessment
system NMMAA. However, annual
statewide assessment of results
do not allow teachers to adjust
their instruction to meet
student needs. A comprehensive
system of assessment is needed
to drive instruction.
Teachers use formative
assessments to gauge daily
progress of students and interim
assessments to measure weekly
unit or quarterly learning, more
systemic formative assessments
could be used to better guide
and direct classroom
instruction.
Now let's turn to the middle of
page 7, legislative
recommendations.
LESC staff focused on the best
way for the legislature to
structure and fund teacher
supports and student
interventions. Based on what
research says matters for
learning.
Regarding teacher training, the
legislature could consider
requiring professional learning
for teachers, addressing both
content and pedagogical skills,
given that not all pre-service
teachers in New Mexico have
access to math content or
methods courses they need. In
addition, the legislature could
provide corresponding funding
for math professional learning.
One example that could
immediately benefit from funding
are the microcredential courses
developed and implemented by PED
to foster
improvement among math educators
in New Mexico.
Regarding student and
interventions. The legislature
could consider funding targeted
math interventions for students,
both over the summer and during
the school year, in an effort to
increase student achievement and
address learning gaps.
Since the inclusion of math and
LESU's work plan in 2023. LESE
staff have met with stakeholder
partners to identify effective
structures for teacher training
and student interventions to
increase student proficiency in
mathematics. The New Mexico
Partnership for Math and Science
Education, a nonprofit that
works to promote coherence and
quality of STEM education is one
of these stakeholder partners.
We would like to elevate the New
Mexico partnership for math and
sciences priority areas to
transfer.
Math education in New Mexico,
but I will let the partnership
talk about the work themselves.
But first, I will turn it over
to PED to present on their
current work regarding math
education.
OK
Good afternoon.
Uh, thank you for inviting me
back. I'm Shafik Shawri. I'm the
director of the Math and Science
Bureau at the New Mexico Public
Education Department, um,
I'm honored to be here with this
distinguished panel today to
come back and present on some of
the work we've been continuing
to do in mathematics. Um, but
before I go any further, I want
to take a moment to acknowledge,
um, Jessica and Merritt, um, for
all of the collaborative
conversations that they've been
having with us and keeping
two-way communications open. So
thank you and we'll continue.
Let's continue doing that.
OK.
Uh, when we last spoke, I
highlighted some innovations in
the system we're working on and
share the current state of
mathematics. Uh, last month,
Deputy Secretary De Bell shared
some work. We are continuing
this year. So all of the work.
Um, on mathematics continues to
utilize the New Mexico math
framework developed by the New
Mexico math community as a
foundation and roadmap for a
systemic approach.
We want students and educators
to understand how mathematical
ideas relate to each other, to
understand the logic, reasoning,
and underlying structure that
makes mathematics a powerful
tool.
We have seen a clear commitment
to literacy instruction, and we
hope to see similar commitment
for mathematics instruction.
Last fiscal year, fiscal year 24
with the generous allocation
from the legislature, we were
able to support 411, um,
educators across the state in
accessing high-quality
professional learning.
These were some of the
initiatives undertaken that
supported increasing students'
access to high quality
mathematics instruction.
Of first start talking. I'll
first talk about the numerals
project. Numerals is numeracy
unlocks math gear for our
students. This is also the
microcredentials that was
discussed earlier. To support
elementary education, we utilize
part of the legislative
allocation provided by the
legislature to pilot and revise
a microcredential series for
teachers that were designed to
build math content knowledge for
elementary teachers and
Provide them with the resources
needed to build strong
conceptual knowledge and
mathematical reasoning in
elementary students. Thus
leading to students being
algebra ready in secondary.
Teachers develop their
professional knowledge in these
topics through year-round job
embedded opportunities, similar
to the approach of structured
literacy that the legislature
passed several years ago.
To date, we have piloted 3
microcredentials in K2 and 3 and
35 with 30 educators and we'll
complete our pilot this year of
the 4th microcourse without an
allocation this year, we're not
able to roll out the course
widely for as planned.
The 30 pilot teachers and 8
facilitators grew in their
understanding of the standards
and practices, and engaged in
deep understanding of how strong
math instruction supported
building proficient,
mouth-strong students. Many
participants and facilitators
relate how eye-opening this
series was as they dive deeper
into vertical articulation of
the standards that strengthen
their teaching and learning.
The other program was focused on
algebra. This initiative was
based on research that indicates
Alderroan is a key access point
to more advanced mathematics
learning in high school.
This two-year initiative focused
on educators, meaning teachers,
instructional coaches, and site
administrators who worked with
middle school and grade 9
students to to support increased
student success in algebra one.
A total of 150 educators from 18
alias engaged in this series. We
had some I had, I've had
opportunity to speak with the
teacher's administrators who
participated in the series, and
I've heard time and time again
how valuable the series has been
to informing their professional
learning community conversations
during the school year. Teachers
and a sight administrators
appreciated learning in
structured conversations with
their great band colleagues and
from
at different campuses.
In surveying teachers, leaders
during the year, we found both.
Groups
Reported high confidence in
implementing new learning during
core instruction and having
collaborative conversations
through their professional
learning communities.
Leads made it a point to attend
all of the sessions, not just
teacher only sessions so that
they could have and lead common
coherent conversations when
providing supports at their
school sites. This innovation
can help make change in the
system. If we had a legislative
lever.
Unfortunately, without a
legislative allocation, we could
continue the series as designed
and bureau staff will be
providing technical assistance
to schools as needed to support
teachers and leaders in
continuing this learning
implementation.
Since our last presentation in
September of last year,
The work, uh, a working group
came together to develop
recommendations for
re-envisioning high school
pathways.
The working group made their
recommendations public from
January through March of this
year. PD staff and working group
members traveled across the
state to conduct listening
sessions in Albuquerque,
Farmington, Las Vegas, Raton,
Deming Ridoso, and Portalis,
along with three virtual
sessions. We had over 450 visits
to the public website website
which you can see on the screen,
where people provide, where the
public provided.
Back
Through this feedback, the
working group revised their
recommendations for modernized
high school pathways, which
included recommendations for a
modernized algebra 2, that
includes core content,
knowledge and skills that
aligned better to students'
career goals and aspirations.
This would include these
recommendations include new
courses focused on quantitative
reasoning, an introduction to
data science and statistics, and
a pathway to
Reading and a pathway for
calculus readiness or advanced
algebra.
As a working group stated in
their in their recommendations.
Preparing New Mexico students
for their future, calls for
innovation in mathematics
instruction, quantitative
understanding and problem
solving skills are necessary in
dealing with the abundance of
data available and utilizing our
daily lives, leading to societal
engagement.
Allowing students to explore the
concepts relevant to their
post-secondary plans creates
better preparation for college
career and life. The
introduction to data science and
statistics in quantitative
reasoning courses, lend
themselves to project-based or
problem-based learning because
of their natural connection to
real world scenarios. This trend
is this trend is also occurring
in other states to expand
options for students.
This would empower students and
families to choose flexible
pathway that meets their
students and community's
aspirations. For example, here
in Los Alamos, many students at
the high school are on a
calculus readiness pathway.
This pathway will continue to be
offered as well as other
pathways that would be flexible
to meet communities'
aspirations.
The working group also developed
recommendations for modernizing
geometry to include more
statistics and probability
interwoven within the concepts
of geometry.
This approach allows for the
rich contextual application and
integrates practical
applications of mathematics,
i.e., modeling.
The working group members also
stated it allows for focused
instruction of statistics and
probability that may be skipped
in the in a traditional algebra
one or algebra 2 course and will
better prepare students for the
SAT.
Now that the working group
submitted their recommendations
in June. The public education
department staff are reviewing
them and preparing a
recommendations for leadership
on the implementation.
Professional learning and
rollout plans to align with new
graduation requirements.
In addition, New Mexico is part
of the launchers initiative
where we are having
cross-collaborative
conversations with members of
post-secondary faculty and
administrative staff. They have
also reviewed the working
group's recommendations and see
strong connections to the
reforms occurring in
post-secondary
that allow math pathways to
seamlessly transitions for
students from high school into
post-secondary.
Again, thanks to the generous
allocation from the legislature,
we were able to work with the
organization Teaching Lab, who
supported two schools with a
dedicated math coach.
These coaches worked with
teachers in the schools on a
daily basis to support strong
instruction, provide coaching,
aligned or through the
implementation of high quality
math materials.
During the course of the school
year, site leaders, coaches,
teaching lab, and PD staff
visited classrooms. They used
what is called the instructional
practice guide IPG from Achieve
the core as a tool to guide
conversations and debrief on
areas to focus on for direct
teacher coaching. You can see in
your PowerPoint slide, the IPG
contains 3 core actions to look
for during instruction within
each classroom visit.
Um,
Brief, I'm gonna provide a brief
description of each core action,
and then the table you'll see
shows how much growth happened
from the first to the last visit
for both school sites. In green,
you will see core action one,
which is focused on on standard
aligned instruction where
content is being taught at grade
level in a rigor.
Correction 2 in blue focuses on
instructional strategies.
And then Core action 3 in
yellow.
Focuses on students' actions,
such as.
Pushing students thinking,
engaging them in productive
struggle asking purposeful
questions. From the data, you
can see that with working with
these two schools, both schools
showed large growth in core
action too, those effective
instructional strategies and
correction 3, the behaviors and
and engagement we want to see
from students.
Without a legislative
allocation, we could not
continue to provide funding for
this to continue, but the two
LEAs saw the benefit of this
work and are looking for
resources to con to continue
this work at their sites.
I'll end by
Talking about some uh resources
and policy needs. We at the
public education department
have.
We'd like to, we want to
continue having
a conversations with the LASC
staff on mathematics. This
should include potential
legislative action for math
professional learning, potential
funding from professional
learning in math and recurring
funding to support the content
areas of math and STEM broadly
through the math and science
proficiency fund that's already
within the math and science
Education Act.
Uh, thank you, and I'm gonna
pass this on to the New Mexico
Partnership for Math and Science
Education.
All right.
to change
OK.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, on behalf of the New
Mexico Partnership for Math and
Science Education. Uh, we're
honored to be here to present
our working group's
recommendations for uh policy
and programs for New Mexico.
Education moving forward.
So my name is Zachary Leonard.
Um, I am a board member in the
partnership. My day job is
working at Los Amos National
Laboratory of Math and Science
Academy, and we run a math
teacher leader network which
supports teachers and principals
doing the work of continuous
improvement on the ground in
northern New Mexico. similar
similarly my um partner here.
Patricia is currently the um the
co-chair of the partnership, and
she kind of our sister
organization in many ways, works
for MC Squared out of New Mexico
State University and does the
work on the ground with teachers
and principals. And we believe
that this makes us uniquely
positioned to be here today and
to be sort of the leaders of our
partnership math working group,
and then share some, um, what we
believe are meaningful
recommendations. A couple of
points of note.
The partnership has been around
since 1990 actually, so it's a
30 year organization. Uh, some
notable accomplishments in 2005,
they got together, they
organized a town hall and let's
see, 2 things came out of that
of note. One was the math and
Science Bureau,
Shafiq Shafiq Spiro,
and the um the other one was the
math and science advisory
Council. And since then we've
played an active role in state
policy, both
Through um presentations to the
legislature, as well as writing
policy briefs and, um,
recommendation letters. So the
partnership believes
inopportunities to improve math
teaching and learning.
In New Mexico so that all New
Mexicans see themselves as math
people.
Simple philosophy.
We'd like to start off with a
question.
This is our driving questions.
We have some recommendations.
This is our driving questions.
How could New Mexico create
structures within schools,
education systems to support
high quality job embedded
professional learning to support
all teachers engaged in
meaningful collaboration so that
students are the beneficiaries.
And that is a lot of educational
jargon, absolutely, OK,
completely. What that means is
teachers engaging in meaningful
collaboration around a
continuous improvement model.
If our teachers aren't learning,
Our students aren't learning and
that's essentially what we, um,
are advocating for today and I'm
going to pass it to my colleague
Pat to talk about some
recommendations.
Oh
Click twice.
So why are these structures
important?
These structures are important
because of the kids you see in
front of you.
Could you imagine walking into
any math classroom in New Mexico
and seeing kids engaged in
learning that look like this.
Kids that are excited about
learning and not afraid of it.
Kids that are challenged.
But no at the end of the
learning that they have
strengthened their math mindset.
These are the kids of New Mexico
and why these structures are
important.
We think very strong with these
structures because they provide
the mathematical foundation that
these kids need to be successful
in achieving the dreams that
they have, no matter what those
dreams are.
So what are these structures
look like?
So these are actual pictures of
these structures happening in
New Mexico.
They are teachers working
together on math task to develop
the content knowledge that we
have all talked about at this
table.
The the teachers and kids in a
classroom sitting together as a
lesson unfolds. The teachers
observing and listening to the
kids to help them, the teachers
understand the student's
mathematical thinking.
This
is the job embedded professional
learning that transforms math
learning and teaching in New
Mexico.
These are the structures that
are happening now in small
pockets.
These are the structures that
need to be scaled up, so that
transformation happens at a
state level for math education.
So how do these structures and
the partnership connect?
But this last year, the
partnership is taking a journey
to create and write
recommendations that support
structures like we just looked
at.
As you can see, we've started
with our own partnership within
our board and the members within
the partnership.
I think Zach mentioned that it's
over 300 members wide that have
voices from around the state in
different avenues around STEM
education.
We've had conversations with the
LESC, which we have enjoyed
immensely because they have
given us insight that we did not
think about.
We had focus groups that
involved educators at all levels
in the New Mexico education
system. And of course we've had
conversations with
superintendents to make sure
that all these recommendations
are hitting at the core that we
hope they will be.
So what are the recommendations?
I'm excited to say they aligned
to what you've been hearing for
the last 20 minutes. But we have
3 focus areas. We have the
pre-service focus area for
teachers that are excited to get
into the classroom for the first
time. We have a focus area for
teachers whether they're first
year teachers or like some of us
have been in education.
30 plus years and of course it's
systemic, so we have a focus
area on leadership.
So let's take a few minutes to
look at each of these focus
areas.
So pre-service.
Like we heard Merritt talk about
having 3 hours of math methods
that are already required for
traditional pathways, but are
not required for the alternative
licensed teachers.
These methods aligned to state
and national standards, so they
are consistent across the state
of New Mexico, no matter where
the teacher goes, they walk out
with a strong foundation in math
methods to be ready to teach at
any level that they go into.
The second recommendation
establishes that collaborative
norm of we support each other in
our classrooms.
So putting together the
priest-service, the
Collaborating teachers, the
mentor teachers, and the
pre-service education faculty,
and again, aligning it to state
and national standards and the
NCTM's effective mathematics.
Practices.
So the teachers are in the
classrooms.
We're asking the first
recommendation require high
quality job embedded math
professional learning for Level
12, and 3 licenser holders every
5 years, aligned to the national
standards of practice.
Recommendation 2, if we have
this requirement, we must
provide structures within
schools, not conferences.
But within schools that support
that job embedded learning for
all teachers, and again,
alignment to the standards of
practice.
And again, if we require it and
create it, then we're gonna ask
that math specialists are at
schools like you heard Mr.
Sawrey say the two schools that
had the math specialist found
value in it.
So our recommendation 3 is to
have the math specialist at the
schools to create support
implementation and the most
important part of our learning
sometimes is often forgotten,
forgotten is the reflection
piece. So having a math
specialist provide that at their
schools.
With that, I'm gonna let Zack
talk about leadership.
And then share what this looks
like in practice.
Thank you, Pat. Um, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee, when we're out in the
field doing this work on the
ground. We talked to principals,
many, and Pat talks from
throughout the state. I'm mostly
central, uh, located in northern
New Mexico.
But no one says we're not
interested in proving math
education. They all say we want
to improve math education. We
want to support our teachers.
I would say 90% of them then
say, can you give us a
recommendation for how to do
that because we really want to
and we just don't know the first
step to take, OK? And so
recommendation one speaks to
what has already been set up
here multiple times. We've got
to create the leaders and build
the capacity and the leadership
so that they know how to support
teachers in the schools doing
the work of improving their own
practice, which then will
translate to student learning
and achievement.
What gets measured gets done
typically, we hope, right?
Recommendation 2 speaks to that.
We are asking.
For recommendation 2 speaks to
this idea of modifying the
teacher and principal evaluation
system to incorporate NCTM's 8
effective teaching practices.
It's going to elevate it and put
it in front and center, and then
people are going to start
talking about it, professional
learning, um, will rise to that
occasion and just like, um, in
reading, it will, um, promote
that as a ubiquitous practice.
Recommendation 3, we want, um,
to establish collaboration
between principal licensure
providers. I know some some of
that is going on already to
ensure consistency and
leadership development. The
reality is, is that if leaders
are saying or telling us that
question and they're saying, we
don't know the steps to improve
math teaching and learning, then
chances are they're not coming
out of prep um leadership
preparation programs with the
capacity to do that and those
aren't sufficient. So we also
are talking about making those
more rigorous.
With that.
It's always, uh, it's
interesting, you know, we're
practitioners, we, we're happy
to be up here and um, clearly we
want to, um, share these
recommendations, but I think
even more powerful, it's nice to
hear from the voices of teachers
and principals on the ground
doing the work. Um, the ones
that we support. So we're going
to go back to our initial
question, which is, uh, how do
we support job embedded
professional learning, and then
this one is, what is the impact?
And so teachers and principal.
are going to share that in a
video that was just produced in
the last oh I think this came
out 10 days ago or something. So
that we're going to debut it
right here. Um, so do we have
the video cued, yeah.
So yeah, thank you, um.
Representative Garrett, this is,
uh, Blanco Elementary School in
Bloomfield Public Schools, and I
actually have the principal
behind me in the audience and so
she, she came out, so I should
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I just want to thank
Linda's principal, Linda Spencer
was in the audience and um it's
been a just a pleasure to be a
partner with her and her staff,
and so, um.
With that, so again, thank,
thank them for the video, um,
and allowing us to come up and
be that partner. We will open it
up for questions.
And to.
Pat and I, well, I guess, is it
the whole group or just family.
Let's make the whole, yeah,
it'll be everybody. All right,
so first on my list, Senator
Solz, please.
Thank you, Mr. Excuse me. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Um, former math
teacher, uh, and I think always
a math teacher, um.
I've got a number of questions
and I'm impatient.
Um, we don't need more pilots.
We need to move things to scale
and make things start happening
was very clear from the judge on
the Yazi Martinez, math was
actually a bigger concern than
reading, yet we've ignored that
for 4 or 5 years and it's nice
that we are now starting to have
that same sort of movement in
the math area that we had in the
structured literacy and reading
areas, um.
Some of the concerns that were
brought out is the alternative
license groups that aren't
required to take any math or a
math methods course, and this
may be more a PED question, but
what are the plans for
correcting that?
Clear deficiency in the
preparation and training.
Mr. Chair and Senator, I'm
gonna, I'm gonna ask uh
assistant secretary for
Australia to address that.
And and let me add to it, most
of what we hear about the
training that they do get is
online. How do you do math
methods online?
Mr. Chairman and Senator, uh,
we're definitely looking at our
uh educator preparation.
Um,
Providers and looking at what we
can, uh, how we can work
together to make sure that
teachers are receiving our
candidates are receiving the
education that they need to be
able to effectively teach not
only math but literacy as well,
and we are looking at what we
need to do. We don't have a
solid solution yet, but look
forward to working with you and
the LESC, uh, I'm putting that
together. Thank you.
Thank you, Greg. You ought to
become a politician. That was a
great non-answer. Uh,
but, but thank you. And, and I
kind of knew that to be the
case, uh, but Mr. Chair, when we
have, I think the numbers are
somewhere around 40+% of our new
teachers coming in are being
trained through an alternative
method, mechanism, and they're
getting no math instruction.
That's a pretty big lift when
it's one of the areas where
we're behind and I know of many
people in the room it's like a
gut punch every time the data
comes out and we're still last.
When we're trying to, working so
hard on trying to to make
changes, um.
Sort of along the same lines, we
hear lots, there are lots of
discussion about the importance
of data and statistics and
teaching and knowledge about
using all of that.
Are those required in the
teacher preparation programs
either for the elementary level
or at the secondary level and if
where.
Because they weren't when I was
in the College of Education at
New Mexico State.
Mr. Chair and senator, the
Teacher the requirements for,
and I'll speak to the teacher
requirements for entry level
competencies, um, they.
May have a few standards where
they're required to learn about
by variate statistics and
probability, but um, as
Um, as the, as this panel has
pointed out, it's one area that
PD will work on in in updating
those competencies.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I know the
numbers, I think they're still
the same. New Mexico State was
Math 111 and 112 were the ones
for elementary teachers, and it
may have a little bit on mean
median mode, but essentially it
has none of that. The methods
course typically didn't cover
that, and the secondary math
list started at calculus and
went through all of the higher
level math, never had a class in
statistics when I was teaching
because that was my area of
interest. I had the algebra
teachers would call me in to
teach the lessons to
Their classes on data and
statistics because they didn't
know it and they were afraid of
it. You know, and so if in fact
that is going to be a major push
to move away from calculus,
engineering for all and the
algebra calculus track to to
more data and statistics, it's
got to be part of the math
preparation programs and people
coming out of those programs
have had none.
Uh, and I think at the
leadership level it's the same
thing at the master's level,
they get a basic data class that
starts literally with mean,
median and mode. Uh, and it's a
class that masters students are
afraid to take, and these are
people going into higher levels
as teachers or into the
leadership. And so, you know,
that's got to be, and partly
I'm, I'm proselytizing a little
bit. It's part of the problem
with how those are taught at the
university where they're taught
as theoretical statistics
instead of practical statistics,
you know, they ought to be
taught around teaching people
how to play blackjack. I mean,
it's, I mean, that would
actually save them more money in
their life. They'd lose money
slower when they go gambling,
but
Um,
How much we've talked about
needing a teacher and Mr. Chair,
I'm sorry, I had to keep brief.
I get going, I forget to, to
respond to you. Um, we talked
about needing a teacher in every
school as a leader. What's the
cost on that? And with that, is
that going to be part of the
proposed budget coming out of
the PE to include money for a
math leader for every school.
Is it clearly going to be in the
budget?
Um, Mr. Chair and Senator, um,
some of the numbers we ran, and
this is this is part of the uh
budget that's still being
developed at the agency. We
anticipate training math coaches
with an appropriate with
appropriate legislative action
could support 60 educators, for
2 million would be inclusive of
stipends, tuition, fees,
supports, materials, and
training.
Mr. Chair, 60 doesn't even get
one for each district, much less
one for each school.
Yeah, we're talking about big
things. New Mexico is a wealthy
state. We could fund all of this
if we choose, but if we only ask
for 60, you know, the, the LFC
is not going to come back and
say no, you really need 500
teachers trained to do this. You
know, if we really are going to
be serious about it, we've got
to be serious about it and not
nibble around the edges. Yeah,
and I'm not picking on you
personally. This is my
impatience and frustration
striking out, um,
One of you indicated that there
ought to be a 5 year um
professional development for all
teachers? Are we talking about
all teachers like my friend over
here who teaches history and the
PE teachers, or is this
elementary and math teachers
when we talk about all teachers
getting professional development
in math.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Senator
Souls.
The recommendations that the
partnership is making right now
is for math teachers with hopes
that it goes through all the
different subject areas K
through high school.
Education does not have the
required continuous learning
that most professions have.
And so that's why we are
starting with math because we
are the math,
um, in the ground map people
just like yourself, a former
math teacher.
And so we're hoping that we can
get it through the math because
we know math is to our hearts
the most important, but the
other subjects follow the lead,
and again, preschool all the way
up to high school.
Mr. Chair, and thank you and I
appreciate because it is a big
lift to get old, but as a high
school math teacher, I can't
tell you how many times I'd have
other teachers come and ask me
to help them do a percentage.
You know, or that would misdo
how they weighted grades cause
they didn't understand a
weighted percentage and things
of that sort, um, and you can't
just make math the job of those
teachers because in the same
way, you can't make reading just
the job of the English teachers.
It's everybody's job. So please
keep moving and pushing towards
all, uh, if that's really what
we mean, um.
Mr. Chair, you talked about the
mass specialists for each, where
are they going to come from? We
have a shortage of math
teachers, much less math
specialists that if we take them
out of the classroom to become a
specialist, we've got another
gap.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
again, Senator Sols, you are
looking at two different
programs that have developed
programs in the state of New
Mexico to develop math
specialist at New Mexico State,
the mathematically connected
communities is on its 3rd cohort
of the elementary maths
specialist master's program.
We are already actively
recruiting another 20 to 30 math
teachers to inter on our program
and they will enter it into the
fall of 26. So I encourage you
if you would like to see this
program, you're more than
welcome to um come and have
conversations with us.
MSA also has a program for math
specialists, and these are the
only two we know in the state of
New Mexico.
Yes, there is a shortage of math
teachers and so we are looking
at both.
How do we develop math
specialists but also develop
more math teachers through
programs like the EMSS and the
math teacher leader network
through Lanel.
Would you like to add, Mr.
Chairman and Senator, thank you
for the question. I would just
add that um to your previous
question and then building on
this one, we believe that the
partnership that every
elementary school needs a math
specialist. Uh, kudos to the the
public education department 4
years ago, they did develop um
the elementary math specialist
on the recommendations of a
variety of um math advocacy
groups, us being one of them.
We have a plan in our um
literature there that's provided
in your packet. We think we can
develop 300 or we would
recommending that 300 are
developed by 2027. Now the crux
of your real question is how are
we going to do it? We have a
couple of models, as my
colleague Pat suggested, we
don't have a mechanism to do it.
We're going to have to, but we
have a couple of models and with
your, you know, with guidance
from others, we could.
Build
Organizations, you know, whether
they be the RECs around the
state, etc. etc. We could build
hubs to make these happen and to
really support and be these, you
know, professional learning hubs
that then
Support mass specialists in a
variety of locations around the
state.
So Mr. Jain, and I appreciate it
in 300 by 2027 is great. That's
only half of what we need now,
uh, you know, and so we, we, if
we really are going to do this,
this is again my impatience.
We've got to really look at how
do we scale this up, you know,
where's it going to come from if
we really are serious about
making a difference, uh,
and it's going to take money,
um, but New Mexico is very
fortunate in that we are a
wealthy state right now and
we've got money and we could do
that. Uh, kind of my last
question, Mr. Chair. I know the
program up at Blanco Elementary
is brand new. I want to see data
on how it improves student
performance on the independent
measures of math performance,
not just the teachers feel
better about what they're doing,
and I know it's too early to
have that data, but that's the
real proof that this is working
on improving the math
competency, numeracy, and all of
those other areas. So thank you
for indulging me and and
recognizing my, my passion and
impatience.
is not anger at you all
directly, so thank you.
Representatives.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you for your presentation. It
was wonderful. It's always great
to talk about math. I was a math
teacher, um, so let's start. I
want to start with the very
beginning with the um.
The
presentation from Jessica and
Merritt, OK, on that first page,
the, the graph shows math and
science, and science is higher.
And, and I think one of you
said, I think, I think it was
Jessica, that it's linear, math
is linear, so is that what you
said? Something like that. Well,
when you learn, you, it goes,
it's linear, it's, it's
sequential, um.
So, I, as a math teacher, I
think the problem with this is,
or why we see math lower is
because of our mobility rate and
our absentee rates until we get
that fixed. That's, that's the
biggest problem we have. I don't
think Los Amos quite deals with
what we do around the rest of
the state. So that's huge, and I
can see that being one of the
big problems.
Um, when we talk about teacher
training. We have the math. Do,
do you know if teachers learn
about mobility and and
absenteeism and how it affects a
classroom. Do, do they teach
that because that's huge when um
you're a new teacher and your
class isn't successful and, and
you realize that, you know, the,
the 30 kids you started out
with, you only have like 4 or 5
of the original ones. So when
you don't see success, you, you
have to understand that, but I
don't know if they're taught
that, do they?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
Representative Santana, I'm
looking at Director Perea
Ornament too, um, not to our
knowledge is that explicitly top
that's, that's a very
foundational question and so as
we're combining math into our
other workflows, right,
attendance, for example, that's
certainly something that we can
look at in terms of what does
really high quality professional
learning look like to understand
the impacts of other factors.
Um, um, Mr. Chair and
Representative Sarenaa, that is
not explicitly taught in EP prep
programs. I think some EP prep
programs certainly cover
culturally responsive, um,
education or are a little bit
more right than they have in the
past, but even I think in that
space, there's not an explicit
connection between the impacts
of those actual um um
Tenants of of what happens in
education, um, particularly
mobility, so yeah, thank you.
Thank you. Um, so I, I, I echo a
lot of what Senator Soul said,
I, I
feel, I felt you. um.
I'm going to you guys, um, so in
APS about 12 to 15 years ago I
was still teaching middle
school. We used to have some
really rich amazing problems and
the district would send them out
to everybody and everybody would
test this kids and then we would
get together as teachers and
look at the problems from
different schools and evaluate
them and just see what the kids
were thinking and and and and
talk to the teacher where the
kids did really well and how
they taught it, but we did that,
but it, it left and, um, we
actually, I remember taking
it back to my kids and I had
some problems and, and I had
them look at them in groups and
Figure out what went wrong in
this problem, and they did and
they really had to think about
what went wrong and what they
were thinking and why maybe they
missed it. Um, but I see a lot
of the skills you have, you talk
about are avid skills too. I
don't know if you're avid
schools, but
our avid in math, we work in
groups and and they teach each
other and they have to present
and they talk about what they're
learning. So Avid's also a huge
proponent. I, I just, you know,
as I was substituting, um, I
have 11 schools in my district,
so I've been substituting it and
I noticed they, they're losing
avid in a lot of schools.
So hopefully we can keep that
because that was an amazing
program, um.
I think that was, that was the
big one,
That might be it, but I want to
commend NMS you, uh, I think
they have always been the
forefront in education. They
have always had some amazing
initiatives. I've gone to a
couple of MC Square training and
um they're getting it right,
especially with math and the
programs they have, um,
I'm a, um, NBCT and we brought
When 1st and 2nd year math
teachers to a group one summer
and worked with them a couple of
summers, and a lot of times
they, they would tell us they
never got to math, you know,
and, and because I believe it's
they're scared of it, but once
we get them to not be scared of
it, then I think the kids will
excel, um, but I, and I know
this group has heard this, I
believe middle school is where
we can catch kids, try to catch
them up because when they get to
9th grade, when I got freshmen
and they could not do so many
things, you know, teaching out
in a year is great, but when you
have to teach everything else
before algebra, you maybe get
half of a year of math, actually
algebra done, so they're not
learning. So I would like to see
algebra, I mean, um, middle
school is a catch-up. No matter
where are your skills, not your
grade, where your skills are
until you get to where you need
to be, so you can be successful
in math. And I also believe
algebra 2 should be a algebra 1
should be a 2 year program
because we have to have our
kids, um, not only be excited
about math, but be, um,
know they can do it, and I
don't, I didn't see that much in
high school. They, in 9th grade,
if, if they couldn't do it, they
would stop coming to school and
then they would drop out and it
was really tough. And then you'd
just get more and it just, it
was just a sequence. So, we
could do tutoring, but they
wouldn't come. There were
certain things that they
wouldn't happen, so I believe we
have to catch up early so that
they have confidence so that
they know they can do it and it
will happen, but we haven't got
there yet and that's what we
need to do. But I think your
program is great. We need to get
teachers together talking and
kids together talking.
And just evaluating what they're
doing, um, so that's all. Thank
you.
Here.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. I think
there's, most of us are teachers
here. It's like it's 2:30, it's
time to do it, M A T H cheer to
wake us up. Um, Mr. Chair, a
couple of things. What's never
talked about is that districts
are adopting new math
curriculums all the time. So
when I started teaching, um,
I got basically crappy math
training in my thing, but I went
through, uh, as an individual, I
took calculus in 11th grade and
I loved math, so I had that
foundation. We started teaching
with Turk, which to this day is
one of the most effective
systems for teaching teachers
how to think about math. Um, and
then we changed to something
else, and then we had eureka
mass at one place I was at and
when I finished as a coach with,
uh,
Um
APS we were doing stepping
stones.
And especially Turk and stepping
stones had lots of PD for
teachers, which I think it's
important to note, however,
teachers would master a system,
understand how to teach it,
understand how to improve and
then the district would change
systems. So,
When we change to stepping
stones. It was a huge shift. So
I just want to point that out
that that's something we don't
always talk about that affects.
Um, the second thing is I saw a
lot of lessons studied. This is
why, uh, uh, Chairman Romero and
me were such advocates of House
Bill 130 embedded duty daytime
learning so you can observe the
best teaching and do lesson
studies with real kids and
Real classrooms because that 4th
grade teacher aced it and I
failed when I taught that
lesson, so I like the fact that
again, it's not anything new.
There's so much stuff that's not
new, but we as representative
Soignano said we stopped doing
it.
Um.
The third point I want to make,
I'm sorry I'm making a bunch of
points and not asking questions.
I think we have to look at
teacher education, um, I didn't,
I'm a post BS, um,
Teacher program. And so I had a
teacher residency.
And so for a year I was in a
classroom teaching math, being
observed and stuff like that. I
don't think we should just major
in education. I think we should
have people minoring in math,
minoring in writing, and then,
you know, something so that
people get more expertise.
Um, because just major in
education and pedagogy doesn't
make sense when we have such a
lack, especially in elementary
schools of a lack of mass
confidence. And finally, um,
You know, we have high school,
secondary teachers used to teach
a class, uh, teaching reading
across the curriculum.
Um, I think teaching math across
the curriculum. So when I went
to middle school, I was teaching
social studies and language
arts. Social studies is filled
with charts and math, PE all of
them, and I think we have to
consciously and intentionally
remind people that don't have
that math experience and haven't
taught math in, you know,
earlier grades, how to
incorporate math, um, and I'm.
we have to do that. And final
thing is just the time. It's
like what you're talking about
is, you know, people are going
back to school on August 1st,
and we're like having 5000
different training courses. So,
um, I think what you're doing is
ambitious. I really think that
there should be 6 hours of math
for traditional programs, and
then we do have to require a 3
unit for alternative, um, every
5 years, um,
Again, you know, if you're
changing math curriculums every
6 years, and then you're doing
this, it, it gets tricky. So I
really want to compliment you on
the practical, practical things,
but consider some of these
things that as you're on the
ground teaching, going to
different districts, and as, as
Representative Zarana pointed
out, the kids you teach in that
come into your class August are
3 quarters different, you know,
in April when you're testing.
Um,
So yeah, thank you.
Thanks for your dedication to
this topic.
That's it.
Representative Herrera.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and um.
Uh, just for information, uh, I,
when do we start? Where was the
first year we started the math
and science academy. I can't
even remember that. It had to be
over 1999, so I've I've been
involved in this kind of on the
edge, certainly on the edge for
many years, but I'm just curious
from both um uh from um uh Miss
Cayden and, and Zack. I'd like
to know the teachers who have
gone through your academy or or
or through your.
Have you done research over the
years that shows that once they
get through your program,
there's student scores improved.
That's what I'd like to know.
You do first of all.
So thank you
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Ferrera.
MC Squieres had two different
programs throughout the years
that pretty much run parallel
with MSA. The first program was
Lift, which was really focused
on leadership and teachers
wanting to grow in their
leadership.
We started the elementary math
specialist, and like I said,
we're on our 4th cohort with
that, and yes, ma'am, we do have
research that shows not only do
the teachers that go through
these programs grow in their
professionalism within their
districts within their um
schools and within their
districts, and they stay within
New Mexico, which
addressing.
The, the question about math
teachers in general. Yes, we
have that research. I do not
have it at my fingertips, but
I'll be more than glad to share,
but yes, um, the EMS program
has, um, the
Statistics to show that the
teachers are making a difference
and their students scores are
improving, so I can share that
research with you. Zach, do you
have? Yes, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Vrera, it's good
to, good to see you, um, we,
when we were partnered with, for
example, Espanol Public schools
between 2007 and 2010 we were
able to move scores of
proficiency scores in
mathematics considerably. One of
the, one of the, the really
unique nuggets about or
characteristics about that
partnership was
It was whole school and we were
involved in with the districts
and we were partnering around
Mathematics coaching and to your
point,
Representative Garrett, we were
using Turk investigations, the
professional development was
completely aligned to that. So
we know it's not rocket science,
to your point, that is lesson
study. We, we don't call it
lesson state because we tweak it
a little bit and for, for the
reasons of um copyright, you
don't want to get in trouble,
right? Um, but we call it, um,
mass study
We have a evaluation reports
that speak to, um, moving scores
as well, um, you know, 2014,
2015.
To, um, Blanco Elementary
School's credit, Principal
Spencer actually does have some
data over the last couple of
years, and she'll she could
provide that, she's moved on
proficiency scores considerably
over the last 2 to 3 years since
COVID.
And
I, I just wanted to speak to, to
those other points when we have,
we do a lot of content training
with math teachers. So to all of
your points that you've made.
There, I don't think I've heard
one teacher who's engaged in
math content training, which is,
which is an element of our
training, right? We do content,
we do pedagogy, leadership, and
systems work, right? Systems
being the math study cycles
within schools. But when we do
content, it's engaged in our own
math learning. Not one of those
teachers who said,
I feel really prepared to teach
math coming out of university.
OK. So I will say we need to
increase the rigor. It's no
joke. We need to have some
really serious conversations
with Senator Souls, um, and it
was suggesting as well, um, so
we, we are for that because no
one, we become an intervention
program for teachers is what
happens. And that shouldn't be
the case. We should be a support
program to support the good work
that they already come out of
schools knowing how to do.
And we end up being an
intervention program, so I will.
You
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. I, I
just have to say I'm with Bill,
uh, Senator Solz, um,
well, let's just do it, you
know, let's just not do a pilot
program again. You know, I think
your request should be how do we
implement this statewide now.
That should be the request, and
this is how much it will cost
and will every school do it? No,
so you, you, you roll it out
much like we did the letters
program, you go, we will pay for
everything if you do it.
Period. So I think that's the
request you come with. Forget
these pilot things, 25 schools
forget it let's just say what's
the statewide plan for getting
to math proficiency in 5 years.
And if we do this and we pay for
it, how much will it cost?
That's what I want to know as a
leg that's what I want to take
to the floor of the house.
And I, and with that I guess.
Thank you.
Any other questions, folks.
Um, so I had a quick question.
It's kind of open ended, is a,
where do you?
Where and what role do you see
parents playing in math
education for their student.
We can start.
Mr. Chair, um, I think that's a
wonderful question. I think the
role that I see as being a
parent of a student that's gone
through the K-12 system, I saw
my time with my child being
reinforcing what's happening in
in daily classroom, having
conversations and bringing out
the joy of mathematics in every
little thing. I think I've not
heard of a parent that doesn't
want to have that conversation.
Um, I think having those
conversations will speak to and
speak to the community, it will
bring that math identity that
we've been bringing up.
When we have conversations
happening in
Home language around
mathematics, it, it resonates
positively with the students
that they can be a
mathematician.
Mr. Chalman, I'm going to build
on that. I have the pleasure of
working with the after school.
Um, most program in several
districts and one of the things
that we provide for the teachers
that are in the program are
games that they get to send home
to their parents and the kids
get to play them, and they are
focused on early numeracy.
And so instead of sending
homework, math homework, home to
the parents, we encourage them
to take these games and play
with the kids and, and really
develop that love of math
together, and that's starting
in.
Kindergarten, 1st, 2nd, and 3rd
grade. So we really, um, I know
MC Squared and I'm sure MSA
always thinks about how do we
get more parents involved. How
do we do a math night where
parents come with their kids,
not only at elementary, but at
middle school and high school,
and I was just talking to our
beautiful um Mesa advisor and
having this conversation about,
let's do a math night and how do
we get Mesa involved with that,
so we do get more parents
involved because.
I think it's a systematic
approach, so kids and parents
and teachers are all developing
that love. And so then we get
more math teachers in New
Mexico, so we might have a
solution coming.
So thank you. Would you like to
build on that? Yes, thank you,
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, and, and thank you,
Pat. I just want to build on
your idea. It's, it's funny
because I didn't think about
this until you mentioned it.
We've actually over the last
couple of years we've developed
um along with some partners,
Pawaki being one of them,
something called the Numbersense
lab, and so it's basically an
hour's worth of math
intervention, games being a big
part of that. And so what, what
we'll work with teachers to do
is send that students will take
the games home and playing play
them with their parents.
They're the leaders of the
learning in that particular
case. So they're building number
sense and what they find is, is,
well, gosh, my parents, they
only know how one way to solve a
addition problem and they they
put it on the paper and they do
this and I can just decompose
those numbers and recompose
them, and it's great, you know.
So I think that's a great
question and you utilizing tools
like that in really capitalizing
on their excitement and the and
the momentum, um, is essential.
Thank you.
Excuse me, thank you. No, I
really appreciate that that
sending home games and making
the students the center of that
sort of learning because um,
I bring that up because um my,
my children are going through
elementary school and they come
home with their homework and
their math homework, and they
both really like math. Um, but,
um, they bring home their math
problems and a lot of it's
reinforcement and problems to to
reinforce the lesson, which is
fine, but like you had mentioned
that I know one way of doing it.
And it was the way that I was
taught. So when I'm trying to
help them with that work, my
Life kind of stops me sometimes
and says, listen, they're
working on number sense. So you
need to follow the method to get
to that problem, or else it
could be like a problem. It's
gonna, they're gonna run into
problems later on. Um, and, and
I mean, you heard I'm, I'm a
high school teacher. I, I, I'm a
teacher, um, but
I have to be educated, obviously
my wife's in elementary school
teacher. I have to be educated
on how to do it and the reasons
behind it, um.
Which is awesome. It's just, um,
something that not all of our
students and kids have, and then
they struggle with their
homework and then they just lose
interest and then disengage and
then, yeah, we see what our
proficiency rates end up
becoming unfortunately, um, but
certainly by, you know, getting
to the parents and being able to
tell them why this is so
important and why it's done this
way. It hasn't been changed for
um any sort of
Various reasons or anything.
It's not like math has changed
in a fundamental way. Um, it's
That we've evolved in our way of
teaching mathematics and and and
to the benefit of our students.
So, um, certainly anything to be
able to get to those parents and
obviously us as educators, um,
because we still struggle with
that. I teach economics and try
to um certainly embed
mathematics into, into my
curriculum, but I have students
that are in that class that are
all over the place and they're
in their mathematics skills and
it's about trying to, you know,
how can I work with them.
on scaffolding them up along
with the other students who may
need some enrichment as well,
so, um.
Thank you all so much for this
discussion. I hope you stay
engaged with us because
obviously this is another,
another big component of, of
what we're working on. Quick
Representative Verrera.
Yeah, I forgot to ask a thank
you, Mr. Chair, both of you, how
much is your, how long does it
take for a teacher to get
through this program and how
much does it cost?
That question goes to Zach and
uh.
Miss Cardigan.
I think the numbers all you.
I'll pause. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman and Representative
Hereta, the the elementary mass
specialist is a two-year program
at New Mexico State they walk
away with their masters in in.
Math
I have to pause.
Um, the cost is
There is still a cost to assume
the teachers that have to go
into that are going into the
program that they still pay, but
it is reduced because we are
always advocating for financial
assistance. Um,
In the years past we've gotten
enough financial assistance
through other programs to help
cover all the costs, but it's a
typical, uh, degree cost that
the teachers, um, are up
against. So,
It's hard to give an exact
number
on the, the financial
responsibility of the teachers,
but MC Squared works very hard
with different agencies to help
cover some of that cost. how
much does it cost? How much does
it? 2 years master program cost
at at MSU.
Uh
I am looking at support here
because.
It's, it's been about 10 years
since I got my master's in math.
OK, I guess I, I can find that
out somewhere else. It's OK.
Mr. Chair Representative Hereda
likely approximately it's a very
rough $30,000. OK, so it's
$30,000 a teacher that we're
talking about.
If they get a master's do they
have to get a master's to be
able to do this and maybe Zach,
you can tell me the answer for
that.
So with the MC squared program,
we have had teachers enter into
the elementary math specialists
that already have their masters,
but they don't have the
elementary math endorsement. So
they go through the first year
of the program, get the
endorsement, and then leave the,
the program.
We also have teachers that are
do not have their masters and
stay for the entire program of
the two years. So we do, um, are
flexible where teachers come in
and receive either the
endorsement or the masters.
Your program?
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Barrera, so I would.
I'll, I'll throw out the number
$350,000 over three years.
Where for 30 teachers.
18 of those will walk away with
a master's degree to your other
point, the rest will all of them
will walk away with an
elementary math specialist
endorsement.
So we can, we can, you know,
finesse those numbers, but
essentially,
It's, you know, it's about
$95,000 a year.
To, uh, for the tuition for
those 18 folks, which are a
subset of the 30 that are
currently in the program for,
for just the tuition who are
getting the master's. The
remaining folks, um, are just
going through a professional
development program. Yeah. So
about $350,000 a year over three
years, includes tuition.
I get, I guess my follow up
question, what if they didn't,
well, I, I know every teacher
wants to get a master's degree
as they go through this. I get
that, but if you just had.
That component and you didn't
attach a degree to it. How much
would it cost for, uh, a person
to get a math specialist, and I
get that.
People want to this tied to
salary, etc. but if you're just
doing this program and you told
teachers, OK, you can get a
elementary math specialist
something, how much would it
cost if it weren't tied to a
college.
Or would you even be able to do
that?
Mr. Chair Representative Frea,
yeah, I think there's multiple
pathways, but I'll speak to our
specifically, um, and then Pat
perhaps can do that. So I would
say that we can run a cohort of
30 teachers on $550,000 a year
to get an elementary specialist,
um, elementary math specialist
endorsement. We like to embed
that over 3 years. We think that
doing the work, it's it's this
learning by doing idea, um, is,
is, is really meaningful so we
spread it over 3 years, but it
would.
be about $50,000 a year if you
take out tuition.
P cohort of 30,
so about 50,000 for 30 that's
what you're saying a year over 3
years, so 50,000 so about 1500 a
prisoner, something you know,
you're the math teacher, you
tell me.
Um, anyhow, OK, I get it. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
All right. Well, thank you all
so much. We really appreciate
it.
Alright folks, so I just want to
make an announcement to the
folks that may be with us or
thinking about joining us, um.
Her public comment online is,
please hang on with us. We're
one agenda item behind. So if
you are online, please bear with
us and stand on there. We will
get to public comment, all
right.
It's a promise.
All right, if we could have our
next group up, thank you.
On school boards.
But he's not here.
Oh I stuff.
I stuck it under your. Oh, thank
you.
Yes,
we're Oh,
OK. All right.
So while we do make the
transition, we do have a quorum,
so, um, I'm sure you've all
reviewed the minutes from our
last meeting in June. May I have
a motion?
All right, so we have a motion
by Senator Souls second by
Representative Garrett. Is there
any objection?
Singan. All right, we also have
an agenda that we've mostly gone
through today.
Can I have a motion on you? All
right, so we have a motion to
adopt the agenda, seconded by
Represent Garrett in the
opposition to the adoption of
the agenda that we're half
through. All right.
Singan, thank you. All right,
that's been our business.
Oh yeah.
All right, thank you.
All right.
So we have our school board
group up, so please, Mark, when
you're ready.
Oh, we have, we have a lot of
chatter. Can we keep it down or
take side conversations outside,
please, because we're starting
our next agenda item. Thank you.
All right, Mark, when you're
ready. I'm ready, uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, um,
today before I begin, I'd like
to introduce our guests. We have
on the far side over here,
Gregory Frosted, uh, assistant
secretary with PED both have Joe
Gan, executive director with the
Mexico School Board Association,
as well as Lorraine V. Hill with
the Mexico School Board
Association.
Um, so what we'll do is I'll go
ahead and do a review of SP 137
and an update on the
implementation. I will then pass
it off to, uh, Mr. Joe Gan to
talk about New Mexico school
board's role in that
implementation and then Mr. Gray
frosted to talk about PD's role
in that.
So, beginning with
This first presentation which
you see on the screen there.
We'll be talking about
background first, give you a
little bit of history as to why
HP um SP 137 was introduced. Um,
there were several issues that
wanted to be that were addressed
with this, um, legislation.
Um, these included improved
transparency with the campaign
financing, increased
transparency of decision making
process at school boards and
governing council levels,
varying levels of access and
participation in training for
those members. And lastly, um,
it required core competencies is
needed in school finance and
budgeting.
Moving on to the next slide.
So SP 137 was passed in 2024 and
during this review, I'll be
focusing on three main areas
that will be again campaign
finances, transparency, and
training.
In regard to campaign finances,
SP 137 brought in the campaign
reporting requirements for
school board members and
governing board members, um, so
what this means is any candidate
or committee that received
campaign contributions or had
expenditures of $1000 or more
shall report that to the
Secretary of State. Also, the
transactions filed uh will be um
And in congruence with the state
campaign Reporting Act.
Now, in doing a follow up and
checking up on the
implementation of this, um, this
bill, I spoke with several
parties, um, firstly, I spoke
with the Secretary of State to
ask him how this would be
implemented on their side and
what they communicate is they'll
discontinue using the system
that's already in place for all
campaign reporting, so that's up
and ready to go. They'll also be
including this change into the
election guide that they release
every year.
Um, the Secretary of State staff
did communicate that they did
have some concern in
communicating this change to new
school board officials or two
new governing board members, um,
but what they've decided to to
do is um.
Included in their election
guide, uh, post this on our
website and then they also
referred me to some of the
county clerks I also spoke with
and what they'll be doing is
when a candidate registers at
that level, they'll be asking if
they've um completed the
appropriate reporting and
they'll also be referring them
back to the Secretary of State,
so there's going to be a loop
that way they can try and
capture all those, um, again,
uh, another level, I spoke with
Joe and his team and what
they'll be doing is they'll be
including this new requirement
in their
New board member orientation
materials, and he'll talk a
little bit more about that when
I pass it over to him.
Uh, furthermore, um, school
board officials may not engage
with the business associations
until after the election. Um, so
a grand, uh, Joe and his team
will be reaching out and
providing updates as they
regularly do to their members
but also in their new
orientation, um, materials, so
we feel that maybe they could
still get in front of them even
before they start attending
meetings within the New Mexico
School Board Association.
Moving on to transparency.
So the next item that SP 137
does require is transparency,
and what this means is
transparency uh for um school
board meetings as well as
governing council meetings and
specifically what it requires is
that meetings must be webcast
and accessible through an
established website, um, a
webcast shall start shortly
after the meeting begins and
ends shortly after the meeting
adjourns, uh, meetings must have
an interface for public
comments.
Recordings of webcasts and
approved meeting payments shall
be posted on the website within
one week of the meeting's
conclusion and archived for 3
years.
Now in speaking to um we spoke,
staff spoke to 27 school
districts and charter schools to
follow up on the implementation
of this item. And what we
received is feedback from I'll
start with school districts, um,
overwhelmingly positive, um, you
know, following COVID, a lot of
these entities already have
these mechanisms in place, um,
but I have a few comments from
some specific districts, um,
they believe that SP
requirements are going well,
running smoothly. We already
broadcast every
on Zoom and have a URL link
already in place. At this point,
we believe we've complied with
SP 137, complete, no issues.
That's uh overwhelming majority
of folks I spoke to from uh
districts.
Now, as far as charter school
feedback, again, um, mostly
positive, um, nearly all charter
schools in compliance currently
training has been offered um to
governing boards regarding SP
137 changes. Some schools are
still in process and testing out
purchasing and purchasing an
audio and video equipment to
meet those requirements, and
many governing boards see new
requirements is actually an
opportunity to optimize, to
optimize their meetings and
participation of the public.
Um, going on to the next page,
transparency implementation
concerns.
Now this was a minority, um, but
there were a few concerns that
were voiced when I was reaching
out. Um, one was a little bit of
confusion with the multiple
tools, Zoom, whatnot, that's
available and how um they have
varying um feasibility and
getting those going. Um, some
districts, um, charge schools
had problems understanding the
legislative intent and what it
was meant to do, um, belief that
webcasts are not needed due to
um this is prevalent in smaller
school districts, small size,
they feel that that's
Not needed, um, the whole
community can pretty much show
up and joining that that that
online um accessibility wasn't
needed, uh, potential disruption
of meeting by allowing virtual
comment was another concern, and
there was a little confusion
that was communicated around the
archiving video, audio
requirement for 3 years and um
that confusion was coming from
the bill's referring to the uh
open meetings Act and the
retention record where it says,
Once the meetings are approved,
once the minutes are approved,
audio recordings become non
record material, so there was a
little confusion of what they
actually need to keep.
Um, going on to the training,
mandatory training.
So SP 137 mandates that PED um
does develop a mandatory
training course to follow these
items below, explanation of
department rules, policies and
procedures, statutory powers and
duties of local local school
boards, legal concepts
pertaining to public schools,
and then finance, budget and
other subjects deemed
appropriate by PED.
Um, PD also has a requirement to
notify governing members of
training dates offered, um, and
that shall be within 3 months of
local school board elections.
Now just to talk about the
minimum requirements, and this
is differentiated between
existing members and new
members. So members in their
first term shall complete a
minimum of 10 hours of mandatory
training within the first year
of service, all over Going body
members are required to complete
a minimum of 5 hours of
mandatory training per year.
And again, there's also a
difference in the curriculum or
the courses, so if you go into
the first training curriculum
page.
This will be for new members as
you see there's 5 areas here,
and that's laws, departments and
policies, school finance,
budgeting, fiduciary
responsibilities of school
boards, 3 legal concepts
pertaining to local school
boards and districts for
effective governance practices
and effective methods, and 5,
student achievement and student
support services. Now if you go
to the next page.
These are the requirements for
existing board members. Now
you'll notice there's 7. I've
highlighted the three that are
different. So 125, and 6 are
carried over from the previous
requirements for new school
board members. However, 3, which
is a local school board's role
in evaluating and improving
student academic achievement for
a school board's role in
providing a safe learning
environment and last 7 other
matters deemed appropriate by
the by the department PD those
are new um
For 2nd year or returning
members. Um, now there's 5 hours
required here, so it's kind of a
almost a pick and choose kind of
of situation here.
Now moving on to the next item,
um, training disclosure, um, so
I spoke to,
to PED um and this disclosure,
the way it's gonna work is animS
NMSPA will continue to collect
the records, the trading
records, they provide a PED and
PED will then post those on
Vista again, I won't steal too
much of Mr. Frosthead's thunder.
I'll let him talk to you a
little bit more later.
Um, but the number of hours of
training attended by each
school.
By each school's local school
board member will be part of
what's posted on Tevista.
That'll be part of the
information that's posted there,
um, and speaking to the
implementation of this item in
the training, again, overall be
positive from the folks that I
spoke with, um, they saw this as
gray areas needed information
that their members need to have.
The only things that they
communicated was a request to
have more online options for
their training.
All right. And lastly, before I
hand it off to our, our guests
here, um, train implementation,
so PD is tasked with imputation
of SP 137 as mentioned currently
in New Mexico administrative
code lists in Mexical School
Boards Association as the entity
responsible for providing
training and tracking hours
earned by school board members.
With that, I'll pass it over to
Mr. Geha to to continue on with
his portion of the presentation.
Thank you, Mark.
Mr. Tir Romero, vice chair of
Souls, members of the committee.
My name is Joe Guilin. I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico School Boards
Association. Also with me today
is Lorraine V Hill. She's our,
uh, program director over at
NMSBA. She's responsible for
helping to develop our training
program and also tracking uh
compliance for all 450 school
board members, so, uh, again,
she's very
vital to this process and works
with me very closely.
I'd like to just go over the
presentation outline that I have
for you. I'll give you a little
bit of background on training,
uh, at NMSBA, uh, also, uh, just
an overview of what happened
during the legislative session
last year, uh, where we're at on
implementation of Senate Bill
137. Some of the challenges that
we're having and then open it up
for questions. So, uh, in terms
of the background, as you know,
uh, NMSBA provides quite a bit
of
services and information to
school boards. One of the most
important is in the area of
training. In fact, uh, NMSBA
championed and led the passage
of the first school board
mandatory training law back in
2003, right after House Bill 212
was enacted and this the goal of
that was to uh focus school
board, uh, interests and
activities in the area of
student achievement.
Uh, at that time, the New Mexico
public education department
assigned program and tracking
responsibilities for all 89
districts and 450 members to
NMSBA via regulation, as Mark
indicated earlier, we've carried
out this responsibility now at
our at our own expense for over
20 years.
And provide, we also provide an
annual compliance report to
Mexico Public Education
Department for their posting.
The training curriculum that we
put into place is very robust.
It's based on the National
School Boards Association key
work of school boards, and also
the National Association
becoming a better board member
guide. In fact, I left copies
with Senator Sols, uh, that he
might, uh, circulate those, uh,
uh, for members to review.
Uh, we also established that
NMSBA, uh, a multi-level
leadership development
recognition program, which
recognizes and incentivizes
compliance with the training
regulations.
We recognize those board members
that far exceed the, the minimal
5 and 10 hour training
requirements. We have some board
members that are receiving up to
30 and 40 hours of training
annually and we recognize them
at our annual conference. In
fact, uh, uh, the award that we
give to the board of the year
every year and board member of
the year are, are mainly based
on training activities and how
much they put those into into
action.
Um,
Last year we recognized 190
school board members from 72
districts for their
accomplishments and again in far
exceeding these, these
requirements.
Every year we provide well over
70 hours of of of uh multiple uh
training uh opportunities uh for
board members at our 4 major
conferences each year and at our
two sets of region meetings in
the in the spring and in the
fall, uh, we also work with, uh,
our training committee, we have
a school board training
committee made up of master
school board members and also
EES trainers that have uh been
helping us over the last several
years to uh with our curriculum.
At each of our annual training,
uh, conferences we provide 16
hours of training opportunities
uh over a 2.5 day period.
Uh, not only do school board
members attend, but
superintendents and stan and all
his folks attend as well. So
compliance with the mandatory
training has varied over the
years, but we've been as high as
88% right before, uh, uh, uh,
COVID. However, it dropped
during that period and it's
steadily rising again to 77%.
Uh, we have worked closely with
pet officials and have
collaborated closely on the
training program throughout this
period of time.
Uh, during that time we've
worked with the secretary's
office and the Office of
Accountability, uh, so that they
can post these results.
Next slide is all of you know
what happened during the, uh,
legislative session, but during
the interim prior to the last
session, uh, we were able to uh
get together and collaborate
with LESC staff, public
education department staff and
ourselves to come up with
legislation that we could all
support.
Uh, LESC as you know, endorsed
Senate Bill 137, which was
sponsored by uh President Pro
Tem Mamie Stewart, Senator Bill
Solz, and on the House side by
Representative Susan Herrera,
my, my representative. We
appreciate the consideration
given to NMSBA by all sponsors,
legislators, and agencies during
this period. And lo and behold,
Senate Bill 137 passed the
legislature 30 to 9 in the
Senate, 42 to 17 in the house.
And was signed into law on March
1st by the governor.
The next slide uh deals with
implementation and what we've
done uh since passage.
Um.
Many of you know that we run a
policy service program for 83 of
the 89 districts.
And uh we issued a policy
advisories in May that helped to
implement and assist school
boards, uh, district policies,
uh, that would, uh, bring them
up to date in the areas of
hiring, live streaming of
meetings, training and campaign
finance practices. So we issued
those uh their advisor 238 to
245. I have a list of those uh
that uh are detailed if any of
you are interested in receiving
those, uh, districts have begun.
To adopt those policies and
bring them up to date and at
that point, we updated them on
our website.
We've also developed a coding
system for the new training
categories. We had training
categories previously, uh, but
the new categories are a little
more comprehensive in nature and
they addressed more than one
area in many cases, so we've had
to decide how to code these uh
to make sure that uh Lorraine
can give credit to those
individual members in these and
you training categories.
Uh, we've also, uh, begun
training the tracking for new
board members, newly elected
board members since December.
Uh, we've had, we had a.
Uh, newly elected board member
mandatory training in December.
Uh, this was the month before
they took office, but we have a
uh training modules for training
modules for these newly elected
members, uh, during their first
year. And although the uh, the
bill did not take effect till uh
July 1st, uh, we are hopeful and
working with public education
department that we can credit
those new board members with
that training that we provide.
4 hour sessions, 44 times
already this year in different
areas. Uh, we also updated the
RFP request for proposal
presentations that we take prior
to each of our conferences we
send the proposals out to
agencies, experts, uh, school
districts to present, uh, uh,
pre uh present the work uh work
sessions at our meetings, so
we've, we've uh updated the uh
form.
To include all the new
categories and we've run now 3
of our last 2 conferences with
the new categories, uh, to be
able to address those.
Then finally, we've been
collaborating with the New
Mexico Public Education
Department to
uh track how we're gonna, if any
changes need to occur in the in
our relationship or in the
manner in which we're conducting
these conferences. We've worked
with, of course, the secretary's
office with Mr. Frost and his
policy staff and we've also
worked with your staff at LESC
with the director Warman with uh
uh Mr. Senna and also with Mark
Montoya who's.
Very helpful to us.
In terms of challenges,
Some uh
Challenges that we're facing
right now are tracking board
members and categories.
Uh, for 450 members manually.
Uh, director of the Hill has
been doing that very well, uh, a
lot easier when we were just
tracking hours and board
members. Now we have to track
450 hours.
Or or hours for each of the 450
members plus 6 or 7 categories.
So we're having to code each of
the presentations into which
category they fall and she's
doing that. We're doing that
manually at this time and we're
looking at ways to possibly uh
automate that process. We also,
uh, you know, we've done this at
our expense at our, uh the
expense of our conference uh uh
budgets and uh we
May want to see some assistance
at some point to bring in
keynote speakers and that kind
of thing. Again, we've been
dealing that with our conference
budgets.
Um, another, uh, challenge is
impressing upon the districts
and the members, the importance
of compliance with 137.
Well, we have a good compliance
on the training part uh
portions. Uh, there are always
board members that cannot or do
not attend training. So we are
looking at providing more
opportunities for online
training, uh, not only coming to
our conferences and going out to
the regions, which is a little
closer for them, but we'll be uh
looking at that.
Uh, in the area of uh campaign
finance reporting, uh, uh, one
of the challenges is advi
advising new school board
candidates about campaign
finance reporting requirements,
as Mark mentioned, while we were
able to advise board members
that are running for re-election
of the new, uh, requirements,
those new board member or
individuals that are running for
the first time, we don't have
access to their uh contact
information, but we
have a candidate manual that we
post online and we get many
requests for that from uh uh
individuals that are wanting to
run for school board the first
time.
Uh,
couple of other minor challenges
clarifying the online meeting uh
comment requirements. Uh, as you
know, the, uh, the act now
allows for public comment
written or verbal, uh, on the
webcast, but the Open Meetings
Act does not, uh, um.
Uh, require the public to have a
right to comment, so there is a
conflict there. The uh the act
with the Open Meetings Act, so
we'll need to to try and address
that. And then finally, uh,
clarifying the webcast archiving
requirements with the records
retention schedules that the
state has, uh, I think that the
the uh the statute says that,
uh, that the uh acts
requirements, uh.
So,
uh, be
adhered to unless the schedule
provides otherwise, so we'll
have to provide some
clarification to our members on
that.
So that uh summarizes and
completes our presentation, um,
I think that uh uh we'll take
questions probably at the end of
the year.
The session.
Thank you, director, again, um,
Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee, thank you for having
the opportunity to address you
today on
school board, the school board
training bill, and thank you so
much for working together with
us this last legislative session
and with the New Mexico School
Boards Association on getting it
passed and now working together
to get it implemented. School
boards are an important piece of
the education puzzle as we are
working to increase our literacy
and our math scores and to
increase our high school
graduation rates. School boards
are.
Going to be integral in making
sure that we make the gains that
we want to see. Uh, we, we
understand their importance and
we also appreciate the service
that they provide and we want to
make sure that they have the,
the training that they need to
be successful in their roles.
Regulation charges the the New
Mexico School Boards Association
with providing training to
school board members and Mr.
Gehan has been great in working
with the agency on that. In
fact, not only do we attend the
statewide trainings, but we go
on the road with the with the
association and often on the
road we end up seeing not only
LESC staff but also members of
the legislature at those
meetings as well.
Uh, the PED wants to partner
even more closely and and we
really see this opportunity in
in implementing SB 137 with uh
not only changing the
requirements but also improving
the quality of the training that
gets provided.
Uh, and, and, and so we want to
partner again with the LESC and
with the, the association to
make that happen. We are
considering some rule changes as
Director Gin and Mark both
mentioned there are questions
around the archiving of
webcasting and what is required
with webcasting. That's an area
that we, that we are likely to
propose regulation. Um, we also,
as one of the, the training
components we're looking at.
Uh, making sure that board
members have access to cultural
sensitivity training.
And, uh, additionally, we're
looking at providing additional
guidance around school board
requirements in terms of tribal
consultation.
And for this next legislative
session, we are interested again
in working with you all on some
additional ideas for how we can
improve.
The improve how we work together
with school boards and we have
several ideas that we are
considering at the time and look
forward to future conversations
and those include things such as
allowing for individual board
members to be removed from a
school board at present, it's
either the entire board or or no
one and it's not always the
entire board that's involved in
malfeasance and um we
Uh, the agency would like to
have the authority to be able to
um
To work against just those board
members who are um involved in
malfeasance. And if that were
the case, we would also like to
be able then to prevent such
board members that have been
removed from being reelected to
the board. So again, right now
at present, we can only remove
the entire board and if that
were to happen, we would not
want everyone to not be able to
run again, but in the case that
there is authority to remove
individual board members, then
that would be something.
that we would be interested in,
in discussing with you all.
We're also interested in
providing consequences for
failure to meet training
requirements at present,
we published the information,
but there is no um there, there
are no teeth to it. There's no
consequence for not
for not meeting the training
requirements other than having
your name posted.
And um there's also interest in
looking at progressive options
for dealing with board
malfeasance. Right now it's just
really removal or or not. Um,
and look, look and also looking
at options for boards to be able
to um to themselves censure
individuals to have a process
for boards to be able to
maintain um to maintain the
procedures themselves.
And and thank you all again for
the opportunity, Mr. Chair, and
I'll pass it back to Mark. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr. Frost. Thank
you, Mr. G. Thank you, Mr. Hill.
Um, with that, Mr. Chair
members, we will stand for any
questions or comments. Alright,
thank you all. Questions,
comments?
Looking at Vera, I knew it, or
Bill sponsor, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
panel, uh, thank you for this
presentation. I, I did help
draft this bill along with
everybody at the table, I might
add, so I, I truly appreciate
the work of the New Mexico
school board and superintendents
association for
Uh, helping to draft this
legislation, that was important,
um.
Here's, here's what I see
happening that I didn't think
would happen. I, I thought PED
was gonna kind of take on a
different role and that you guys
were gonna do the board
training, 10 hours of board
training, and the and that the
um and that the New Mexico
School Board Association would
continue their
role really as an advocate and,
and also as a trainer. I didn't
know the whole thing would go
over to the New Mexico School
Board Association because that
certainly wasn't the int
The intent was that that that 10
hours of training would be done
by PED. That was my
understanding.
Mr. Chairman and
Representatives, so this, this
regulation has been in place
for, for many years. Uh, do you
know, uh,
Director Gin since 2003, so we
are looking at opening up,
opening up regulation and
considering how we can amend
the, the, the previous
regulation to, like I said,
improve the quality
and the the 10 for new members
in 5 hours, we are, we're
considering different things.
We're considering opening up.
providers like how we have at
present for governing council
members for charter schools,
they're they're,
they have long had it open for
many people to be able to
provide training, not just one
provider and so we're looking at
what we can do in regulation to
um to improve the quality as we
move forward.
Sure, please.
I should mention that NMSPA
ourselves do not do a lot of the
training. Our training has
opened up to all agencies,
including public education
departments so that they can
provide those hours of training,
uh, in the past, uh, the public
education department would
provide the 1st 5 hours of
training for newly elected
members at one of our
conferences, but we gave them
the whole afternoon to do that,
and they brought in their staff,
uh, over the years that had
dropped off, so we had begun.
To take it over within
consultation with the public
education department. So this
does not prevent uh any uh
outside agency and particularly
the public education department
from providing training at any
of our conferences.
Uh, thank you for that and thank
you and Mr. Chair, I, I just
remember getting beat up on the
floor because I said I want a
PED to do this training and that
was the intent of the
legislation and people saying,
well, what is PED know? yeah,
I'm just telling you how the
debate went. I don't necessarily
agree with all the debate I do
on the floor. I'm just telling
you I got beat up over that
because people, um, were upset
with the performance of PED and
they said, well, why would you
have PED do it and it's because
I think the
legislative intent was to have
different levels and I you might
bring them in, but for them to
kind of come in and for them to
be required by law, which as I
read it, it was required that
that PED do 10 hours of of of um
of training. So that, that's
all, Mr. Chair, that's all I
want to say. That's how I read
the legislation and, and how I
presented the legislation on the
floor.
Oh, thank you. Other questions?
Represent B, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you all for being here. Thank
you, Mark, for the great
presentation. So quickly, I just
was wondering, can this
be done virtually.
Or is it only at like a
conference that you would have
to get your 10 hours.
Mr. Chair.
Uh,
Mr. Chairman, Representative uh
Block, uh, this can be done
virtually or at conferences. Uh,
we have, we have, uh.
On some uh virtual training,
particularly during COVID, all
of our, our opportunities were,
were online at that time. Uh,
we're looking, of course, at
doing conferences and towards
the end of the training year
providing that the training that
anyone has missed out on, uh,
uh, virtually in order to make
sure that our compliance rate is
high and that those board
members that really can't
travel, have an opportunity to,
to meet the requirements prior
to that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Joe, for that answer. If I can
call you Joe.
But uh so I'm wondering, so.
Are the school districts
required, Mister Chair, to foot
the bill for this training, or
is it up to the individual
school board member, because I
know some districts are really
strapped thin, they don't have
much extra on the top, and I'm
just wondering who, who, who
eats the cost of that, Mr.
Chair, especially if, if you
have to drive to Santa Fe, for
example, if I, I live 4 hours
away from Santa Fe, do you pay
for that or does somebody pay
for that other than the actual
individual because they
Don't usually get paid, my
understanding,
uh, generally there is a
registration fee for our
conferences, uh, and the
district pays that, um, uh,
they're, they've been very
reasonable in the past and uh in
order to make sure that we
incentivize them coming to
training, uh, but there are some
conferences that we and a remote
sessions that are we don't
charge for, so.
OK, thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you for that and I, I
would just note.
I was one of the people who
voted against this bill. I, I
don't know if I beat the good
representative up on the floor
too much about it, but I did
just see it as a another mandate
for local school boards, and I
think it's.
I'm against more mandates for
anybody, but I do think that one
thing that's good about this is
the transparency aspect. I think
that's good, especially
regarding open meetings because
I always get IPA requests to my
email address. Oh, what did
Representative Block send to
someone or other, and I think
it's good to at least have the
meetings like we have as a
legislature. So I think that's
one good thing about the bill.
And then Mr. Chair, one other
question about PED. I didn't
know that they could just, they
had to take out the entire
board.
If there was any kind of
misconduct, what would, what
would be the impetus for that?
Is there any kind of regulation
that says you can only remove
the board for things such as uh
Embezzlement or I think the word
you said was malfeasance. So
what, what constitutes
malfeasance and can it just be
anything at all like we didn't
like what the PED did, so we
just ignored it. Bye bye, you
know,
what, what is the uh
The framework for that, Mr. Mr.
Chair, Gregory.
Mr. Chair and representative,
there is statutory language on
what um
on
requiring that we take action
against an entire board and not
individual board members and I
don't, I apologize, I don't have
that statute in front of me at
the moment, but
yes, there are um there are.
There are stipulations on what
that uh
On what uh
On grounds for taking action,
yes.
OK, thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you for that. Yeah, go
ahead, Joe.
And I add that, uh, generally we
have worked with the public
education department where there
have been occasion on 3
occasions that I can recall were
a full board was removed or
suspended and uh we worked with
the department to make sure it
was a, um action of last resort
that we were given the
opportunity to work with the
board and the superintendent to
address any uh concerns or um um
Activities that were not
appropriate,
uh Stan Ros and I, uh, on
several occasions met with those
boards, provided individualized
training to those boards in
hopes that we could avoid
suspension, but in the end, a
couple of them went through and
we were in agreement as well,
so.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for that. I, I had no idea
that was the law of the land,
but I think a pretty easy
builder to take that away might
be a good idea, make it
individuals like you said. So,
uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you all for the great
presentation.
Thank you.
Senator Lopez.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair,
and I appreciate the
presentation. Um, I think this
was a long time coming um for us
to be able to have this
particular requirement. Um, I
remember Mr. Chair, when we
actually made a change and some
of you will remember also when
we narrowed the role of board
members from getting involved in
employee um issues within the
district, so it was only
oversight of school
superintendent and not
everything else.
Um, and I know there was a few,
um, I think deep breaths that
were taken um in some of our
communities, but I think we have
progressed, Mr. Chair.
Um, to, to help and improve, I
think what our school boards,
um, role and responsibility is.
And I firmly believe that um if
we can tweak a few things that
continue to help, but training
is so important, especially with
the issues that we've been
discussing over the years and
even today when we talk about
special ed and some of the other
um important items I issues,
it's just important that
training happens and if
sometimes if we have to
legislate, it needs to take
place. And one more thing, Mr.
Mr. Chair, I'd like to say, I
just wish we could do this for a
lot of the nonprofits in our
state, we would have oversight.
What they do, they're meeting
the requirements of their bylaws
and such because I think there's
a, a few other issues in that
realm too, but that's a whole
another conversation. Thank you.
OK
Thank you,
questions, comments from
members?
I'm not seeing any, so thank you
all for the update. We
appreciate it.
All right.
So we will go to.
Final item, which is public
comment.
waiting
So,
so we'll start, uh, I think with
folks online. I'm gonna talk
kind of slowly, remind folks you
have up to 2 minutes.
To address us.
So Manny has a timer?
We got, all right, so we have.
Two people online we'll see if
others start to populate. Um,
but remember you have 2 minutes.
Manny has the timer up.
Nope, it's behind me. It's to my
right. It's all over the place.
Oh, cool.
Right.
All right, so you'd be ready,
Manny, as soon as.
It's like Nat, Nat Dean. All
right. Hi, Nat, you have up to 2
minutes. Welcome.
Thank you for joining us. Next
on my list is Steve.
Hi Steve, you have up to 2
minutes. Welcome.
You should be on. Welcome,
Steve.
No worries.
Yeah
Mm
Mhm
And.
Mhm
Thank you, Steve. That was 2
minutes. We appreciate you
joining us. Thank you.
Next on the list is Gabriella.
Please, Gabriella, welcome.
Thank you for joining us.
OK
And
Mhm
Thank you, Gabriella. That was 2
minutes. Thank you.
Uh, Athena.
Hi, Athena, you have up to 2
minutes.
Thank you. Next up we have
Gayle.
Hi Gail, you have up to 2
minutes. Welcome.
Do you, your mic should be
working, Gay?
All right.
Thank you, Gail. That was 2
minutes. Thank you.
Susan.
Don't believe there's a last
name on it, but Susan, you have
up to 2 minutes.
Thank you, Susan. That was 2
minutes. Thank you.
Daniel, you have Daniel.
Hi Daniel, you have 2 minutes.
Welcome.
All right, thank you so much. I
can even sleep in my own house
after all that. All right. So
we'll go to our in-person. My
wife's a fine arts teacher. So,
so I make that joke. Um, so
we'll go to Lena.
In person, yeah, we're here.
It's your moment. All right.
Give you a moment to get
settled. Yeah, just make sure
it's red for don't say anything
silly and yeah.
That mainly goes for us at the
table. I have 2 minutes. So I
didn't practice. So let's see
how it goes. I'll speak as fast
as I can, please.
OK, Mr. Chair, Director and
committee members, my name is
Lena Gurman. I'm a STEM educator
and an advocate, um, and have
been active mainly in Santa Fe
and lately in Espanola for the
past 27 years since I've moved
to New Mexico. I'm here to speak
in support of developing a STEM
innovation network.
For New Mexico in 2016, I
founded a nonprofit I called STE
Santa Fe, which in 7 years grew
to serving about 1000 students
annually with thousands of hours
of project-based mentorship in
small group settings at no
charge to families. Uh, Stem
Sanofe won many multiple awards,
especially that we were
addressing equity and access to
STEM education, um, I was
carving time to network and
collaborate with others, but it
looked like a mission.
creep as the priority is to
provide programs rather than
networking and sharing ideas on
best practices,
um, and can you in STEM
programming. In addition, I
realized that the goal is to
reach more New Mexico students
were needed, um, but that goal
is very difficult for one
nonprofit to do without uh
considerable considerable
investment in capacity building
and in collaborations and, and
partnerships. My example is just
one of many.
STEM programs in New Mexico that
can become um sustainable or
scalable only if we have a
centralized STEM network that
would evaluate shepherd and
propagate successful programs
and partnerships. I hope the
state of New Mexico will see the
value in establishing and
funding a STEM innovation
network in New Mexico that you
will hear about it's vision more
tomorrow. And since I have 17
seconds, um, I want to comment
on
a parent, um, and my and and
math education and that in the
summer, my kids will come home
with their math workbook half
done, and you said what those
parents do? I used to bribe them
so they can finish it. Thank
you.
$5. I've heard bribery works.
Might be more technology time.
That might be the bribe in my
house, right, Jan, hi.
You, you know the list order,
members of the committee, uh, my
name is Jan Williams. I've a
retired Sandia Labs engineer.
Um, I'm a fellow of the Society
of Women Engineers, and I, we
always work to bring more young
people, especially
underrepresented groups into
technology fields through
outreach and advocacy and um
just increased awareness of STEM
pathways.
Tomorrow this committee is going
to hear panelists talk about the
structures and benefits of
existing STEM innovation
programs from several states,
and thoughts about how this
concept could be adapted for New
Mexico. I want to publicly thank
the LESC Director Warnerman,
John Senna, and, um,
particularly, I want to thank,
um, and offer kudos to Condor
Hicks for his professionalism
and diligence in investigating
this uh this concept, pulling
together a stellar panel that
you're going to hear.
tomorrow of experts to provide
key information to this
committee as you consider the
potential benefits of a STEM
centralized innovation network
for New Mexico and the need for
regional implementation of STEM
learning throughout that
network. I trust the information
provided will convince you that
such as an investment will
provide big dividends for the
students of New Mexico as they
face a technology-driven future.
Thank you.
Right.
Linda. No.
No.
No, Linda?
Once, twice, OK?
That concludes my list.
Remember, folks under the
announcements portion there is a
reception this evening at 5
o'clock, so is that a question?
A question, a comment. I'm
sorry. I just wanted to comment
about the uh Rose program from
Doctor Kabina at UNM, a great
program. I went to graduation a
couple weeks ago on a Friday.
Got to me with a lot of our uh
educators at our K through 12
schools and the research that
they did at UN.
And so just wanted to highlight
that it's a great program.
What's it. Thank you.
Oh, I thought that was gonna be
an online comment, quizzing
about what it stands for. OK. So
remember reception, um, other
than that, we will reconvene at
9 o'clock right here, same time,
same place tomorrow. Bye, folks.
Uh, you may leave your binders,
yes, they should be secure
by folks.
