For the legislature, right, uh,
anyone opposed to coming out of
the executive session.
But seeing none, we are no
longer in executive session.
Let's go back and finish our
Uhinda Shana, I think it's you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So just
a couple quick reminders and
reports, um, Madam Chair, Mr.
Speaker, and leaders, I would
ask in your conversations uh
with caucus members and, and,
uh, other members, please remind
them to notify the council
service, uh, planned attendance
or non-attendance at interim
committee meetings, even though
the interim has just begun and
only organizational meetings
have been held, some interim
committees have already
struggled with attaining a
quorum or even a special
subcommittee to allow a meeting
to convene.
Which requires calls to the
speaker and the pro tem, um, to
temporarily appoint members as
needed, but the sooner the
council service staff can know
who will be in attendance of the
meeting, the earlier we can
decide in coordination with the
chair, whether committee
meetings should be canceled or
postponed due to an inability to
establish a quorum or special
subcommittee.
As is required by legislative
Council Policy 12 legislative
space. I am reported to the
council that the National
Hispanic Institute, in
partnership with the University
of New Mexico, hosted the 2025
Lorenzo de Zavala, Youth
legislative session for New
Mexico high school students
earliest month in the capital
and was allowed use of the
chambers and committee rooms for
this purpose.
As to building projects, we are
all very, very much aware that
the exterior stucco
refurbishment project is
underway, so there's going to be
a little dust.
a little noise until it's
completed. I was looking at the
what's happening calendar and uh
the legislative Health and Human
Services Committee is meeting
later this week. However, it's
in room 322, which is on the
other side of the building, um,
the contractors are focusing on
the southern side, um,
initially, so hopefully there
will not be um any
Noise disturbances for LHHS, um,
but we will work to address
that, um, if disturbances are a
little bit too much to handle.
Um, the exterior of the south
side is the process being
pressure washed, grouts being
removed from the precast
concrete contractors are
beginning to put new cement coat
on top of the fiberglass mesh.
And next steps on the side of
the building will be primer and
finish, and then moving on to
the north side. Uh, the project,
the entire project is
anticipated to be completed in
kind of the late fall time
frame.
Uh, lastly, I would just like to
announce that the council
service has established a
central email to facilitate the
opening of drafting and research
files. Uh, this email address is
lcs drafting at NM legis.gov,
uh, legislators and authorized
staff and other authorized
individuals may always, always,
always reach out to me,
Mounayin, assistant director for
drafting Services or any other
member of the drafting staff to
open files. However, we hope
that this new email address will
be a consolidated uh place and
help facilitate.
The opening, um, and assignment
of files, especially during
session, uh, when people's
schedules are a little bit um
different. So that is all I have
for today for staff reports and
Ista for questions.
Uh, any question to share. Um.
Madam Chariot question comment.
I know that um
At least we've talked a little
bit about uh restrooms.
And
And what we can do physically
inside this building.
I'm just
Wanna bring this up for
consideration here.
So we're already in a small
group.
But together, Senators share
working on this issue that
involves other people. Mhm. So
if you could let us do our work
on that issue, that would be
very appreciated.
we're actually addressing
The bigger picture.
Of
Of the women not only in this
building, but
Everywhere
Because there just seems to be
growing concerns.
And I'm not sure that
physical changes in this
building.
will make
The difference make sure that
we're concerned
that there are
People have concern, real life
concerns.
And we look at some of the
statistics, I think people have
reason to be concerned.
So, I will.
I will be, I just want to make
sure that, that this is not lost
in there and that we do schedule
some kind of effort to make sure
that we are protecting people
and it's not just physical
changes.
And we are working on that with
you. So we will continue to do
that. I'm sure we'll have
another meeting pretty soon.
I see Shana saying yes.
Nobody's forgetting about it.
And I think point well taken. I
think it's been recorded for the
sunlight, so we're good now.
All right. Any other comments or
suggestions or questions. Thank
you all for being here so long
for uh paying attention for
asking questions. I don't know
when our next meeting is.
We, it's not scheduled, is it?
Madam Chad has not yet been
scheduled. I will be in touch
with uh yourself and Mr. Speaker
to find the best date. We do, we
have identified a couple of
dates that seem feasible up to
your discretion.
Great. All right. We are.
