But otherwise, I'm, I'm gonna do
the PBM after they explained it
this morning, and I don't need
it printed unless somebody
wanted it.
You know.
In other words, you don't really
want it and, and, and so it
would be OK just to use it on
the electronic versions.
Everybody, everybody happy with
the electronic versions.
Save a tree.
OK, let's say an entire forest
that's that's good, that's
British Columbia, it will be
intact.
There you go.
All right.
All right, well then let's get
started with the morning's first
presentation, which is an update
from the Office of the
Superintendent of Insurance, and
we're gonna start with the, the
uh healthcare consolidation
Oversight Act, we have uh
Senator Doig, Representative
Sapanski, the superintendent,
Alice Cain, the superintendent
of the office of of insurance
superintendent of insurance, and
It is Jane gonna be here or is
she online or she'll be online.
Jane Wishner will be here
online.
And so we'll turn it over to
you, Senator. Go ahead.
Great. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee.
So Mr. Chair, there's something
unique in the history of
healthcare in the United States
is taking place right now.
Private equity and large
corporations are playing a
rapidly growing role in our
healthcare system in ways that
have enormous consequences for
patients and for healthcare
professionals.
Healthcare Consolidation has
increased significantly in
recent years.
physician practice acquisitions
have increased more than sixfold
from 2012 to 2021. From 29% uh
uh physicians working for
hospitals and health systems in
2012 up to 41% in 2022
and New Mexico is directly
impacted by these changes. In
fact, we have uh 38% of private
hospitals in New Mexico are now
owned by private equity firms,
which is the, the highest
percentage in the nation.
And these massive changes
require new ways of thinking
about how to ensure that patient
care always comes first.
Mr. Chair, we, we can't turn
back the clock and eliminate
these business models, but with
these growing trends, we need
better oversight tools that
focus on impacts on patients and
on patient care. I'll hand it
over to representative.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um, so
transparency and coordination
and competition and healthcare
remain essential, um, before
Senate Bill 15 was passed by
this legislature last session,
New Mexico was one of only 11
states that had no market
oversight.
Um, together with the office of
the Superintendent of Insurance.
Um, it's very important for this
committee to know we have
engaged communities across the
state during this interim to
understand their concerns about
major transactions that have
impacted their communities and
the frustration that they have
when they aren't included in
major decisions that directly
impact them and their access to
healthcare.
The need for a transparent fair
process that centers community
and patient needs is essential.
That's why we want to provide
context to this committee about
how uh Senate Bill 15 came
together and how we have brought
together stakeholders over the
past several months to really
dive into the issues to find a
workable solution going forward.
And not passed to the
superintendent of insurance.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, committee
members, thank you for this
time.
Oh, thank you to our sponsors
who have been so engaged with us
over the uh last uh during the
stakeholder process, they
attended most of the meetings
with us either by Zoom or in
person, and I would say the
legislature recommending us to
have this engagement with the
communities was absolutely
invaluable. Uh, we learned a lot
about their concerns. We had
providers, members of the
community, CEOs, and I will go
through more of what we learned,
uh, but, uh, I
think you were incredibly wise
to encourage us to do that. So
let me move on to where we are.
Um
I
You all have the PowerPoint and
it's somebody handling the
slides.
Probably not.
Yeah, we're having some
technical difficulties. So we
have copies of the, we have hard
copies of PowerPoint you know.
11 forest went down with this,
so apologies. Um, as you know,
uh, last year, the Presbyterian
proposed merger sort of woke a
lot of us up. There was no
regular authority to review the
major transaction a major
transaction that would
significantly impact the quality
availability at accessibility
and affordability of healthcare
in New Mexico, uh, as we, as
the, our sponsors mentioned,
research shows consolidation,
especially.
involving private equity
increases prices and
can lower the quality of care.
um,
Should I give up the microphone
and can you hear me? They won't
be able to hear you online. I'm
sorry. Research shows the need
for a regulatory process to
review transactions involving
merger acquisitions or change in
control. I, I think this last
year, this issue has come to the
forefront with the Seward issues
in the northeast where that uh
that hospital system.
went bankrupt and it had been
owned by a private equity group
for over 10 years. Not only is
New Mexico and other states
looking at this, there, there
was a bill introduced by Senator
Markey in the Senate in July,
focused on private only mostly
on private equity. We have a
broader focus here, but
obviously the need is apparent.
Uh, last year, as you know, we
had limited time to propose a
bill.
Before the legislative session,
the original draft.
based primary primarily on the
Oregon statute and built on
OSI's expertise in reviewing
similar complex transaction in
the insurance industry, uh,
under the holding company, the
insurance holding company law.
The bill as introduced covered a
large number of entities and
included significant
transparency provisions and the
opportunity for public input.
The compromise bill SB 15
terminates in July 1, 2025
covers only hospitals and
provides complete.
Confidentiality with no
opportunity for public input.
The sponsors and OSI agreed to
engage in this stakeholder
process that I mentioned earlier
and propose a more comprehensive
bill in this session in this
upcoming session.
Uh, just to repeat a 5 SB 15
covers hospitals only. There's a
single review process for all
transactions. Uh, it is
confidential. Uh, there's no
role for the Attorney General,
no specific enforcement or right
of appeal, it terminates July 1,
2025, except for a three year
oversight of any transactions
that have been approved.
The stakeholder process which I
mentioned, and again, I would
say it was invaluable.
The legislature urged OSI and
our sponsors to implement a
stakeholder and community
feedback process. OSI
established a web page and built
a list of nearly 600 individuals
to receive notice of the
meetings. We held community
outreach and targeted
stakeholder meetings. The
community outreach meetings were
conducted in Albuquerque, Santa
Fe, Gallup, Las Cruces,
Almogordo, Taos, and Las Vegas.
Multiple targeted stakeholder
meetings addressed the key
policy aspects of the Act.
With hospitals, providers,
consumer advocates, and
insurers. There was a
significant engagement of
providers, consumer advocates,
the hospital association and
many and many of its members.
The community outreach, as we
mentioned, raised major issues
regarding local past hospital
transactions and uh we wanna uh
highlight that there were during
these meetings there were in the
CEOs attended and it was
interesting conversations
between the CEOs, the community.
members and the providers.
Uh, there were over 250
participants in these meetings,
uh, and, uh, let us share what
the community members were
concerned with, uh, the one big
issue continued to come up in
almost all the areas, OBGYN and
women's health services are
often not available in many
areas. Uh, providers are
referring patients long distance
for OBGYN and other essential
health services and in many of
these areas, transportation to
these uh to.
to the providers and other state
cities, uh, is really a
challenge.
Following significant
transactions, individual
providers expressed concerns
with the lack of transparency
and quality of health care. The
challenges for the hospitals
remain operating costs,
staffing, and, and as we all
know, the special needs for
rural hospitals.
To, to repeat, and I can't
repeat this enough or stress it,
the importance of community
input and transparency. It it
is, is bedrock for me. Uh, the
need to protect access to
essential medical services, the
need to protect medical
providers which came up in the
outreach meetings, uh, often
hospital transactions have
significant impacts on medical
providers' employment,
doctor-patient relationships,
quality and accessibility of
health care. Independent
practice providers remain
concerned about the bureaucratic
burden and cost of being subject
to this act and uh one thing
that we've really uh just
discovered and I wouldn't have
thought of, there is a need for
whistleblower whistleblower
protection for hospital
employees.
Mostly in before and after the
transaction. Uh, a number of
doctors
We're at the meetings, but only
wanted to speak um anonymously,
uh, which was quite compelling.
Um, the need for
post-transaction enforcement and
monitoring. Uh, there is a
disagreement among the
stakeholders over the duration
of the monitoring and oversight
after transaction, and there was
objection to criminal penal
penalties by hospitals and
medical providers, which we have
responded to in this new draft.
Uh.
Now the proposed legislation.
Uh, we're gonna go through
covered transactions, how we
dealt with hospitals and
independent practices, the size
of transactions, a new tiered
approach where we have
preliminary review without
approval, but with uh a strong
emphasis on attestation that
we've been told uh the complete
story.
Uh, and they're not hiding red
flags that would take them to
comprehensive review, and then
uh administrative hearings, uh,
if there are any uh after a
disapproval and probably if
conditions are imposed, which
ultimately have judicial review,
confidentiality is, is
definitely going to be a
balanced approach, public review
and comment, as I said, is
critical. Uh, we do need, I
think Senator Duhe reminded us
that last year that you can't
have an act without enforcement
and uh.
I, I totally agree. Uh, we've
been discussing, uh, you know, a
role for the Attorney General.
We do need ongoing oversight,
and then, uh, something that
came up which is new to this
bill is really uh an annual uh
ownership disclosure, just uh
which we will share with the
healthcare authority so that
they get a they get a view of
the entire health care system
and and hopefully can pick up
trends since it was so opaque
when we first
Picked up this issue.
Um, mergers and acquisitions and
change in control are covered,
uh, change in control, the
change in control definition
continues to be modeled after
the insurance company holding
law, and it's really who has
influence. There's going to be a
presumption of control at a
certain point, which can be
rebutted, and then there's going
to be if there's control,
perhaps in a in a more uh.
Um
Creative structure, we're hoping
to pick that up as well. Uh, the
legislation, as we emphasized,
is not limited to private
equity, and the language is
designed to capture the creative
structures used to change
ownership and or control.
Uh
We really appreciate the
significant engagement and input
by our stakeholders, especially
the hospital association and
many hospital CEOs, several,
several provisions in this draft
reflect their input, but we also
disagree with some of the
positions that they've taken.
All types of hospitals licensed
by the healthcare authority will
be covered. Change of control
will not be triggered if, if
there's a publicly elected or
publicly appointed board change.
We don't, we do not agree with
the hospital association.
that all information should
remain confidential, but we are
working to strike a balance
because we believe some
information should be be kept
confidential. Uh, again, there's
real dis there's real uh uh
diversity about the duration of
the oversight, um.
We did have discussions with the
medical society and the greater
Albuquerque Medical Association
about physician practices, OSI
and our sponsors are committed
to sustaining and supporting
independent physician practices,
independent providers' concerns
have led us to support a tiered
approach to limit the number of
transactions to further limit
the number of transactions
subject to comprehensive review,
the new bill will clarify that
no change of control occurs when
a practicing clinician owns
clinician.
owners are added or removed from
the governing board of an
independent health care practice
and larger transactions will be
covered because of significant
evidence that independent
practices are a major
acquisition target of private
equity and large health systems.
SB 15 applied to healthcare
entities where at least one
party had gross revenue of at
least 20 million in the
preceding 3 years, a newly
created entity is projected to
have at least 10 million of
gross revenue over 3 years of
operation, the final version of
SB 15 had all hospital
transactions with without limits
to size involving a merger
acquisition or changing control
were subject to review.
Stakeholder recommendations
range from no dollar threshold
to $500 million.
gross revenues to trigger a
notice requirement. The hospital
association proposal is 50
million in gross revenue of one
party and 30 million for a new
entity, with hospitals, if so,
if a sole provider of a service
in a community or geographic
area, it even if lower revenues
impact the community, uh, we
want to review it. And the new
legislation will continue to
cover all hospital transactions
and the SB monetary threshold
will
apply for other healthcare
entities.
We've, we've have a tiered
approach. So let me show you
some of the nuances that where
we shifted and the notice of of
uh notice and preliminary
review. Uh, all hospitals have
to give notice, large
transactions involving most
health care entities, um, as we
said, evidence shows
consolidation has impacts well
beyond the hospitals. A
pre-notice meeting is
recommended and available on
request, so people can come in
and ask, you know, you know,
where do they, we think they fit
in in this framework.
Um, and then, uh, we are instead
of approval at the at the
preliminary level, uh, we're
gonna ask that they, uh, the
parties attest to the
completeness and accuracy of the
data and tell them to go forward
with the transaction. I don't
think approval is appropriate if
we haven't looked deeply, but,
but we are gonna hold them to a
cer uh to a level of attestation
that they give, they've given us
a complete and accurate uh
picture of the transaction. Um,
there'll be public posting.
of notice and the opportunity
for written comments. Um, this
is where the public can come in
and say they think we really do
need comprehensive review
because we're concerned about
the transaction.
There will be, uh, the number of
transactions selected for
comprehensive review, we think
is probably fairly limited, uh,
uh.
The expectation is that most
transactions will not require
comprehensive review, and again,
the opportunity for public
comments in writing and an
in-person forums and committees
and communities impacted by the
transaction will be part of this
process. Uh, OSI will have, if
there is comprehensive review
review, it results in a formal
and OSI formal determination
with very with real input from
the healthcare authority on
actually the
What, what they're most uh
experts have the most expertise
and actually the healthcare
itself and uh approval, approval
with conditions or disapproval.
Uh, on the notice of preliminary
review, specific information
will be requested in the notice.
Again, we're gonna ask for a
certification of accuracy and
completeness from the parties,
the notice and transaction and
information will be published
online, so public written public
comment will be invited, uh, and
And the main question for the
public comment is whether to
proceed with comprehensive
review. After preliminary
review, OSI based on whether we
see certain issues, uh, we'll
select transactions for
comprehensive review. Before
identifying transactions
requiring comprehensive review.
OSI will these are the
considerations. Will the
transaction have a negative
impact on the availability,
accessibility, affordability,
and quality of health care for
patients.
patients and other consumers,
and this will be in consultation
with HCA. Is it in the interest
of patients and consumers of
healthcare services, and this is
the uh one of the issues, uh
there will be an emergency
provision if there's a a
facility that uh could go under
if we don't allow it to happen
immediately, but sometimes
there's signs that they're going
they're in a financial crisis,
uh, so the question we're gonna
ask is, is the transaction
urgent urgently necessary to
maintain the solvency.
of the entity.
Comprehensive review triggers a
need to provide additional
material materials and
information, and this will be
this will be a lot of
information we ask if we go to
comprehensive views similar to
what we do with insurance
transactions. We will have a
public hearing and impacted
communities, and we will have
that formal determination, as we
said with put from the
healthcare authority.
Uh, to provide due process, we
want to emphasize that the
parties will receive notice of
the and if there's an intent to
disapprove, OSI is required to
conduct an administrative
hearing prior to an order
disapproving the transaction
following the hearing, OSI
again, I can go either way, we
may approve, approve with
conditions or disapprove, and
there will, and the party will
have a right to an
administrative hearing pursuant
to the administrative code.
Which includes the right to
appeal and judicial review.
Um, OSI has an established
system on the insurance side and
forms for regulated entities to
request that information be kept
confidential, or to redact
certain information, um, the
Oregon Healthcare Authority has
a process for redacting certain
information, but otherwise
publishes the notices and
attachments. We asked
stakeholders to review uh the
Oregon disclosure and and uh
share their thoughts with us.
Uh, the hospital association and
Presbyterian want to maintain
complete confidentiality of
disclosed documents and
information. Again, uh, our, our
thoughts are that we will create
a middle ground between total
transparency and the need to
protect commercially sensitive
material information.
Public review and comment
transaction notices will be
posted on our West side's
website, the public will have
the opportunity to submit their
comments, um, and, and I think
the focus of the comments will
be their concerns and whether we
should go forward to
comprehensive review and for, as
we said, for during a
comprehensive review, there will
be a public forum in at least
one community impacted by the
transaction. Uh, in reaction to
some of the comments.
last year, there will be no
criminal penalties, but were
still considering the nature of
the civil penalties for
violations of the Act and uh
Wherever we end up, there will
be significant monetary
penalties for a knowing failure
to provide notice before
finalizing a transaction.
And then the ongoing oversight,
I think that became very clear
at the uh the outreach meetings
that there needs to be ongoing
oversight after the transaction
is implemented.
Uh, and what's being discussed
isn't that we need one, it's
the, the time frames, uh, the,
this, it's range from uh 3 years
to forever.
we, we're gonna address these
concerns about changing
circumstances for conditional
approvals, and we're gonna
provide a process for parties.
To request modification or
termination of conditions.
And then this is really the uh
the issue of transparency
through the whole healthcare
system, uh, unrelated to notice
and review of transactions. We'd
like, we're asking a broad set
of health care providers to
disclose basic ownership
information and location of
healthcare sites, uh, the
disclosed information will
provide insight for
policymakers to identify health
care trends and potential
challenges and uh we proposed an
annual analysis and report to
the legislature regarding
Uh, what, what this filing, what
these filings have revealed.
Uh, I think our, uh, we're
working on a timeline, we're
hoping to uh have draft
legislation available.
Oh
Probably we were hoping for
before Thanksgiving, but uh, but
probably right after.
Um, and then, uh, in December
we're gonna go back to those
stakeholders and have them give
comments on the draft and in
January, we're hopefully we'll
have a revised graph taking in
all the stakeholder comments,
um.
And then written comments and
policy positions, we will look
at at any time.
Thank you for your time.
And if you have any questions,
any closing comments, uh,
Senator or Representative,
anything? OK, let's go to the
committee, um, uh, let's give
everybody a chance if you, we'll
give everybody the option of
asking a question, so we'll
start with you, Representative
Herndon.
3 minutes.
The enforcer says 3.
So thank you, Mr. Chair and with
and present us with respect to
these transactions that you're
gonna look at.
Are you also gonna be looking at
transactions that are going to
cause um
A medical facilities to be
closed, and I'll give you a
specific example, like in Las
Vegas when we lost all of the
birthing center or hospital in
OBGYN so that you would do
something so that those don't
close. Please let me know if
these type of transactions are
also included.
Mr. Chair Representative, yes, I
mean that stuff like that is
exactly what this is looking to
uh identify before it happens,
uh, so that if a transaction is
going to have an effect like.
Closing down all the labor and
delivery, uh, in a situation
like that, probably there would
be conditions placed on, uh,
approval of not getting rid of
those essential services, um, in
order to, to proceed with that.
Representative, can I ask a
question? Can I, uh, Mr. Chair,
Representative, may I, may I ask
a clarifying question. Are you
asking us to look at it even if
there isn't a transaction in
place. If there's a proposed
closing. That is exactly
correct.
I, that is also, I'm just
thinking that in the broader
sense of what you're doing that
we have to include that too and
maybe what you'll do even though
legislation does not usually
look back that you'll go back
and figure out how we get that
center reopened. So I just
present that to you.
That's, I think we're the
sponsors and I are nodding our
head. I think it's something we
should look at. All right. And
thank you very much. The only
other thing I would like to add
to this as you're looking at
this comprehensive transactions
that in the rural areas of
The women that don't have access
to 3D mammograms in New Mexico
does not have a mobile
mammography unit that has 3D
mammogram access on it. So as
you're looking at these
transactions and units and what
needs to be placed. I ask you to
please continue to look at those
items where there's an absence
of um medical provisions,
particularly in these types of
situations. Thank you. I, I
would say the outreach program
with a lot of things came up,
some of which we can handle on
the consolidation.
Bill and other things that are
really fundamental to healthcare
in New Mexico. So I, I, as we
told everyone, these are really
key issues. We're trying to, you
know, we're just taking one
piece of this, but it's, it's,
it's a piece of a much larger
situation that that.
It
You know, heartbreaking at
times. Thank you. My time is up.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Representative Chay. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman and thank you all
very much for this work. Um, I,
I guess I, I wonder at this
point you've done it remarkable.
But
amount of work since the session
or since the passage of this.
are you anticipating opposition
to what's going to be proposed
in 2025.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair,
Representative, uh, Leader
Chasey, I think, uh, yes, I
think we, we have worked really
hard to get to, um, at least
part way with all of the
commentary that we have
received.
Um, but I think we'll find that
out in the next, you know, 2
months as we prepare for the
session, um, and that's one
reason why the superintendent
has been so clear that we are
circulating the draft early so
that folks can really look at
what this means for the entities
that they work for or run or the
communities that they live in
and give those comments.
Thank you very much. I think my
time's up.
No. Oh, that was something else.
OK, what was that?
And
ultimately what your goal is.
is to
Try to protect areas that are.
Underserved from being further
underserved or or poorly
resourced or limited resources
from being further underserved,
was, would that be correct, Mr.
Chair and Leader Tracy, yes.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Senators to facts.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
everyone for your presentation
and working on this. I'm gonna
ask all my questions, then you
can just respond, um, for OSI,
are you gonna have enough uh
staff for an in-person meeting
with all of these entities. Uh,
secondly, what are we, what does
this bill do about hospitals
that have many
Ownership of more than one
hospital in the state and also
corporate ownership and 3rd, um,
I just want to make a statement
that we don't want to prohibit
provider clinics in any way and
the recruitment of providers to
our state. So that threshold
will be of interest to me. So
those are my questions and
comments.
Mr. Chair Representative, um, I
think we have enough staff to do
this 2nd level of stakeholder
interaction. We are going to be
asking, uh, I, I did at the LFC
hearing asked for increased
death if this bill is passed,
and I just want to point out
what we do with the insurance
companies as we uh we go out and
get expertise where we need it,
that is charged to the the the
acquirers.
And Mr. Chair, Senator, um,
you asked what will this do
with, with hospital?
Hospitals where there, there's
multiple ownership of multiple
hospitals and, and corporate
ownership, because all hospital
transactions will be covered by
this period, those would be
covered just as as any other one
would, and, and part of the
review that the superintendent
does is really, is with the
intention of getting to that
ultimate, finding out who in
that chain of ownership.
that actually is. Um,
But uh really, uh, Mr. Chair,
what I'm asking is, let's say
ex-hospital owns A, B, and C.
Are each A, B, and C gonna be
looked at separately or are they
gonna be looked at as part of X,
and if X is owned by Z in
another state, how does that all
interface.
And
I, I, I think we're having that
situation in one of our first
reviews, uh, and in the we're
very used to doing this in the
in the insurance uh holding
company law where you sort of
go, you go wide and you go up,
and then you go to the right,
and we ask, uh, we're we're
asking for biographical
affidavits outside of the
entities and they are outside of
New Mexico. So I think this is a
common thing that we've seen.
In the insurance side, so we
will be looking to the sides up
and who the ultimate uh
financial owner is.
Representative Chavez. Yeah, um,
thank you, Mr. Chair. So, um,
Senator Stefani's kind of asked
my question too, but I just kind
of wanted to ask it again just
to make sure. So you said that
in the insurance industry, you
go up, you go.
Right, you go,
So basically, just to give an
example, so Las Alamos Medical
Center.
Is owned by LifePoint. LifePoint
is owned by Apollo, right? And I
think Memorial will follow under
that too. So with that in that
example, you would get
information from all of those
entities.
Yes, perfect. OK, so then the
other question that I have is,
Would this cover behavioral
health hospitals?
Yes, yes.
Um, and then one of the issues
that's
Come before this committee is
The problem of entities not
being totally honest in terms of
what their financial situation
is, um, we, we had that
situation this week as a matter
of fact, um, and so if they're
only required to
Um, I forgot the word that you
used.
Sort of certify, um, you know,
what they're telling us is is
true and we have doubts about
it.
Will we be able to actually go
into their financial information
and look at that information for
ourselves so that so that we're
absolutely sure that what
they're telling us is correct,
Mr. Chair, Representative, yes,
that's really, I think why the
uh OSI has gotten involved
because that's something we
we're used to doing in the
insurance side, we're heavily on
the financial side and then
getting biographic biographic
affidavits, so we have the
background of the people that
are going to run it. I think
when
we shift, we're gonna shift over
to the HCA and sort of get their
input on the the other windows
we have, which is the essential
health services, the quality,
cost and accessibility of the
care. So that's why I think
we're gonna have a very strong
partnership.
Right, and then just uh uh one
more question, um, you, it, it
will cover all types of
hospitals license, right?
There's no hospital that can
possibly exist in New Mexico,
that wouldn't be licensed,
correct?
Mr. Chair Representative, yes,
in the original version in the
the SB 15 that passed last year,
there was an exception in there
for essentially UNMH and
state-owned hospitals. Uh, that
exception is, is not in this
one. So it's, it is all. Thank
you.
Representative Ferrari. Thank
you, Mr. Chair and thank you for
um this uh great deal to help
protect our um.
patients
I, um, along the same line of um
how deep and sideways, um, with
this also because a lot of um
hospital owners, um, also sell
off part of the.
Um, like provision of equipment
and things like that, so that
then they can pay that and make
more money. Um, will this also
look at um some of those uh
things that happen.
Mr. Chair Representative, I
don't know about equipment
sales, specifically I don't
think so. I don't, I don't think
that would be covered, but.
But real estate, certainly,
because a lot of times they do
these kind of real estate
holding companies where they're,
they're transferring those
interests. And so that, that
would be covered. Uh, but I
don't think equipment would be.
And I can edit when they move
providers as we saw it to joint
ventures, uh, that would be
covered as well.
Oh, good. OK, thank you. And Mr.
Chair, um,
And panel, uh, I was most
interested too in the
confidentiality that they want
to protect and Oregon, um, are
we adopting in this bill what
Oregon has done to redact and
predict.
Protect certain things, but also
give us, you know, the
transparency that we need.
That's the goal, uh, to, you
know, protect what we think is
commercially should be
protected. One of the key things
that everyone's concerned about
if the transactions announced
that the actual transaction
documents aren't made public
during the negotiations so
someone else sweeps in, so that
would probably if we'd probably
determine what we, we disclose
post transaction, but we're
gonna make sure that there's
enough information that the
public can uh will have enough
information to comment on what
they're concerned about, uh.
And that's really the way Oregon
does it with some redactions.
Thank you. And Mr. Chair, is my
time still?
OK.
um I was wondering also, uh, the
enforcement aspect you are
including the Attorney general,
uh, to help with that, um, what
If there was something that um
has gone awry. You don't want it
to go through.
Uh
What happened, Mr. Chair
Representative, we have spoke to
the Attorney General about 3 or
4 times about whether they
What kind of role they play, uh,
well, you know, we're still in
ongoing conversations with that,
um.
Uh, we are trying to have an
enforcement that's noncriminal
but powerful enough that uh
large entities will take notice,
but also have a concrete enough
so that you will understand what
what we're trying to do. So
we're trying to strike all those
things at once, um, I obviously,
I'm an independent agency, so I
have more ability to go to court
than traditional cabinet
agencies, but uh I acknowledge
and I'm sure everyone knows that
when
an attorney general goes to
enforce something, it will have
a lot more clout, uh, at least
public cloud and, and whatever
then then if the OSI does, uh,
but we're still, we're still in
conversations. I've spoken to
them and I think
Our sponsor has.
Great, I think that's important
to um be sure and have a way
once we find this all out to
possibly stop. So a transaction.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Ferrari. We'll go to
Representative Garcia next and
then back to the vice chairman.
Thank you, uh, as much, uh,
chairman.
Um
This proposal that you're
bringing forth, um, is it
retroactive? No.
Mr. Chair, uh, representative,
no. No.
Um
What about uh this uh chairman,
um.
What about hardships that um
Occur
After a transaction.
In this particular case, uh,
hospital going from community
base.
Board
Uh, to, uh, for profit.
Um
And
In the
process of consolidating.
Uh, the nu transition.
From community-based to for
profit.
Uh
The actions of
Uh, the new process has caused
Um, dire hardships.
Um
For example,
Um
Doing away with radiology.
Um,
Doing uh uh having a hardships
created.
Uh, in terms of surgery.
By the new.
Process
Eliminating the only surgeon in
this community.
To where now simma chairman.
Um, individuals have to go.
To Texas.
And into Colorado.
To um
Be provided those surgeries.
So how does this proposal kind
of deal with those.
Inhuman
Kind of scenarios.
That are created by a
transaction that really
Plundered house services instead
of improving health services.
So Mr. Chair Representative.
For the circumstances where that
has already happened,
unfortunately, I, this would not
reach that and, and I think
there might be constitutional
issues with trying to kind of
retroactively apply to those,
but going forward, let's say in
doing in applying for the
transit for approval for the
transaction. They represented to
the superintendent. We're going
to keep all those essential
services, radiology and
everything. If they then don't
going for after they have
committed to do so.
Then there will be a significant
penalties that, that they will
face for doing so. Or let's say
they came and asked for approval
for a transaction, and they
said, we want to get rid of all
our radiology. And the
superintendent said, Well, I'm
only going to approve this
transaction if you agree not to
do that.
But then they go forward and
they do it anyhow, again, there
would be, uh, they would, they
would face significant
penalties, and I'll be honest
with the committee, we are so
we're still working with that
penalty section. We're still
trying to figure out how to make
it a meaningful penalty, um,
without, you know,
and some people to prison. I and
going, going down a criminal
road, uh, and so to the extent
that the committee members have
have suggestions on that. We
are, we are absolutely open to
to that input.
Thank you Mr. Ma.
Thank you, Representative
Garcia. Representative Thompson.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you all for your hard work. It's
just
dense and I know how much work
went into it. So my concern, and
it's been brought up by several
folks is that um hiding money is
seems to be the the thing to do
and calling it this and calling
it that and making sure that no
one knows what's this and that,
and we've had that happen to
this committee, this interim
multiple times. And, and I have
said, you know, if you don't, if
you don't want to.
give us your financial
information that we can't give
you money. I mean, that only
makes sense. We found out we
were severely lied to in some
legislation that passed last
year. So, uh, that, that's my
real concern about this, and
then in your, in your
presentation it said
trade secret trade secrets,
proprietary info or data privacy
and data security concerns will
be um
I, I'm afraid, and I'm not
saying you need to change this.
I'm not saying this is wrong.
I'm just saying.
That's, that's a lot that they
can hide under, and, and I know
you're smart and you're gonna
figure this out, but, but it's,
it's, um, it's just been so
obvious to this committee that
that we're getting um
The, the wool pulled over our
eyes and we as a committee have
decided no more. So,
I love what you're doing and um
let's just make sure that um
I mean, I, I don't know, I know
they have, you know, bars of
lawyers to get ahead of us just
like tobacco does, you know,
every time we change something
in the law about tobacco, they
just changed the name or they
changed the percentage or they
changed the, so, uh, best wishes
to, to really get him and um I'm
assuming this is a work in
progress even after it's passed,
it will be a work in progress to
see, but go get them. Thank you,
Representative Thompson. We'll
go to Representative Martinez.
and work our way back this way.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, my
questions, I think will be a
little bit more friendly.
Um,
I'm, I'm curious.
You, you talked about all the,
the meetings with all the
stakeholders. Do you, do you
have a list of all the
stakeholders?
And is that available?
Um, Mr. Chair, um,
Representative, yes, we do, and
We can make it available.
I'd, I'd be interested to see uh
what stakeholders have been
involved in this. Um,
And I, I'm, I'm confused about
the overall issue, what is it
that we're trying to solve? Are
we trying to solve
Corporations
Bringing money in, investing in
local hospitals.
Are we afraid that these
They're gonna
I, I'm, I'm really having a hard
time wrapping my head around
what we're trying to solve here,
Mr. Chairman and Whip Martinez,
um.
The center of this bill is
protecting access, affordability
and quality of healthcare. So
that is what this whole process
is structured to protect, and
those are the factors that the
superintendent will elevate as
she's doing these reviews. It is
not necessarily about the source
of funds or the types of
entities that are involved. It's
about at the end of the day, if
before the transaction this
service was available after the
transaction goes forward, will
that service continue to be
available, for example, um, and
the other thing I would say is
also providers have been a big
part of the input to this
process and providers, uh, are
the ones that often feel the
most immediate change.
pre-transaction and
post-transaction because they're
they may be dealing with a new
set of managers, a new set of
policies, so, um, that's also a
big part of what's built in.
Thank you for that. Uh, it's
just listening to the, to the
questions, it just seemed like.
It was more anti
Corporation coming in.
So I, I appreciate the
explanation. My last question.
How many more FTE if this
passes, how many more FTE are
you gonna need to
Actually run the program.
Mr. Chair Representative, I
think we've asked for 3, lawyer
and some business merger
expertise, but the the way this
really works on the insurance
side, which is what we
anticipate we'll be working here
is that uh we have people that
can provide oversight and then
we pick the experts, the
financial experts or what other,
you know, in our case, the
actuarial experts, uh, who are
hired at the expense of the
acquirer, uh, and that was
discussed in S.
15 as well.
My time is up, but I, I, uh.
Totally confused about what you
just said, but I'd like to maybe
have a discussion with you.
Offline. No, go ahead and ask a
follow up right now if it would
help. Go ahead.
What do you mean it's gonna be
at the cost of
So, uh, Mr. Chair
Representative, the way it works
in the insurance industry is
that the insurance departments
usually have experts that
understand mergers and
acquisitions that have had some
experience, but they don't have
the team of lawyers or or people
behind them to sort of be on an
equal footing with the acquirers
who are usually large
corporations or big, you know,
with lots of uh expertise uh
available either hired or
in-house.
What, what's your, what we do is
we go out and we find experts in
these areas, whether it's law
firms, in our case, actuaries,
you know, people that understand
mergers and acquisitions,
bankers, and we, we, we in this
bill we're gonna tell the
acquired this these are the
experts that we're using, uh,
and we're, and we're uh going to
hire them to review your
transaction so that we're on an
equal footing, and that's how
it, it usually works. We did
have a
conversation last year, would
you, if you, Mr. Chair
Representative, you wouldn't
mind a little anecdote, uh, that
where they basically uh the I
think the hospitals proposed
that OSI get $10,000 to sort of
do this, and I said, you give me
10% of what you're spending and
I'll be fine. So, uh, you know,
we, we do understand that, that
inequality.
But the key is really having
experts in OSI that had the
oversight and know where to go
and who to hire.
And review the materials, and I
promise this is the last
follow-up question. When you say
higher, are you talking about a
contract or are you talking
about a full-time employee.
Uh, Mr. Chairs representative
contract.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I
appreciate the indulgence.
Representative Jones.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
presenters. I'm trying to wrap
my mind around this too. I have
a question.
Uh, more of a statement, but uh
a concern and uh it kind of take
off on on a lot of the other
questions. You mentioned a
situation where you have um you
have um a hospital, for
instance, that
That an investor comes in and
they don't see that OBGYN for
instance, is sustainable, uh,
uh, for whatever reason, and
according to a business model
would be unsustainable, then how
would
We as a state,
prevent oversight or or work
with that entity or work with
any entity who's willing to
invest, since we do have such a
high percentage of private
equity firms working here in New
Mexico, we can't afford to lose
access, work with any entity
that's willing to invest to make
sure that they keep OBGYN.
I don't really understand how
that happens with, you know how
government can
Intervene and say, you as a
business, you need to keep your
OBGYN services even if it
doesn't.
Make money.
And Mr. Chair Representative, I
mean, that's kind of the point
of this bill is to give
government the ability to say,
if you want to come in to New
Mexico, and, and we, we welcome
investment and we want, we want
healthcare to come here. But if
you're gonna do that and make
healthcare worse for New
Mexicans, for your own profit,
and that's not OK. So if you
want to come in here, please do,
but keep those essential
services that New Mexicans are
absolutely dependent on, and
will, will
do poorly without, uh, in doing
so, or else we're not going to,
or else, or else you are not a
good fit for New Mexico. We want
investment. We want people to
come here, but not if it's going
to damage us for their profit.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you. I, I understand what you're
saying. I just don't, I want us
to be careful that we don't
create a situation that means we
have no investors who want to
work in New Mexico and invest
their funds in New Mexico. I,
I'm sure, you know, I'm glad you
think there's a way to do that,
and I hope there is a way to do
that. We need to keep our OBGYN
services. We're fortunate in my
district, the only hospital I
have provides good care, uh, and
they are
privately owned. They even
expanding uh care to provide um
urgent care instead of using our
emergency room, they're doing a
lot of good things, so I'm
really happy to have them. I
don't want them to be in it or
any of our hospitals to be in a
situation where um
People investors just decide not
to look at New Mexico. So I
guess the balance is my concern.
But thank you so much for your
um presentation. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thanks, Representative Senator
Pinto.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. Thank you for
your presentation.
The
So
I think for me, it's more of a
comment because when we talk
about the Indian Health Service
and the government entity,
providing that.
There's still a lot of work to
be done. So we're looking to do
this as a government entity to
run the health service.
But
You
How good is it gonna be?
I mean there's still a lot of
catching up that has to be done,
um, funding has to be really
there to do it.
To make sure there aren't any
shortfalls.
But
You know, it's
There's a lot of nose in the
anxious um entity. So I hope
that um
You know, that, that's also
looked into because we talk
about really trying to do no
harm. Um, there's harm that has
been done by government entity
providing health or trying to
provide health services. So
thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thanks, Senator, uh, Senator
Lopez.
Oh, thank you, Mr. Chair, and I
apologize for being late, um,
I'm just reading through Mr.
Chair, at this point, so I'll
probably have more questions as
we get closer to session, uh,
but just quickly, does this um
include like the boutiques.
And I call him boutiques, those
are the smaller entities that
provide outpatient surgery
services and such, there are
some of those facilities around
in Mexico.
Um, that I know we've heard over
the years, a few years anyway,
of some concerns about um, you
know, services provided.
So Mr. Chair, Senator, so for
those kind of boutique folks,
they would have to meet certain
financial threshold thresholds
of the parties involved for it
to cover them, um, but we also,
for, for a truly for an
independent provider practice
where it, it, you know,
We are, we are physicians who
own the practice and we are
practicing there. Uh, they are,
are largely going to be, be
exempt from, from this, because
that's not what we're worried.
We're not worried about the, the
independent practices who are
here and who are functioning,
uh, but for like those
outpatient kind of boutique
folks, as long as they are
meeting those financial
thresholds, yes, they would be
covered under this. But if
they're not, they're not meeting
those financial thresholds, they
would not.
Sorry, just a question, Mr.
Chair, cause we've heard some
stories.
Um, and then Mr. Chair, Madam
co-chair.
This private equity stuff is
really, you know, filtering
through many different aspects
of everywhere we look. So to me
that raises questions in my
mind.
Thank you.
Thanks, Senator, um,
Representative Cates.
Thank you, chair.
And thank you very much for your
presentation, um, and I was one
of those stakeholders. I
appreciate uh the, the road trip
around the state, uh, as you
gathered stakeholders
information, and I want to thank
my colleagues for uh some great
questions today that really
covered a lot of um what I would
like to bring up, just um just
to recap, the concern why this
bill is being presented, is that
We may be vulnerable for
monopolies to have control over
all of our medical services
within
Our communities that could
Control wages and access and
availability to patients. And
so, although we always encourage
investment and opportunity here
in New Mexico, we want to ensure
that we are not under that sort
of vulnerability. Is that a fair
statement to say with this bill
is addressing.
Mr. Chair Representative Kate's
yes, the competitiveness of the
healthcare system is also an
important part of this.
Thank you so much. How many uh
states uh have a similar bill or
some similar protective measures
within uh
They're either their
constitution or their laws.
Hey
I'm forgetting the exact number.
It was a handful when we started
this, and I know 6 or 7 states
are looking at it and some are
passing it right now, but I can
go back and get it for you. It
is a trend to really get
oversight. It's a national
trend, and they're even looking
at it at the federal level. Oh,
Mr. Chair, sorry, I represented
one other, one other thing I
might say, it's beyond
monopolies because it's really
people that are coming into the
state. Maybe they don't have,
you know, full control of the
area. We are worried about.
op ol ies but they're they're
powerful with a lot of uh
capital behind them and uh we
want to make sure even we want
people to come in, we want them
to make a profit, but we don't
want to make it at the expense
of the, the, uh, the access and
quality of the health care. OK,
thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and
thank you, Superintendent. So,
um, I, I have a couple of just
things concerns that haven't
already been addressed. And, and
one is, is as you stated this,
this sounds to me like
People's lives are in danger as
as Representative Garcia has
brought up the time and time
again, whether it's not access
or availability to healthcare.
So if that's true, why is
criminal, uh, you know, criminal
solutions, a criminal
prosecution, not on the table.
And Mr. Chair Representative,
um,
Because part of the negotiating
process. Fair enough. Thank you,
Senator, and, and thank you, uh,
Mr. Chair.
I, I have one more quick
question. So I would just, it's
more of a statement, um, I
appreciate you looking at and
I'm speaking this actually to
the AG's office who's I hope is
listening right now as well. It
protections of whistleblower
laws uh regarding these uh
transitions and mergers and
acquisitions, but I would
further state that the
protection of whistleblower laws
amongst our medical um
communities, uh, for all
scenarios.
are drastically important. We
are a rule state and where if
you are a professional
practicing in the area and uh
you, there's uh for some reason
that corporation does not want
you talking about whatever that
you have kids in school, it's
not like you go down the street
and we get another RN job and so
our whistleblower protections
have to be especially, and I
know that we think.
whistleblower as um maybe our,
our entry level or our
mid-level, um, workers, but
these professionals are very
much isolated and there may only
be one opportunity for work in a
place that they've already
invested, so I would strongly
encourage the AG's office to
beef up that whistleblower
protection, and thank you very
much.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Representative Thompson, a quick
follow up. Yes, thank, thank
you, Mr. Chair. So in the in the
slides I read um the hospital
association and Presbyterian
want to maintain complete
confidentiality.
So that's worrisome. Um, so when
you talk about confidentiality,
is that confidentiality in terms
of what the public can see or in
terms of what the office of the
super, I mean, do they get to
decide what you get to see, OK,
Miss Sheriffs, I don't know,
Superintendent gets to see
everything, the confidentiality
only goes to what is released to
the public. OK, that's perfect.
Thank you so much. And, uh, Mr.
Chair Representative, and if
they don't let us see something
or hide something, that's where
some of the
attestation, uh, you know,
enforcement or penalties come.
Um
Yeah, well, let me ask you a
couple of quick questions, but,
but first, thank you for working
on this and getting this ready
for introduction. I think it's
really gonna be an important
step for the state to take. Um.
The focus is on the facilities
rather than and and the services
that are provided at those
rather than the, than the
systems. Is that, is that
correct? So, for example, it
does not include or would it
include PBMs.
HMOs.
Um
Things that don't really have a
physical location, but that are,
have become crucial elements in
the healthcare delivery system.
Chair, I, I think so. Like if
there is an HMO that is
acquiring, um, a facility, then
yes.
Yes, How about if it, if an
equity firm is acquiring an HMO.
Mr. Chair, you know, I, I think
so, but I need to look at our
definition of healthcare
provider and healthcare
services.
And, and the PBM so that would
be the other,
uh, uh, Mr. Chair, we have
authority over PBMs at OSI and
how they operate, uh, this
really is focused on where the
where the medical care is being
delivered.
Uh, we have authority over HMOs
and in the sense of licensing
and whatever as an insurance,
yet regulator. What I'm getting
at is I just want to make sure
you have the authority. I know
you can regulate how the PBMs
are operating, but if somebody
takes over a PBM with the, you
know, with the intention of, of
Mr. Chair, that would be under
the insurance law, if they're
taking over PBM we get to look
because they regulated to this
similar to what we already have
that, OK, OK.
That's good. Um,
Check into the HMOs too, cause I
think that would be, I mean, I,
I
The reach of the private equity
dynamic is, is extensive and,
and you don't want to
Suddenly find out that we
haven't covered it when we might
have if we deal with that
definition accurately now, Mr.
Chair, I think that's the
traditional insurance review,
but I will confirm that. OK,
very good. Um, no, not yet.
Yeah, no, not yet. Um,
I have a suggestion about
leveraging, uh, you know, or, or
penalty to use a brutal term,
but what you might do in case
they screw up.
Um, we, we have been in recent
years, pasted several bills
designed to shore up the
financing of hospitals,
particularly rural hospitals,
but, but they also benefit from
for the big large urban area
hospitals. Uh, you, we might
amend some of those bills to
make it impossible for them to
participate in those programs if
They are not fully compliant
with, with what it legislation
you come up with, that might be
part of a of a
Of a stick as well as, uh, you
know, uh.
Whatever other penalties you
might be able to impose. You
wouldn't necessarily need to
impose a fine if by failing to
comply with this law, they're
then not eligible for the rural
hospital initiative or the tax
policy that we just uh opened up
the door for. They're gonna make
hundreds of millions off of
that.
And, and that might be a much
more uh
Penalty then
Any fine would be, um, who is
it? Senate Representative
Chavez, you had a follow-up
question.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Yeah, so,
so one of the other things that
I thought about too was
There are situations where
hospitals will hire a private
equity firm to do.
Um
So I'll give you an example
that's probably easier, so, um,
a hospital hired a private
equity firm that would provide
the ER services.
Within a particular hospital.
So the hospital still sort of
ran the ER, but the private
equity firm um hired the docs
and was responsible for them. So
with that, with that situation
be covered?
Mr. Chair Representative, yes,
perfect. Thank you.
Well, good. Well, thank you for
working on this. I think we're
all eager to see the, the final
version as it emerges from the
process and um
And good luck. So then we'll
move on to the second item that
you're going to talk about uh
Madam Superintendent, and that
is the um an update on the drug
transparency Act.
And the
Health insurance, mental health
coverage. Yeah, both of those
things. So, thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm gonna
have my colleagues lead those
conversations. Uh, we have via,
I canniva, who's the head of our
life and health division.
And we have Alejandro Palmer,
our pharmacist, who's gonna be
talking to you about the uh drug
transparency and, and again,
because we did get such support,
we're able to hire and keep
these professionals. So thank
you all for that.
Very good. Thank you.
So go ahead, who's gonna start?
Valerie, you're gonna start?
Good morning, um, Mr. Cha,
members of the committee, um,
thank you for the opportunity.
Does everyone have the slides
since we.
OK
Thank you for the opportunity to
provide an oversight of OSI's
implementation of Senate Bill
273, the state mental Health
Benefits Law and HB 33, the drug
price transparency Act. Um, I
would like to also think Mr.
Chair, members of the committee
for your continued support for
OSI and ensuring that all New
Mexicans have access to robust
quality healthcare coverage at
affordable cost. Today we'll
provide a very brief
Overview of the key initiatives
related to mental health
coverage under the federal
mental health parity and Equity
Act MAPPA, enhancements
introduced by the state Senate
bill 273 mental health, um,
health insurance, mental health
coverage and House Bill 33, the
prescription drug.
Transparency Act and provide an
update on the implementations of
those.
Historically, there have been
significant inequities in how
mental health and substance use
disorder benefits have been
treated in comparison to medical
and surgical benefits. Behavior
healthcare was often subjected
to stricter limitations, health
plans were allowed to restrict
the number of covered visits
impose greater out of pocket
costs, and even exclude coverage
for services altogether. This
created a system where
individuals needn't be.
behavioral healthcare is greater
barriers to care that those
seeking medical and surgical
treatment.
these disparities led to poor
health outcomes and widened the
gap in care for vulnerable
populations.
You're probably familiar with
the federal law, uh, mental
health parity law which requires
um
Which requires parity in
financial requirements,
quantitative treatment
limitations and non quantitative
treatment limitations. For
example, plants cannot impose
higher deductibles and
co-payments or co-insurance for
behavior health benefits than
for medical surgical benefits.
Uh, plants also cannot impose
stricter limits on visits or
treatment duration and scope of
care must be equivalent for both
behavior health and medical
surgical care.
plants must also apply processes
like utilization review and step
therapy requirements in an
equitable manner.
Despite the improvements created
by the Federal Mental Health
Parity law in New Mexico, we
face staggering challenges.
Suicide deaths have been
increasing in both New Mexico
and the US with suicide date
rates in New Mexico, at least
50% higher than you US US rates
over the past 20 years.
New Mexico has the highest
alcohol related death rate in
the country, the negative.
Consequences of excessive
alcohol use in our state are not
limited to this, but also
include domestic violence out of
crimes, poverty and
unemployment. Nationally, one
in, that's among adults ages 20
to 64 is attributed to alcohol.
In New Mexico, this ratio is 1
in 6 deaths. This is not just
the statistic, but a public
health crisis.
We ranked 6 nationally for drug
related overdose and that's a
sign of the ongoing and
devastating effects of substance
use disorders. New Mexico ranked
16th, Indonesian or access to
mental health in 2024. The
demand for services far exceeds
the supply of services available
to New Mexicans, and many
individuals in need of care
simply do not have access due to
workforce shortages, geo
Traffic barriers in systematic
challenges.
Introduced by senators Hickey,
Cori Humel, and Steinborne SB
273, the health insurance mental
health coverage coverage law
costing 2023 with an effective
date of January 1.
This legislation is a
significant advancement in
ensuring the behavior of
behavioral health parity,
building on federal mafia
standards closing the gaps to
improve equity for New Mexicans
and ensure that they get the
care they need when they need
it.
The state law aligns with
federal requirements provide
state level behavior, health
coverage mandates and parity
requirements. It aims to enhance
access to behavioral health
services and benefits, removing
the requirement for prior
authorizations for specified
treatments. The laws requires
insurance companies to apply
generally recognized standards
of care in evaluating medical
necessity of services in
coverage decisions.
protects patients from arbitrary
or discriminatory barriers to
receiving necessary treatment,
strengthens OSI's role in
monitoring health plan
compliance with parity and
coverage requirements, expands
our ability to enforce penalties
for non-compliance and promote
insurer accountability.
It also requires
Um, health insurance carriers to
provide data to support OSI's
annual legislative support,
which enhances transparency
around compliance with network
adequacy, utilization review and
behavior health coverage
standards.
As B273 builds on the Federal
law and incorporates it
enhancements aiming to remove
barriers to behavior or
healthcare, ensuring timely
access, equitable coverage, and
symptom-wide improvements. It
prohibits prior authorizations
for most in-network behavior
health services and prohibits
decisions or modifications
approved.
Once they're approved, uh, in
order to reduce delays and
uncertainty. The bill also
requires equal reimbursement
rates for behavior health and
medical health.
providers to support a robust
provider network.
And last but not least, it
mandates coverage for out of
network behavior healthcare in
network cost sharing levels when
in network care is unavailable
in order to promote equity for
patients.
I always thought was taken in
proactive measures to ensure
compliance with the mental
health parity, uh, law on a
federal level as part as our
responsibilities, uh, under this
law here the key actions that we
have taken, um, we incorporated
mental health parity reviews
into the qualified health plan
form review process to ensure
the parity is evaluated at the
earlier stages of plan approval.
Insurers were required to submit
mental health parity compliance
stat stations certifying their
adherence with the federal
parity standards. They were also
directed to develop and upon
request, submit to our sight
comprehensive, non-quantitative
treatment limitation and
quantitative treatment
limitation comparative analysis,
which is a crucial component of
demonstrating compliance.
It was like recruited
contractors and specialized
would specialized expertise in
the audits to conduct detailed
review, enhancing scope and
depth of compliance evaluations.
Oh, I say leverage, federal
grant funding to hire those
professionals develop training
materials and templates for
insurers, um.
Provide um detailed guidance,
uh, for standardized mafia
reporting, uh, and engaged in
two phase comprehensive review.
is one include a comprehensive
reviews of insurers written
policies and procedures related
to benefit design, provider
network development and
utilization management
practices. These two expanded
claims review to assess whether
the insurance practices align
with their written procedures
ensuring that they're being
implemented in operations.
As a result, all size
contractors identified few
potential violations.
Data completeness issues related
to utilization management, um,
were indicated through claims,
um, where prior authorizations
were missing procedure codes
indicating gaps in comprehensive
data collection. Denial records,
log denial codes indicating that
the data that was provided to
our side was insufficient or
compromised claims data also
indicated the prior
authorizations for behavior
health are being.
applied more frequently than
prior authorizations for medical
and surgical benefits.
Contractors also identify
potential inequities in how
insurers evaluate behavior
health claims compared to
medical and surgical claims,
higher rate of behavior health
claim denied due to, due to
provide a credentialing issues
and no similar trend was
observed for medical surgical
denial claims.
Potential explanation for this
observation is the providers
we're seeing patients and claims
were being filed before the
credentialing process was
complete.
Um
And, uh, uh, another observation
was that prior authorizations
were not consistently applied in
such cases, leading to automatic
denials.
Data analytics suggested network
inadequacies. Claims reflect
that high rate of out of network
claims and authorization
requests for behavior health.
The data also showed a high
number of behavior health claim
records denied referenced
credentialing of the providers
versus no instances noted on the
medical and surgical site.
Potential explanation is again,
the providers process for
contracting, uh, uh, was in the
process, but maybe in the
process of contracting
proceeding to see patients prior
to the credentialing process
being concluded.
Um, data also suggested delays
in credentialing and
inconsistent reimbursement rates
and um this initial review of
the Feder Mapi
claims is the framework for
future audits and sets the
expectations and compliance
monitoring.
The OSI mental health party team
is in the process of validating
findings from the contractor's
final reports. This is a
crucial, crucial step before sur
issuing corrective action plans.
Um, and assessing penalties for
insurers who are found to be
noncompliant.
A key challenge we're facing is
that the final reports currently
like the specificity required to
issue violations and penalties
with certainty. This gap in
detail must be addressed to
ensure that our enforcement
actions can you just explain
that that.
Previous paragraph because I,
I'm not sure exactly what it
gets at. Currently specificity
is not available in the final
reports.
Which is a critical component
for issuing violations and
penalties. So what's missing?
What's the specificity you don't
get now that we need to get,
make sure you do get.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, thank you for this
question, um, and absolutely the
data which was provided to our
side showed inconsistency. And
this is where the uncertainty
comes. We are not sure if the
data that was provided was
faulty or if there were actual
compliance issue, and in order
to ensure that we have
fundamental and the right to
issue penalties and there are
definite noncompliance issues
we're going back and double
checking all.
of the findings to ensure that
so that we know how to proceed.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, uh, there's, there's
a.
You're stuck with my legal
background, but there's a one
way to look for trends and to
find out what's going on when
you really want to take
enforcement action, you really
have to have.
a, a deeper dive, and that's
really what we're setting
ourselves up for. We've been, I
think we've been pointed in the
right direction for where the
targets are, and now we're gonna
go deeper and more really
complete audits. It's more the
level that we're talking about.
So, so you
You have sufficient authority
now, it's just
You don't need any of this, you
can get at it if, if, if, if, if
you have the resources, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
correct. OK, I'm sorry, I'm
sorry for interrupting, but I
wasn't really clear what, what
that meant.
Mr. Chai, thank you for your
question. Not a problem, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee.
The problem is the law
department is telling us that we
have to be more specific to be
successful, and that's what
we're doing. So, um,
Our immediate focus is to review
and pinpoint noncompliant
documentation files and data
from the carriers. This will
form the foundation for our
corrective action plans.
Once noncompliance is
identified. It's in essential to
ensure that the carriers receive
clear and detailed guidance for
the corrective action plans so
that they understand the
specific measures they need to
improve.
will work to resolve the gaps in
the contractor's reports
ensuring that all violations are
validated with precision. This
will enable us to finalize those
reports confidential confidently
corrective action plans with
outline concrete actionable
steps for carriers to achieve
compliance, addressing each
violation truly.
Or unresolved violations, we'll
assess whether penalty should be
imposed uring accountability and
adherence to mental health
parity laws. Senate Bill 273 has
allowed oversight to
significantly increase our
staffing and expertise to handle
the growing demands of men of
behavior health parity
enforcement specifically, we
have added 4 contractors and 3
key staff positions. We have
high2 program coordinators. We
have
Uh, a, a mental health party
designated attorney and OSI was
able to hire a data analyst.
Um, after extensive stakeholder
input, um, oversight published a
detailed bulletin providing
clear guidance on compliance
expectations for SB 273,
including policies for review of
utilization management, provider
networks, and benefit designs.
These includes mandated carriers
to include evidence of coverage
language for behavior health
services, issuing a
comprehensive timeline for
compliance data requests for the
202.
4 laner, including templates or
some of the operational
compliance plans like network
adequacy uni.
As well as guidance and
acceptance generally recognized
standards of care for
determining medical necessity,
ensuring the insurers base their
decisions or recognize best
practices.
Um, OSI also purchased data
analytics software which will
help us with rock climb uh
claims data analysis, um, and we
have began staff training.
Finally, we've developed a
robust data planning process to
identify the exact metrics
required to evaluate compliance
with SBQ 73. This ensures that
our approach remains
data-driven, allowing us to
identify trends enforce
compliance effectively and most
importantly protect consumers.
In January of next year I will
issue the first data request to
assess compliance with both the
federal and state mental health.
Coverage law. This is the
crucial milestone as it is the
groundwork for ensuring robust
compliance moving forward in the
spring and summer will begin
reviewing the 2026 plan year,
uh, benefit plans which will be
sold off and on like on and off
the health insurance exchange
and ensure compliance with.
Mental health parity laws.
Uh, disaligns with our
regulatory oversight cycle and
ensures that the carriers are
meeting both federal and state
requirements in advance of
planning implementations.
Oversight also monitoring
federal rules related to mental
health parity, and we will draft
and issue a bulletin to notify
insurers of any changes and
outline their responsibilities.
Um,
OI will continue to enhance its
methods for assessing mental
health, uh, and, uh, substance
use disorder party. Our goal is
to leverage these advancements
to better serve New Mexico's
communities by promoting
equitable access to care will be
issuing annual data calls, um,
and, um.
Engage in public outreach, uh,
as well as post comments and
FAQs on our website, um, during
the 2025 year.
With this, that will turn over
to my colleague Alejandro
Amparan for an update on HP 33
implementation.
TBR.
Mr. Chair members of the
committee, my name is Alejandro
Aparran. I'm the director of
pharmacy benefits and drug
compliance for OSI and I'm here
to talk to you briefly about the
implementation of the
prescription drug price
transparency Act, otherwise
known as HB 33, that was passed
earlier this year.
A lack of transparency in drug
pricing models and strategies
utilized by these entities
within the drug chain is a hot
topic around the nation as it
stands more than half of the
states have similar laws related
to transparency.
Now, if you would move forward
to the timeline displayed in
front of you, you'll see that
with regard to implementation,
well, the law doesn't go into
effect until the first of
January of 2025, right? So we
are currently in the
implementation stage designing a
system. We're engaging
stakeholders and putting that
system into place so that
entities who are required to
report data to us can do so by
the May 1st, 2025 deadline.
The first annual report for the
legislature will be ready by
December 31, 2025 as required by
the act. So why does this
matter? Well, the cost of
medications only moves in one
direction, right? And it's
important to understand the
factors that are going into
these increases. As it stands,
there's a lack of visibility
within the drug supply chain.
The supply chain itself is a lot
more complicated, as I'm sure
you're aware than most people
think.
Uh, a given consumer may think I
get my drugs from pharmacy who
in turn buys it from a
wholesaler, I'm sorry, buys it
from a manufacturer, which.
As you all are aware, it's not
that simple. Uh, we have our
wholesalers, we have our
distributors, we have our PBMs,
um, that kind of act as
intermediaries or middlemen, if
you will. And honestly, it's
even more complicated than that
we have third party logistics
providers, right? We have
pharmacy services administration
organizations. These all
Our chains within that supply.
So it's complicated, right?
Now the Transparency Act again
is part of a national trend
toward addressing pharmaceutical
pricing challenges. Uh, as a
brief refresher to the act, we
are gathering data from 4
entities within the drug supply
chain, those being
manufacturers, a pharmacy
service administrative
organizations. I'm gonna refer
to them as PSAOs going forward.
Uh, health insurers and the
pharmacy benefit managers of the
PBMs, right? I do want to note
that while the PSAOs are
registered with OSI, we do not
regulate them, and with regard
to drug manufacturers, we do not
register OSI does not register
license or regulate these
entities, which are by far the
largest group of reporters with
the most robust reporting
requirement within this act.
Now, that being said, we have
been approached by numerous
manufacturers or entities that
manage compliance for the
manufacturers.
Indicating an interest and or
willingness in complying with
the requirements of the Act.
So
Some positive news. In addition,
the data provided by the
aforementioned entities, um, OSI
is required to gather and
present data specific to New
Mexico and how it affects New
Mexico residents, I'll go into
more detail in a bit.
There is also a component of
enforcement along with some
enforcement concerns that again
I will talk about shortly.
Now, as a brief refresher of
what we are requiring from these
four entities.
Uh, with regard to the drug
manufacturers, we are requiring
them to report any medications
with the wholesale cost of more
than $400 that have increased
more than a certain percentage
threshold over the last 1 to 2
calendar years. For these drugs,
we are requiring the
manufacturers to report
information such as the direct
costs associated with
manufacturing, marketing,
distribution, total revenue,
annual price increases over the
past 5 years. Any agreements
that they may have in place that
will delay the
marketing of a generic version
of their drug, among other
things. So,
The pharmaceutical services, I'm
sorry, pharmacy services
administrative organizations, we
are requiring them to report a
sample of drugs with the highest
reimbursement rates and any
changes in those reimbursement
rates. It's, they're 25 top.
For the pharmacy benefit
managers of PBMs were requiring
them to report the aggregate
amount of rebates and fees that
they collect from manufacturers.
In addition, we're requiring
them to report what happened to
these rebates, where they
Passed on to the manufacturers
where they give in to the
consumers at the point of sale,
were they retained by the PBM
directly, they have to report
all of this. Now, it is
important to note that PBMs are
exempt from identifying any
specific health insurer or the
price changed for any specific
drug or class of drugs, and they
are also exempt from
Uh, any specifics with regard to
their rebates or their fees in
terms of drug or specific drug
class. So everything coming from
the PBMs is in the aggregate.
And this aligns with other
transparency laws around the
country.
So the thing you're probably
most interested in, where do we
currently stand?
Well, we have initiated
conversations with the vendor to
develop the contract and the
data collection.
As I previously stated, we've
already engaged numerous
advocacy groups and third
parties that manage transparency
on behalf of drug manufacturers
to gather input on
implementation.
We've discussed how this data
has been collected in other
states and we are taking those
recommendations into
consideration. We've spoken to
regulatory bodies that have
similar laws such as Utah and
Minnesota to determine how they
have implemented their systems.
I also have an open call with
Oregon right after Thanksgiving,
uh, because they have a very,
very similar collection
requirement as we do.
Um, you know, though the data
collection is not due until May
1st of next year, ideally, we
want to have a pre-submission to
get a 2nd round of stakeholder
input to evaluate what works
best for them and how the data
collection system can be
optimized.
I think what I'll do is I'll
conclude with where we're
headed.
So we're targeting early March
of 2025 is the published date of
industry guidance for those that
have to report to us.
We have a target date of March
31st for full implementation of
the reporting system with the
first submission date again
being May 1st, 2025, as outlined
in the Act.
Uh, we will prepare the
legislative report for the first
round of data, it will be ready
for you by December 31st of
2025, again, according to the
act.
Um
Mr. Chair members of the
committee, that concludes my
presentation. I would like to
thank you for your time and open
the floor to any questions that
you may have or any concerns
that you would like to share
with me.
Thank you.
Thank you, thank you all. Um,
it's, I just, I made a comment
to the vice chairman while you
were giving your report. It's so
refreshing to hear.
Actual implementation of laws or
bills that we've introduced in
past.
I wish it weren't as rare as it
is to hear actually a department
reporting to us that here's you,
you asked us to do this and here
we're doing it even a little bit
ahead of time. So I think uh it,
it's, it's been a refreshing
presentation. Um, any, any
questions from any of the
committee members?
We'll start with Representative
Martine. 2 minutes.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, um, I just have, I
have two questions. um related
on page 16.
Uh, talking about the uh.
Complexity of
The prescription drug.
Issue.
Why is it so complicated and why
can't we do something too
uncomplicate it.
Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Martinez, thank
you for your question.
That is an excellent question,
um, to simplify it, there are,
there's a lot of money involved,
you know.
Drugs are what, 14 to 20% of all
health care spending, there is a
lot of money here, and there are
a lot of hands in the pot.
Not against business, not
against people making money, but
These entities have evolved,
I'll use the example of PBMs,
everybody's familiar with PBMs.
They've evolved from one
function to a different
function.
Right, they've changed how they
operate in the past 10 to 20
years and what they are doing
now is very different than what
they were doing 20 years ago. So
it's a complex issue.
And simplifying, I don't have an
easy answer for you, but we do
need to make sure that they are
transparent in their practices
so that we can identify anything
potentially that will help.
Unravel this issue.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
I'm a free market economy guy.
If you can make money good for
you.
But if you're
Just if you're only making money
to complicate an issue.
Then we need to figure out how
to change that.
Um, so, but I thank you for
that, you know, I hope we get to
the point where we can
uncomplicated because it makes
it easier for
The general public.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Representative.
Anybody else over here with,
yes, Representative Jones.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
presenters. I don't know if you
have an answer for me, but kind
of a take off on um what
Representative Martinez just
said, how is this going to help
patients.
The information that you just
presented about pharmaceuticals,
um, I, I really relate to this
thinking about dismissing my
patients who had zero money and
no access to funding, having a
prescription that needs to be
filled or they're going to end
up right back in the hospital,
making calls to different
pharmacies anywhere, anywhere I
can find the cheapest drug, you
know, is this transparency Act
going to to give patients
information.
That allows them to get a
medication for the, the least
amount of money.
For instance.
Mr. Chair, Representative, I
think this is the first step in
us really understanding how
everything is coming through
this distribution system. And I
think once that's transparent to
us, and we, we can take some of
the other steps. This really
isn't information gathering
bill, it's not an enforcement
bill.
Thank you, and Mister Charon,
thank you. So at what point are
we, are my patients going to get
information about.
How much their drugs cost.
Is that, is that even part of
this effort?
Yeah, Mr. Chair Representative,
it will be whatever we we get
information on, it will become
public, yes.
OK, thank you very much. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Anybody else Representative
Garcia.
Thank you, uh,
chairman.
Uh, let me lay out our scenario
and then see how the legislation
kind of
Uh, affects it.
Or not.
Uh, Chinese manufacturer.
Uh
Producing a high blood pressure
medication, valsartan.
Uh, in the process, there was a
toxin.
That went into a certain batch.
That manufacturer basically had
control of almost 50% of the
American market.
So naturally there was issues in
terms of
Uh
The escalation of pricing.
Of the existing manufacturers
that were producing the same
medication, valsartan.
The problem is that the US has
no control over the manufacture
of medication that it imports.
In this case, the Chinese
manufacturer.
So the US only has control over
the manufacturer of US-made
medication.
And um
Uh, so naturally there was kind
of turmoil.
In
The, the medication market.
But most important, there was
complications with those US
citizens that
were exposed to that
contaminated batch.
That led to deadly results,
fatal results in some instances.
That's the scenario.
How does the legislation before
you kind of do anything about
scenarios like that.
Mr. Chair Representative Garcia,
thank you for your question.
Difficult question. So again, I
will reiterate that
manufacturers are not under the
oversight of OSI, right? We are
collecting data from them only.
Um, so this is more about drug
pricing than it is for
regulatory oversight of
something that harmed patients
that regulatory oversight would
be.
Managed by the regulatory body.
For for manufacturers. Now that
said, anybody that is sending
anything into the state does
need to be registered with the
state, they have to be licensed,
not by us, but by a regulatory
agency, that would be the agency
that would come down on them
for.
That that would be the inci
would come down locally, the FDA
also uh would be looking into
that.
Here I believe it's the board of
pharmacy that would be.
The entity that licenses
manufacturers.
Thank you for that.
Thank you. Uh, Representative
Thompson.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So I'm
wondering, um, you go in for a
behavioral health appointment
and just so happened the day
before you went for primary care
visit and they at the behavioral
health appointment they charge
you 3 times the copay or, or
refuse your insurance or
whatever. So is there a like a
hotline or uh a a something
where patients can immediately
call your office or contact, I
won't say call and say this
happened to me.
today. what's my recourse and
I'd like to report it.
Mr. Cha,
Representative Thompson, thank
you for your question. Yes, um,
OSI regulations require health
insurance carrier to put the
phone number of the managed
healthcare Bureau on their
insurance card.
So for any complaints against
the insurance company, the
members can contact us
immediately, notify us of the
issue, file formal grievance or
get assistance. Wonderful.
That's good to hear. And then,
um,
On page 23.
Get the
So the, the, the last bullet,
um, that's concerning, I mean,
it's a concern, uh to me is
particularly um that reports are
exempt from identifying any
specific health insurer, the
price charge for specific
prescription drug product.
Um, or class of prescription
drug products or the amount of
any rebate or fee paid provided
for a specific prescription drug
product or class of prescription
drug products, and that's under
PBMs. That seems like PBMs have
total opacity. I mean, we can't
know this and you can't know
that and you can't know this and
you can so.
Is there really anything we can
know from PBMs and um we all
know PBMs are a big part of the
problem, but if they're, if
everything is off limits, how
are we ever gonna rein them in.
Mr. Chen, Representative
Thompson, thank you for your
question, um, and this is
similar to the confidentiality
with our healthcare, uh,
consolidation oversight actSI
will be part of you to this
information, what will be
released to the public would be
the aggregate data.
Wonderful.
No
apologies and I apologize, I I
believe that the way this
statute is written that it's not
even to be submitted to us.
Everything is in aggregate.
Unfortunately
So, Mr. Chair, just a quick
follow up.
Can we do anything about that?
I guess the only way to get more
specificity would be to amend
the law. I assume it was a comp
I wasn't part of that this
legislation, but I assume this
was a compromise to get people
to start reporting, which is
usually the first step in in
breaking, you know, in opening
up markets or questions, and I
assume that's probably the
thought is we go through the
aggregate data, and if that's
not enough, then at least we get
a sense of what's going on and
come back and sort of say, you
know, this is what we found is,
is there more we should do?
And what this makes me think,
wonder is what was left in the
bill. They took all this out as
a compromise. It feels like they
sold, you know, took the baby
out with the bathwater, but
thank you for your answers.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thanks, Representative
Representative Ferrari. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Um, so following
that, um, I, my question was
about um.
Ozember
And, you know, how that is
costing us so much, um, is there
a way that this, um, now that
you're saying it's just
aggregate data, but um,
What, um,
Percentage of Medicaid costs. I
think it was really high, and
then is there a generic, and if
people know how much it is, can
they switch over.
I'll let you just tell me what
you think about it.
Mr. Chair Representative
Berrari.
Ozempic is
Fairly new for the indication
that I assume that you're
thinking about, right? It's been
around for a little while for
diabetes. Um, it is being
marketed under a different name
for weight loss.
Now being under a different
name, it's
Only retains the brand name,
does not have a generic
available for now and what the
insurers are saying is that
there are other drugs that treat
the same thing that are a lot
cheaper that have been around
for a little bit and have
generic versions. So,
Hopefully, because it's such a
high-cost drug, it's going to
show up on this data that is
being collected, I don't know
that for sure because the data
collection hasn't started.
But I should have a better
answer for you this next time
around because you're right, it
is very costly.
OK and hopefully then patients
can.
Stop asking because of all the
advertising and have that
alternative, you know, to help
save
funds as the director stated,
um, it is all will be public
information.
Great. That's what we need.
Thank you.
Representative Chavez, thank
you, Mr. Chair. So
Um, Reb Thompson and Rep Ferrari
asked one of the questions that
I have already, um, but the
other question that I have, um,
has to do with um the
credentialing.
Are the MCOs, the only entity
responsible for credentialing or
are there others? And how can we
make that process smoother.
Mr. Chair Representative Chavez,
thank you for your question. Um,
the, the Office of
Superintendent of Insurance have
jurisdiction jurisdiction over
commercial barriers. Um, and
also the same entity can offer
uh
Medicaid coverage as well as
commercial coverage, our
responsibility is very specific
to the commercial market, and
those are the private insurance
companies and oversight has in
place credentialing regulation,
uh, which requires uh reporting
for all ears and last year in
2023, we collect the data, uh,
and issued penalties for
Noncompliance with the
credentialing timelines. We're
looking to receive the new set
of data in um the spring of
2025, um, and hope to see some
improvements.
So do you have a sense of Mr.
Chair.
Are there particular um
Companies that are violating
this more than others, I mean,
are there's some sort of
Ones that stick out to you.
So penalties which were issued
in 2023 or, or
All carriers except for Cigna,
uh, who had um.
Exited the market and I cannot
recollect off the top of my head
if they had no violations or if
they were included into this,
uh, but everybody was pretty
much in violations of the
credentialing.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative Chasey. Thank
you, Mr. Chair and thank you
very much for your presentation,
and I, I might, I might need to
Well, I might.
I should perhaps know the answer
to my question. Do we deny, um,
do we allow denials of
psychotropic medication,
prescription, and if so, um,
this your office and you talked
about the information gathering
that, that your, is your
function here. Um,
Do you gather information about
that or uh field complaints if
um psychotropic medication is
denied.
Mr. Cha.
Um
Representative uh TC, I am not
aware of any consumer
complaints, however, we can
confirm and follow up with you
and let you know whether any
have been received.
But if there is denial based on
medical necessity, um, the
member has the opportunity to
contact the office file, um.
unofficial grievance with us.
I don't know if there is
anything that Alejandro
transparency, no, it's two
separate, two separate issues.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Representative
Herndon. Thank you, Mr. T. I
just want to, uh, direct your
attention to page 7 of 2 of the
um specificity that you uh
authorized there and one with
respect to following up on
Representative Chasey's
question, uh, denial of their of
psychotherapy, uh
psychotherapeutic medication.
Once it's prescribed, then
according to this, it could
never be denied because it says
prohibits medication.
and rescissions of prior
authorization. Is that correct?
So once there, it is always
there.
Well, I would, I would have to
confirm and get back to you. I
don't want to provide you with
misrepresentation, um, but, um,
generally it should be there,
however, it could depend on the
situation and without concrete
examples, it would be hard to
tell.
Well, let me just go to the last
item that on that same page when
it's, it talks about requires uh
coverage of out of network
services at in-network cost
sharing levels, but if we don't
have a service in state and I
have to go out to Colorado, then
what are you comparing it with
to determine what the cost
sharing is going to be.
Um
Mr. Chair
Representative Chain, if there
is no access to in-network
services.
Uh, whether it's a service,
whether it's a prescription drug
medication, the out of network
service or benefit must be
provided at the comparable
in-network.
Cos sharing.
So for example,
In
Let's say for a generic drug
you, if, if you're not able to
obtain it from a pharmacy and
you have to go out of network,
then the cost would be the same
cost sharing as its represented
on the summary of benefits and
coverage for in network.
drugs, for an example.
Mm
Mr. Chair, I, I, um, was on the
bill that looked at um prior
authorization for medications
and the bill that we passed
includes behavioral health,
medications,
medications for autoimmune and
for cancer that once you get it
approved that they can't require
preauthorization again.
OK.
Uh, thank you. I, I, I
appreciate that, Mr. Chair. I
just wanted to know if they have
a form for the um
uh, under the prescription
transparency Act, where these,
the way in which this is going
to be reported to the Department
of Insurance. So how is that
reporting going to occur?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Fernan, I'm, I'm, I apologize.
I, I don't understand what
you're asking.
Sorry, I'm just looking at,
under the prescription drug
transparency Act, then if
there's an increase in, for
example, in drugs, uh, that
they're gonna increase it by
25%. But let's just take
Ozempic, we've been talking
about that and, and we want to
know why, and I guess what I'm
trying to figure out is did you
all create a form for receiving
this information that's gonna be
uniformly applied to every
person who is required to report
under the Act.
Mr. Chair Representative.
Thank you. Yes, so it's not a
form per se, this is an online
submission is the way that it
has been designed. It is
uniform.
Among each required entity to
report. So manufactures their
reporting will all see the same
thing. The PSAOs that are
reporting will all see the same
thing, same for the PBMs and,
and health insurers.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um
Xander are staff attorney, uh,
commit for the committee.
Indicated that he, he helped
draft the the prescription drug
pill, and, and he, he wanted to
bring up the issue that when the
bill was drafted, the, the
thought of, do you have
authority over manufacturers,
um, as you indicated, it's not
spelled out in that bill, but he
did point out that the pharmacy
board apparently has authority
over that they can't sell a drug
in the state unless the uh
pharmacy board is approved it.
So do you coordinate
closely with the pharmacy board
about their approvals or
disapprovals or whatever, or did
they ever disapprove, I guess
they do disapprove some, but.
Mr. Chair, committee members,
thank you for that. Uh.
We are separate from the board
of pharmacy. Um, I actually came
from the For of Pharmacy in a
previous position. Um, so I am
familiar with their processes
and how they operate, um, and
they do, they do have, you know,
regulatory authority over the
manufacturers, but we
Aside from potentially getting a
list from them, uh, we, we
haven't engaged them,
particularly because the bill is
not in effect yet.
If I can be honest with you,
I'm, I'm not sure where they
would stand in terms of how to
enforce or how they would want
to enforce that would, that
would be a question for them.
Um, but it would, it would fall
to the board of pharmacy. You
are correct.
Um
Yeah
OK.
You could, I suppose, have a
An agreement with them, a
memorandum of understanding or
something in which
Um, you could bring to their
attention certain things, which
would then give them the because
they already have the authority
to clamp down a little bit on
whatever is going on. If it's an
increase in price, it's not
justified or whatever.
OK. Um, and I had a
Um, the issue around
credentialing, I wanted to get
that clear. You don't have
authority of the uh office of
the Superintendent of Insurance
doesn't have authority over over
Medicaid, but since Medicaid
makes up such a huge percentage
of the
Um, New Mexico population.
Most of the uh commercial
insurance, I wouldn't say most,
but
Most of the people covered by
commercial insurance are covered
by an insurance company that
also has a Medicaid contract.
And so if, if the, if the
Medicaid, which they tell us
they're gonna do.
They're going to consolidate all
the credentialing so that it
won't be up to each individual
MCO to do their own
credentialing, they'll be a, I
don't know if the state will do
it or if it'll just be a rule
that says anybody credentialed
by any of them is also
credentialed by you. Wouldn't
that also cover, I mean, does it
make any sense for them to then
say to the commercial part,
well, we'll still, you know, you
still have to be credentialed by
us. Could you piggyback onto
that Medicaid, the potent
Medicaid credentialing
authority.
Mr. Chair members of the
committee, uh, yes, we're in
conversations with the
healthcare authority who is
working on streamlining the
credential process, and we want
to see this follow through and
apply across the board.
Great.
Well, thank you all. Thanks for
the work you're doing on both of
these bills and on all of your
work, uh, I think it was just
refreshing to have an activist
office of the superintendent of
insurance, that's really going
to be for the people of the
state. Thank you so much for
coming today. keeping us
updated.
So members we go now is
representative of Pinsky here
right outside the door. Tell her
to come in.
Don't hang out out there. We
can't hear her up there.
Um, we never go to Medicaid
forward and then the Senate
Memorial 5 Task Force.
Are you here for Medicaid for,
uh, commissioner. Good, good to
see you.
Superwoman
And what are you doing about
pigeons in Albuquerque.
I used to.
That that answer would be easier
than the answers to the things
we just talked about
we're gonna.
even. Yes.
OK, well.
Is there a handout we're
supposed to have?
Uh, Mr. Chairman, we believe
they should have been shared
with the committee.
You have
Like deck.
The
Oh, so we have them online.
We'll just go online and watch
them there. 00
no good
so
in his back pocket he had 500
copies.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
we have a, we're gonna have a
very efficient, uh,
presentation, but we're gonna
have, we have a number of folks
with us today. Um, I do have to
apologize in advance because I
have a work call at noon that I
have to.
Get to, so hopefully we'll, OK.
Um,
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
members, um, we're first gonna
open up this presentation. I'm
gonna pass it to Adrianne Barboa
of Strong Families.
I do want to be in like I'm
loud, but um, hello, thank you,
chairs, um, and members of the
this very important healthcare
committee. My name is Adrian
Barboa, and I am the policy
director for Strong Families New
Mexico. We are one of many
organizations and hundreds of
individuals across the state of
New Mexico that are part of the
New Mexico together for
healthcare campaign. We have
been fighting for quality
affordable health care in
partnership with many of you for
the
of 7 years now. We've been
successfully um pass the patient
medical debt act that doesn't
allow for folks under the 200%
the federal poverty level get
met uh acquired medical tech.
We've been able to pass the
healthcare affordability fund
that has already seen a $0
premium for Native Americans
below the 300% federal poverty
level, that's huge for our
communities and a 10% decrease
in premiums for small businesses
across our
entire state that is only some
of what it's also gone to
greatly decrease the cost, um,
supplement the overall cost on
the New Mexico health insurance
exchange. So if you've heard
that people have gotten
affordable health care through
our health insurance exchange.
It's because of the healthcare
affordability fund being able to
supplement some of that. You all
know this cause you're the
health care committee and you
all have been taking the lead to
help us pass these bills that
have all been just building
blocks towards, um, what we
really want is access to quality
of.
affordable healthcare for all
New Mexicans. Affordable
healthcare is the number one
barrier for families really
carried by the middle working
class of our state. We know that
if you're really in poverty, you
can have access to healthcare or
if you're a fluent in the state
of New Mexico, it's not hard to
get healthcare, but really the
burden has been in our middle
class, so today our community
led driven project is um happy
to present you all pass this
past session.
A study on Medicaid forward,
which is the ability to take the
cap off of Medicaid and provided
a path towards true quality
affordable health care for all.
This study was commit was passed
by you and commissioned by the
state at $900,000 so it has
accurate, wonderful information
and shows us the true
opportunity. So we're excited,
um, to dive into this with you
all today, um, and, and see what
the opportunity is for our, for
us to all access healthcare.
Thank you.
Um, Doctor Angeli Taia is going
to present to as well.
All right. um, thank you,
everybody. um, chair and members
of the committee. Um, my name is
Angeli Taneja and I am a family
physician, uh, the executive
director of Casa de Salud, a
nonprofit clinic in the South
Valley of Albuquerque. Um, and I
also work as an ER doc in the
Navajo Nation, um, in a small
rural hospital, um, have done a
lot of work with organizing
healthcare workers around the
state, and we are um part of the
New Mexico together for
Healthcare Coalition.
Um
We are, um, here, I'm, I'm
wanting to share a position and
provider perspective on Medicaid
forward, um, first want to say
thank you for um the really game
changing profound legislation
that the state legislature
passes year after year and in
this critical time, um, on the
national stage, what is at
stake, um, means that there's um
a need to pass.
more profound uh legislation
going forward, um, and Medicaid
forward, uh, would land New
Mexico in the top 2 or 3 states
in the country looking at, uh,
taking off the income cap off of
Medicaid so that people making
um a a minimum wage job at full
time, um, can, uh, stay on
Medicaid for their health
insurance. Um,
There is overwhelming support
from on the ground, healthcare
providers for this bill, um, and
for the idea of expanding health
insurance overall to all New
Mexicans, um, this is a very
creative bill that helps
healthcare that helps patients,
that helps the economy, that
helps the state, um, and you've
all heard of the concept,
perhaps of moral injury, um,
which is defined as
The psychological response to an
event that violates a person's
deeply held values or morals,
and we are losing healthcare
providers, uh, from this state,
um, in great part because of
burnout and moral injury.
Burnout is caused by a lot of
different reasons, but moral
injury injury being one of them,
um, and that is particularly
around the inability for us to
be able to care for our
patients, um, many providers are
flocking to states where there
are other.
services and supports and the
general patient population might
be more well off. We want to
continue to attract providers
here and serve uh folks who've
been underserved, um, served
with high quality healthcare and
serve with supports that are
needed when someone has
Medicaid, um, as providers, we
see that they have access to all
kinds of medications, no copays,
no barriers to care for imaging
or for urgent care or hospital
visits, and they can get the
care that they need.
every single barrier put in
front of someone who does not
have Medicaid, does not have
insurance, is overwhelming
burdensome and makes us just
want to throw up our hands in
the air and say.
Forget this. Um, so this would
really incredibly help um
providers um overall be able to
take better care of our
patients. Um, the impact of
Medicaid on winding is like case
in point of what's happening
right now in the state and in
the country, people are being
dropped for all kinds of
reasons, whether they're um uh
reasons that relate to income or
administrative, uh,
inefficiencies or um male issues
or whatever being dropped from
Medicaid and without insurance.
And many people are not opting
to get on other programs with
their employer or with the
health insurance exchange
because of the concern about um
other costs that might be
involved, as well as the
complexity of doing so, um, and
we are seeing people not get
care. I have a, a patient who
had um a head trauma was
recently uninsured after, uh,
Medicaid unwinding happened. It
happened all of a sudden to him
and he is resisting every effort
to get the needed care that we
need.
an MRI of his brain, other kind
of follow up so that long term
this brain trauma won't affect
him as much as it likely will
now and that work of trying to
get folks' care is really
incredibly challenging, um,
Medicaid also is a structure and
a vehicle is really helpful for
providers in this state. It
allows for healthcare providers
and it allows for all of you and
it allows for the state
healthcare authority to create
standards of care that have to
be followed. That feels more
more important now than ever
before, um, when there's um a
lot at risk, um, nationally, and
the primary care council of the
state, which I get to be on, um,
is moving forward with the
Medicaid value-based care, um,
uh, move where we can work to
take the best care of patients
instead of working on a fee for
service come into my clinic for
this visit and I can bill for
it. And being able to expand
Medicaid would allow for
creativity and um ability to
move as a larger vehicle doing
really innovative things.
I'll just end with um the, the
uh Medicaid, um, chief medical
officer recently announced big
um protections for various
different medications and um uh
gender-affirming surgeries for
people who are non-binary gender
expansive, transgender, and
those are protections under
Medicaid. Medicaid will cover X
and Y and Z. We don't have that
kind of ability to create those
protections.
outside of things like Medicaid
and as easily and directful
away. My, I have a patient last
week who was afraid to come to
my clinic, um, after the, the
national election, and was
panicking about what would be
pulled away from them in terms
of their ability to get care, so
this is real impactful and
expanding Medicaid in this way
would help providers, uh, take
care of, um, um, New Mexicans.
And we have uh one more provider
with.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, my name's Karen
McCartney Brown. I'm a native
New Mexican and I practiced for
um as a family practitioner for
um more than 30 years, mostly in
rural and underserved parts of
New Mexico. I started out, uh,
working in the international
zone, um, in Albuquerque. I
worked um in Carlsbad, New
Mexico in the southeast part of
the state for about 15 years and
um I most recently worked in the
South Valley of.
Albuquerque.
Um
And I retired about um a little
more than a year ago.
Um, Medicaid for healthcare in
New Mexico more equitable, more
affordable, and more accessible.
My two adult children had
Medicaid. My son established
care, had a primary care
provider, um, and, uh, was sort
of underemployed, unemployed,
um, until he got his dream job
at a lab, uh, but the, uh, lab
only had 4 employees.
So this small business could not
offer insurance.
Um, my son, however, made too
much in salary to qualify for
Medicaid. So he hasn't had
health coverage for several
years now.
Many of the medical assistants,
community health workers and
front desk, other staff at my
clinic's benefited from Medicaid
over the years, but I worked
alongside staff who chose not to
advance, not to take, um, a
raise because the small increase
in their income, um, would
disqualify them and more
importantly for a lot of them,
their children from Medicaid.
Um
Uh, Medicaid for it would end
the fear of falling off that
Medicaid cliff where you have to
Delay or deny yourself a little
extra income, uh, to keep your
health care system.
Um, Medicaid for it is an
expansion of a trusted and
established system. It's a
relatively simple, although we
know all of you, all of us know
insurance is never simple, but
it's a relatively simple system
to navigate for both providers
and patients. There's decreased
paperwork like Doctor Taneji was
saying, fewer prior
authorizations and a more stable
drug formulary, um, sometimes
insurance companies get a better
deal on, say,
inhaler and so they changed
which inhaler they'll cover and
that provides no end of
confusion for patients and
increased work for providers,
so.
Um, Medicaid for it as Medicaid
does does now would allow people
to have a more stable, uh,
medication formulary and they
could actually get their
medications since it's an
expansion, Medicaid for more
people would be covered and
could get their medications. I
had lots of uninsured patients
that were on a sliding scale
that managed to come to a clinic
appointment but could never get
the medications that I
prescribed for them.
Um, I think Medicaid for
pregnant and postpartum women is
a current example of how
providing um an increased access
to care for a group and um
really promote um a healthier
outcomes and um
You know, really an increased
participation in healthcare.
Medicaid board will expand
services all across New Mexico
for medical, dental, and
behavioral health by adding
support to frontline clinics by
ensuring currently uninsured
patients, Medicare Ford will
provide wider revenue to
frontline clinics, so they can
recruit, increase, and retain
staff, um, medical assistance,
community health workers, front
desk staff, laboratory folks.
Um, so with adequate staffing,
this builds the healthcare team.
It really takes
Providers, but it takes a lot
more than providers to to
actually take care of patients.
So by building the whole team,
um, it will ease provider
burnout and turnover.
So more Mexicans will get
affordable quality healthcare,
frontline clinics will do
better. Providers and staff will
be better supported and New
Mexico can gain revenue.
When, when, when, when.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um, and
now, uh, I'm here with Erica
Sanchez from Center for Law and
Poverty, and we, uh, will
Go to the slide, starting on
slide 4, and what we'd like to
do is review um the uh results
of this study. So, um,
You know, we.
feel that every New Mexican
deserves access to quality and
affordable healthcare. Um,
unfortunately today 200,000 New
Mexicans are living without any
coverage at all.
Uh, over half of New Mexicans
have sacrificed needed care or
medication because of the cost.
And these are dangerous
statistics, um, and, and
obviously impacts not just uh
the, the stress and difficult
choices that these families have
to make, but also impacts their
ability to access education, be
able to work, um.
And so clearly affordability is
a top issue for our families.
90% of New Mexicans want the
state to take action to make
health care more affordable for
everyone. And with Medicaid
forward, we can take real action
today to bring down the cost of
living for New Mexicans and
provide them coverage that will
have health and financial
benefits for their entire lives.
So, Medicaid forward, uh, lifts
the cap, income cap from
Medicaid, allowing New Mexicans
who earn too much to qualify
today to buy into the program at
a sliding scale that will not
exceed 5% of household income.
By doing this, um, and we can
move to slide 5, which has a
number of the details, um.
By doing this, we're gonna be
able to bring in significant
federal resources into our
healthcare system.
Um, Medicaid spending for the
newly eligible people would
qualify for federal matching
funds at the state standard FMAP
of 71.68%.
Also, um, in the Medicaid for
program, our provider
reimbursement rate increases.
Those would be raised to narrow
the gap between Medicaid and
private sector, um, private
insurance payer reimbursements.
Employers would contribute a
small fee for the workers who
enroll in the program, um, which
is, uh, some of you may uh
remember uh a program that
existed back in the mid 2010s,
um, under Governor Richardson
that allowed small businesses to
enroll their employees in
Medicaid. Um, this is, this
would be a similar opportunity
for employers, um, and it's very
clear from the research that
employers will come out ahead.
Uh, these contributions are far
less than the contributions
they're currently paying for
employees.
Um, this is a an all around win
because the study with the study
reflects is that this will save
money for the state.
Or employers and for families.
Um
And we can finally stop the
Medicaid cliff.
I am going to turn it now to
Erica Sanchez to start on slide
6 and just, uh, we won't be able
to go through every single
detail, but we did want to
provide the details in the
slides up for you, um, just in
the interest of time, um, to
talk about the studies that have
been done on this program.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. So over the last
couple of years, the state has
commissioned a couple of studies
to explore the potential for an
impact of Medicaid forward.
The Office of the Superintendent
of insurance released a study
conducted by the Urban Institute
in August 2023, the healthcare
authority released a study last
month that was conducted by
Mercer.
And
Moving to slide 7, while the two
studies had different scopes and
some varying assumptions both
show that Medicaid forward
offers a viable pathway for all
New Mexicans to access
affordable healthcare.
This slide 7 shows some of the
differences in scope and
assumptions, including slightly
different baseline Medicaid
enrollment numbers, uh,
different, um, federal Medicaid
assistant percentage and
difference in calculations used
for increased provider
reimbursement rates.
But even with these differences,
both studies show that Medicaid
forward will simplify and make
our health care system more
affordable and accessible for
all of us. Something that New
Mexicans have been asking for.
Slide 8 shows that um both
studies project that the most
expansive model.
The one that opens Medicaid up
to everyone without an income
cap will expand health care
coverage to people who are
uninsured, substantially
decrease costs for those of us
who are underinsured, which
again is a major priority for
our communities.
It will raise Medicaid
reimbursement rates to ensure
that providers are compensated
more fairly.
It'll reduce spending on
employer sponsored health plans,
decreasing the burden on our
businesses, and it will result
in a net savings for the state.
Do the matching funds, savings
from shifting enrollment and
increased revenue from existing
and new sources, revenue will
actually exceed new state
spending.
Slide 9 outlines the savings and
revenue sources, according to
the Urban Institute study. This
includes over 300 million in
state savings for public
employees who would opt into new
coverage. Nearly 200 million
additional dollars, the state
will collect in premium tax
revenues is more uninsured
individuals and rolling
coverage.
And a $40 million savings in
uncompensated care costs to the
state.
Slide 10.
Breaks down the cost savings and
revenue according to the Mercer
study.
So it shows that the Medicaid
forward design that has no
income limit and requires cost
sharing for enrollees who are
over 200% of the federal poverty
level. The state will see a net
gain of $45 million.
Well, overall Medicaid costs
will increase by 62%, and there
will be new administrative
expenses of $88 million. These
costs will be offset by 348
million in enrollee
contributions.
160 million in additional
Medicaid drug rebate revenue.
2.7 billion in federal matching
funds, 31 million in redirected
marketplace subsidies.
381 million in savings from
contributions for public
employee healthcare.
214 million in additional
premium tax revenue.
And over 400 million from a
potential new contribution
assessed on employers.
Slide 11 highlights some of the
benefits New Mexico will see
according to each of the
studies, for example, the
uninsured rate will be cut in
half and by even more in some
parts of the state.
New Mexicans will save a billion
dollars on healthcare spending.
Businesses will save over $200
million and providers will see
additional increases in Medicaid
reimbursement rates further
narrowing the gap between
Medicaid and private insurance.
So I'll pass it back to a
representativeansky.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, we,
that concludes our presentation.
Thank you, thank you very much.
um I just need to get a couple
of things clear before we go to
the committee for questions is
HCA supporting this?
We have been in conversation
with HCA, but this is not an
HCA.
back to Bill, we have a meeting
with them in December where we
will have that conversation.
Um, and you're the sponsor of
Representative Spansky? Yes, Mr.
um, then the uh
Couldn't really figure out from
the presentation, the F map.
Would we be able to collect FMAP
for people over 200% of poverty.
Yes, Mr. Chairman, and we have
that uh confirmed in writing
from CMS.
That's the curr CMS. It's not
the RFK junior
or, or the Doctor Oz CMS
whatever, whoever it is.
But so it kind of hinges on
that. I mean, I think, I think
everybody
Loves the idea.
If we get the F map.
If we don't get the F map, it,
it, it.
It's very difficult to make it
work. Mr. Chairman, um, it is in
the federal statute also the DFM
map uh is available for expanded
eligibility.
How high,
Mr. Chairman, with no limit.
Anybody can get Medicaid?
Mr. Chairman,
Mr. Chairman, if the state, the
state would need to apply for
the expanded eligibility to CMS.
However, the federal statute,
uh, it allows for the FMAP or
any income eligibility.
Oh, well, that, I mean, that
does make it feasible. Which of
the two versions are you
proposing? The one that would
covered undocumented or the one
that would not.
And we don't get a map for them.
I'm, I'm pretty sure.
Mr. Chair, um, the Mercer study
did not include estimates for
including people who don't
qualify for the federal, um,
reimbursement, which includes um
undocumented people and people
in certain immigration statuses.
So the Mercer report doesn't,
doesn't include that. The Urban
Institute report did include
that, um, anticipating the state
would cover that, but the Mercer
report.
So which, which version are you
introducing?
I just went on the on the last
two points I want, yes, that the
most, the reason why other
states haven't maybe taken the
opportunity of anyone being able
to get Medicaid, right? is that
our state is this health care
committee really knows that our
state has over 40% of our folks
are already on Medicaid, another
30 on Medicare, so really we're
just talking about that 30% to
get us to everyday New Mexicans
having access to Medicare based
on a tiered income, right above
200%. But
To the question about uh what
was the last question?
The undocumented that
we did pass the immigrant
coverage Act that will be
enrolling this June, it's
already set up. HSD is ready for
enrollment, um, this June, which
uses the healthcare
affordability fund that I talked
about a little bit in my
opening, um, which you all pass
the healthcare affordability
Fund is a tax on insurance
companies, not on our taxpayers,
the tax on insurance companies
that brings over $300 million in
recurring revenue to the
stayed in New Mexico, about half
of that because of the
healthcare affordability fund
goes directly into a fund that
has been able to do those things
that we're talking about Native
American, um increase, and that
is going to be what um forms for
the.
For coverage for undocumented
New Mexicans in
Um
Do we collect the premium tax on
Medicaid?
Mr. Chairman, yes, on the, the
uh, Medicaid MCOs.
Hm
Members of the committee,
senators to banks.
2 minutes. Thank you, um, Mr.
Chair. Um, the, I have uh two
questions that are
Just more or less factual. Um,
enrollment decrease in Bewell,
New Mexico would affect the
viability of the pool. Have you
considered that?
Um, Mr. Mr. Chairman and Senator
Stephanics, that was considered
um, in the legislation, um, I
don't know if Miss Sanchez wants
to discuss that.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator
Stefaniks, so, um.
We would, but yes, both studies
show that we would see a a
transition from private coverage
to Medicaid forward. Um, we know
that in reality that transition
will be gradual. It won't be
something that happens
overnight. Um, and we anticipate
that during the the planning
period, the healthcare authority
will work with the
superintendent of insurance and
be well New Mexico to plan um
Um, for
For that transition and
potential impact. OK, and Mr.
Chair, my second question has to
do
Um, I sit on the investment and
pensions Committee.
And the retired healthcare fund,
how if state employees went into
this, how is that going to
impact the retiree healthcare.
Uh fund.
And that's all I have.
Uh, thank, thank you, Mr.
Chairman Senator Stephanics. We
have, um, opened up a
conversation about what it would
look like for state employees to
participate in Medicaid forward,
um, particularly because of the
huge premium increases that
they've been seeing that the
state is actually been funding
rather than passing on to the
employees, um, and the relation
to the retiree healthcare fund,
I think is something that we
should investigate, and I wanna
make sure that that fund remains
solvent.
Representative Chas thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So I, I do
have a couple of questions, um,
and one of them is on your slide
9, reduction and compensated
care. So the question that I
have in terms of you have a um
an estimate of 40 million. Um,
so what all does that involve?
Are you talking about the
uncompensated care that
hospitals are providing right
now are supposed to be providing
um and are you, does that also
include the
The mill levies that um certain
counties, um,
have in terms of property taxes
to um contribute towards the
uncompensated care.
Mr. Chair Representative Chavez,
so that is one of the numbers
that was anticipated in the
urban Institute study, and
that's just the, that's just the
impact on uncompensated care in
the state. There are also
federal impacts on that. Um,
there were, there will be
decreased, um,
Or cost savings to the federal
government as well in terms of
the uncompensated care, so there
is um some complexity as to to
exactly which, which are the,
the which is the state county,
federal, um,
Um, costs, and I don't have
those details today.
OK.
And then my other question, I
actually have 3 questions. Um,
so the other question that I
have yesterday, we had a
presentation, um, about dental
care.
Um, and it sounded like dentists
were not compensated at the same
rate that physicians are, so
with this, um, equalize that.
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Chavez, the um, the, the plan is
to have a global look at all of
the reimbursement rates under
Medicaid, um, because it will
have a larger impact and so.
I think that would be a great
thing for us to look at.
Yeah, OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative Chay. Thank you
very much, Mr. Chairman and
thank you all for your work and
this is great information
because we have such a limited
amount of time, um, I'll
I'll start with
Just one question. I, I worked
as a um for a small private
company where we employed
professionals, PT, OTs, SLPs,
and we had to negotiate every
year with our, with some health
insurance company to provide um
coverage for our employees. It
was a real pain and it seemed
like every time.
Every year the rates went up. So
if I understand it, those
employees of that company would
be eligible to join this, and
they would pay the cost share
above 200% of poverty because
they would be at that level
because they were at higher
salary level. So that they would
be covered and then the private
employer, and this was a small
company, um, wouldn't be
spending.
Months negotiating health
insurance costs.
Or
Yes, Mr. Chair and Leader
Chasey, that's correct. And the
employees would have a choice of
the MCOs.
Great. And, and since I still
might have 10 seconds, um, it
looked to me like
Honestly, the uninsured rate
should be 0 instead of 50%, but
that's probably because we don't
have everyone enrolled now.
Is that, is that why it would
still only, you know, we
wouldn't have, we would still
have some uninsured.
If, if this were adopted.
Well, both that um just speak it
because it's like court they're
listening to you. They might not
see you nod your head. Yes,
thank you, um, chairs and
Representative Chasey, um, what
we do know is that there is that
and hopefully this would give us
like to Doctor Angeli's, um,
comment about being able to have
more creative room to ensure
that we know that there's a
population of young adults that
just don't think they need
healthcare and will enroll in
healthcare, regardless of how
affordable we may make it, but
again that might provide us the
creativity to show the benefits
of actually being having a
healthcare plan for every.
Did you have a question
representative? I do, Mr. Chair.
I, I would just like to
clarification, uh, on this plan
that's presented. So right now
there are things that are not
covered like uh coverage for
doulas which I've been talking
about a birthing centers that
are not reimbursed at the same
rate as hospitals. So does that
mean that under this plan that
would then occur?
Yeah, Mr. Chairman and
Representative, um, that work
will continue, I think as
healthcare evolves to
continually add and refine the
services that are covered by
Medicaid. This proposal is
focused on the who qualifies for
Medicaid and provide a
reimbursement rates. So
certainly some of the issues
you're talking about in terms of
birthing centers could fall, uh,
this could provide an
opportunity to raise those
rates.
And then thank you and Mr.
Chair, just for one more
clarification, did I understand
you to say that the coverage
would be at 30% over the um 200%
of favorite federal poverty
level or did I not hear that
correctly, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Herndon, this
would propose no income.
Cap, so anyone could could
enroll.
Thank you.
Excuse me Representative add one
thing that I don't think that
we've made it clear, so it would
remove that income cap. It would
be uh people under 200% of the
federal poverty line wouldn't
pay anything, and then those who
are over 200% would um purchase
coverage on a sliding scale with
the overall maximum cap of 500.
Or 5% of household income. So
that would be the most that
anybody would be playing out of
pocket for premiums and other
out of pocket costs. So, Mr.
Chair, does that mean that we
determine what the sliding scale
amount is gonna be, meaning the
state of New Mexico.
I see.
All right, thank you.
Representative Martinez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for the very
interesting presentation.
I'm reading through, um,
42 CFR.
I don't see where.
That guarantee is that we get
reimbursed above 200%. Could you
possibly
Share that with me, because what
I'm afraid of is the
sustainability of a program like
this.
You know, I think in a perfect
world, this is a great idea that
we can just give insurance to
everybody, but insurance costs,
and somebody's gonna have to
pick up that cost.
And I'm not seen in the federal
regulations.
That the feds are gonna pick it
up.
And like the chairman said
there's gonna be changes to
these federal regulations and my
fear is
When those changes happen,
This program becomes immediately
unsustainable.
So if you could share that with
me, I'd like to talk to you
offline. We will have a
Beautiful debate about this.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, presenters.
Great. Uh, did you have a
question, Representative Jones?
That's your question too. Um,
Senator Pinto, do you have any
questions? Senator Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and, um, I
appreciate the information that
you've shared with us today.
Um
I think, uh, Representative
Martinez and I share similar
thoughts as to what to
anticipate with the incoming
administration.
Um, I think this is a way for us
to go and I mean, even if you
look at 200% of federal poverty
level for a family of 4 that's
$61,000.
And as you know, most of the
people in our state are median
income is about $53,000 Mr.
Chair, give or take, I, I don't,
didn't go through and look at
the number, but.
I think this would offer
opportunity for many.
There's some similar concerns
also that Senator Stephanics
raised, of course, with regards
to um state employees because we
don't pay them enough either. So
it's all of this mix of issues
for teachers and others. Um, I
think this, this has, uh, it
will have a, a good impact, I
think for families because of
costs, as we're all looking as
to what our our bottom line is
at home.
Um, but what else will this do
and what does the state have to
um contribute just to make sure
that we keep our pool um hole.
Um, it's, it's just a concern,
Mr. Chair, and with the um
Unknown of what's going to
happen, um, in, in
In Washington DC, um, I just,
you know, concerns come up.
Um
I think we also have to make
sure that we can maintain at
least for those who are
currently covered, Mr. Chair.
I it just were an uncertainty.
It's just how I feel at this
point. Thank you, Mr.
Representative Ferrari.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and um my
One of my constituents, um, was
on Medicaid getting coverage and
um then she got a better job and
she was taken off and
Her insurance to the state was
much higher. I think we were
talking about this already, but,
um, so I'm really glad to know
that there's um, you know,
compensation for the cliff
effect, cause we've been talking
about that for a long time, a
lot of different situations. So
I'm really glad to see this, um,
but is there a way to, when
you're deciding between the
urban and the Mercer uh
proposals.
To, um, have urban go to the
200%, and so that we can
include, you know, the, um,
immigrants coverage, whereas the
Mercer doesn't.
Mr. Chair and representative
for, uh, great question, and I
think, you know, these studies
are here for us to take the best
of the findings from each and
craft the best proposal for New
Mexico, so, and I think they
took slightly different slices,
which is actually helpful for us
to understand the cost
differences of that and the
coverage, how many more people
you covered, so I think, I think
we're at a place where we could
take the best of both and craft
that.
Thank you and uh Mr. Chair, um,
and the doctors.
When we're looking at um asking.
Doctors to take more patients
under Medicaid. Is that a
problem or is that something
that because they'll be able to
do better care for their
patients that, that will help
compensate and make up for it,
or we're also talking about
giving better um compensation
for whatever Medicaid.
Services are provided.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative Ferrari, um.
We, we would be enrolling more
people in Medicaid under this
plan, um, and uh for providers
that means more people covered
under insurance where they're
not worrying about out of pocket
deductibles, hospital costs,
other things that are still
overwhelming and obviously for
uninsured people, or people, um,
moving to Medicaid, the
reimbursement for Medicaid right
now is at 120% of Medicare
reimbursement and with uh
Medicaid for this will move up
to 150% on January 1st.
So much more robust
reimbursement to help cover
costs and break even for
clinicians, especially as
private insurance pays more
reimbursement, so getting there
and, and Medicaid forward could
um increase that even more and I
know there are other efforts
legislatively to look at what
that, what can, what that can
look like within New Mexico,
even outside of this legislation
to increase Medicaid
reimbursement up to 200% or so.
Representative Thompson,
I, I just like to add that also
it will help.
People not be feel burned out.
It it it will make people feel
much better about being able to
take care of patients and
actually know they can get their
medications and do uh work with
us to um to improve their
wellness. So I think and
hopefully will attract more
people and more people will want
to stay because they'll feel
better about what they're doing,
they'll be better opportunities.
There'll be a better team, so
we're not just asking the people
that are here right now to see
more patients.
that has problems of its own,
right? But it's a, it's a
complex wheel of things that
will come together to provide
better care for New Mexico.
Great. Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Oh, we're behind.
Yeah, we're, we're pretty far
behind, but Representative
Thompson, thank you, Mr. Chair.
I love this concept, but like
many of us, I'm really worried
about what's happening in the
federal government, um.
And it's particularly
particularly around the F map,
but, you know, say it's in the
law. Well, we have a
non-traditional administration
coming in who does
non-traditional things, so
That terrifies me.
Universally, but on this, I
mean, I could see that we in
depending on how long it takes
them to uh put their own.
been on uh, on what's happening.
So I, I'm not sure what my point
is, except that I really want to
be for this, but I'm terrified
of what New Mexico can get stuck
with if the non-traditional
incoming administration takes a
non-traditional route through an
executive order to through a,
you know, Department of Justice
order, you know, it just, it's,
we don't know anything. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
And I just had a quick question.
The
Slide talks about the savings
for state employees. Are you
also talking about all the IBA
agencies or just the state
employee.
Mr. Mr. Chairman, uh, uh, and
Mr. Chairman, we have been
talking with the uh the state
employees, but we are very
interested in all of the IBA
agencies honestly so the plan
would work better if all of them
were.
Well, thank you for working on
this, uh, looking forward to
seeing how the legislation does,
so you're just asking for money
for the study to advance it. How
much are you asking for, Mr.
Chairman, we're actually coming
forward with the bill um to
establish this, um, in part,
Because the federal
authorization is in statute. It
is not in regulation and due to
some recent Supreme Court
rulings actually regulatory
agencies have much less
discretion to interpret the law
than they used to, for better or
for worse, in this case, I think
this will actually be a benefit
to actually making this program
happen.
Because it says the Medicaid
forward legislation in 2025.
To initiate planning for
Medicaid forward is the first
step.
Mr. Chairman, correct, because
we would not expect an
implementation date of the
program until 2028.
So the legislation would
actually instruct the secretary
to move forward with the
application for expansion of the
eligibility and all of the
planning that would need to
occur, um, and the funding would
need to be secured over that
time period as well. And so how
much are you asking for for this
year?
We do, we have to meet with the
secretary of Healthcare
Authority in December and put
that number together. OK.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
All right, members, we're gonna
try to pick up the pace here,
we're gonna move now to um
The report on Senate Memorial
51, Senator Lopez, we'll turn it
over to you. You have 2 minutes.
Good morning, Mr. Chair.
Adam Coer, um.
It's 2 minutes times what
Um, uh, Madam Chair, Mr. Chair,
Madam Chair, um.
Members of the committee, I am
here just to report out on a
memorial that was passed by the
Senate, um.
This last, uh, it seems forever
ago. It's almost a year ago. I
can't believe how quick time
goes.
Um
for the legislative session,
soon to be former.
Uh, and what we were
Looking to do with this task
force, Mister Chair, is
Um
With all of the concerns and
issues that have been around
with CYFD, um, and it's not just
recent, Mr. Chair, as many of us
know, it's, it's been building
over
Decades.
And
I think there are um.
Most notably, you know, some,
some concerns that exist and um
and we talk about workforce, and
we talk about those who are
providing care for our, for our
children, um.
And it's, it's not just
particularly centered, Mr. Chair
on CYFD Children, Youth and
Families department
specifically, but it's a systems
issue. And with this task force,
um.
Has been working on, um, and you
can see here on the, on the
page, uh, page 2, this one does
have numbers. Thank you.
Um
Is looking at the agency mission
values and organization and
comparing it to national best
practices.
Implementation of differential
or alternative response.
To investigations and removals
of children, the availability,
needs and gaps in existing
services, best practices and
permanency and well-being,
including hard to place
children, looking at the
workforce, uh, reviewing
leveraging federal funding.
Looking, reviewing juvenile
justice, including trauma
informed programming and
behavioral health.
And of course, Mr. Chair equity
considerations.
And before I go further, uh the
task force was, um,
Given to to the legislative
Finance Committee.
And Rachel Mercer has been
phenomenal, wonderful working
with us and leading us in many
of the discussions, um,
providing information and doing
the scheduling and such of many
of the different entities that
we have sat, um.
And listen to different
presentations from around the
country.
And uh
As you can see on page 3, the
task force membership, um who
the appointments to the task
force currently are, and who is
um the appoint, you know, the
the the appointing authority. So
I believe, Mr. Chair, this was a
a pretty cross sectioned um
group of of persons to sit at
the table and and begin our our
Education as I call about what
it is that we can do to suggest
for improvement to children,
youth and families department.
And I will make mention, of
course, too that um one of our
fellow committee members,
Representative Chavez was also
appointed, um, so she too has
been, um,
Sitting through much of the
information.
And of course, bringing her
experience of when she also
worked at CYFD or before it was
called CYFD, um.
To the, to the table for us.
And Mr. Chair on page 4, it
tells it will show you the
different meeting dates that we
have had.
Our most recent, of course, was
November 15th, and it says final
task force recommendations, but
Mister Chair, when you get a
group of um experienced persons
together. Uh, it takes time to
go back through all the
information and recommendations
that we have made after each of
the hearings that we've had. So
what we are currently still
going through, Mr. Chair.
Is uh
And you'll see on the upcoming
um slides is still going through
and discussing and fine tuning
or as I call it wordsmithing,
um, some of the language, so we
don't have a final product as of
yet.
What I'm presenting to you is
simply some of the tentative
recommendations that we are
going through.
Um, we are still trying to find
a a date and time for us to
meet, cause everybody's schedule
is busy, so we can continue to
do our wordsmithing and
discussion.
And then take a final vote, um,
so that we can have a final
report that we can bring forward
for this upcoming 25 legislative
session.
Um, so what I'm going to work,
uh, go through with you on the
next um few slides.
These are, I call them tentative
recommendations because we have
not taken a final vote.
But this is part of uh the
outcome of our discussions that
we've had, um, in a pretty good
discussion group, um, mode that
we've that we've done.
So on page 5, Mr. Chair, one of
the areas, as you could see from
the initial um.
Task force charge on page 21 of
them deals with child welfare
workforce, um, and
What it looks, what we're seeing
here is that
Um, on the blue area developing
and stabilizing CYFD's workforce
is core to the functioning of
the child welfare system.
The state needs to focus on
retention, as high rates of
turnover undermine any
recruitment efforts. And so
these are some of the
considerations that we are still
in the process of working
through.
Uh, want to seeYFD to implement
a variety of strategies to
recruit, train, support, and
retain a child where for child
welfare workforce, including
establishing targets and
incentives to hire and retain
licensed social workers.
And the legislature.
Should can consider, continue to
monitor and evaluate the impact
of the $80
million that have been
appropriated to the schools of
social work.
As these investments should
increase the number of social
work graduates in New Mexico.
Um, legislature should consider
establishing House Bill 2
measures that are related to the
percentage of case workers who
are licensed as social workers.
Consider return to work
legislation for licensed social
workers to incentivize, return
to work at CYFD.
Um, the legislature, legislature
can consider.
Uh, prioritizing uh to and
address high and protective
services caseworker caseloads as
we work through the CYFD of 26
budget.
and codifying statutes CYFD
leader priority criteria.
And uh Mr. Chair, some of this
we've already done this, um, you
know, with the Office of Family
Representation, public education
department also has this awful
office of state um.
Superintendent of insurance and
of course the PRC.
And what this is, Mr. Chair,
we're referring to this is um
for those who are in that leader
position, such as maybe the
secretaries of the areas is to
have specificity as to what
their qualifications um should
be.
So that is one.
The next, and Mr. Chair, I think
you probably like for me just to
go through and then we can go
back and probably just break it
down um for any questions that
we, that the committee may have.
Um, and then on page 6 we talk
about prevention and early
intervention.
And in Mexico has gaps in its
array of prevention and early
intervention services,
particularly Evanston-based
programs which may prevent and
divert the need for foster care.
And where we are considering Mr.
Chair, members of the committee
to recommend again.
Nothing definitive as of this
time. I'm asking CYFD to
implement prevention and early
intervention programs, identify
outcome measures that include
preventing subsequent
interaction with CYFD and track
progress, prioritize
implementing programs that will
be eligible for Title IVE, of
course, which requires uh
approved state plan, and of
course, Medicaid.
We are also considering to
suggest to the legislature to
consider.
Existing statute requires at
CYFD make reasonable efforts to
preserve families.
And we should, uh, the
consideration for the
legislature to consider updating
that particular statue to
outline the types of actions
that CYFD um to take.
That includes delivering
services, um, that can be
provided for families eligible
for Title IVE and Medicaid, and
again to help connect families
to services delivered by other
departments. And of course,
that's healthcare authority and
ECECD.
And also the legislature um to
consider updating the
differential response statute.
As it currently references a
pilot to complete in 2022 and
establish a target for statewide
implementation.
Um
The next section, Mr. Chair, is
number, page 7. Community-based
prevention and intervention. Uh,
the state should prioritize
retention of foster families and
treatment foster care providers
to improve the availability of
community-based placements for
children in care, leveraging
appropriations made um through
the grow, which was our most
recent.
Um, I call it a substitute for
junior bill in the past.
On the task force, of course,
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee is still considering
these recommendations, but for
CYFD to dedicate resources at a
regional level for foster family
recruitment and training.
Consider an exit survey for
foster families to identify
retention opportunities,
leverage the grow appropriations
to pilot an intensive support
model for foster families.
focus efforts on placements for
young people who have had
multiple placements or a lack of
a home placement.
Um, also, Mr. Chair, the
legislature, uh, to consider
providing CYFD with funding for
an external entity to conduct a
race study of foster care and
TFC rates.
And the legislature to consider
ensuring the statutory functions
of the behavioral health
collaborative.
Um, making sure that those are
performed.
To identify gaps, coordinating
the behavioral healthcare
system, etc. And of course, Mr.
Chair, there are many committees
who've already reviewed this on
the behavioral health
collaborative, so there may be
some
Other, uh, suggested legislative
changes coming.
Not from the task force but for
other persons.
On page 8, Mr. Chair, under
juvenile justice.
Um, again, New Mexico should
continue to make data informed
decisions about juvenile justice
services, recommending the state
to seek better um understanding
of the current data trends and
program outcomes to inform any
future decisions about juvenile
justice, and the state should
look to implement evidence-based
and trauma-informed programs.
And again, Mister Chair, members
of the committee, again, we are
still considering, we haven't
taken a vote on these just yet,
so we're still working through
it.
Um, but CYFD, uh, to continue
evaluating the juvenile justice
budget.
To identify opportunities for
efficiency and to move resources
to the front end of the system.
Um, to consider using a
validated risk assessment tool
and resume annual public facing
reporting, and to convene with
the association of District
attorneys to facilitate
collaboration regarding
decisions to bring charges.
The legislature, um, to
consider, directing the
legislative finance Committee or
another entity to study juvenile
justice trends, programs and
outcomes, updating previous
research to better understand
current trends and inform any
future changes to the Children's
code.
The legislature to consider
updating statutory language that
is related to the community
corrections fund to allow for
the provision of services, a
pre-adjudication, in other
words, what this would be is to
have um and work with local
organizations in each of our
communities that understand each
community and the nuances that
each of us have across New
Mexico.
On page 9, system oversight
accountability and governance.
A variety of federally mandated
and state-created external
mechanisms exist.
To provide oversight of child
welfare and protection agencies.
Within New Mexico.
Um, the existing mechanisms for
oversight and accountability
have gaps and could be enhanced
to drive system improvement,
provide continuity and improve
outcomes for the children within
our system.
And again, uh, Mr. Chair, the
task force is still considering
recommending.
That uh we move the substitute
care advisory council.
From the regulation licensing
department where it currently is
housed, and we don't, we haven't
determined a department or where
to send it just yet, but to also
strengthen the functions of this
oversight body.
Um, looking at risk management
recommendation requiring all
agencies to conduct post hoc
reviews following significant
losses.
Um, that's something that we
need to to look at, um, for us
to have a better grasp as to the
costs.
Um, additional, um, performance
measures related to the child
wel welfare system and of course
the creation of additional
oversight or accountability
mechanisms, along with
streamlining mechanisms that
already exist.
And, um, Mr. Chair's kind of
short and sweet because I don't
have anything definitive with
any.
Um
How should I say endorsements or
strong support for any
particular um potential piece of
legislation that may come up.
I know that in front of the LFC
day before yesterday, there were
questions asked uh about Kara. I
know that we've had discussion
about Kara, but I know that
there will be some suggested
changes this coming legislative
session. I mean we and in this
committee and others we've all
heard the testimony, um, so I
know that there will be some
changes proposed, but again, I
don't have anything definitive,
say this is what we're bringing
forward just because our task
force is still discussing and
we'll be taking votes hopefully
within the next month.
So with that, Mr. Tara, I'll
stand for questions and my
comadre here Representative
Chavez, maybe if she'd like to
add a few um.
Comments, please, Mr. Chair.
So Representative Chavez, you
have something you want to add?
Yeah, I mean, I think that this
has been um an incredible task.
Uh, in terms of looking at CYFD
and, and what all of the issues
are and there are many, um,
And I guess for myself, I'm not
convinced that
Um
That the current structure.
Is the structure that can help
move CYFD forward.
Um, I think that, um,
It's not getting better.
Um, and we really need to do
something to.
To address all of the issues.
Thank you.
Stanfo questions, Mr. Chair.
And Mr. Chair, it's gonna be 2
minutes, and if everybody
actually sticks to their 2
minutes, we will be back on
time. So please try to stick to
2 minutes.
Good. Let's start with senator
Stephanics and just move right
around and give everybody a
shot. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
I think that last year, thank
you for the presentation, and I
know this probably was a
difficult group and a difficult
conversation for change.
Um, last year we held off.
Um,
Passing things that would change
things structurally, but my
first question is, I think it's
gonna be coming, but my first
question is, what's CYFD
responsibilities could be
transferred to other agencies
besides the one that was
mentioned. Did the group discuss
that at all?
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator, I think
we went the high, took the high
road on it at this point.
Um, I know that there's
suggestions if I may, you know,
the, the commission, um, bill
that I know Senator TZ Pino and
Representative Chavez and
others, uh, there's the
ombudsman. I mean, there,
there's some other discussions,
but we really
Quite honestly, haven't taken
the deep, deep dive.
Into removing, I mean EC ECD was
mentioned because that early
childhood function was removed,
so that's one portion, but
Um, there's still that difficult
decision to go. Thank you, and
Mr. Chair, I was one of those
last year who felt that we
should
Let the administration try.
And I now believe that we should
be open to change. Thank you
very much, Mr.
Representative Jason. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman, and I, I, um also
appreciate your presentation and
the work that you have managed
to do. I think it's a pretty
formidable task. Um, I, I wanted
to say that um with regard to um
Senator Stephanic's comments. I,
I've never been opposed to
independent oversight. It's just
a matter of, of how one goes
about it and I haven't liked any
of the proposals so far.
But, um, the one thing I, as a
former practitioner as a court
appointed attorney in this, this
field, I have to say that um.
The substitute care advisory
council has been of no value to
me as an attorney.
Um, and I did not find that the
um they were valuable in the
court proceedings, and right now
the office is one person at RLD
who um has actually doesn't
report to anybody, says no one
has authority over the SCAC and
quite frankly, I think that
needs to be part of your
scrutiny here. Um, there's no
point in
having that, I, I, there, there
was a previous, um, I can't
remember what they call them,
but public members, um reviewed
cases
and review board. Thank you very
much, Mr. Chairman. I don't know
how that left my head.
But we had an opportunity as
guardians ad litem or as
respondent attorneys to provide
um
Input to those and then the
court looked at the reports. I
don't see that the SCAC is doing
that and I think there were some
questions about the value of the
citizen review boards too, but
um right now, there's, I think,
a substantial budget for that
office and as far as I can see
with little result.
Representative Herman, uh, thank
you, and Mr. Chair and
presenters, the one thing that I
would bring to your attention
when we were in Silver City, uh,
The university brought to our
attention that less than 10% of
the people who were studying
social uh welfare.
We were majoring in welfare. I'm
sorry.
Social work social work, I'll
get it right. We're actually
passing the exam, and so that's
gonna be major to though your
workforce here, and I don't know
if that's true or not, that's
been some discussion, but it's
important for you to find, to
bring that forward and then to
help comment on that.
Um, Rachel, you know, I think
that, I think that's not
accurate, but go ahead, Rachel.
um, Mr. Chair, uh, that's what I
was going to say, I think
there's a lot of narrative
around that, and I might
actually uh point to
Representative Chavez, who has
compiled some of that data if
you want to speak to it, um, but
essentially what what we have
seen when looking at the
national passage rate. Well, our
passage rate for BSWs may be
slightly below the national
average, particularly the MSW
and um and LASW level. We are,
we are relatively on par with.
national passage rates.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And I can't really add any more
to that, but that's correct. I'm
not sure why that 10% or where
it came from, but it's not
accurate, um, and we do have the
information that we can maybe
pass out to the committee, Mr.
Chair. Yeah, it was, it was
given to the health, the social
work consortium yesterday. I
just got a copy of it and I'll
try to send it around, but it,
it did show that
Um, for the bachelor's in social
work taking exam, the, the pass
rate for some institutions was
very low, but it was a small
number too. It was like 8 would
take it and 1 would pass it. um.
For the master's level, I think,
is Rachel pointed out, they're
very much on a par with national
or actually above national in
many cases.
Thank you.
Representative Martinez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. One
quick question. Do you have a
target date?
When this report will be
compiled.
Mr. Chair Representative, I'm
hoping by uh before Christmas.
think, Mister Chair, that was
the only question I had.
Representative Jones. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. He reads my mind.
That was part of what I was
gonna ask you, I noticed on the
task force charge.
Um, that you were gonna
considering um
The task force would make
recommendations to the
legislature and governor for
consideration during, I'm sure
you meant 2025 legislative
session, yeah, which is great
and, and within a month or so, I
appreciate that. I just wanna
say,
Um, the task force. I like the
variety of people you have in
your task force. Have you had um
attendance by all those people
at all your monthly meetings.
Mr. Chair, yes, the secretary,
she's had her staff there,
everybody that is listed on
here, if they're not in person,
they're on Zoom. Oh.
This is good, um.
I've got mixed feelings about
this. You can't help but have
feelings about this, um, because
here we are a year later.
I remember saying, same day last
year, I was nearly in tears
about CYFD and how the urgency.
So I, I feel like we can't just
throw emotional legislature,
legislation out there, I get
that. So this is necessary and I
really appreciate the work that
all of you have done.
Um, toward just organizing what
uh directions we need to go and
uh looking forward to supporting
some.
Some legislation that will
change things for our kids.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative Thompson.
Thank you, Mister Chair. So,
I heard at risk, um, and early
intervention. So once again, a
plug for the family infant
toddler program, the at-risk
portion of it. I mean, we're
trying to prevent ACEs, and
those are the things that can be
at risk, you know, substance
abuse, untreated mental illness,
um, domestic violence, all those
things that can lead our kids.
bad outcomes, um, used to be
covered under at risk, you know,
it's say, oh, mom is only 15 and
dad is abusive and the kid
doesn't have any delays, but,
you know, this is not the best
situation for a baby, so let's
provide them some extra support.
So just another plug for making
at risk under the FI program,
robust and meaningful right now
it's an hour of service a month,
which uh doesn't really help
much of anybody.
That's a maximum of not just of
all services together. Oh,
sorry, I didn't start my own
timer, but, um, and then
qualifications for a secretary.
What an idea. I mean, really,
what an idea and it's, you know,
I mean, it's not that I'm
looking at any current secretary
or former secretary per se, but
I mean, when we have a secretary
who goes from tourism to CYFD.
It seems like that those are two
different skill sets and so I
mean maybe we need to start
thinking about
Qualifications for every
secretary in minimum
qualification. So since the
Senate does the confirming,
maybe the Senate wants to uh
come up with some ideas for
qualifications. So thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Cheer may just answer that
one. Yes, please. As the former
chair of rules Committee for 19
years.
Go back and look at some of my
legislation that I introduced to
try and establish
qualifications, not for CYFD but
other departments. If you know
the only one that ever passed
was for the ped, public
education department secretary.
There was resistance from my
colleagues in the Senate about
having
Well, hopefully we have some new
sheriffs in town to uh to make
some changes that are long
overdue. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Just an FYI from historical
information.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I was
looking at your task force
membership and I'm glad to see
um.
Uh, Doctor Natibatiad, I'm from
NMSU, but I was also wondering
because um.
Uh, the task force or pilot
program that Farmington did in
Donana County. Are you taking
into account, uh, that, um,
their results or their uh
recommendations too.
Um, Mr. Chair, um,
Representative, yes.
We've, we've listened to a lot
of testimony from a lot of
different um.
Programs if you wish to call
pilot projects as such, and it
it's all part of it's all part
of the consideration that we're
looking at.
Um, and I know quite frankly,
it's like time we got to stop
doing the pilot.
So that's kind of where we've
had our discussion. Pilots are
done. Let's, let's see how we
implement the statewide.
OK, thank you. And if I may also
mention too is I know that the
um
Caviness has been also part of
our discussion, and I know that
they're still having hearings
today. There's been the out um
the report from the co neutrals.
And that's still yet I think to
be part of our discussion that
we'll have the next and whenever
we have this rescheduled um
meeting of our task force too.
OK. Yes, thank you, um, the
arbitration, uh, meetings have
been going on and.
Maybe we can go back and see
some of them.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Cha.
Did the, uh, or has there been
any discussion about making a
recommendation on the issue of
confidentiality.
Um, Mr. Chair, no.
We haven't had any, did you have
a question?
Oh, sure. It just seems to me
that that's a crucial issue
regarding
the credibility of the
department in the state when
they
Say, and I'm not sure it's
accurate, but they say they
cannot comment on their
performance in a given case
because confidentiality forbids
that.
The impression is left that
they're covering their tails,
not protecting the child.
Whether that's true or not, the
impression is a strong factor in
the low public support for the
department. So I think
clarifying the confidentiality
rules to make clear that
There should be no use of that
provision to protect
The department from public
scrutiny, but in their ways of
doing that, I mean, every state
has dealt with that now, except
I think us we're one of the few
that haven't. So I was hoping
that the task force would, would
take a look at that.
Um, Mr. Chair, I, I think we've
had talk about it, but it's not
specifically under our purview
that we were looking at, um,
based as to what the task force
was charged with, but we've
talked. I do know Mr. Chair,
that there are a couple of other
task forces out there. We have
many, um, I think that that may
have a recommendation coming up
this session about that.
So it'll it'll come in front of
us.
The other thing I would say is
that the, the substitute care
advisory Committee.
Or whatever they're calling it
now, um.
The council, uh, they just, they
just have not.
produce anything of any use in
the last 4 years. We get an
annual report from them. They'll
look at like 20 cases in the in
the in a year and make some
recommendations that are
So I'm not sure that it makes a
lot of sense to move them out
and do something better with
them. I I just think it's a,
it's a question of the function
is so minimal right now that
Nobody trusts them to do much of
anything.
Representative Chasey.
Yeah, it, it, it, it's
It's just a
It's harsh to say it, but I
don't think they're producing
what they what they ever
promised to produce. And, if I
may say, I, I was able to join
on Zoom for their meeting they
just had last month and with
those persons who were there, I
think they, they realized and
understand that there's a lot.
Missing.
So
I think for those who were
there, they're not complete.
There's there's they they need
help.
In whatever way we determine.
Well, um, anything else, any
other comments or questions?
Yes, Representative Chas Mr.
Chair, if I can, I just wanted
to, to make some additional
comments and response to some of
the things that have been
raised, um, in terms of at-risk
kids, we have, we have had some
conversations about that in the
task force in terms of, you
know, how do we as a state make
that a priority, uh, in terms
of, you know, making sure that
kids don't enter child welfare
and and and foster care, um, and
then I think the other piece
that we have had some.
conversation about is, um, a
secretary with some specific
qualifications, right? I think
that this secretary has done
some hard work, but I also think
that we need a secretary that
has some child welfare
experience background, um, and,
um, education around around um
the issues that we're facing.
The other piece that we haven't
dived into a lot about uh in
terms of a possible solution is
the whole idea of a
missions so that we get out of
um sort of this political
appointment and chaos that that
has been going on in CYFD ever
since I, uh,
before it was CYFD, um, there
was some of that, and I think
the other piece too is that when
the department was under a
consent decree, there were some
really major improvements that
were made, um, and as soon as
the department came out from
under that consent decree, it
started to slide downward, um,
and I think that we see that in
terms
of the lack of the numbers of
social licensed social workers
that are employed, um, because
that number is now what 8% of
the social workers or the
workforce, um, and that's,
that's dismal, um, and so we
have one more meeting and.
We'll definitely have some
hopefully some some
recommendations and um there
will be legislation put forward
in terms of um looking at um a
commission.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, I ask
Representative Chavez clarifying
question.
When, when did they come out of
a consent decree.
Oh gosh, it was, I don't
remember the exact year, but it
was sometime in the 90s. It's
been a while.
No.
Well, thank you, Senator. Did
you have a closing comment? Just
one more thing too is to say,
um, and we've had intensive
discussion about workforce.
Um, in, in talking about uh
valuing also our employees.
And what we do about invest
because no matter what we do,
um, if we don't invest and help
our employees, we don't have a
department and we, you know, in
other words, what is it? Is it
the cart before the horse or
what is it? How how do we move
forward with that, making sure
that our employees know that we
do value them.
Because if not, we're going to
still continue to have that
revolving door.
And we can't provide services
for our families.
Thank you. Well, thank you and
thank you for all the work you
put into this, uh, and, and
we'll continue to put in, I
guess, is a commit is the task
force meets again. Thank you.
So we'll go now to public
comment.
And, and we have several people
who've signed up for it, and I
know at least one person here
who texted me and said,
She wanted to make public
comment, but she didn't sign up,
so I'm sorry, you can't make any
public comment.
So we'll let her make comment
too.
Um
Oh, look, all these people now,
don't you understand you have to
sign up to me.
All right. We'll, we'll let you
off, but we'll start, uh, and
remember, keep it to 3 minutes,
and, and I'm gonna call you up
in, in, in pairs, so two people
come up at a time and, and uh as
soon as one finishes, the other
one slides into the chair and
shares their opinions with us.
Natine and Robert Cagle.
There's a powerhouse duo.
Remember 3 minutes apiece, so
Nat Dean, you go first and then
Robert will have his 3 minutes.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam
Vice Chair, I, I hope that was a
compliment.
Um, my name is Nat Dean. I'm a
person with multiple
disabilities and a disability
advocate.
Yeah.
Mhm
Um,
I, uh,
Have had a repeat, repeat calls
from an individual and also
their family and also care
coordination and also the, the
The MCO.
I'm sorry.
them.
Yeah
Yeah
Um, and, uh, they're, uh,
there's a lot of confusion
between Presbyterian that as the
provider.
Saint Presbyterian Hospital or
Presbyterian Medical Services
and Presbyterian in the managed
care organization,
and it's led to quite a few
breakdowns in establishing a
continuity of care for the
Medicaid enrolled uh
participant, um, I think that
we're always working to help
lift people up and understanding
the, the differences between two
things that sound similar but
are not the same.
Um, I also wanted to just
mention something that might be
worth examining more closely in
the next uh interim, which is
examining MEP, the Medicaid
estate recovery program, because
fact versus fallacy is a very
significant issue, so someone to
were to pass, who was a skilled
nursing facility and is
receiving Medicaid. The cost of
that care and other additional
care can be
Um, accessed as part of, uh, a
repayment to both uh federal and
state, and it has become a much
more robust pursuance of that
estate recovery because of
trying to make up for the cost
at the federal level and it's
uh, we tried to put some
protections in during the last
legislative session, but the
state law cannot override the
federal obligation on that. Um,
I will be happy to help on that
if someone would like me to. And
I would like very much to thank
Leader Chase.
for her very many years of
service, and other outgoing
legislators, but I just wanna
say thank you very much, Mr.
Chair, Madam Chair, members of
the committee and Leader Casey.
Thank you, Ned.
Um
Robert Cagle and uh Karen
Armitage will be after Robert.
Two other parents when Kim
Carter and Dan Taggart asked me
if I could, uh, do a comment for
him quick.
So I'd like to stretch it just a
bit. I'll keep it pretty brief.
In our uh earlier discussion
this week in the LFC evaluation,
I started working on a point by
point uh responses, uh,
Representative Thompson was
discussed.
Uh, it got to be about 10 pages
and I decided to trim it down to
2. I talked to the therapist,
the providers, the case
managers, the parents, uh, the
guardianship agencies, and I
crafted this response, um, it's
self-evident. I'm requesting
that the report be withdrawn and
revised.
Um
As I had time to go through this
report a little bit. I woke up
this morning and realized it's
not a report from my kid's
perspective, it's a hate crime.
Um, what I flashed on and woke
up before this morning is back
in college, I did a report on
Hitler's henchman Goebels and
how they use manipulated the
language and the propaganda to
do the Jewish thing. Can you
let's stay away from attacks.
OK. So,
In essence,
This decres discredits every
provider, every person and
every.
Part of the waiver.
Uh, and it, it's, this is not
acceptable.
Uh, we, I talked a little bit
about uh getting some uh like a
bill of rights together and I
realized one of the big problems
that we have is we don't have
real valid information to tell
how this waiver's doing.
Uh, there was a misconception
that's going around about what's
a, uh, an A&E and what's a
general events thing. So I've
listed of that, like a
medication error is a general
event. It's not an abuse and
neglect, that's a different
thing. All of these, these, this
list of stuff is, is required by
the feds, the Medicaid thing and
it's in our waiver for them to
collect this information. So
they, they by law already have
to have all of this stuff with
the exception of the mortality
data, and perhaps
Doctor Acosta could address what
mortality data they would have.
Um, so this would be the basis
of what my legislative ask would
be that, that uh we remodel a
little bit of 2816A, call it 22
and add this reporting
requirement. So we have actual
data of how long people live,
how many hospitalizations, if
they're running around the
street, if they're in urgent
care, uh, what causes their
death that, and different things
of complaints and stuff. And you
can see here, this is a page out
of our uh Medicaid wait.
that shows that they already are
telling the feds they have this
information. So this isn't
something that is gonna be some
big burden for them to do.
They're already required to do
it.
Um, and that's, that's my asset.
I appreciate it if you would
consider it.
Uh, for Renee Kim Carter, uh,
I've received this a few days
ago.
It's a Facebook post. Please
advise me I'm at a total loss
what to do. My son was released
yesterday from the hospital in
Santa Fe. After 4 days of
excruciating pain in the
gallbladder remover and other
cleanup surgeries. The hospital
in Santa Fe released him in my
care. They sent an oxygen
concentrator home, but no
incontinental surgeon supplies
is a drain coming out of the
stomach with few written
instructions. Currently on the
DD waiver and changing to Mea,
he resides at a group home here
in Santa Fe. This, there's an
open investigation on this
corporate nonprofit home.
Neglect food insecurity staffing
problems. How can I send him
back when the staff isn't even
trained to shave him cut his or
cut his nails or follow doctor's
orders. Diet change is written
in July by the doctor to make
lunch for him and send him out
without lunch. He's in the
process of changing over to
media and Didi has the
paperwork, but this process
takes 60 days. I've written me
via and DD department heads.
Nobody returns calls or emails
about the expediting appointment
tomorrow with primary doctor to
try and get supports at family
home. Now
I need him in the house, the
hospital not pressed, sent him
home with no home health plan,
no incontinence, no wound
supplies, no oxygen meter to
measure his 02 case manager and
is given notice and is not
consulting me.
Uh, this has gone on for 2 days.
There is no response whatsoever.
This is a perfect case for the
intensive medical living.
And the case manager cannot put
it on the budget, because if you
have no provider, you can't put
it on the budget.
And that's how we avoid giving
people the right to a fair
hearing, because not having that
to be able to put the provider
on the budget, the clock never
ticks for the 45 days by law you
have to give the service or give
them a fair hearing.
Um
And also for Dan Taggart, I kind
of wanted to go through his
situation. Uh, he, he's a very
rebellion very honorable man. He
was the head physicist to
oversee the whip plant in
Carlsbad.
He had a son with very severe
autism, um,
Representative Thompson
situation is similar.
They could not educate him
there. They sent him to school
in Texas, Kansas, Baltimore, um,
Utah, uh, I forget where else
that was all paid for by the
MCOs at one point they got tired
of paying for it and demanded
that he come home.
When there was no educational
plan in their placement in the
group home in Albuquerque. We
got to Santa Fe judge to say no
way. So when he hit 22 and was
no longer entitled to the
education. They told Taggart
they could take him out of the
the uh intermediate care
facility in Colorado, which was
doing just fine and drag him out
and put him into an understaffed
house in, in Rio Rancho.
The staff at Rio Rancho, that
house was closed down by the Rio
Rancho Fire Department and code
people. It was so horrific, so
they moved him up near the
corner of Montgomery and
Wyoming. The kid runs away, so
you've got him running away all
the time in the biggest traffic
area in Albuquerque. He tried
for almost a year to get a
different placement. He asked
for an intermediate care
facility placement.
Since the Lewis lawsuit, the
state has had regulations that
require the department to have a
registry for people wanting to
be in in intermediate care
facilities. They have refused to
conduct that and do it for
decades.
He could not be put on a
registry for a house. The
providers of intermediate care
facilities can't register their
openings.
It's, it's, and that's an
entitlement.
That we're blocking through this
process.
Now he moved, he had to move his
kid from Albuquerque to Las
Cruces, so he was commuted to
Albuquerque. Now it's Carlsbad
to Las Cruces.
One of the largest groups of
intermediate care facilities in
this state is in Carlsbad.
His right to that care has been
abused in disregarded and denied
for 20 years. Thank, thank you,
Robert.
Um, Karen Armitage, followed by
Connie Beal.
Let's see, maybe some of these.
I don't think so.
Ellen.
OK
Go ahead.
Members of the committee, I am
so honored to be here today, um,
to bestow an award on one of
your own.
Could you please introduce,
please introduce yourself. Thank
you for the reminder last year.
Um, my name is Karen Armitage. I
represent all the pediatricians
in the state of New Mexico, and
I attend these meetings in order
to carry information back to
them, um, to support their
practice. But today, my.
Uh, presence here is
celebratory.
Um, we would like to bestow a
lifetime achievement award on a
member of your committee, um,
we're not sure how we could have
done the kind of health policy
work we've done without this
member's help, and this is a
special day and that it's his
last day of service in this
role. I'd like to present the
award to Senator Gerald
Ortizipino for the for the New
Mexico Pediatric Society.
Robert Greenberg, lifetime
achievement award for advocacy
on the behalf of children.
Um, permission to approach the
chair.
Yes.
OK
Now we're going to the people
who didn't sign up.
So we'll start with Connie B.
Hill. She told me she was gonna
sign up but didn't come in and
sign up. Well, my name's on that
piece of paper.
Oh, you signed a different
piece, OK.
Anyway, I wanted to echo the
sentiments.
Acknowledging our outgoing
leaders, um, Representative
Chasey, Senator TCP now.
And uh
Senator Tollman, who's not here
today.
And acknowledging the work that
they have started and say that I
hope this group will continue
that effort. With that said, I'd
like to acknowledge two major
bills that came out last year.
We were here talking last year.
Senate Bill 149 and Senate Bill
23.
I was sent to drafting by
Senator Antoinetteidio Lopez,
uh, to continue the work of SB
149, which did not get funded
well, lo and behold.
Adrian Avila, George Munoz's
assistant went to Miami.
Hence, the front page of the
Albuquerque Journal on Tuesday,
says in the crime bill, there
will be a trust fund set up for
behavioral health. Yeah, we're
moving in the right direction.
There's need for more major
support for our existing DOH
facilities now with Patrick
Allen leaving and Gina de Blasi
coming in, I hope that we can
continue to work on those
facilities, specifically BHI Las
Vegas, turquoise Loch
Albuquerque, and swell.
SB 23 is a critical bill, and I
hope someone in this committee
might take it forward because
courts corrections got a draft
of the competency bill, and I
don't think it's changed
significantly from when it
didn't pass last year.
These are the things that I'm
asking this committee to do with
all due respect. Please provide
scholarships for staffing from
our local universities and beef
up the behavioral health
initiatives for staff.
UNM is working hard with uh with
Highlands on a social work
program, but I'd like to see a
lot more support for the local
universities. Please also
support um this trust fund part
of the crime bill that's coming
out today. I don't know the
sponsors, but Mimi Stewart was
in the newspaper, so I presume
that's leadership.
Number 3 is please um,
Keep working on Medicaid so that
we can have longer term Medicaid
to serve those people in
behavioral health.
Um, number 5 is, I agree
completely with Representative
Thompson. We've had far too much
overturn in all of our cabinet
secretaries, and we just
Pasoralen, so it'd be good to
know that they're gonna um be
around for a while. And again, I
just wanna say that we're moving
in the right direction. More
people have gone to Miami, 50 so
far, 8 more in December, and
Antoinette Sio Lopez was heading
there in October, but.
I believe this is an initiative
that will continue to grow, and
it's well supported by the
Supreme Court and now our
senators, so thank you everyone
here and I'll continue to do my
part to bring awareness and, and
bring better treatment. Thank
you so much.
Thank you, Connie. Uh, anybody,
yes, come on up.
Senator, sorry for not signing
up. Um, uh, Mr. Chair and Madam
co-chair and members of the
committee. I'm Doctor Wendy
Johnson. I've been a family
physician in northern New
Mexico.
For um 15 years or so in New
Mexico, working at La Familia,
always a community health
centers and then also now
currently at El Centro and I've
worked all over northern New
Mexico, Las Vegas, Taos, lot of
the little communities, um, and
I wanted to just address one
thing about the Medicaid forward
plan and legislation that I
don't think was really brought
out enough in the, in the
testimony in the short time that
books had another huge economic
benefit of this um legislation
to the state, um, that, that I
don't think was really
addressed, which is the huge
benefits to the workforce. Um,
in seeing thousands of patients
in northern New Mexico on
Medicaid and privately insured
and uninsured, I can tell you
that many, many, many people are
not in the workforce because
They were they're working
part-time jobs, low-paying jobs
because they simply cannot
afford to lose their Medicaid,
not only for themselves but for
their children and other
dependents that they have. So I
see this literally every day in
my clinic that people will not
take higher paying jobs will not
go full time because they cannot
lose their, their healthcare.
Um, so, uh, in a lot of these
folks are in our most critical
sectors where.
We are just suffering because of
a lack of workforce education,
teachers, other kinds of workers
in education, health care,
nurses, you'd think have a high
enough salary, but no, uh, a lot
of them, especially in high uh
uh in uh in high cost of living
cities like Santa Fe and Taos,
um, also in the same boat. And
then there's the other category
of uninsured and privately
insured patients whose I see
their health deterior.
and I see them drop out of the
workforce because they can't
afford the medications to
properly manage their diabetes.
And so they end up with kidney
disease. They end up with other
kinds of disabilities and they
drop out of the workforce. I see
people all the time not able to
afford physical therapy copays,
so they have debilitating back
pain, can't get better, drop out
of the workforce. I just want
you to consider that also, that
wasn't addressed in the studies,
and I think it's a huge economic
benefit.
of a healthy workforce that can,
when we desperately need that,
especially in education and
healthcare. Thanks for your
consideration. Thank you,
doctor.
Next
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, my
name is Jim Copeland. I'm the
executive director of the
Association of Developmental
Disabilities, Community
Providers, and we are a little
late to the dance, but I, I have
my goal is to get out of here
before the vice chair's alarm
goes off. Uh, we've been working
with the healthcare authority
and with the early childhood
education and care department to
try to come up with some funding
to uh reinstate the rate
increases that were retracted by
the health, the early, early
childhood education and care
department.
Um, we're also working to fund a
partial increase for the 7
services on all four of the
developmental disability waivers
that did not receive a
recommended rate increase from
the 2023 rate study. The problem
with both of these approaches is
in order to maximize our state
general fund dollars there will
have to be state plan amendments
filed with CMS by the Healthcare
Authority to get the approval
to, to increase these rates.
So we're looking at different
ways to try to make that happen,
but particularly for the 7
services on the developmental
disabilities waiver if we can't
get some sort of rate adjustment
to those providers, they will
have been without a recommended
rate increase since the 2019
rate study other than the 5.32%
cost of living adjustment that
they got July 1, 2023.
The next rate study is supposed
to be done sometime in calendar
year 25, but those rates won't
be available to process for rate
increases until FY 27.
So the providers of those
supported living services and
the 2 or 3 other services that
didn't get a recommended rate
increase would have been without
a significant rate increase for
8 years since 2019.
Uh, so we're just asking, uh,
you guys to take that under
advisement, the legislation
isn't done yet. We, we're
working with sponsors now to get
that legislation drafted and get
it introduced so that
legislation will be available,
uh, submitted at a later date,
but we would certainly recommend
some sort of uh recommendation
from you guys to fund the rate
increases that were retracted in
fit and to fund the 7 services
that didn't get rate increases
on the DD waiver. Thank you,
sir. Thank you, Jim.
Is there anyone else who had
thought they were going to make
public comment but forgot to
sign up.
Hm
OK, Mr. Chair.
Um, are we allowed to make
public comment?
We, I think we established that
precedent last time
she is but you have the special
discounted legislator time
frame. Thank you.
Um, well, Mr. Chair, um, we also
would like to recognize um your
experience and years of
dedication to this committee as
well as Representative Chasey,
and this is.
Um
From all of us and including
from us as legislators and
staff. So thank you for your
years of service.
You guys
And, and we love you and you
will be sorely missed.
It, and Mr. Cha, may we please
take our um picture together
with you before you go to lunch.
Well, we, we have, we have a
working lunch here today.
So before we work can we take
the picture?
Yes, not hungry
if we can if we can do one quick
thing, we have the minutes that
have just been distributed to
you from the, the uh
Rio Rancho meeting more people.
Oh, I, I almost forgot. I
apologize.
We had two people who signed up
to make comment online, um, and
that's Mike McMillan, uh, and
Stephanie Richmond. Let's start
with you, uh, Doctor McMillan.
Hello, Mr. Chair. Madam Vice
Chair, members of the committee,
Mike McMillan with Southwest
Bone and Joint Institute in
Silver City.
A couple of points I'd like to
make during comment uh today
and, and for the committee to
consider, um, on Medicaid
reimbursement.
Please consider raising those
rates, continuing to raise those
rates, but including all
providers.
And not just carving out
specific providers for rate
increases, and the other point
here is we also need to uh
consider raising the floor.
Right now, the floor is 100% of
Medicare, um, at some point, uh,
hopefully soon, we need to raise
that floor as well, so all
providers, um, see an, an
increase to, to Medicaid
reimbursement, so please
consider to to con continue to
increase the
but increase it for all
providers, um, and also consider
a rule um bump or a real
increase just for rule providers
because of the increased cost
and, and providing services in
our rural areas.
The other point I would like to
um
bring to the attention of the
committee is medical
malpractice. Um, over the last 4
years, we've seen an average of
about a 10% increase to our
medical malpractice premiums.
Just this morning, I received
our renewal for this next year.
So this next year, our practice
will be seen in 18.5% increase
to our medical malpractice
premium.
I know that's, it's been a, a,
a, a bit of uh a point of
contention, so that's, that's
something I wanted to share with
the committee just, just
received that today. It's an
18.5% increase. With these
continual high increases to
medical malpractice and other
practice costs.
We've really got to look at
Medicaid.
Reimbursement and continuing to,
to keep up with these
inflationary increases.
I did share this information
just this morning with Allegra
and asked her to share it with
the committee would be glad to
have uh
Offline conversations about this
and other topics to help, uh,
support our healthcare
providers, especially our rural
healthcare providers, as we get
ready for the upcoming session.
I appreciate your, your time
this morning or this afternoon
and uh thank you for your
service.
Thank you, doctor.
Uh, then finally we have,
and I
Stephanie Richmond.
Hello, Mr. Chair and members of
the committee, says Stephanie
Richmond, the president of the
New Mexico Academy of Physician
Assistants. It was a pleasure to
have presented to this committee
at the September meeting in
Silver City. The Academy of New
Mexico PAs is motivated to move
forward with legislative efforts
for the upcoming session, uh, at
that meeting, representative
Ferrari identified legislation
that could include PAs and the
ability of signing death
certificates and representative
Thomson.
expressed interest in sponsoring
a bill for our draft legislation
regarding PA supervision.
I look forward to working with
you and your staff in these
efforts, and I'm happy to
provide my contact information
for our future collaboration.
Thank you for your service.
Thank you very much, uh,
Stephanie.
Mr. Chair, uh, since, since I
was called out, another thing I
forgot I promised. Um, if you
could contact me on my
legislative email and it's
available online. It's Thompson
with no P, and we'll start the
conversation. Thank you.
Thank you, Stephanie. Thank you.
It's Joanne Ferrari.
Excellent. I look forward to it.
Thank you.
I get off the hook on that one.
So it turns out that that there
will be a couple of bills
considered for endorsement this
afternoon that that covered
these topics. So we, we may be
OK. Um, so the minutes of the uh
Rio Rancho meeting.
Uh, we've been passed out and we
need to take action on them. So
we have a motion to
And the second, is there any
opposition to uh adopting the
minutes or accepting the minutes
of the
improving the minutes, I guess
is what we're doing. We're
approving the medicine.
Seeing none will consider that
to have been done. And the food
isn't here yet, but they're
tracking it down. Somebody may
have
Kidnapped it on the.
Um, so we're, we're
You could do the picture. Yeah,
why don't we go ahead and do a,
a photo op, uh, we, we're
scheduled to have the
Uh, working lunch started at
12:45 and it is 12:45 now. It's
12:55. So, um,
right after the photo op, it's
the people that are gonna make
the presentation would come on
up. uh, Doctor Acosta on the
youth risk and resilience
survey. Uh, so we'll do that
right after that and then we may
have people slipping out to get
food while, when it does get
here.
