District 40, which is realar
Rancho.
Morning, Madam Chair. I'm
Senator Katie Dohek from Senate
District 10, which is
Albuquerque's, uh, North Valley,
uh, and downtown and uh west
side.
Didn't matter, man. Good
afternoon, Madam Proim. My name
is Pat Woods. I actually
represent Senate District 7,
which is Curriqua Union and
Harding, but we'll change that.
I'll pencil that in.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair,
Madam Protem, I'm Bill Sherrer,
District one, Farmington, and
Harding has 25,000 cows and 4
people. That's why it's not on
there.
Uh, good afternoon, Peter Wurtz,
Senate District 25 Santa Fe.
Thank you. Let's move to
Patricia Royal Caviero. Thank
you, uh, Madam Purtem Patricia
Royal Caballero, I represent
House District 13, which is the
far southwest quadrant of
Albuquerque and happy to be
here. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Protem or
afternoon actually. Thank you
for having us. Glad to be here,
Gail Armstrong, state
representative for District 49,
uh, largest house district in
the state.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair. Uh,
Dayan Hoffman v. Hill,
representative for House
District 15, North Valley of
Albuquerque. Happy to be here.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Rena
Sapansy representing House
District 47 in Santa Fe.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
Javier Martinez, District 11,
downtown Albuquerque and parts
of the North Valley.
Thank you so much and the
co-chair with me at this
committee. I'm state Senator
Mimi Stewart.
District 17 International
District and the East Gateway
area.
Uh, uh, representative, would
you like to introduce yourself?
Thank you, Madam Chair, Alan
Martinez, House District 23.
Thank you.
All right, let's first, uh,
approve our agenda as you see,
we're gonna talk about the
capital to security and the code
of conduct and our
Our uh
Working group will talk with us
and the staff reports.
Right, we have
A motion to approve any uh
Opposition to that, seeing none,
uh, and next we have minutes,
just one set of minutes to
approve.
I move adoption of the minutes,
Madam co-chair. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Uh, any opposition to
that, seeing none, we've done
that.
All right, let's hear from
Shawna about capital security.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
Shawna Caseer, director of the
council Service, uh, by statute,
as you may all be aware, the New
Mexico State Police has
concurrent or joint jurisdiction
over the state capitol along
with the Capitol security staff,
uh, during the legislative
session. Uh, there's been
several sessions between the
staff of both agencies to ensure
close collaboration and
coordination over security
matters during the session, and
to ensure that the legislature,
legislators, staff, and the
public are kept safe.
Traditionally a representative
of the state police has come
before the council, uh, to
provide some remarks. So at this
time, I would like to invite
Major Alex Rodriguez, uh, to
join me in addressing the
council.
Oh welcome, Major Rodriguez.
Good afternoon, uh, Mr. Speaker,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, this year's
legislative session budget for
uh the New Mexico State Police
security detail is going to be
$489,320.62. Um, that will
include, uh, 60 days, um,
involving uh we'll have one
lieutenant here full time, uh, 4
sergeants and a total of 36
officers from around the state.
Um, male, female, uh, and this
will be
from every corner of the state
of New Mexico, uh, ultimately
this will be in 2 rotations, so
you will see 2 sergeants here,
uh, throughout the, throughout
the session, you'll see a total
of 18 officers day, night, and
and graveyard shift. Uh, this
also includes our special
operations unit, um, conducting
bomb sweeps and uh bug sweeps uh
for the uh for the session, um,
and travel to and from. Our
officers will be here in Santa
Fe, uh, once they get here to
Santa Fe, they will be here for
the duration of the session.
They will not be going home uh
for their duration.
time here in in the capital. So
the, the 30 days that each
officer is here will be spent
here.
All right. Thank you so much.
Uh, questions or comments, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, madam. I
just want to thank you and your
officers for um making the time
and making the sacrifice to help
secure the building, to to help
keep us and our staff safe and
also the thousands of visitors
that descend upon the state
capitol, um, during sessions,
so, um, you know, I know it's a
sacrifice for for you all and
for them to be away from family
for for such a long time. Uh, so
I just wanna say thank you.
Appreciate you. Thank you, sir.
All right. Any other comments?
Right, I'll, I'll add my thanks
question, you, your officers, if
they live around the state and
then they come up here for a
period of time. How do we put
them up?
Uh, we should have a little uh a
police dormitory close to the
Capitol or something. How's that
work, Mr. Speaker, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, um, so
we do have a police dormitory
that's at headquarters, but
that's also, uh, that's also
housing our recruits, so, um,
ultimately they end up coming up
here on per diem, uh, because we
do not have enough space to to
uh put them all up uh for the
duration of this.
All right. Well, thanks for
that. I did not know that.
All right. Well, thank you so
much for your report. Thank you,
Shawna. Let's move on to our
next agenda item.
Code of conduct. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Um, I would like to
invite some of the working group
members to come up and join me
for this presentation, uh, be
Dennis Roche, uh, Lorraine
Montoya, Sanders Moore, and Ryan
Hade, if he is available.
And I guess we actually need
another chair so I can step back
for a second, but maybe I'll
present the overview, um, and
then have the working group
members come up and help explain
some of the rationale for the
proposed recommendation.
Um, so following up with the
discussion of the last
Legislative council meeting, um,
the district office group
working, working group, sorry,
considered um concerns that were
raised by members of the council
regarding if a legislative
employee may run for office, and
if that legislative employee
does run for office, are they
allowed to continue acting in
the role of legislative
employee, or do they need to
take a resignation? And some of
the concerns that were raised
was whether if they took a leave
of absence, would not be paid or
unpaid, and then also
what would be kind of the tie in
with the prohibitions on
off-duty electioneering if
somebody were running for
office. So these considerations,
concerns were brought back to
the working group, and we had,
um, actually several discussions
over the course of a couple of
meetings as to what might be the
best path forward. Uh, we also
looked at some states, um, I say
some because it's a little
difficult to get internal
legislative staff policies from
a lot of states as they are not
on publicly facing websites, um,
and sometimes
stock policies are not in
statute. However, we did look at
some states and um they kind of,
you know, have run the gamut of
various policy, um, positions on
this point. Um, after
considering all the issues, the
working group, um,
On a kind of 7 to 97 in favor, 2
against, um, position favored a
policy that a legislative
staffer who wants to run for
office must resign from their
legislative employment to do so.
So the policy that is up on the
board here, and actually if we
could scroll down to page 3, and
this is also in your folder, um,
a red line.
Um, the first change on page 3
here, you see, um, taking out
what has been excised. It says
legislative employees shall not
hold political office or be an
officer of a political
organization during the
employee's term of employment,
and then goes on further to say
nothing in this code of conduct
shall deny legislative employees
the right to vote as they choose
or accept as provided herein to
express their opinions on
political subjects and
candidates.
And then on the next page, top
of 4, there is the directive
that if a legislative employee
becomes a candidate for any
political office, they shall
resign upon filing or accepting
the nomination. So the
recommendation, the majority uh
recommendation of the working
group is to require resignation
for legislative employee who
wants to run for any office.
Um, so I'm happy to stand for
questions now, or if the working
group members would like to come
up and uh give their perspective
on why the working group decided
on this direction, I'd be happy
to hear.
Let's do here from the working
group. Uh, come on up.
I think we'll need one more
chair.
We can get someone to help us
accommodate.
So much differentialness.
There you go.
A long list
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the Committee of Sanders more
and, um, Madam Purin's, uh,
chief of staff, and um
I think Sean mentioned that
there are 9 members of the
working group, the 6 chiefs of
staff, um, Shawna and then the
two chief clerks. And some of
the conversations that revolved
around um this issue was um one
of the big things we talked
about was that the leave policy
that we have at the legislature
is um for parental leave, and
that's the only paid policy that
we have. We also follow the
federal, um, family medical
leaveave Act, which provides
unpaid leave for medical.
leave for family members. Um,
that is not a legislative
specific leave policy, but that
those are the only two leave
policies that we follow here at
the New Mexico Legislature, and
so that was a big part of the
conversation that we had was
this adding in the code of
conduct, uh, a staff member
could take leave for running for
office would be opening up the
leave policy in a way that has
not been done before. Thank you.
Madam chair and members of the
of the council, we appreciate
the opportunity. I'm sort of the
new kid on the block, and so
I'm, I'm.
Got up to speed pretty quickly
on discussions around the
working group policy. I'm the
chief of staff for the Senate
Republicans, uh, and in addition
to what Sanders, very aptly
described, we've also recognized
that the nature of elected
positions, um,
people in a in a very awkward
spot because they may be asking
for capital outlay or
legislative funding for an
agency that they represent, and
it very much blurs the line if
they are running or serving and
seeking re-election to a local
position, and then they're
working on the staff of a
legislator, and they may, even
if they don't exert undue
influence, there may be the
appearance of that undue
influence, and we wanted to make
sure that the institutions
stayed above reproach. And so we
thought it much.
Wiener as a, as a working group
to just
Require resignation if somebody
stands for office, uh, or
accepts the nominee.
You're sitting at the table, you
must have something to say,
Madam Chair, I appreciate the
opportunity to be here and these
two summed it up brilliantly. So
thank you.
OK, sort of a cop out, Sean.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I also
would like to add that, um, all
legislative employment is at
will, and the uh working group
also discussed that if an
individual was allowed to take
leave, uh, for an extended
period of time to run for a
campaign that effectively
changes the at will nature of
the employment and requires, uh,
really would require their job
to be left open for the duration
of the campaign. So in that
situation, while uh legislative
staffer may be out campaigning,
the work of that position.
is not being performed, and
additionally, the office for
which that individual was
working, uh, would not be able
to hire somebody else to perform
those duties because that budget
money would be tied up, um, with
that particular individual who
is on leave. So there were a
number of issues as um as raised
by the group here, that the
current policy in place that are
really protective of the
institution would be undermined
by allowing somebody to either
take leave, um, or otherwise
continue in their legislative
employment, while engaging in a
campaign activity.
Or an elected position activity
that may be contrary to their
duties, uh, and their interests
as a legislative employee. So
again, it's kind of a, a clean
black and white um approach, um
where everybody understands what
the requirement is, should they
decide to. Alright.
Are you finished with your
presentation, um, Madam chair,
if, uh, if the council would
like to hear from those members
who had a different um view of
the situation, um, we'd be happy
to have them come up to the
podium as well.
Sure.
Or we can just do that through
questioning.
All right.
OK, open for questions, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, madam uh
Prote. Thank you all for your
hard work. Um, this has been,
uh, a long time coming. I do
have a few questions just um for
you all, maybe mostly for
Shawna.
Um,
What happens with folks who
maybe are asked to run for a
leadership position, say with a
land grant or an asseia. Land
grants for political
subdivisions, they're
nonpartisan races, um, how would
they be impacted by this new
proposed new policy.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Mr.
Speaker, um, so under the
current, the, the policy
revision that's being proposed,
um, any elected office would be
prohibited for a legislative
employee, so that would, um,
also extend to political
subdivisions or local
governments where the, the
offices may be nonpartisan. Um,
and one issue, as was raised
earlier, is that a lot of those
political subdivisions and local
governments have a strong
interest in the legislative
process, uh, in particular with
funding requests, capital outlay
requests, and
the working group, um, felt that
there was enough of a conflict
of interest there, even though
it was a nonpartisan position to
disallow uh legislative employee
to sit in one of those roles.
Thank you, madam Protem. What
about tribal leadership
positions?
That's a good,
Madam Chair, uh, Mr. Speaker,
that's a, that's a very good
question. Um, I believe by the
plain language of the policy, it
would also prohibit that if it
were running for office. So
Madam Protem and and Miss Ca be,
um, I think that that's uh the
crux of some of my concerns,
right? I, what we're trying to
prohibit is a member of my
staff.
Like the most obvious example
would be a member of my staff.
See running against the sitting
senator.
Um
And asking me for a month off or
whatever, um, assuming they have
the time, uh, banked already to
to go pursue that office, right?
That that would be like the most
obvious example, probably that
we would want to avoid, to avoid
all these conflicts.
Um
I do understand as we move down
from that example, say a member
of a, a community college
governance board, um,
nonpartisan, they run for the
office and they work here and
there's that perceived conflict
where the community college
might come and ask for capital
outlay or, you know,
administrative funding,
operational funding or whatnot.
But then as you move down,
And it starts to get tricky,
right? Because now I'm thinking,
what if you have a rural
community, um, and, you know,
maybe more cows and people.
Right? And are we prohibiting
That very
talented legislative staffer
from pursuing an elected
position, say, on the town
council, right? And if we're
making them choose between their
livelihood and volunteering
their time for their town.
What are we doing to that rural
community?
Right, are we, are, are, are we
keeping talented people from
actually jumping in and and
helping their community. Um, and
then, of course, if you go down
to the
What what could be a pretty
massive rabbit hole here, but if
you go down to like tribal
leadership, like, uh, my
understanding some of these
tribal communities.
My understanding is some of
these tribal communities, um,
are, um,
Uh
I don't know that, you know,
they have a very unique internal
process, and it varies tribe to
tribe. Um, so, so now we're
gonna have to have somebody
either quit their job because
they've been asked to run for a
position of leadership within
their tribal community. That
seems problematic. Um, so I, I,
I know that a lot of work has
gone into this, and I know that
there's a lot to think about.
Um,
I don't foresee.
Uh, over the next 60 days,
anyone.
Hopefully, jumping in and
running for something, um, and I
would just throw the suggestion
out there. Obviously, it'll be
up to to to to the council,
however they want to proceed,
but I would say let's, let's,
let's punt this a little bit
longer because I think they're
the questions I've asked.
Don't have simple answers, and
I'm concerned of unintended
consequences, because we're
trying to protect the
institution from the dude
running for Senate and working
here.
I mean, I'm, I'm concerned about
the, the tribes, the land grans,
Yasi, a small rural towns that
may not have the population base
to
Um, you know, have people run
for their local elected offices.
Um, so I'll leave it at that,
Madam Chair, but thank you all
for the indulgence.
OK, OK, I've got a lot of people
now, so I'll take one from this
side, then one from this side.
Representative Rebel Caballero
followed by Senator Si Lopez.
Thank you, madam uh Prote on
this along the same lines I had
um
Put a question mark when um
It was brought up about the
tribal leadership positions
because I think I'd like to
explore more about the legality
and tribal sovereignty versus uh
how tribal sovereignty plays
into this legal legal wise.
Uh, because my concern is that
we're then treading a gray line,
um,
And perhaps
Crossing into it because we
really don't have much to say,
um, about tribal leadership
positions and how individuals um
run for those and whether we are
in a position of
Addressing so along the same
lines of giving it a little bit
more thought, um, or maybe I,
I'd like to have some sort of a
legal, um,
Response to
Whether that would be an
infringement or a violation or
how that plays, uh, in terms of
sovereignty issue. Thank you,
madam uh Protem, that was my
question.
Uh, Senator Siddi Lopez.
Thank you, Madam Prote. Um,
It's it's, it's correct that
senators and representatives can
be school school board members.
And you know, because of the
part that you took out is is
available to senators and
representatives. Is, is that
correct?
Madam Chair, Senator, yes, that
is correct. Uh, the language
that was, uh, stricken out was
really cobbled from um statutes
and policies that apply to the
executive, um, that's what the
genesis of that original
language was. OK, it, it just
seems to me, Madam Chair, that
we are playing a stricter
standard to the staff than we
are to ourselves. There may be
policy reasons. I I understand
and I understand they're up.
The um
It will employees, but I just
wanted to, to point that out,
that we, we're asking me to do
something that that we couldn't
do. And then my other question
is the resignation, um,
When you file or accept the
nomination, there's a whole time
period before that you're
actually running for office,
you're
Getting signatures on your
petition, there's a whole
process, um, before you're
actually
A candidate. And, and if that's
what you're just trying to find,
I guess my question is, is
you're just looking at that as
the bright line.
Um
And you're not concerned about
that, that time period where
you're actually seeking.
The nomination.
Or the or the
Candidacy.
Madam Chair, Senator, exactly,
there has to be some trigger
point, some bright line, and the
filing, um.
Um, of the, um,
Um, intend to, to run is, is a
bright line in that or accepting
the nomination, that's a point
in time that we can, you know,
pinpoint, um, to trigger the
resignation. Are you concerned
that some of the harms that that
are, I mean, I, I think this is
a good idea. It, it does not, it
undermines public confidence
when you, when somebody is
running for office, but also
exercising discretion, um, in
their, in their positions with
the state, with the legislature,
um, and but you don't see.
harms.
At the point where they're
gathering signatures or doing
whatever it is they need to get
on the ballot. I get some like
county positions, I guess they
just need to pay.
Um, but
There is a period of time before
they actually pay that fee that
they're letting it be known that
they're running for office.
There are other, other kinds of
things too, if you're getting
appointed by a state central
committee.
You're getting your, your,
you're talking to people,
you're, you're trying to do that
and
You're not worried about those
harms during that period, or
they're just lessened?
Madam Chair, Senator, I would
offer that the, the harms are a
little bit more attenuated
during that, uh, period where
the candidacy is not official,
um, but additional, uh,
provisions of the Legislative
code of conduct would continue
to be in play, um, so that
individual would not be able to
use state resources, let's say,
to further their campaign
ambitions. So all of the
additional language uh that was
added into about electioneering,
uh, would remain the same, even
in that situation.
And of course during work time
and all that, OK.
Thank you, Madam, Madam
President Prote.
Thank you, Representative
Shipansky.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um.
So it really interesting uh
conversation and certainly one
that I have lived myself, um.
I the
I really support um the first
part of this, which.
Uh
In Section C legislative
employees shall not hold
political office during the
employee's time of employment,
Mr. Rosh's comments and others
on this, um, are really
valuable, um.
But, you know, listening to the
conversation around, well, what
if someone is serving on a very
small elected body within a
small community.
And they are trusted in that
role, probably for the same
reasons that they're trusted in
other roles. I think that
deserves, uh, another look, um.
And previously this policy had
included some distinct uh
distinction between nonpartisan
versus partisan. Um, I think
that should be part of the
conversation. Um, the piece that
I am really struggling with is
um running for office and I, I
would just assert that employers
have the ability to negotiate
leave with any employee, any
employee who brings forward, I
wanna take, I mean, if, for
example, if a legislative
employee came in.
Today and said I've earned this
annual leave and I'd like to be
off for the next month.
Uh, as we go into session, I
think the supervisor of that
employee has every ability to
say.
You know, this isn't sick leave.
We're talking about. This is
annual leave. This is not an
appropriate time. It is the
legislative session, it is go
time and that's just a, a minor
example, but I think that's just
a basic principle of management
is that.
Employees need to be able to
bring leave requests to
supervisors and supervisors need
to have the authority to grant
that leave or not grant that
leave or negotiate on that
leave. Um, and to me this really
I think will prevent some really
good people from running for
office. Um, I think as a matter
of course, generally speaking,
we should be encouraging
employers to figure out how to
encourage their employees to run
for office because that gives us
the the true representation.
Across occupations that we need
in the legislature and in so
many other local elected bodies.
Um
I also think the scenario, Madam
Chair of
Um, an employee taking a month
or two off.
would only apply to individuals
that have worked here for a very
long time, stored up that length
of leave, the current accrual
rate is probably 2 weeks a year.
So certainly no one who is
starting a DLA position.
Now would be saying I need to
take 3 months off because they
wouldn't have that type of leave
accrued, um, so I, I would just
love for this to go back and and
look at um.
You know, something that is
maybe.
If an employee decides to run
for office, that employee shall,
um,
negotiate a time frame for their
departure with their supervisor.
Um, or something like that. I
think that's reasonable, but you
know, the reality is sometimes
you have.
Uh, an opportunity that comes in
in a short amount of time, you
have to make a decision, and I
feel like we are imposing
something that I would not ask
any other employer to impose,
which is, um, decide between
your livelihood or this really
great opportunity for public
service, and if you file for
office next week, you know,
that's your last day.
On the job, I think that's
really tough for some of the
things that we're trying to
encourage, which is people to
participate.
In public service and people to
rise to those positions, whether
it be a tribal government, local
government, um.
So I, I have a lot of
reservations about the second
half of this policy, both on the
employer supervisor front
because I would want that
supervisor to be able to
negotiate that.
Um, and I also think typically
we're talking about somebody
taking off a day here, a day
there, this afternoon here, um,
and they may not be successful.
And so now we have removed
someone from our employee that
is potentially a great employee,
um, that, that we've now let go
of because they they were trying
to serve their community, so I,
I have a lot of reservations
about the second part of this.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Uh, Senator Doheck.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I
I just wanna mention that, uh,
so we've been talking about
elected offices, but there's
appointed offices too, and so
your D there doesn't.
It's only talking about filing
for accepting the nomination. If
someone is appointed to a
political office.
I assume the same things would
the same concerns would exist,
but there would be no
requirement for them to resign.
And with this language.
And that, that's all.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair,
Senator DuH. So subse does talk
about not holding political
office, um, and there are other
provisions uh within the code of
conduct, um, about, uh,
loyalties and independence there
are also incompatibility
considerations, uh, really for
any, um, activity that a
legislative employee engages in
um this policy or the revisions
to it here are really just
focused on that elected and and
uh
political office situation that
was brought up at the last
council meeting.
So, Madam Chair, Miss Cas be,
so.
So under this with with someone
who was appointed, they would
not need to resign.
Or cause I'm, I'm just, I'm
looking, I don't see that she
says you can't hold one. But
then D says an a legislative
employee who becomes a candidate
for a political office, shall
resign upon filing or accepting
the nomination, period. If you
don't have language in there
that would also cover an
appointment, they do not have
the same compulsion to resign.
Madam Chair, Senator Duha, my
apologies, um, Madam Chair, uh,
so there's kind of two
considerations here. There's one
about the holding of the office,
um, sub D is more about
campaigning and being able to,
uh, campaign on unfettered from
the conflicts of interest that
mate um might occur while
concurrently holding a
legislative uh employment. OK.
Uh, Montreal also just mentioned
that, so I was the Albuquerque
city clerk when I decided to run
for this position.
I had to quit, um, and that was
because of a a city policy, um,
but
Thanks.
Thank you, Senator Sha.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair.
I
I just want to make sure that
we're
Still looking at why this came
about. So this came about
because of
Uh, loyalty, but I think more so
because of insider advocacy.
So, uh, all of a sudden you've
got somebody that's inside,
advocating for whatever it is.
They're running for. So it could
be capital outlay, it could be a
change in, in a policy that we
want to do and now all of a
sudden you've got somebody
that's inside giving that person
a dramatic uh advantage for one
thing.
Um, but also it just looks bad.
Uh, if, if my staff member, uh,
is now calling.
Say, hey, you know, my name is
whatever. Well, they know that
it's Senator Sheriff's staff
member, and so now Senator
Scherer is involved in the, in
the political game, whether he
wants to be or not.
And all of the people that are
affected by this, believe now
that Senator Scherer is somehow.
Doing this, and I think that,
you know, the reason this came
about was because of that. We
didn't want inside advocacy.
And, and so that's why I think
this is an important step here.
As far as the, the, the tribal.
issue did hit me, OK? The others
Not so much.
But we could add.
Legislative employees shall not
hold New Mexico political
office.
So you can still be a tribal,
uh, on tribal council or
president or whatever, uh,
because that's
Separate government. It's not a
New Mexico government.
I still think you have some
insider advocacy in there that
we need to be careful of. But I
do think that if, if that's the
real
Sticking point that's gonna keep
us from addressing the insider
advocacy.
I would say New Mexico
governments an acceptable
solution.
Thank you, Senator, uh, Senator
Woods.
Thank you, madam Prote.
You know, it's funny.
The same arguments that there
wouldn't be enough talent to go
around was made when we put term
limits.
Sheriffs in small counties.
The same exact argument was
made.
And yet we put the term limits
on it, and somehow we found the
talent out there.
And as far as my district, I
represent, I happen to have one
of those districts that was uh
In the 10% that was over.
So I'm representing somewhere
around 53,000 people.
So many of the senators in here,
probably represent less people
than I do.
So
I can find talent.
Yeah, it may not be out of just
one particular county, but I've,
I've got a, a pool of people to
find talent.
So that's my argument.
On that part of it. The other is
the appearance of conflict of
interest.
That's the, what we're trying to
address here in my belief.
How do we keep the appearance
out of our, our legislative
aids.
Of favoring one over another.
And
Another problem I have on a
multi-county district.
is how do I divide anything up?
And it's a pretty big
difficulty, so
If you have an aid that is
Uh, uh, particular appointed
elected given.
Strong ties.
you want to put it.
We should think about.
The position that puts him into
also are, are they into or he
she it into.
We have to keep that appearance.
Of, uh,
No conflict of interest.
And that would help our
employee. It will help us as
individuals in this legislature
to, to
pretty much like it's worth it
as far as I'm concerned.
Because
We want that appearance. Thank
you, madam.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um, I
just have a couple of
points. Um, is this similar to
the language um that the rank
and file state employee in New
Mexico is held too.
Madam Chair, Representative
Martinez, uh, this language is
different from what is in the
personnel act for executive
level employees. Um, I do offer
though that it is not dissimilar
from what a lot of other states
do for legislative employees.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh, and
China, so a state employee can
Hold their employment and still
run for political office.
So Madam Chair Representative
Martinez, the language that is
actually uh redlined um out of
the redline version, that is,
uh, I think it's identical
actually to what is in the
personal act, uh, for the
executive employees. So with the
original policy was that the
working group proposed to the
the council last time was what's
in yellow here entirely. Um, and
then based on the discussions,
the
The language not needed was
excised out.
Thank you for that
clarification, Madam Chair. Um,
The, the discussion has been a
um geared towards
Smaller communities.
Um, smaller subdivisions.
Tribal entities, but these
groups also come to the
legislature and ask for capital
outlay money, so.
Um, just because of the size, I
don't.
I don't understand why it would
be different.
And any comment on that?
Madam Chair, members of the
council, I think that was
exactly the logic that the
working group was, was working
with, um, in determining that,
um, even if you're
Uh, elected to a nonpartisan
county or say political
subdivision or municipal office,
the same conflicts of interest
exist, um, and an individual,
uh, who's a legislative employee
may be in a position to exert
influence vice versa, use their
legislative uh resources to
exert influence or the resources
of the office they were elected
to at that local level. Um, and
we, uh, the majority of the
group felt that that was an
improper use of the power of
either office. Thank you, ma'am.
Sure. Thank you. Thank you,
Senator Brandt.
amount of chair and um.
Actually
Like the way this is written, I
think it's uh it.
keeps us out of trouble. It, it
works well. I think we shouldn't
make exceptions as to which
office someone's holding. I
think Pat made an excellent
point about we all have.
Senate side, we all have, you
know, 50 plus or minus 1000
people that we represent, that's
50 plus or minus possible
employees.
Uh, we should be able to find
someone in that large of a
group, as that's what, almost
30, somewhere around 30. I think
we should be able to find
someone in that size group. I
did want to go back to see.
And ask um
Where it talks about an officer
of a political organization.
What is, what, what's our
definition of officer?
Thank you, Madam Chair, Senator
Brandt, uh, so that is a holding
a position of of officer in a
political organization and that
goes down from the lowest levels
to the top levels. So it's
somebody who is in a position to
make determinations, decisions
for that political organization.
There is case law on that point,
and, uh, the cases support that
somebody who's even a ward
chair, uh, would be a political
officer up to, uh, you know,
somebody who's a county chair or
statewide chair.
etc. But, um, any of those types
of positions are political
officer.
um Sean so even like treasurer,
secretary, any of those within
that political organization,
those would be officer
positions, Madam Chair, that's
correct. Just wanted to clarify
that. Thank you.
Right. Any anyone else? Yes,
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Protem. Um, I,
I believe, uh, personally that
this is really clear. any
elected office.
And, and I think we have to keep
it clear for transparency.
For transparency in the job that
the uh legislative aid will be
doing.
And who they're doing it for. So
it's a little bit of a of of
difference in in holding this
position, this job, not my job,
my free job.
The paid position of uh
legislative aid. And so I, I
just think that it's very cut
and dry. I think it's very
clear. I think if we muddy the
waters.
With, well, if you're this or
you're nonpolitical or what, uh.
All of everything, even if it's
non-political, is political. And
so I personally think you guys
did a wonderful job.
Taking everything into
consideration and leaving it cut
and dry in the elected office.
Thank you, Madam Protem.
Thank you.
Right. Any other comments or
questions speaker?
You want to make a proposal,
Madam, Madam Chair prote, I
would, I would propose that we
kick this off to after session.
Keep working it. I think we
heard some really good points. I
think Senator Shers, um,
Uh, proposal is
A really good start when it
comes to tribal governments. Um,
I, I just continue to be
concerned that this becomes a
catch-all and look, as I'm
sitting here listening, I'm
like, well, what if you have a
spouse that works for the
legislature, and you are the
mayor of a town somewhere.
I don't know, I mean.
Or they prohibit it from talking
about it at home. I, I don't
know, right? And do we want to
start navigating those waters.
Um, I think that what I would be
after is maybe the partisan
office.
Right, I mean, that's the most
obvious example, um, but I, you
know, I I don't represent the
rural district, but it seems to
me that sometimes it's, it could
be difficult. It could, it's
difficult in the city sometimes
to find good people to run for
school board or or CNM board or
You know, a maska, um, I can
only imagine how
Much more difficult it is in
other communities, so I, I would
suggest that we take this, uh,
to the council meeting in April
after session, um, give
ourselves more time to think
these things through. Um,
If it's OK with the body, um,
obviously, uh, we can vote on it
if, if you all want, but that,
that would be my suggestion,
madam Proton.
OK, so we have one proposal
first. Let's, let's deal with
that first. OK.
was that that was really
emotion, was it? I can put it in
motion form.
Madam Cherry moved that we
Um
That we send this back to the
working group and reconsider it
at the next meeting of the
council service after this
legislative session.
Alright, so now it's open for
debate, any debate on that
motion, uh, seeing no debate on
that, are you here?
Roll call vote on whether or not
to postpone this laughter.
Uh, the session. OK, uh,
Representative Armstrong.
Uh, no. Armstrong is not.
Senator Brandt.
No.
Brett is no.
Chasey is not here. Senator
Doig.
Senator Doig is yes.
Martinez.
Nope.
Marines, no. Um,
Representative Rebo Caballer.
Yes.
recovery that Senator Sheer.
Oh
Repetsky.
Yes.
Senator Wirth
Uh, no. Senator Woods.
no
Mr. Speaker.
Yes.
Senator Stewart.
I vote no.
So that fails 7 to 4. Is that
right?
All right, so, uh, Senator
Brand, your most.
Second,
All right. Any other?
Comments about that.
Uh, singer if you'll call the
role.
Representative Armstrong.
Senator Brandt, Senator Du
Hager.
It was Martinez, Representative
Robert Caballero.
No.
share.
Represeransky.
No.
Senator Wirth, yes.
Senator Woods.
Mr. Speaker, no.
Madamerote.
Yes.
So we have that 8 yes and 3 no,
so we have adopted the policy,
let me say that I, I think we
will be talking about this
again. Uh, we've adopted this
now, this moves forward, but the
council can always revisit uh
what we have adopted and I think
there were enough questions, so
that we'll be talking about it
as as we move forward.
So, Shawna, if you will uh round
us out with staff reports now.
Thank you, madam Prote members
of the council, try to be brief.
Just want to give you an update.
59 district legislative aides
have been hired to date. Uh,
we've also, uh, developed a
solution for providing in-person
closed captioning in the
galleries during uh the Senate
or I'm sorry, during the
session, the solution is low
tech, uh, but high quality, and
we're really hopeful this is
going to provide access needed
to um the floor sessions for
people who are have a, um,
hearing disability or otherwise
need closed captioning to
understand.
The action. I also want to
announce that the lactation room
has been moved from the 2nd
floor to the 4th floor, west
side. Now it is behind a secure
access door, which, uh, you
know, is a little unfortunate.
However, LCS, uh, reception
staff have access to that door,
Capitol security staff have
access to that door, um, in the
legislative building services
does. So if you're aware of
somebody who needs to use
lactation room, please direct
them to one of those 3 offices
for very prompt access. Um,
Jarrett also
has access to that room, as do,
um, I do. Uh, just a quick
reminder that after the meeting,
uh, right now, uh, legislator
anti-harassment training will be
provided in this room with a
brief training on the American
Disabilities Act thereafter.
And lastly, I'd like to extend
condolences to the family,
friends and colleagues of
Representative Alcon. He will be
lying in state beginning at 2
p.m. today with the services
scheduled for 4:30.
And uh with that, Madam Chair, I
stand for questions.
All right.
Um, Mr. Speaker,
you had a question,
Miss Case beer, the lactation
room, is that the room up by
your office space that we have
discussed.
Madam Chair, Mr. Speaker, it is
not because as we looked into
that room that we wanted to move
the lactation room too, it was
discovered that it was too small
for a wheelchair to get in there
and turn around. And so it would
not be in compliance with the
ADA and so we discarded that
idea. Um, there is a bathroom,
not a room that has a toilet in
it, but literally a shower room,
um, that is behind a secure
access door that we have kind of
reconfigured to have a nice
chair.
in it, there's a refrigerator in
it, there's a sink with soap.
There's a lot more amenities
than that smaller wrinkly closet
would have provided. It's also
large enough for somebody uh who
is in a wheelchair to get in and
have access and be able to turn
around appropriately. So, um,
any individual who's using that
room, um, they don't need
permission or they don't need a
key to get out of it. It's
really just getting into it. Um,
I understand that this is not,
uh, 100% ideal, uh, but given
the limited space within the
capital, it was the best option.
And um
Where the lactation room was
before on the 2nd floor, um, the
folks need key access to get
into that room, or is that
unlocked? They did need access,
Mr. Speaker, Madam Chair. They
did need access, OK, so they
would have to go find somebody
get it unlocked.
Um, what about the, uh, nursing
pots we had discussed, uh,
offline, or those is, is, is, is
there a possibility to get one
of those in.
In the next.
A few weeks. Madam Chair, Mr.
Speaker, uh,
We have considered the nursing
pods. We have researched the
nursing pods. We have looked at
places within capital, the
capital and Capitol North to
place them, and there is not an
appropriate space for such a
pod.
Is it the size of them or what's
the issue? Um, Madam Chair, Mr.
Speaker, yes, the size, uh, of
them, um, the hookups that might
be needed for electricity or
water, uh, we would also want to
look to get an Americans with
Disabilities Act, um, approved
pod, uh, so that individuals who
are in a wheelchair may be able
to use it. Those are quite
large, so finding an appropriate
space uh within the Capitol or
Capitol North has been very
challenging. Um, many
cases have been looked at, have
been measured out, um, multiple
people have had their eyes on
this and thinking it through to
figure out the best way to
provide this service, um, for
those members, um, in the
legislature or the public who
need them. I will add that
somebody, somebody, some people
have been using um the lactation
room um that is currently
existent. So it has been
successful thus far. The one
that you reconfigured upstairs,
I'm sure that's correct. Good
deal. Thank you, madam, uh,
chair, and thank you, Ms. Gin.
All right, we're, we're out of
time. We're now supposed to be
in our next session, so keep
your comments quick, uh,
representative. Thank you, Madam
Chair. It, it occurred to me to
ask the question you mentioned
the reconfigured room on the 3rd
floor, um, for being necessary
and close to a restroom. Does
the in consideration of
wheelchairs.
Does the restroom that's close
to there or all the restrooms
there have the automatic door
opener to them.
Madam Chair Representative, uh,
I may have misspoke if I said
that it was close to a restroom.
It's actually there's a shower,
there's a shower on the 4th
floor, and that's the only
purpose of the room, but it's,
it's been reconfigured to uh
accommodate uh for lactation
purposes, um, the restrooms
themselves are not.
Adjacent to that room, but yes,
all of the restrooms do have
automatic door openers. So,
Madam Chair, that that
particular shower area does not
have an automatic door opener.
Madam Chair Representative, it
does not at this time, and that
is regrettable, uh, and we
would, um, proceed with doing
so, um, if it were not a secure
access location, um, meaning
that there are only individuals
who have access on their key
cards can get into that space.
And so putting an automatic
opener on it would not be, um,
really, well, we could, we could
discuss putting it on there, um,
but there are some key card
access issues with it. Thank
you.
Right, any other questions or
comments, uh, Sing Nan, thank
you all so much and we will meet
again.
April, May, June, July, August.
2026. Alright, so we are
adjourned and we'll see you
tomorrow.
Opening day.
