took office. So since January
20th, 298 official presidential
actions have been taken, um,
including 46 on the first day.
Um, and, and presidential
actions fall into 4 broad
categories. There's executive
orders, um, you know,
everybody's familiar with those,
um, kind of the president's
official way of declaring law.
They declare um or direct
agencies in the federal
government to take certain
actions. Um, and there's
presidential memoranda, which
are basically executive orders,
but without the procedural, um,
like, they don't have to be
printed in the federal register,
like, executive orders do, but
they, they can also have the
force of law.
Um, and then there's
presidential proclamations.
Those are kind of like what a
memorials are in New Mexico.
They're, they're really health
and human services day or
something like that. So we're
not going to touch much on
those.
And there's no appointments
and um you know, there there's
been many of those and we're not
gonna touch much on that either.
So, um
Let's go ahead and move on to uh
the first day, January 20th.
Um
Probably the biggest one that
came out on January 20th was
executive Order 14148, um, and
it was basically, um, the
initial rescissions of of all
the Biden era executive orders
and actions. So, uh, it
rescinded 78 executive orders
and um executive administration,
um, there, there's a lot of
categories as you can imagine,
with 78 executive orders, but
the, uh, the ones that most
closely touch on the health and
human services, especially on a
state perspective.
Um, there was a lot of executive
orders rescinded related to
federal and state coordination
on COVID-19, um, and then there
was a lot of orders related to
climate change mitigation, um,
and they were, uh,
Rescinded and replaced by
executive order 14162. Um, it
was called the Pudding America
first and international
environmental agreements, um,
executive order, and so, uh,
the, the main thing that that
executive order did is it pulled
um the United States out of the
Paris, uh, climate agreement.
Um
And then a few other things that
happened on January 20th, um,
there was executive order 14155.
That I withdrew the US from the
announced the nation's
withdrawal from the WHO.
Um, and then, um, one of the
biggest ones, a presidential
memorandum 2025020032. It was
called the America First Trade
Policy, and we'll go to the next
slide to dive a little. So, um,
I think you've all heard about
the tariffs and, um, you know,
there's been many tariffs, many
um changes to how the tariffs
are being implemented, um, but
really they fall into two broad
categories. So there's the
reciprocal tariffs, which are um
basically
The
Trying to address uh trade
deficits. So if, if we have a
trade deficit with another
country, the reciprocal tariff,
I, I guess try to uh make it
equal in in the trade terms. Uh,
we're not gonna focus much on
those. The ones that uh touch
health and human services are
the so-called fentanyl tariffs.
And so those tariffs were issued
against Mexico, Canada, and
China, um, because, uh, those
were seen as the countries where
um
Illegal and synthetic opioids
were, were coming from and and
coming into the country. So,
Uh, there was a blanket 10% uh
tariff on all uh origin goods
from those three countries, and
um that tariff was reasoned
because of the
Um
Those tariffs were enjoined by
um
The Court of International Trade
on May 28th.
But, um, that enjoyment was uh
Stayed by a federal court, the
United States Court of Appeals
for the Federal Circuit. They
had joined that ruling, and
they're going to hear oral
arguments on 31st, so that's
really still in flux.
That's gonna be kind of a
Something that that I'm gonna
talk about a lot. It's a lot of
this influx. Uh, many of these
executive orders are more um
Prescribing policy and, and, and
looking that or saying that uh
the government wants to look
deeper into certain areas and uh
there's gonna be deadlines on um
policy prescriptions for
Some of these areas that are 180
days down the road, um, not many
of these actually have any um
Speaking of one, that is looking
at a lot of policy areas. We
have uh executive order 14273.
Um, it's called lowering drug
prices by once again putting
Americans first.
So this was issued on April
15th.
And it it focuses on several
really broad, uh, prescription
drug price policy areas. Um, so
it talks about looking into
improving Medicare and Medicaid
drug acquisition costs, um,
access to affordable insulin and
epinephrine, and that would
specifically is um talking about
conditioning FQHC funding on
them being able to provide uh
basically free insulin and
epinephrine.
Can you talk a little bit about
habits been on this committee,
so sure madam, so it's a
federally qualified health
center. They're, uh, you know,
he heavily federally.
Health centers, um, throughout
the entire country, we have, I,
I, I don't know how many here
dozens for sure, um, and they,
you know, get to participate in
several uh federal pricing
schemes such as the 340B drug
pricing program that um allows
them to have access to cheaper
drugs, um, that they can pass on
those discounts to patients, um,
they're, they're really seen as
like kind of a frontline
community health approach. And,
um,
Um
So this portion would require
them to provide um free insulin
and epinephrine as part of
their, um, you know, getting
qualified as a federally
qualified health center.
Um, there's a lot of interest in
re-evaluating the role of
middlemen like PBMs, um, so PBMs
are pharmacy benefit manager. My
apologies, Madam Chair. Yeah,
pharmacy benefit managers, um.
And so those, those are kind of
intermediaries in the, the drug
supply chain, and um,
This executive order directed
the officer or the director of
the Office of Management and
Budget to recommend policies to
improve competitiveness,
efficiency and transparency in
the pharmaceutical supply chain.
That um those recommendations
are supposed to be out uh as of
July 1st. So should be out
pretty soon. Um, another area is
accelerating FDA approval of
generic and biosimilar drugs,
um, so there, there was a lot of
talk in that executive order
about uh
deregulating um the FDA
processes for a generic and
biosimilar drugs because they
are essentially the same drugs
as ones that have already been
approved.
Um, uh, an area that I think is
going to be really interesting
for uh New Mexico specifically
is streamlining and improving
drug importation. Um, I think
back in 2019, the state passed a
bill um that set up a program to
uh import drugs from Canada.
Unfortunately, that whole
program was locked in federal
court, and it was because the
federal government hadn't given
states the um authority to do
that is what the court said.
Um, but if the federal
government does give the state's
authority to do that, it would
really give the state an
opportunity to purchase those
drugs from Canada, so that,
that's definitely gonna be one
to monitor.
And then, uh, another area is
streamlining domestic production
of pharmaceutical drugs, um, the
executive order in that place
talks a lot about, um, really, I
think deregulating the
manufacturing of prescription
drugs, um, especially like the
um.
The factories that they're made,
I guess, you know, it's, it's
looking at um removing some of
the the building requirements
for the factories that make
pharmaceutical drugs in the
United States.
Um, and as I said, all of these
different policy areas, um, are
supposed to have recommendations
within 90 to 180 days of the
issuance of the order, um, and
the order came out April 15th.
So that's all really still in
flux, but we will be monitoring
the recommendations that come
from that. So let's see, um,
other so we have executive order
14 to 12. Make America Healthy
Again. The, uh, this executive
order creates the Make America
Healthy Again commission. um,
and uh
The commission currently has a
pretty narrow objective. It's to
uh advise and assist the
president on how to address the
childhood chronic disease
crisis. Um,
And so it's, it's going to be
really looking at um
Drug price insurance for, for
children, uh, is what it's
specifically looking at. And so
this commission is supposed to
come together and make
recommendations to the president
on how to address that crisis.
Um,
Executive order 14214, uh,
keeping education accessible and
ending COVID-19 vaccine mandates
in schools. Um, so basically,
this uh this executive order.
Makes it so uh federal funding
can't go to any schools or
discretionary federal funding
can't go to any schools that
require COVID-19 vaccine, um,
as, uh, like a requirement for
atten um and moving on, we have
executive order 14216, expanding
access to in vitro
fertilization. Um, so this one,
the, the president directed um
his assistant to the president
for domestic policy to create
recommendations on
how to uh make in vitro
fertilization easier to access
and cheaper. Um, that assistant
was supposed to provide
recommendations by um May 20th,
and apparently they did, but
they're not public right now.
They're they're apparently under
consideration by the president.
So we're going to have to wait
and see what happens with that.
All right, uh, we have some
other significant actions, um,
executive order 14297, um,
delivering the most favored
nation prescription drug pricing
to American patients. Um, so
this one, the president directed
the Secretary of Health and
Human Services to, um,
Basically come to all of the
pharmaceutical manufacturers and
tell them that um they need to
charge um a price for their
drugs in the United States
that's equivalent to the lowest
price charged.
Um, in any country that um has a
GDP per capita of at least 60%
of the United States' GDP per
capita. I'm not sure which
country that is, um, but
basically they're saying if, if
it's that cheap in a different
country, that's the price that
we should be paying. Um, as of,
um, a week ago, uh, the
Department of Health and Human
Services said they're
implementing this program. It
hasn't, you know, been fully
implemented, so we'll have to
see how that works, but that
could be a means of lowering
drug.
s
Um, let's see, the June 6, 2025
memorandum, um, eliminating
waste, fraud and abuse in
Medicaid.
This, this one,
It, it doesn't really have the
force or active law, but it, it
stated some broad policy ideas
that I think might give some
insight into where the federal
funding of Medicaid. Um, it's
specifically tells the director
of the Health and Human
Services, uh, department to take
appropriate action to eliminate
waste, fraud and abuse in
Medicaid, including by ensuring
Medicaid payments rates are not
higher than Medicare to the
extent permitted by applicable
law.
So, you know, um, if that's
their policy that could lead to
decreases in Medicaid funding,
especially in a state like New
Mexico where, where we have some
significant um
Reimbursement for several uh
types of services.
So that's really where we're at
currently with all the big
health and human services
executive orders.
Um, what's next on the horizon
is House Resolution one, also
known as the one Big Beautiful
Bill Act. Um, it's the federal
budget reconciliation bill.
And, um, you know, it, it's a
unique thing because it allows
Congress to pass budget-related
measures with just a simple
majority in the Senate. It's not
subject to the filibuster, but
part of the requirement for it
to not be subject to the
filibuster? Is it has to only
include uh budget-related
measures. And so currently
they're going through the Senate
parliamentarian process and the
Senate parliamentarian is making
decisions on what is a
budget-related measure in the
bill and what is. And so they're
currently still in that process.
um, the Senate has a
self-imposed deadline of passing
this by July 4th. Um, I, I'll
leave that up to you whether or
not that's gonna happen, but
that's, that's what they say as
of now.
Um, you know, it's, it's
changing all the time. So we'll
go to the next slide. Um, and,
and so, you know, it's passed
through the house obviously, but
the Senate has been changing it
a lot, especially because of uh
the parliamentarian process, um,
but these are some of the, the
things that could be included
in, in this, um, one big
beautiful bill act. Um, it could
require states to institute work
requirements for people to
receive Medicaid, um, it could
uh increase cost sharing.
For Medicaid recipients, um, it
could prevent Medicaid from
being used for gender affirming
care, um, but it could also ban
PBMs from using spread pricing.
Um, it could, uh, also decrease
in enrollment or decrease
enrollment in health insurance
exchanges across the country,
uh, the Congressional Budget
Office estimated that the House
version of the bill would take
4.2 million people off of the
health insurance exchanges, uh,
that are so that's kind of where
we're at as of now. We're gonna
be monitoring all of this. We're
gonna be working closely.
with LFC bring closely with um
what's that committee called the
federal funding whatever
committee. And um so we're we're
gonna be looking at that, and
we're gonna be making periodic
updates to you, um, but that's
all I have for now. So I, I
stand for questions and uh thank
you for your time.
From the committee senator.
So go ahead, um,
Oh, Senator Scott. So go ahead,
representative, um.
They're also putting things in
that back into the health topic,
which is obviously where we're
at. So I don't know if you've
been reading the news. I'm sure
all of you have. You're now
using chatbots to provide, um,
counseling to people, one, you
know.
Things along, we could be
prohibited potentially chatbots
that were chilled out.
I am on a task force with the
National Conference of State
Legislatures on um innovation
and that it was brought up, the,
the concern about
The state AI for 10 years, so I
believe this committee wrote one
of our sternly worded letters,
so, so we're trying to be on top
of it, um, I would suggest in
let them know what you think,
yeah, they are. Next I have um
Uh central block.
Thank you Madam Chair. um.
Thank you. Um, I, I also have
concerns on the capabilities um.
To engage in AI, which is
Most important technological,
it's gonna impact our lives
tremendously. Um, I'm not sure
I, I really favor that I said we
want to make sure that um when
we're talking to somebody, we
hope they're a person, um, but
many times, um, let me just ask
you real quick.
Can you tell me the difference
between
Executive order 14273.
Lowering drug prices.
Uh, putting Americans first.
And how does that relate to the
most favored nation.
Madam Chair, uh, Senator Block,
um, they're definitely closely
related, um, the, uh, the second
one, the, uh, most favored
nation came from one of the
policy recommend um lowering
drug prices by once again
putting Americans first. So that
was one of the early, so.
Then um the president put that
executive order out on the
moment I'm sure, yeah, because I
mean, you know, the first one
kind of focused on insulin here
and you're just trying to
understand how that
That specific drug relates to
most countries that have the 60%
GDP, so, uh, I'm trying to
understand.
How, how you do that.
How you measure the most favored
nation price for insulin and,
and, um, epinephrine, is that
what you're saying? So
specifically for those ones, I,
I mean, in some of those
countries, uh, epinephrine is
like almost free. It's very,
very cheap in some of those
countries. So, um,
If we were doing the most favor
nation pricing for insulin or
epinephrine. I mean, it would
be, you know, 10, um, but, you
know, those are still distinct
ideas because the insulin and
epinephrine was specifically for
federally qualified health
centers, which have a different
drug pricing scheme than the
rest of the country. They they
get drugs at a much cheaper
price because they're federally
subsidized.
Uh thank you, Madam Chair. So
I'm on the fence on these two
executive orders because it
almost seems like price controls
for me is, is that how, um, are
you guys looking at that as as a
price controller is a private
industry talking to state
government entities on some of
the negatives that might have.
I'm gonna jump in here and this
is kind of, I mean, he obviously
Xander doesn't know what's
happening federally. So this is
more of an informational thing,
so in terms of how it's gonna
go. We just, we don't know.
I appreciate that. I just
thought he knew everything. And,
and Madam Chair, I, I appreciate
that, you know, I, all I can say
is, um, as of a week ago, um,
the Secretary of Health and
Human Services came out and said
that they're implementing it,
they're working with the drug,
um requirement work. Uh it
hasn't been fully implemented,
so I can't speak to exactly how
it's gonna work, but, but I, all
I can say is thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. The
executive order of
Um, that little, the bullet says
recommendations were revived
2225. What is the name?
Madam Chair, Senator Sidia
Lopez, so no, it's not currently
publicly accessible. That's
based off of a report that they
put out through the press that
they had received the report and
then that it's currently uh
quote unquote under
consideration by the president.
So, um, we'll have to wait and
see on that.
Because currently IVF is
regulated. There is a lot of
difference it more accessible.
Yeah, and thank you, Madam Chair
and Senator Sadia Lopez, I
think, um, yeah, with a lot of
these, uh, it's gonna be when we
find out what the policy
recommendations, we'll have a
much better idea, but right now
all we know is that they're
looking about as far as we know
because right now it's kind of
like abortion, um, and then my
my second question is, um, when
you said, um, potential and the
bullet that says decrease in
enrollment in health insurance
exchange, they do that. What,
what enrollment.
And Madam Chair, Senator CD
Lopez, so it's based off of
those how the church exchanges
are funded through the
Affordable Care Act and they're
subsidized federally, so, um,
currently like states are able
to um expand access it because
there's more federal funding for
it when they narrow the the
funding states are going to have
the ability the eligibility
requirements for it. Thank you,
Madam Chair, cause I didn't, I,
you know, just decrease in
enrollment, so it's really a
decrease in funding.
subsidies, OK. Um, and then
Um, and the estimate is 4.2
million people because they
Um, but is there an estimate of
state by state what it would
In place.
Um, Madam Chair, not that I've
seen yet.
OK.
Thank you, Scott.
Oh,
thank you, Madam Chair. So
spread pricing is a, it's a
pricing mechanism that pharmacy
benefit managers use where they
charge um a health plan or an
insurance plan, a separate.
A different price than what they
charge, um, a pharmacy. So like
they make, they make money off
of the spread difference between
what they charge the, the um
health insurance and what they
charge the uh.
It's, it's like they're one of
their big pricing mechanisms.
So say like, how about they they
reimburse um a pharmacy.
At like $35 for a prescription.
They pay them $35 but they, they
charged the health insurance
company $40. So they made like
$5 off of that deal just.
as an intermediary between those
two entities. That, that's,
that's how they make their
money, you know benefits
managers as, as Senator Hickey
says he's very complicated,
very, um, non-transparent and
very, very lucrative. Um, I
have, I and several folks have
been trying for years to get
some PBM regulations passed in
New Mexico and it's happening
throughout the country, but
it's, it's another middleman in
our healthcare that have become
very, very. So Madam Chair.
And said, What are those folks
bring to the table.
To justify their,
they, they claim that they bring
savings, healthcare is very
Complicated and um difficult to
get to the bottom of anything,
um, so their claim at least some
years ago was that they brought
savings, but I don't think the
Madam Chair and Senator Scott,
um, other states have, have
banned spread pricing and
required um pharmacy benefits
managers to charge just like um
and and some of those states
have found savings in their
prescription because currently
under the spread pricing, um.
Yeah, like I said, they, they
basically.
decide what they read the
pharmacy and then they charge
the health insurance company a
totally different amount and
they make all that money in
between there, it's a very
profitable scheme.
And Madam Chansander.
Is that
All transparent.
Madam Chair, uh, not, not.
Sounds like some sunlight would
be in
me,
and I will tell you that one of
the issues with PBMs is they,
they charge their rates based on
a percentage, so they're pushing
the more expensive drugs to be
used because then they get a
higher kickback, so it could be
a, a generic antibiotic that
would cost, you know, the
patient $20 when they're pushing
some.
Some fancy one that would cost
the patient, you know, $2000.
It's a mess. Senator Pope.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator Pope,
the impacts.
with
Thank you, Senator.
Really heavy topic.
That and and just for those of
you who are new to this world,
um, the entire state budget is
somewhere around a leap, and
when you add in what we get for
our Medicaid match, our
healthcare costs.
are over 12 billion.
So, um, if we have major cuts,
that there is a bill a month to
spend, um, if, if it turns out
that that um
Anaya.
Clearly we are infamous for
The voting members are um the
chair, the vice chair,
Representative Chavez, E.
Chavez, Representative Herndon,
Senator Scott, Senator Block,
We did set up a Medicaid trust
is being pushed by our president
00, OK, I can't see. OK, OK,
well then we will, uh, we will
just leave that.
Where it is for now. So thank
you so much, Xander, and as we
are probably all can tell um.
There's more we don't know than
we know, but we'll, we'll try to
keep, try to keep as much ahead
of uh.
Or on top of things that's done.
What little we get. So, um, we
will now go on to um Harry
Rommel with for healthcare
workforce.
And just a reminder to the
committee, don't get used to
being early cause we never, this
is like there's gonna be.
Big crack of light, the rotunda
or something.
So we
Thank you, Madam Chair. Good
afternoon members. We've got
some handouts coming out.
My name is Harry Rommel. I'm one
of your health and human
services analysts, and today
we're going to discuss uh
healthcares. Uh, the overview
today, um, looking at slide 2.
I'm going to show you sort of
the tools I have in mys I'm
missing from my toolbox. Um,
we'll discuss health
professional shortage areas. We
know we're short on nurse, but
where are those shortages
particular how critical are
they? Uh, we'll take a quick
look at the workforce,
behavioral health. I'm just
gonna touch on very briefly
because you're gonna hear a lot
more from uh AOC and then uh
Cheer on Friday, we'll talk
about Medicaid and behavioral
health.
Um, and then I'll sort of show
you what the projections are
looking like 5 years down the
road, and so, as I said, we, we
know we need physicians. We know
we need nurses, but what kind of
physicians?
What kind of nurses?
You probably find some
surprising data.
Uh, at the end. So, um, there's
some key points on slide 3. we
know about the shortages, um, we
have really diverse sources of
data, but you have to be careful
what types of data you use, um,
and what kind of questions you
ask from the sources. Um, we of
course know about our rural
shortage areas. I'm going to
show that to you graphically. We
also need to be aware of the
maldistribution of healthcare
practitioners, if we add 500
positions and they're all in
Bernalillo County, and
that doesn't really help the
whole state, um, and then
looking at these shortages and
surpluses can help us, you know,
guide policy. Um, moving to
slide 4.
I pulled some data from the
Department of Workforce
Solutions and 7 of the top 10
job posts online job postings in
New Mexico.
Or in health care or personal
care.
Uh, the top being registered
nurses, physicians, and this is
just the online job postings
that workforce Solutions has
done. So this is probably a
lower bound.
Um, that's 82% of our online, so
that's, you know.
Pretty stunning, and you can
tell that, you know, improving
our healthcare workforce in the
state is going to improve our
state's economy.
Um, turning to slide 5,
again, I just want to show you
sort of the tools in my toolbox.
We have very diverse sets of
data. Um, we've got our
healthcare Workforce Committee,
who's been, you know, going for
years, we can get uh managed
care organization reports,
Medicaid reports.
Workforce solutions data like I
just showed you, you'll notice
that the all-payer claims
database, which is housed at the
Department of Health is in red.
Um, because that's one that I
don't have access to. We also
have lots of federal data, uh,
the national provider identifier
database is useful. We've got
things like the area health
resource file, workforce
projections, but one issue we've
had with the federal data is
Some of that data just
disappeared.
Um, and then some of it
magically reappeared, such as
the area health resources file.
Um, and then, of course, we've
got other sources of data. I'm
gonna show you some really
interesting behavioral health uh
data from George Washington
University that combines, uh,
and prescription, uh,
prescription data to give us an
idea. Um, turning to slide 6,
Again, I just want, I want you
to be mindful that there is no
perfect one source of truth for
data in healthcare. Um, the NPI
master file is huge. You can't
even load it into Excel, you
know like are uh in order to do
the analysis, um, some of the
reports are, some of the data is
fresh, it's not so fresh, data
is a lot like food.
You can have nutritious.
Healthy food, you can have empty
calories. It can be fresh, it
can be stale. Uh, so we have to
be mindful of that when we, when
we, when we do these types of
analysis, in general, though, we
should have agreement, um, and
then if I could get to one
source of truth, Madam Chair, I,
I would say that's the all
pairent claims database, but uh
that's how the DOH and we have
not yet successfully been able
to get de-identified but unit
level uh data from that database
that we really do some so
turning to slide 7.
I'm gonna show you some federal
data and that's what we call
health professional shortage
areas. Um, these have different
designations, geographic,
population, facility-based, 32
of 33 counties have some sort of
health professional shortage
area. The only one that doesn't
have a HPSA designation is Los
Alamos County.
Um
We can use this data to, you
know, find out where the
shortages are particularly
critical.
We can use it to guide policy,
um, in general, the key metrics
are the HPSA score, uh, a higher
score is a higher need, so a
higher number is worse.
Um, it can give us estimates of
provider shortage by number and
type, um, and then percent
adequacy, how well are we
serving the population in these
different counties. And that's
what's really great about these
health professional shortage
area data sets is that we can
look at individual counties. Um,
so I'm just going to go quickly
over these, um, turning to slide
8, you can see that every state,
every county except Los Alamos
has a hip rather high HPSA
score.
Um, the higher the number, the,
the, this, the greater the need.
Um, and then we can also get
estimates of how many primary
care, uh, FTEs. Now, of course,
you can't have a fractional uh
person, uh, but it gives you an
idea of that distribution, of
course, Berlio County, uh, or
most public county does have a
huge shortage on FTEs, um, and
that's why these, and so these
are basically heat maps just to
show you these different types
of shortages. Um, I just showed
you the 3, the 3 main categories
of the hips.
Uh, this is all, um, data from
US Department of Health and
Human Services Health Resources
service agency, and you guys can
study this uh closer and check
out your counties and your
areas. If you turn to slide 9,
you'll notice that uh the, the
hip scissors are, are a little
bit different because uh for
mental health, Hsa is actually
categorized uh these uh group
several counties together as, as
what they call catchment areas.
Um,
But I don't like the phrase
border catchment area,
particularly, so I just put the
area, um, and you can see where
those different shortages are.
Obviously, we have counties, uh,
you know, the Northwest area
are, are, you know, tribal areas
have particular uh high
shortages, um, and that's what
the mental health hips look
like.
Um, and then,
Dental health is healthcare, and
so on slide 10, I'm also showing
those dental, uh, those dental
ipsa scores and shortages, you
can see that, again, we have
these critical chronic
shortages.
All across the state. But this
can kind of guide us about where
are the most critical areas in
the state, um, and, you know, do
we, do we want to, uh, you know,
do we want everything to go to
Bern Leo and Donana County
because there are, you know,
there are shortages there, or do
we need to look at other areas,
um, and so that's why I wanted
to show you these uh health
professional shortage areas.
Uh, turning to slide 11.
We had the primary care
physician distribution, and I'm
showing you two different sets
of data here, which don't
exactly agree.
Um, one is the HSA, health
professional shortage
designation, um, and
According to that data, we need
200 primary care physicians.
According to healthcare
workforce report.
We need 330, because the
benchmarks are different.
So that's something that I, I
try to keep, uh, be mindful of
when I'm doing my analysis is,
again, what type of data source
am I using? Are they consistent?
Do they agree or not? Um, and of
course, I'm sure you've seen the
map to the right from our
healthcare Workforce Committee
report, and this really um
This is a very important map to
look at because it it it
emphasizes the maldistribution
of practitioners. We actually
have
More that we have a surplus in
Benefit County, a, a huge
shortage in San Juan County.
Um, and so the benchmarks are
slightly different, but in
general, the data is consistent
um across the two sets.
Turning to slide 12.
Um, I just wanna, I'm not gonna
go through this slide, uh, in
great detail, but just, you
know, remind the committee that
behavioral health is really
broad spectrum. It's a dive,
it's so many different types of
practice, um, and that becomes
important in the next slide,
where I'm gonna show you some
data on slide 13 from the George
Washington University behavioral
health workforce data set. And
what they did was they, they
looked at
Traditional behavioral health
practitioners, but then they
also looked at our primary care
practitioners, and by using
prescription, uh, prescription
utilization data, they found
primary care practitioners who
may not.
Label themselves as a behavioral
health provider, but provided
more than 10 behavioral health
prescriptions in a year.
And what you can see from that
is we do have quite a few
primary care workers, um, on the
left-hand side that are
Delivering the uh
Behavioral health services, but
you can also see that
There is a real serious shortage
in addiction psychiatry and
addiction medicine, uh, and
child psychiatry, you know, they
only found 4 addiction
psychiatrists. Um, but it gives
you an idea of that
distribution and it should also
remind us that, you know,
primary care.
Turning slide 14, I, I only put
this slide in because it
wouldn't be an LFC presentation
without dollars. And and so
you're going to hear more about
this from Eric Cheer on Friday,
uh, but it's something that we
are taking a close look at. We
are monitoring Medicaid
behavioral health expenditures,
both state dollars and the
federal dollars. Um, you can see
it's been growing every year,
and I think with the investments
we're making in SB 3, we'll
probably see even greater
growth.
Uh, my last topic today, Madam
Chair, members, is, let's take a
look in the future, and this is
some more federal data I wanted
to show you. Um, we're gonna
look at what uh Hsa calls a
supply and demand model, and I
think maybe Doctor Richards
presented to some of you last
year, uh, some similar data. He
went on to 2037, and I thought
that's a little too far. Let's
just go 5 years in the future to
2030. 1 of those shortages and
surpluses look like, turning to
slide 16.
You can see a supply and demand
chart, so I have uh on the
difference in between supply and
demand, that's your need. And
then percent adequacy, how close
are we fit, how close are we to
fulfilling the workforce needs
in the state. Um, for example,
on the left in 2030.
We're gonna need 5750 registered
nurses. And that
Uh, and, and we'll be at 71%
adequacy.
However, if you look at the 3rd
bar from the left.
We're gonna have a surplus
projected of nurse
practitioners.
Now that's very important
because we know there's a
primary care physician shortage,
and that's gonna be very hard to
fill.
But if we have PAs and nurse
practitioners that can at least
alleviate part of that shortage,
and that's something that we
need to be mindful of as we look
at the workforce. Um, this slide
17.
Rather complicated, any bar that
points down is a shortage, and
you can see that this tells us
what types of physicians we're
probably gonna need in 2030. Um,
we may have a small surplus of
ER physicians and pathologists,
but we're gonna need all those
other different special
currently do.
Um
Turning the slide 18, uh, this
is again 2030 behavioral health
projections, you can see, we
need a lot of addiction
counselors. We need about 160
adult psychiatrists, uh,
800 psychiatric tech
technicians, um, so this is just
to illustrate, and again, we
don't know what the workforce is
gonna look like exactly in
5 years, it's a pretty
sophisticated model. Um, it's
been pretty good at tracking
things, but it does kind of give
us an idea of where those
distributions are. And again,
you can see that we're probably
gonna have a surplus of nurse
practitioners.
Night
slide 19.
The only area of healthcare
where there's a projected
surplus is for nurse
practitioners, um, and you can
see the growth over time.
Now why is that? Well, it's
easier to become an MP or a PA
than it is to be quicker, less
debt.
And the return on your invest
primary care is a difficult
field to get in as a physician.
Um, finally, my last slide,
slide 20.
is the primary care projections,
and I do have a couple of
bullets I want to go over on the
side. You can see we're gonna
need family medicine physicians,
internal medicines, geriatric
physicians, um, but with that
surplus of nurse practitioners
and physician assistants, that
is projected an estimate, again,
not a guarantee that could
alleviate some of our primary
care physician shortage.
Um, and the other thing to be
mindful of is
You know, the primary care
physician workforces.
as an aging workforce.
So what do we do to alleviate
that. And
Also, again, as I mentioned at
the beginning, the
maldistribution is something we
need to be very aware of because
these shortages and surpluses
don't tell us that geographic
distribution. So that's
something we like to look at,
um, as we're doing this
analysis. So, so the point of
this presentation today, Madam
Chair, will sort of give you
again an idea of my toolbox, um,
the source of data that I have
available to me, and hopefully
to encourage you to think about
some of the questions you want
to ask me as I
Uh, focus on healthcare and with
that, I thank you very much. I
would stand.
Again for um those of you who
haven't served on the committee
last year we did a, a big
infusion of cash to hospitals
thinking that we were saving um
rural hospitals, and as it
turned out, we got a a
presentation from Allegra
Hernandez from uh LFC, um, last
year, and she told us that
Well, what happened is we did
all that and then the hospital
association came and said, your
data is all wrong.
They would not provide us with
the data Allegra said that the
LFC had to IPRA, the healthcare
authority.
To get data that we could use.
So, uh and all payer claims data
that you've talked about, we
have been trying to get that up
and running for
It feels like 100 years. I
don't, it just feels that was so
we are having a hard time
getting data from within our own
systems, that the systems that
we oversee are not willing to
share their plan to decide how
much money to put where, and
just, just something, just
another hurdle that this
committee has since I joined in
20, so we will, so I'll go.
The deal Lopez, you, you don't
have to, OK, OK, we'll, so we'll
start with Stephanic and then
Sadia Lopez. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and um thank you for the
report.
Could you tell me who is on the
healthcare workforce committee.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator
Stephanics, it is a rather
large, the Healthcare Workforce
Committee, which is housed at
UNM, it's, it's a very large
department of health, UNM Health
Sciences Center. I can get you
that list, uh, it's about
companies, but I don't know the,
I can't give you all the names
right now, I will jump in here
that we looked at this with some
depth last year. There's a lot
of folks medical society,
there's no, there's no one from
the consumer patience.
Um, and for, I think it was 2
years ago for the first time
ever. Generally they have just
been providing us with the
numbers. They put without being
asked, they provided us with
recommendations about what to do
around um medical malpractice
that were not at all that well,
men share, the reason I'm
asking.
His, uh, and you indicated.
Uh, Mr. Rommel, that the
Department of Health and all
claims. So, um,
Once
But at that time, and it would
be aggregated throughout the
state.
So I'm not, maybe they don't
even have it, uh, Madam Chair,
and it does seem like there's a
A disconnectors said the Lous.
Thank you. I kind of building on
this all claims.
Payer database what exactly
We don't know. So, so, Madam
Chair, Senator Cia Lopez, uh, I
did, I did reference sort of the
sole source of truth, we can
tell, uh, if we get
disaggregated, de-identified
data. We don't want PII.
But we can drill in and see what
types of claims are being made
on a per patient level.
We can identify again, uh, help,
help us possibly identify areas
of mal distribution of the
workforce.
Um, the types of claims that
we're getting will tell us a lot
about the types of healthcare
people are seeking or not
seeking. And, and that's,
that's, that's the main reason
we're a source of truth Could it
possibly think like weird trends
like that is a possibility. I
wouldn't want to speculate on,
you know, it's, it's sort of,
you don't know what the data is
going to show you until you dig
in and take a look. Um, and
that's when the.
Um, thank you. And um yeah,
cause I'm sort of I'm
interested.
The database hasn't and then um.
Last year, as you know, we, and
one of the things that was said
over in physicians in my
district. And so I started
asking them, you know, I'm not
talking about a ton of people,
um, I think.
And both of them left because of
the, they didn't have enough
time with patients, their
problem. Um, they didn't have
any data on, you know, they kept
saying.
Like my data just is there any
way um
And then
Some data that we saw showed
that they weren't in fact.
You know, that it wasn't this
big uh number of physicians that
were, they weren't, you know, it
wasn't this, um.
A is, would it be possible to
Madam, I, I don't know that a
single data source is gonna be
able to answer all of those
questions. We may look at the
NPI, the National Pride Provider
Identifier database. We could,
we could possibly
Possibly identify if they're
really anecdotal exodus, um, we
would have to look at our, uh,
neighboring states, and if, you
know, and one of my slides on
slide 11, I showed, you know,
all of our neighboring states
are having a similar issue. Um,
so, you know, physician
shortages, healthcare provider
shortages are, are, are chronic,
they're nationwide.
Um, you know, we're not the only
state that is experiencing these
types of, of, of shortages, uh,
but we could look at the NPI
data. Again, that is a very
difficult file to work with, but
we could potentially do some
longitudinal identification if,
if, if physicians are leaving
for, say, errors identify that.
I'd be happy to uh follow up
with that because this is part
of the work that I'm assigned to
this committee to do
on the the um a lot of what
they, what they look.
The, the workforce group uses is
licensing data.
And you can be licensed in New
Mexico and not practice, um, so
that is a a bad data source to
begin with because we don't
know. I mean, it could be
licensed in New Mexico and doing
telemedicine into color, there's
all kinds of things we don't at
this point have any good
measures of who's here, who's
practicing, that's just one more
layer of
Difficulty for getting this
information. Thank you, thank
you, Madam Chair, but I do
appreciate the creativity and
because um it bothered me that
we're just relying on um in the
release that was the only know
it difficult to use, um, just to
see, because I will uh
difficulty in trains a very
More.
adequacy versus here.
Madam chair a question, and
these are the federal, according
to the federal benchmarks to
address the percent adequacy.
And those benchmarks, Madam
Chair, representative, may not
be.
Thank you, Representatives. Uh,
thank you, Madam Chair. I, I too
want to take a moment and, and
thank you for this presentation,
uh, I've had.
challenges with other.
Uh, presentations or your
sources are and the parent.
Of a gathering, um, and for the
individuals who are listening,
it's, it looks to me that
Colorado, Texas.
Utah are in more of
primary care physician needs
time, um, Arizona uh are are
slightly less than us, so this
is a showing our neighbors and
estates, we are not at the we
were all in crisis. Is that a
fair analysis of what I'm
seeing,
Madam,
that is correct. Um, the, you
know, if you look at the, the
column on the far right on the
slide. It is a function of
population.
And of course, right, we're a
smaller state, 500, Utah only
needs 72. Uh, so that's, that's
exactly what you're seeing, and
I do what I just kind of want to
emphasize it, you know, we're
all, all of the states are in
this boat, especially at least
ourselves and
these are just prime to me, uh,
pointed out that you really did
a great job by breaking down
physicians and some of these
specialty shortages and it also
is a function of what uh what
the capacity.
of our hospitals. So, you know,
a small rural Myersufax versus
the UNF Health systems. Um, it's
harder to get the specialties in
Presbyterian, uh, you know,
stopped delivering OBGYN
services because of the shortage
and well for several reasons
today, uh, but that, that's
correct, that's a correct
assumption, OK. Uh thank you,
Madam Chair. Just one more
thing, and it is also um how I'm
Looking at this is, uh, we
currently
On primary care, but
In the future,
you are uh
That's partially correct, Madam
Chair Representative Kates, um,
you know, the slide 4 is just
the job postings right now, just
the online job posting, um,
further down in the
presentations, that's the
shortage we're projecting, we're
gonna be short about 6000 nurses
by 2030.
Um, so we're already, we're
already experiencing there's the
all again, Madam Chair,
representative case, the only
place we project any surpluses
of healthcare practitioners at
all, is in the nurse
practitioner. Thank you.
Looking at slide 17.
It looks like these numbers add
up to a little over 1000,
anecdotally we've heard.
Over and over again that New
Mexico is short.
Over 2000.
positions, and I looked that GPs
don't seem to be represented in.
Um
Madam Chair, Senator Scott, yes,
this is just physician, this is
just specialty physician.
So what would the total be?
If we look for
General Madam Chair, Senator
Scott, uh, the total number of
physicians in New Mexico,
according to licensure data.
So, I don't have that exact
number in front of me, but I
would be happy to follow up with
you and drill into that for you.
And again, this is just uh this
is on slide 17, just the
specialty project shortages. So
it does not include, so this is
not a net total number. This is
just shortages. So what you're
not seeing is the existing
position.
But our
Shortage
Projected shortage would be
substantially more.
Severe
And is represented because of
the absence.
Thank you, sir.
Thank you, Ma.
Can, can you go to slide 19,
sir, real quick for me.
Uh, I share some of the same
concerns with Senator Scott, um,
but on the nurse practitioner
and PA side.
Uh, it's just my opinion that
these are really the
Um,
man, I chair, Senator Black, uh,
in general, yes.
So, when you look at um how did
you come up, uh, Madam Chair,
um, sir, how did you come up
with, with these numbers?
MPs and Pier center block. I did
not come up with numbers myself.
This was some very sophisticated
work done by the US Department
of Health and Human Services
Bureau of Health Workforce, and
this is their health workforce
projections, specifically for
the state.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you a year. There's only
one P.
Madam chair and block, that is
correct, and, and I would
actually uh phone a friend on
that if Nathan's in the room, he
might have that number for me.
Uh
Madam Chair, and, and, uh,
committee members at the
University of New Mexico. How
many PA schools. Well, Madam
Chair, I, I know the number.
It's 26 um admitted into the UN
only 26.
Um, Madam Chair, and, um, so, I,
I guess, were you, was you and
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator, not
to my knowledge, but I would
defer to my uh uh madam chair
center block. No, I, I, I did
not consult with the University
of New Mexico.
Per data. Uh, however, I, I will
mention that, um,
Doctor Richards from UNM Health
did present very similar data
last year using the same data
source.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, just
a couple more quick ones here,
um, so out of those 26 that get
admitted through.
Um, how many of those, let's
just say it's 24, um, how many
of those stay in New Mexico.
center block, uh, I don't have
that retention data, that's OK.
Um.
Again, that may be something
that the au pair claims database
could tease out for us.
So Madam Chair, I think that's
data from you because
I, I look at the small amount,
the smidgen.
Of the amount of PAs that come
out of UNM, the only school that
produces PAs in our grades 25.
And there's such a need for
these, I have a hard time
understanding how we can have
it.
Huge, huge surplus of PAs.
Uh, when we see in the data
here, not many providers are
coming to New Mexico.
Um, I, I really don't understand
that data. Now granted.
You know,
Just a dumb nuclear weapons can
add up.
Um, so if I could just have you
and I kind if they weren't.
I would hope that they were um
Coordinated with uh and so, but
I, I know a lot of work you do
and thank you, Madam Chair. So
just we were doing a little
googling, so until May 1st,
2025, the University of Saint
Francis Physician Assistant
Program was in Albuquerque May
1st, um, and I will tell you,
having come from the PT program
at UNM, I'm
I think their classes are 32
now, um, and we need 600 of
them. The trouble is getting the
funding for it, and particularly
getting faculty.
Accreditation, yeah, and we did
where we had a chance to grow
the PT program and we didn't
invest in that, so um.
It's an issue, it's not just
physicians assistants, it's and
you and M has
a plan to double.
the output of professionals and
by what year?
Madam Chair, thank you for the
question. Um, I believe, I mean,
some of this is going to be
contingent contingent on
legislative support and other
things that may be beyond even
your control, but, um,
We are an active conversations
with the legislature and the
governor's office trying to get
The financial piece and also the
capital outlay piece,
synchronized.
And that is for a new school of
medicine, but I should also, uh,
Um
Disclose to you all as a, as a
friendly measure that that is
not just um
Medical professionals and then
just, just kind of as an aside,
um, and probably the um scope of
practice war if a, if a nurse
practitioner, it was a major, I
mean, there were major major
fights in in this body, um, for,
for people and it was comes down
to turf wars, and I'm a firm
believer and there's plenty of
so I was at a conference
recently and they talked about
As opposed to looking at scope
of to consider scope of practice
to call it levels of competency.
So we did pass a bill to allow
um optometrists to do minor
surgical things. I believe that
governor vetoed that, but what
we're trying to do is to
Have everybody practice to the
highest possible level of their
licensure and and stop with the
turf wars all that, you know,
we, oh docs, only docs can do
blank or only PTs can do blank,
um, but to try and get every
cause there's plenty of patients
to go around. So just some for
those of you who know scope of
practice, trying to start
thinking about it as a level of
practice. So signature block and
then I'll go to Representative
Kate, thank you, Madam Chair,
for those comments because we
also passed Senator Stephonics
and I.
We passed that bill in the
Senate, which unfortunately was
vetoed, but I, I will say, uh,
we are not getting a large to
meet the need and the demand.
Here in New Mexico, and I would
hope the legislature could do
something to help.
Either expand UNM or another
school because Saint Francis,
if, I mean, they actually closed
a couple of years ago and
weren't accepting students, um,
we go, um.
I'm concerned about PTs. I know
you're a physical therapist and
quite frankly, when you people
work um
And I know we have to do a lot
more to start producing uh
quality end so those, those.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank, thank you. Is it on this
point or actually let's go to
Kate representative Kate, and
then we'll come back to you,
Representative Jones. Go ahead,
representative.
You know, I, I agree with my
colleagues here on um being able
to increase medical education
here in our state, um, and also
with the source of your data.
Uh, the US Department of Health
and Human Services, Health
Resources Services Agency,
Bureau of Health Workforce Week
refer to it as hersa.
Thank you very much and thank
you, Madam Chair. And would it
be?
For us and add statistics
finding.
Madam chair representative
Kates, I'm a chemist, not a
statistician. Um, so my, my
inclination is when you have
diverse data sources, you look
for correlations and
disagreements. Um, so again, you
know, as
Depending on the research
question you're asking.
You're gonna go to a particular
data source, um, the
The workforce projections moving
into the future, it's a very
sophisticated supply and demand
model that Hearsa developed.
Um, by people a lot smarter than
me, um, and it does, it uses um
county level.
Um, de-identified data, they
actually analyze each county,
and I actually asked them. I
asked her, said, well, can you
give me the county level data,
and they said they couldn't,
unfortunately, um, but yeah,
it's, you know, we have so, we
have no dearth of data sources
in healthcare.
But depending on the question
you're asking, you have to be
careful about which data source
you're using and and and again,
Madam Chair Representative
Kates, I, I would point to the
all pair claims databases are
our sole source, our source of
truth. If I could get to one
piece of data that I would
consider the most reliable.
It would be that one. And, and
Madam Chair represent case just.
I'll let it go. Um, there are
states that have done very
sophisticated dashboard work
with their au paired not one of
them.
But we could answer some really,
I can answer you lots of
questions about California,
Massachusetts, a couple other
states just by going to their
dashboard, but I don't have that
tool at my disposal. Uh, that
would be the legislative finance
Committee, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Representative Jones, and thank
you for the presentation. I know
in the past we've heard similar,
we've heard.
We've seen the data on the um,
I'm, I'm going to take this for
what it's worth.
I, I do you have something to
say for that, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Jones, this
everything I've presented today
except for the comparison to the
states is specific to New
Mexico. So the workforce
projections are specific,
specifically designed to New
Mexico by the supply and demand
model, which again is based on
existing workforce, um, data
sources such as the AMA master
file, and they actually modeled
down to the county level, but I
couldn't drew.
understandable. Madam Chair, um,
again, thank you, what you've
proven here is that this
physicians are, are hard to come
by in every state, which for
you, but I think that proves the
point that we need to create an
environment.
In New Mex
It, it proves a place where
physicians, PAs, nurse prac, I,
I appreciate
your questions.
Thank you, opened the can of
worms that uh.
And send it Ortiz yanking our
hair out about all pain us very
far except Baldur.
So, um, we are waiting. I, I'm
gonna keep telling the committee
don't get used to us being on
time or early because this
never, OK, OK, so just, 00,
they're here. Oh, OK, well then
good.
Come on forward. OK, thank you.
And thank you for being.
Everybody has a presentation.
Again, thank you so much for
being here, um, and I want to
say revamp our recover our uh
damaged behavioral health uh
till the end for questions, so
go ahead and
related
to the most recent health reform
reform and Investment Act.
Um, no one, I, I keep trying, I
keep trying. That act, um,
Really envisages, um, as you
know, since this.
It's sort of a three branch very
excited to be part of this. It
is
specific a very defined.
Narrow scope and then this
behavioral health executorcept
mapping for the whole, and then,
um, also, um, the AOC to then go
across the state, new behavioral
health to develop.
Local plans to implement, uh,
it's not AOC's role to decide
what the act requires the plan.
Um, those plans then get their
job at the executive.
The committee itself, um, by
statute features, you know.
Um, the state medical, the
statute appoints the AOC
Rural focused, she's she's deep,
deep ties to some.
A senior re so with sim mapping,
Um
Experience on the national
level. She also has a law
degree, um,
An Aggie and a logo.
And uh the third member is uh
Uh, now retired state senator,
The theme I was really trying
for folks had experience
delivering services firsthand.
And then also doing policy work
in in rural New Mexico, working.
Um, the
Uh committee met yesterday for
its inaugural meeting, just two
business days later we had our
fruit and the big outcome from
that meeting, um, really, really
good, I think, as the
legislation kind of at the time
was, even though we're talking
about that as a geography, it's
not so that we're focused on the
criminal.
It's a kind of a current con um
As Carl mentioned, um, yeah, and
these are the same regions that
So, um, based on
So I guess I will, I will start
and, and I know this came up
yesterday.
Yesterday. Monday was
Legislative council, sorry.
Yeah, so
In the uh it was brought up
several times that the fear that
The way we're putting this
together, it has a criminal base
behavioral health and looking at
the sequential intercept model
and there's intercept 0.
But we wanna intervene before 0.
So I'm wondering, is there a, I
know that finding a model to to
do all this is gonna be tough,
but
Is there, have you figured out
how to include the before we
Is a requirement of Senate Bill
3, so it was, it was built into
the and I appreciate that. I
guess I just to keep because I
mean, yeah, intercept 0 was
crisis line. We don't want
Chris, I mean, we want, we want
treatment before there's a
crisis, so I'm just, I'm just
bringing it out because I'm part
of the disability community and,
and it's a concern and we
really, we really, really don't
want the public to come away
with the impression that
A behavioral health.
Disorder issue is criminal. I
mean, we, we just need to keep
pounding that into the heads
and, and I'm not saying that you
don't have that basis, but I
think using this kind of model.
Will take
Much appreciated. So I have um
Senator Cedil Lopez.
And we'll start there.
Thank you, Madam Chair. You, you
started where um
Going and I believe cause I
worked with that was the biggest
concern when we saw the first
draft of the legislation was
having the AOC, which is an
extremely competent
organization, but we were
worried that the tunnel vision
would be on criminally on um.
I'm uh criminal and we the the
fund is for all behavioral
health services. So it's violent
services, it's for services for
victims of sexual assault. It's
for, uh, it's for people with
depression. And so looking at
this, I am disturbed because 0
just does this Chris just says
crisis lines, which is that
services to individuals with
these happy to hear that you're
going to include juveniles.
But I don't want it to be just
um and, and
How, what is the, the mechanism,
I mean, his the reason that Sim
is in on it.
In their pilot project.
And honestly, that's why the AOC
was involved with because they
were so impressed with the work
of the courts. And I have a lot
of confidence, confidence
organization, but I was very
worried in vision of just
dealing with justice to think
about people who hopefully will
never become justice involved
that are not just a symbol is.
What is the plan for getting,
you called it intercept zero,
just calling it intercept
is, is a tunnel vision.
I'm talking about sexual assault
victim or, you know, whatever,
there are many, many people that
I hope that this gets to in man
and chair Senator, I think we're
We're in this interesting.
Attempt to balance things
because we have this sequential
mapping, uh, where the services.
Mm
What are linkages that just need
to have, you know, they might be
existing, um, and so that's all
part of effort. And then it's up
to the regions to find very,
very, very broad to really come
up with the priorities. So
depending on what the priorities
are, it's this region in each
locality themselves.
Um, and so I think
Through those local stakeholders
and
the mystery of the courts and
the healthcare.
And supplement the mapping to
ensure complete behavioral
health coverageization. So it's
that complete part.
and we actually put you would
work with us, um,
This committee to, to ensure
that and I would probably ask
you every time and um, you know,
so just be prepared and what are
those groups you're dealing
with? Cause it looks like you've
included the tribal because it
looks like you included them,
you know what I mean? They're,
there's so many.
Potential stakeholders and so
many gaps, um.
There, there's um
you, but you know, those are to
make sure that we have adequate.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and um.
Thank you. This is very
important to me, so my, my first
of all, Senate Bill 1.
In 3 because they are huge
investments.
Uh, in New Mexico. This is the
first time in history that we're
actually putting some guardrails
and some metrics on this stuff,
so we're not just throwing money
at a problem to do, which is why
we put that recommendations in
there every year for you guys to
come back and tell us the
regionals to say this is what's
working here, this is can better
focus our resources to make sure
the proper and appropriate um
Services, so
Um, Madam Chair, I, I just need
a couple of minutes to, to go
through this for a couple of
quick things here. When I look
at this, um, snake chart.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So if
this is linear, you're taking
into account in some of these
steps all the different regions
to make.
So thank you, Madam chair. So I
can assume then say if
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair. My,
my, my concern is the risk in
the schedule.
Um, that's my concern from an
overall strategic schedule to
when you dive down to the uh the
bandwidth to, to keep up and
then I, I don't want to, it
sounds like it's a concern of
yours.
Um, madam chair, and, um, and
panel, the other thing I want
for the stakeholders, we
purposely did for me, it's also
an economic development piece I
mean it provides services across
regional. How do you
How do you vet them, and when do
you vet them? And what are you
looking for
when you madam, no, what I'm
saying is we want to make sure
that this company or nonprofit
is in good standing. Are there
any vetting processes or
procedures in place to ensure
like when we pick acme
counseling services that we know
they're in good standing and,
and, um.
Just cause they're not a shady,
you know, nonprofits or
businesses out there that are
gonna, you know, screw.
There's a funding mechanism, and
then there's what agency.
House Bill 2 is a lot of funding
for housing that was separate.
It's the job though of the
to say
Yeah
Ensuring that from previous work
that I've done.
The program because sometimes
the administratively
overwhelming and the smaller
entity. Thank you, sir. Yeah,
um, you know, the pilot program
in Santa Fe that to do that. The
the other thing I wanted to make
sure that we, we do in the money
being spent. How are the AOCs or
how's the executives, Madam
Chair, Senator, I, I don't think
we 100% know yet, as a reminder.
AOC did not think that's going
to be developed though through
This funding strategy that we've
kind of yet to see, but it's
going to build on existingity
could could come up with its own
procurement.
You're gonna have to live within
um, Madam Chair, uh, I think I
asked you about the burden AOCs,
uh, and, um, I'm sure the exec
worked that out at some AOCs
maybe need to madam chair
Senator B block, uh, so yes, the
administrative office came to us
and said, Will you take the G,
that's a lot, guys. Um, and we
talked through it and we said,
And I, I want to make sure I how
important.
The record I get um uh funneled
up because that's really what
I'm looking courses of action.
That is uh critical to me for
doing that.
Um, lastly, I'll just say, Madam
Chair, um, the intent of this is
not judicial or criminal by any
means, the intent of this, you
know, we have an epidemic in
this kind of empirical data.
Um, where we need to focus on
invest more resources or pull
back, stay on top of this. I
know it's a big burden on you.
And thank you very much. Uh, I,
I would say that, um,
I would characterize the leg
Uh
The courts did not come into the
session asking for anything
related to uh behavioral health
other than just to fund our
summer special session.
requests for recurring
appropriations related to that.
Thank you and thank you, Madam
Chair, questions usually
directed to to the presenter,
but
In in in Cine Bill 3 did not.
I slept since then
asking is what sort of are we
serving less or uh a decrease
greatly or is the budget.
Spoon feeding, what was
initially over a long how such a
drastic changing because we are
taking a plant protocol.
So
Um, Madam Chan representative,
uh, one of the things overview
I know the small pot that was
given specifically to my agency.
And thank you, Madam Chair um
data reflected back that bills
actually, um, I will just say
that that is strategies with the
budget you were given, and, and
I do also appreciate um
That there may be.
This may all to get a breakdown
of HB 2 for these these
measures.
Um, if you could, if I don't
know.
Oh, OK. A reason to be back.
Not that you needed one, but OK,
we'll go to um Senator.
Oh, thank you, Mr. Was that I
had.
Significant
This piece of legislation.
And one of my
Main concerns.
I
And that is in each of these.
Various
Regs
We're going to have some
Organization.
Or behavioral health.
What does that organization.
Looked like
What hierarchy of respons.
Who is ultimately going to be.
What entity or individual
failure.
Of those programs.
In each region,
Um
We don't know specifically what
agency they need to.
Broad view. That's what's in my
mind when I read.
Madam chair
His first
That is exactly.
Yeah
And the
If this doesn't work out, we're,
we, we're not gonna fire the,
we're not gonna fire.
The county sheriff.
We're not going to fire the
local hawk. No, I cannot point.
to an organizational structure
that I had seen or has been
proposed that looks workable to
me.
And the two
You'll come up with some sort of
base model.
That could be applicable.
Somewhat statewide.
I don't ask
You've got to give folks in each
region, something.
Some sort of organizational
structure to build on.
Scott, um,
one of the things I am hoping
will be on the is a rubric or an
in organized. I think we have
this set up from the statute
itself, from Senate Bill 3,
right, that says it's these
regions and we're ultimately,
In, in the real world, this
would be
Oh
The responsibility.
And the accountability of the
executive branch of.
And
This
seems to be at minimum.
Significantly diluted.
With this
Piece of legislation. I'd be
interested to see.
What kind of structure you some
accountability.
Someone or some entity.
That we can point to.
It says
You're not doing it right or you
are.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I think as this a new endeavor,
and then, um, manager.
has been mentioned, for those
prior to.
Yeah
In working with the Kevannas,
uh, some persons that group of
persons, very learned person
regards to
visiting programs and such as I
think reached that we need to be
doing as a state.
We had hoped that the behavior,
piggyback on Senator Lopez to
the table. They had regional had
um consumers back and review.
Whatever
But I want to pick.
Everybody in the entire be
excluded.
So, I think you have a big
challenge. I realized.
You're one
But I think your challenge is
included.
For example,
I talked almost every one of the
mortalists for 5 years had to do
with them. Those are people's
lives who could be domestic
violence.
It could be um
So I, I just, I have a
A, a question, I guess. So will
the executive committee have
veto power, let's say uh
districts comes up with a plan,
that's all about heartened
criminals with nothing, um, is
that a possibility or is there
some sort of oversight saying,
whoa, this isn't quite what we
man chair, I, I think the short
answer is maybe.
Is the region came in and said a
plan, and it was purely hold on.
Why are these the top priority?
And maybe there would be very,
very good reasons for that and
main thing for that region. It's
hard.
I
Oh, I knew you would. I was
stalling for you existing chair,
uh, we.
Uh, up in San Miguel, age 8,
premise of, so they worked at it
and with counties on either side
in, like, for example, a Santa
Fe with Ria Riba and Los Alamos.
There is and probably they don't
know the needs of Los Alamos.
So I think that the needs should
be assessed in terms of Senator
Stefani's kind of jogged my
memory on this. This is one of
the things that the I think it's
gonna be a challenge, and by the
way, it's OK for the regionals
because
I love standardization.
Just love it, but you're not
gonna, I think if you try
standardization, um, I'm a
little bit OCD on I think where
Senator Stefaniks is going,
it's, it's gonna be a challenge
because Sandoval County is
right, we, we bought a uh Ria
Riva County.
Uh, we also touch, um, McKinley
County.
totally different issues and so
um those are some majors.
Um, but I, I, I understand that
as a guy who makes that point.
Thank you, Madam Chair will
keep coming back to us and we
look forward to it. So we will
be in recess until um
8:45 tomorrow morning.
And again, lunch will be
provided, so, um, so thank you
