seats.
Um, good morning, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. Uh, my
name is Rachel Garcia. I'm the
LFC analyst for Workforce
Solutions, so you're going to
hear two items this morning
related to workforce. Um, I, I
apologize. I actually don't know
the tab, um, but you'll,
Charles, you know.
It's agency code 631, and we'll
start with aegisat that looks
like this.
All right, um, so, um, there are
two components to the agenda
this morning. We'll start with
the legiststat, which is the
component that's focused on a
performance challenge in the
state. I'll highlight a few um
key pieces of data, do a little
bit of table setting, and then I
will turn it over to the
secretary, um, with me at the
table, uh, is Secretary Naier of
the Workforce Solutions
department, and she's joined by
her team. Um, so,
Related to workforce, you all as
a committee have focused on um
legisstat or a specific
performance challenge over time.
When it comes to workforce,
we've been really focused on
labor force participation. So
I'm gonna read from this brief
um and just point out a few key
elements of data, um, before I
turn it over to the secretary.
So the state's labor force
participation really holds the
state back from economic
development and expansion, and
it's both a symptom and a and a
cause of.
Greater kind of social and
economic issues. Um, if you look
at this, uh, brief with me
that's labeled Workforce
Solutions Department, Labor
force participation. I'll point
you to the first chart you see,
and that's the state
unemployment rate.
And the key point you can take
from this chart is that the
state has really um rebounded
from kind of the high of the
pandemic when it comes to
unemployment. Unemployment is
that number that measures people
who are in the workforce and uh
not currently employed, but
looking for work. That rate as
of September was 4.2%. So if you
look at that number alone, it
looks like we have a pretty
tight labor market. But if you
go to the next chart, I'll
highlight where we
the state have a significant
challenge, and that's the, the
rate of participation in our
labor force. That measure
includes people who are not
participating in the labor force
and not looking for work. And
what you'll see is over time we
as a states have experienced a
decline, and we have a
significant gap between the rate
of labor force participation in
our state and the nation. Um, as
of September 2024, New Mexico's
labor force participation rate
was 57.
5% compared to the national
average of 62.7%.
You all have heard about this a
few times over the interim in a
variety of program evaluations,
particularly a workforce
evaluation that looks deeply at
this issue, um, and in that
report was the chart you see
right below it, which is the
breakdown of labor force
participation by gender.
What you'll see in, in that
chart, um, and we have
highlighted previously is there
are about 206,000 New Mexicans
in the prime working age range.
That's kind of 20 to 54 who are
not working, not looking for
work, not participating in the
labor force.
New Mexico would need to add
about 40,000 people in that age
range to meet the national
average.
What you'll see in the chart,
um, that tracks gender over time
is um
The labor force participation of
women with children increased
kind of post pandemic, but has
stagnated when it comes to men
in that prime working age.
So that's kind of a summary of
key data over time. If you turn
to the next page, we do just a
little bit of recap on um
appropriations you have made and
activities and initiatives,
workforce has been engaged in
over the last few years to work
on labor force participation.
Some of the key takeaways is
that while the state has
implemented programs, um, we're
sort of chipping away at the
problem, but not seeing the
level of numbers or
participation or impact that we
would need to really make
progress toward, for example.
that 40,000 number. So I'll just
point out a few key activities
or initiatives um during the
interim, you all heard the LFC
program evaluation um related to
workforce participation in that
report highlighted a few key
things that included things like
underutilized workforce
connection center offices and
really an opportunity to reach
more disengaged adults.
Uh, and the next section,
there's a little bit of summary
about youth reemployment and
pre-apprentices, you can kind of
think about pre-princesses a
little bit like paid
internships, um, for young
people and uh over the last few
years, workforce has been
implementing a
pre-apprenticeship program.
targeting young adults and
there's a little bit of summary
about that program there. You
all made an investment in in the
grow last year. Uh, and then
finally there's a little bit of
summary about apprenticeships,
um, you all made a quite
significant investment in um
apprenticeships through house
Bill 5 last year, which created
the workforce apprenticeship and
training fund that spins off a
$5 million for apprentices
starting in FY 25 and will again
in FY 26.
There was a significant increase
in the funding going into
apprenticeships starting this
year. One of the things that
you'll see on page 3 of your
brief is kind of a projection of
the number of apprentices. Um,
what has happened over time, if
you look between FY 22 and FY
24. There were quite a few more
apprentices and so that the
amount that workforce pays per
apprentice went down with that
$5 million increase starting in
FY 25. If you look in that
chart, work
uh, we'll be making an
investment to increase that per
apprentice amount, but isn't
projecting a really significant
increase in the number of
apprentices. So that's kind of a
key chart on that page. And then
in your brief, there are a few
questions you all might want to
engage uh with the secretary
regarding as you, you all talk
about, um, what can we do about
the state's labor force
participation rate and then
transition to the budget. So
that's kind of the table setting
and background that you have in
your packets. I will turn it
over to the secretary.
Thank you, Rachel. Uh, I want to
say thank you, of course, as
always to our analyst Rachel and
um my DFA analyst Simon Miller,
and I have my some of my team
here, my CFO Joanne Chavez, um,
my budget director Steve Riggs,
and my deputy secretary will be
coming in at some point, Marcos
Martinez.
Uh, so I do have a couple more
slides than usual because we're
doing the two things, the
legisstat and the budget.
Uh, slide number 2, am I in
charge of this? Great. Slide
number 2 is just the October
numbers. Rachel went over this,
uh, September numbers, but
unemployment is sitting at 4.3%
compared to the US rate of 4.1%
and you then have some year over
year job growth statistics,
11,500 jobs up on the year, and
you can see that that is
primarily in the in the private
sector, which is a good thing
for the efforts we've been
making to diversify the economy.
Next slide.
Uh, so this next slide you've
seen from me for a long time
now, for probably about 2 years.
This is the estimated employment
gap. The orange line represents
the number of people who are
unemployed and looking for work
and then blue line represents
the number of job postings
estimated in that bottom half of
the chart. And you'll see that
we've kind of reached that worst
point of the gap being about
38,000 people in July 2022,
August 22, right around the time
I got here, and you can see that
now that gap.
is reduced to about uh 28,826
still an inverted labor market,
but in a better place than we
were, um, in a couple of years
ago, and then you also see at
the top overall employment at
8,888,000 a little more. Um, we
always want to keep track of
that at the same time, cause we
don't want to see that gap
closing because people are
giving up on hiring.
Next slide.
So Rachel covered some of this
data, but, uh, you know, if
New Mexico had the same labor
force participation rate in the
US as the US does in the state,
we would have over 110,000 more
workers. So this is a real
concern. Um, that said, the
difference in men has gone down,
as has the difference in women,
and you'll see those numbers on
the right of the chart, but, uh,
again, we were in a worse place
uh two years ago. We are making
progress.
And then this next slide is, is
gonna start to talk about the
reasons why we see these changes
in labor force participation
and, um, apology for people who
don't like sports metaphors, but
it's the best what I've come up
with. Um, we like to think of
people who are not in the labor
force as sort of being in the
stands, and you'll see that
that's about 42.5% of the
working age people in our state.
And then the bench or the people
who, you know, they're on the
team, they're looking for work,
but they're unemployed at this
moment. There's about 40,000 of
them, and then the field is
is my analogy for the people who
are actually employed and
working and there are about
888,000 of them.
Um, I like this metaphor because
it kind of shows you that the
further up you are in the
stands, the harder it is to get
down to the field, and that,
those are some of the barriers
that we're trying to tackle.
Next slide
So this is some data on where
people are coming from and going
to in the labor market. And so
the US Department of Labor
Bureau of Labor Statistics looks
at the group of people who are
unemployed and looking and tries
to understand where did they
come from. And I put, started to
put green stars next to the
numbers that are good, cause
sometimes low numbers are good
in our world like unemployment
and sometimes high numbers are
good, so it gets a little
confusing. So you'll see that
new entrants
to the labor force, that means
they haven't worked in 5 years.
That number is at about 4500 for
September 2024, and you can see
that's a good improvement over
last year. That's good news.
That means that people are
coming from the very top of the
stands down onto the bench. Uh,
you'll see the same thing for
reentrants who worked more than
12 months ago, but less than 5
years, that number is up pretty
significantly. You'll see
re-entrance to last work less
than 12 months also coming back
in a higher rates. And then um
the people who
We're sort of going from the
field employment onto the bench,
um, those numbers are down,
that's the direction you want
those to go to. So job Levers
has gone down since 2023 and
involuntary separations um has
also gone down, and you'll see
that that all gets rolled up
into a higher overall employment
number.
So I'm gonna shift into some of
the performance evaluation
updates, um, based on the
performance evaluation that we
had earlier this year. Um, I
think it was a good hard look at
our department and um I did want
to note that our deputy
secretary Marcos Martinez went
to all of our field offices and
actually made them watch this
hearing, um, and I think it was
a really powerful exercise
because, uh, you know, that's
not what people are normally
doing on a day, daytime, on a
work day, um, but they got to
hear firsthand the concerns that
this committee has and, and it
was a
really great tool for change. So
we um have made some progress in
some of the key areas, uh,
RESEA, which is the uh program
for people who are most likely
to exhaust their unemployment
benefits. You can see that the
number of participants went up
by, uh, quite, quite a few in
the um first quarter, year over
year, um, the temporary
assistance for needy families
career link program was one of
those ones. I think this 5 hires
in in FY 23 was one of the
things that was highlighted in
the
performance evaluation, you'll
see that number quadrupled to 22
hires and a, a much higher,
almost triple of the
participation in that.
Um, co-location, uh, you know,
uh, Rachel mentioned some of the
concerns about utilization of
the offices in the field, you'll
see a co-location was one of the
recommendations and we have new
co-locations in Socorro and in
in truth or consequences that
picture on the right there is um
us cutting the ribbon on the new
uh tier C office with the mayor,
and then uh a good increase in
Title 3 Wagner Per, those are
basic employment services, a 14%
in increase in participation.
year over year. Um, we also had
a lot of volume in the workforce
Connections office saw over 1200
people in 8 in 10 different
offices as a result of the fires
and floods in Riodoso, so that
was another example of why those
field offices are so important.
We're also rebranding, so we
have these things called
workforce connection centers. No
one knows what they are. And so
we've decided to adopt the name
America's Job Center. That is
the national name, so it has a
national brand, we didn't have
to spend any money on.
You know, coming up with a logo,
we're using the federal logo,
people who come to this state
will be able to see um the logo
that they're familiar with, and
so that rebranding is going to
take a hard start in on January
1st, so you can look out for
that. And um lots of lots of
good news, but I'll move on for
time.
Also wanted to touch on our
fiscal picture, uh, you know,
our federal funding has remained
flat while our, um, you know,
we, we love giving our employees
raises, but um those are
unfunded when we are in our
federal programs and so you'll
see that we've had an effective
reduction in our budget of $6
million between FY 23 and FY 25
as a result of those unfunded
salary increases. And then there
was a straight up reduction of
funding to our local workforce
development boards, um by over
$3 million and
that's just as a result of
federal formula funding. Um, so
when I think when you look at
those reductions in funding
combined with the improvement in
performance, it paints a strong
picture of how our department is
progressing.
We've also tried to make up for
it with competitive funding, and
you'll see we've got a $5.9
million 3-year grant um on a
pre-apprenticeship and
apprenticeship, $1.5 million to
work on sector strategies and
250,000 to establish an Office
of New Americans. That is
something that um we have
actually talked about in this
committee and the chairman and
others have encouraged us to
engage in the work of getting
people who are legally
authorized to work into training
and jobs and the new head of
that office, Leo Castaneda, is
here today.
Um, so we're excited about that.
Um, we've also grateful for the
increases in state funding and
those are listed there. And
we've also really worked on our
reversion. So we're, we're
really happy to have only
reverted less than $30,000 less
than 0.7% of our budget because
historically, as you'll see,
that was, that was an issue for
this department.
So this is an overview of our FY
26 budget requests. They're all
non-recurring. We tried to stay
within the, the guidelines and
recognize that while we have a
lot of cash, a lot of it is not
necessarily on a recurring
basis, um, and I'll go over each
of these in turn. The only one I
want to hit here is the $50,000
in disaster unemployment
assistance payments. So in a
federal audit, it was discovered
that we had overpaid some of the
beneficiaries in the Caps Canyon
Hermit's e.
Fire, and that was because our
system didn't know how to take
in um part time employment
versus full-time employment.
That resulted in some
overpayments that frankly, I
just think would be morally
wrong to claw back from these
people, but the feds also say
that we are not allowed to use
any federal dollar from any
source to, to make sure that
these folks don't have to repay
the fund, and so we we're asking
for state money for that.
Uh, then I'll go through the
other requests one by one.
Uh, it's really important that
we have to, to make movement on
this labor force participation
rate that we've all been talking
about, um, we got to understand
it better. So, you know, these
are some federal data because we
don't necessarily have this
level of detail in, in the state
data. But you'll see that they,
they talk to people who are not
in the labor market and 95% of
them say they do not want a job
now. And then they don't ask any
other questions about why. And
then of those who do want a job,
60% said they didn't work.
For search for work in the
previous year, and 40% of those
did, um, but not in the past 4
weeks, not in the past month. So
then they asked those people,
well, you know, what happened?
Why didn't you search for work
in the past month, and 30% of
them say they're not available
to work right now and another
70% of them fall in this
category of marginally attached,
which means they didn't look in
the past 4 weeks for various
reasons, but they are available
for work.
So then that little graph on the
side there goes into detail on
these marginally attached folks,
and you'll see that uh orange
line is October 2024. Blue Line
is October 2023.
You'll see some of them cite
health and ill health and
disability, but really it's a
small amount. It's 9% now, it's
a little up from 2023. Some of
them cite family
responsibilities, that's a
little up from 2023. Some of
them cite in school or training,
and that's up, that's not a bad
thing, um.
The number of people saying that
they're discouraged over their
job prospects has actually gone
down to 25% of that little group
of marginally attached people,
and then you have this giant
category of other, which anybody
who's ever done survey work
knows, right? If you end up with
this many people in other, the
problem is the survey. So, uh,
you know, this has led to our
request and this was also a
recommendation in the
performance evaluation for
$750,000 to do an in-state labor
market, uh, for labor force
participation.
study. And these are some of the
numbers for 2023 in New Mexico.
Again, 169,000 people in that
age group, 25 to 54, who were
not in the labor force, of whom
156,000 have have elected this
choice of don't want a job now,
and we don't know why. They
could be independent
contractors. They could be gig
workers. They could be
self-employed, maybe they don't
need money for one reason or
another. Maybe they have
barriers, maybe they're retired
because we know we have a
younger retiree base here in
this state.
In other states, and it could be
something we just haven't
thought of. Um, so our idea here
is to do a combination of
traditional survey methods with
phone, email, polling, and then
uh engage some community groups
to to get into communities that
might be a little harder to
reach through those traditional
methods and really be able to
come back and tell you a story
of why people are not working in
the same rate as they are in the
in the rest of the country and
then programs that can target
that. Our next request is for
pre-apprenticeship. We are very
grateful for the $600,000.
and growth funds that we
received last year. We're asking
to double that to an additional
$600,000 whether that be one
time or, or also put into the
growth cycle. Um, we've done our
job in going out to get external
funding to to also fund this
from the federal government, but
that said, uh, we still have a
waitlist of 803 apprentices
right now statewide. That's
about the amount that, that we
were, we'd be asking for. That's
about, you know, how much we cut
the program and it's only
November, um, you know, the big.
Demand for this is usually in
the spring and summer. So, uh,
you know, we have a lot of
highlights here that I won't
spend time on. I, I've presented
this chart to you all before,
but we're really hitting the key
sectors of the economy. Um, we
have 10 pre-apprentices who've
gone through it, Children and
Youth and Families department.
We have a number of people in
the trades. We have a 10% Native
American participation, which is
pretty proportional to the
state, which has been really
great, um, and we're doing
things like digital media, uh,
that little clip is of a
Young woman, um, in the True
Kids one pre-apprenticeship
program that they actually made
a whole video talking about the
power of that experience.
Our next request is for $750,000
non-recurring for aligned case
management. This is another um
thing that we talked about a lot
in our performance evaluation.
So I actually just kind of
screenshot a little
recommendation from that report.
Um, this was a strong
recommendation. We've got to
make it more streamlined as
people passed from one agency
and to another, um, within the
workforce system. We also need
to know if I refer you out to
another agency like Goodwill or
are you ever getting connected
with those people and
is the outcome. That's what a
line case management will allow
us to do, um, and we're starting
a pilot now, even prefunding, we
were, we found uh scraped up
some money, we're starting a
pilot in the east in Santa Fe
and Espanola to try out some of
the software to see how it works
to get people's feedback so that
if we are able to get this money
for people and processes, we
will be able to hit the ground
running on that side. We also
have a C2 request in for the
tech side.
And then the next step is our
local journalism fellowship. So
this is something that we've
been doing with really strong
success over the past two fiscal
years, and we've gotten one time
funding each time and in
collaboration with some of your
colleagues in the Senate, um,
we've been encouraged to request
the $2 million one-time
appropriation that would fund
this local journalism program
for about 10 to 12 years. Um, I,
I thought the most best way to
explain this is to show you the
faces of some of the
participants.
who are truly all over the
state. They are keeping local
journalism alive, which I think
is really important to keeping
those small communities alive.
And, uh, you know, we have
people in towels, Carlsbad,
Gallop, Santa Fe, all over the
place, um, there that website
will tell you all of their
profiles. They're a diverse
group of individuals. We believe
in this program, we've
demonstrated the success, the
partnership with UNM and um so
that's why we're looking for an
investment that will allow it to
continue.
And then, um, moving to our next
request, we are asking for
$750,000 of one time money or
grow money, whichever you
prefer, um, to do in intensive
case management for out of
school youth. And again,
returning to labor force
participation rate because
that's our, that's our mandate
here. Um, when we look at the
rate for uh youth, 16 to 19, uh,
again, the blue is the United
States, the orange is New
Mexico. You'll see that the
United States is doing better in
terms
terms of labor force
participation 16 to 19 year
olds, um, at 40.6, well, about 2
points higher than us, um, but
in 20 to 24 year olds, we're
doing better than the United
States by about 3% points. And
then when you look at the
unemployment rate where you want
that number to be lower, we're
doing better, um, with the 16
and 19 year olds in doing worse
with the 20 to 24 year olds.
And then as you move over to the
right. This is the number that
you've probably seen in the kids
count report and so forth. This
is the percentage of people of
all ages who are not in school,
they're not in the labor force,
and they don't have a high
school grad, um, they, they have
not graduated high school or
gotten equivalency. And this is
where, uh, again, female uh
female rate uh for unemployment
is better, but then, uh, when
you look at the nails, this is
where we're struggling. And so
there's some pro
models coming out of other
states where uh they do
project-based learning, trauma
informed practices, employer
engagement is really important.
We've seen success of these
programs in Arizona, Ohio,
Michigan, Indiana, Happy to
share that data with you, but
we'd like to try some of these
tactics here in New Mexico. So
that's what that is for, and we
would put that money out to bid.
So with that, I am happy to
stand for questions. Thank you.
Thank you. Let me ask you a
question before we get started
here today. You know,
What is the grass fastest
growing people in the workforce.
Um, Mr. Chair, I'm not sure.
Women. Oh, well, yes. Women are
outpacing men going into the
workforce. Women are outpacing
men getting a college education,
and men are declining in the
workforces as.
No, I mean, are we
I just want to ask you that
question, Senator Padilla,
you're up first.
Um, Mr. Chair, if you'd like a
response, we, we see that across
the board, as you mentioned,
both college entry, college
graduation, uh, employment,
unemployment, those rates are
worse for men across the state.
We talked about that a lot, I
think about a year ago. One of
the reasons for that intensive
case management request is that
that's a proven tactic for that
demographic. Thank you. Uh,
thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Madam Secretary.
Great information as usual. Uh,
I just had two items I wanted to
ask about. One is, um, so when
you mentioned the
apprenticeship,
Training trust fund. I was the
Senate sponsor on that bill, and
Can you, where is it? Like how's
it going? Uh, do we need to be
doing something differently? Is
it already starting to spin off
the dollars that we expected.
Can you give us a little update
there? Mr. Chair, Senator
Padilla, uh, members of the
committee, uh, very grateful for
that, that has had the, the
impact we hoped. So as Rachel
mentioned, um, the rate that we
were paying per hour under, um,
one of those programs, which is
the, the AAA, which pays out
based on um hours of technical
training, that
had slipped, um, from $3 over
the years all the way down to $2
per hour, which wasn't even
beginning to cover the costs for
those apprenticeship programs.
Um, due to the funding that we
received from the Workforce
training and apprenticeship Fund
that has gone up to $11 an hour,
so that was one of the major
things that we needed to
accomplish and we got there.
Um, the second thing was the
increase in the number of
participants and we, we talked
about this a little bit last
time, uh, but we are up by about
125 over the all programs, and
we also have 3 new registered
apprenticeship programs in some
fields that we didn't have
before. So, um, while that is
not as dramatic of a change as
the funding amount is. We have
some other sort of um
institutional limitations in
terms of the number of
journeymen available to
supervise those apprenticeships
that we're starting to hit up
against. It's a good problem.
Um.
But I think we're, we're really
happy with the impact of that
money, uh, the public works
apprenticeship and trading fund
money is the next round that
will go out, that had gone down
over the years to around $1250
and we we know we will at least
be able to double that per
participant this year, thanks to
that funding. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman and Madam Secretary.
So, uh, you know, literally
right behind my office, we're
kicking off the Ebon solar and
Maxion solar, they're both the
companies are going into that
area. So, uh, apprenticeship
training
programs
Are there any that are specific
to that industry that we're just
helping, I guess, prop up, I
would say because that's gonna
be an enormous amount of jobs
and economic impact, economic
based jobs, that money is coming
from somewhere else. Do we have
anything focused just on that
area?
Senator Padilla, it's a great
question. You know, most, mostly
it's the electrical apprentices,
both the JTAC, which is the
union, and then the ones that
come out of the um building the
ABC and uh general contractors
that go to that, but we actually
are about to release an RFP from
some of our federal funding that
is targeted at expanding and
building new apprenticeships and
pre-apprenticeships and
specifically in clean energy. So
we also recognize that same need
and we're trying to target it
with those funds. OK. Thank you.
I just hope that again, we're
using that apprenticeship
training trust fund and focusing
it on the growth industries,
cause that's what's going to
make the most impact and the
greatest throughput on those
dollars. And then I guess I'd
like to see more uh just regular
reporting on how it's.
Doing so that we can
You know, ideally adjust
additional dollars into it at
some point, if we're getting the
impact that we want to see. And
then maybe you can even come to
us and say, well, these other
programs just aren't working,
maybe we should reach, you know,
refocus those dollars to this
thing because it just seems like
that's gonna be the future of,
of, you know, employment and
stuff. Um, and then the, the
second thing, uh, Mr. Chairman
and Madam Secretary, do, do you
have anything that you're doing
in the, in the public high
schools or the the schools that
just training individuals on on
how to interview.
Um, you know, how to be prepared
for the interview. Uh, how to be
able to discuss customer service
and soft skills, um, how to put
a resume together. The reason I
say that is I've been doing a
lot of hiring in my, in my
business and recently and I'm
just shocked at how
I mean, so give you an example,
we have 11 people starting on
Monday. We had 301 candidates,
which was beautiful. We had a
great robust group of
candidates, uh, qualified about
180 of them. And we tried to
interview about 7 people per
position. So we're looking at,
you know, 77, somewhere in
there. We had to schedule 100
interviews to get 70 people to
show up to actually do go
through their interview. I've
never seen it like that before.
Is that a trend that I should be
and others should be ready for,
or is there something
we can do on the front end, say,
hey, you know, if you really
want to represent yourself
really well. This is, these are
the things you need to do.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Peda, it
is a trend that we're seeing not
just across our state, but
across the country. I think it's
a direct result of pulling those
things out of the schools and
and having to refocus time on
other priorities. Um, that said,
there are two things, uh, that
I'd like to mention. First is,
you know, we did have career
consultants in the schools about
2 years ago, 2 fiscal years ago
in response to one of the uh
reports that was given to the
LESC saying that we need
dedicated career counselors in
the school.
not guidance counselors who are
dealing with hunger and
substance abuse and instability
in housing, but people who were
there for the purposes that
you're talking about. We did
not, um, get that funded again
last year and we didn't ask for
it this year, but we're happy to
talk about it if there's
interest in renewing that
program, it was successful. And
then we're also, um, you know,
we have career counselors, uh,
we have a couple now, we have a
two basically covering the whole
state for the pre-apprenticeship
program. All our pre-apprentices
get that training, but we're
also rolling out a new product
called.
big interview and it is an AI
based product that allows you to
do practice interviews, practice
resumes, and then we can just do
a volume that we could never
achieve with just our humans by
being able to do it through
that, um, computer-based um
approach and also that's kind of
what the younger group is, is
looking to do anyway. So we're
optimistic and we will by next
year, we're by even maybe by the
session, we can tell you some
preliminary results on big
interview, but, um, you know, we
agree it's a need. We're doing
what we can with the resources.
we have, um, and also happy to
report uh more frequently on the
workforce training and
apprenticeship fund. I want to
thank the State Investment
Council, I think it was the day
after that bill was signed that
they called us to talk about how
we wanted to invest that money,
and so we can um report both on
the earnings and the use.
That'd be great. Thank you, uh,
Mr. Chair and Madam Secretary,
on, on the second piece on the
um, you know, employment piece
and interviewing and all that,
yes, AI is gonna be wonderful.
All those things are great. Yes,
and that's probably where most
of that will be adopted by the,
the, you know, up and coming
crowd or whatever, but it's also
just simply a conversation with
somebody, letting them know how
critical it is.
To show up, present yourself, be
prepared, have a pencil or
something to write with when you
come in. I'm just really shocked
at how things are changing so
much in that area. I have to go
through this a lot, you know,
with my business and stuff, and
I'm just seeing a trend here
that's really devastating. And
I'm wondering when the economy
really goes bad, who's going to
want to hire these folks, you
know, at, at some point. So, um,
thank you. That's all I have.
Thanks, cheer.
Mm
Thank you. Uh.
Represented Dela Cruz.
Thank you Mr. Chair.
Uh thank you secretary. Back in
the middle 2000s, uh when Mayor
Chavez was the mayor, and I, I
was actually a deputy director
at the solid waste department,
we used to use day labor uh at
Saint Martin's for actually the
homeless population. Is there
any outreach today from your
agency to try to engage,
educate, uh around potential
employment opportunities,
uh, Representative Dela Cruz,
yes, we
are, um, it, it towards the end,
but we have a federal grant. Um,
it's part of the old uh
emergency rental assistance
program that we administer the
job search and training piece of
that. And we have a dedicated
career counselor. He actually
will be co-located at the
Gateway Center, uh, which is the
homeless place in um Albuquerque
that um is coming online, and uh
he also works statewide, so he's
done a lot of work in Las Cruces
with their um palette community
and he has lived
experience, so he is finally,
you know, we've had this grant
for a while, to be honest,
getting engagement from that
community, being able to find
folks after that initial um
referral has been real struggle,
um, but I think we got the right
people in place now, so we are
doing that work and certainly if
anybody has a homeless service
provision agency in their
district that they'd like to
connect with us, we'd love to
make that connection.
Thank you Mr. Chairman and
that's perfect because that's
what I was gonna ask secondly,
is, is their efforts to engage
these agencies that serve the
homeless homeless population.
Um, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative de la Cruz,
absolutely, uh, we work closely
with, um, when we were working
closely with heading home. We
have a, a long term relationship
with uh Chicanos Sparla Casa,
which will be the new operator
there in Albuquerque, so we're
optimistic about that and um the
UNM pathways program also in the
metro, um, because I know that's
your district is uh a good
partner, and then in other parts
of the state, um, 100% Otero is
an amazing organization that we
do a lot of work with, so there
are organizations across the
state.
And we do partner with them, but
always willing to do more.
Thank you, Secretary. Thank you,
Chair. Thank you. uh, Star State
police chiefs and captains.
There's plenty of rooms right
here in the front row if you
want to come up and sit down.
Uh, Representative Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for your presentation.
I, um, have a couple of
questions. The first one is
about the Americans Job Center.
I like that uh that that name a
little better than the than what
it was before. Can you tell me a
little bit about how it
affected, mainly, um, during
COVID, you know, a lot of those
centers were shut down.
Uh, two of them in my district,
but I see two of them are open
again in my district, so can you
talk a little more about that,
uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Armstrong. So, um, we are back
to sort of full force of our
workforce centers, um,
including, uh, in Socorro, we,
we, it's been hard to find a
good location, but we're
actually co-locating with the
county, um, which I think is
going to bring more traffic in
just like into your sea locating
with a a child care service, I
mean it's just bringing families
across our way. Um, we are
uh also working towards having
an unemployment insurance
representative in every single
office, and that's not just for
claimants, it's also for
businesses and um the business
community is actually the ones
who are super excited that they
can go in and ask tax questions
now in real life, um, and, you
know, I, again, it, it was or
the number of offices has been
criticized in this committee,
um, nationwide, we see a trend
the other way, but we feel
strongly that that is how we
need to work in New Mexico and
um so we are always looking for
new opportunities.
Especially to co-locate so that
the overhead isn't so high. Um,
our local boards do sort of make
some decisions about where those
offices are, but in cases where
we've been concerned that they
don't see enough traffic, we've
said, we're just going to have
our own presence. So you and
Valencia is another great
partner where we have an office.
We also co-locate in TANF, um,
so where we don't have uh
American's job centers, we might
have some presence in the um
The ISD, the Income Support
Division offices. Thank you for
that. Uh, thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I, I really appreciate
that. I rural New Mexico is and
Socorro specifically is is uh a
place where there's not a lot of
people working. And so, uh, I,
I'm excited about that. One of
the other questions, Mr.
Chairman, that I have is on
apprenticeship.
Um, are, are there any plans to
expand the definition of
The entities that are, are, um,
In apprenticeship programs say
beauticians, uh, inspections,
renewables, forest, uh, clean
up, uh, is there any
Indication to expand those.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Armstrong, absolutely. So, you
know, we do try to focus on
those um professions where there
are, you know, good strong wage
potential and the um the United
States Department of Labor has
sort of a list of apprenticeable
posi um types of jobs, but you
know, we can always innovate
within that and there's also
room to expand within that, um,
a couple of the new ones we have
some um film and media ones that
are coming online from Catharsis
Media, um, Hobbs Public Schools
has partnered with us for the
first teaching uh apprenticeship
and
Then, uh, we, you also mentioned
forestry, um, when we were down
in Riodoso earlier this year, we
talked to Eastern and the county
about doing uh a forestry-based
apprenticeships so that we could
really, I mean, it's it's such
an apprenticeable position,
right? It's something that you
learn by doing, um, and that's
really all apprenticeship is and
so we're, we're optimistic about
building that out as well. So
always welcome to hear ideas,
um, what we need is a program
sponsor, so someone who will
understand the technical content
and the
instruction, we need uh an
employer base to hire those
folks, and then we can make it
happen.
Thank you for that. I know, um,
and one of the businesses that
we own, we, uh.
Licensed over 100.
Uh, apprentices last year.
So, you know, having that
investment in your community and
in the state of New Mexico.
We need these employees
employers to step up and take on
the challenges of that. It is a
cost, but the, but the uh reward
is much higher. So thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, uh, folks
from state police, feel free to
pull him over on his way home
today, um, after the hearing.
He usually speeds. I've I'm
headed north
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
secretary. It's so good to see
you. Um, I just got a couple of,
of, uh, brief questions. Um, can
you, can you, um,
Just reiterate for us our um
labor participation, uh, rate,
um, can you talk a little bit
about that and how, uh, that
potentially impacts our economic
development, um, activities and
um
Potential.
Sure. So, uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
Speaker Martinez, the labor
force is force participation
rate again, it's, it looks at
everybody ages um 16 to 65, I
think 64, yeah, and
non-institutionalized population
and um sees how many people are
either working or unemployed and
looking for work. It is a
survey-based uh statistics, so
it's not like you check in and
out of the labor force and, you
know, call us and be like, oh
man. Um, so, you know, it's not.
Necessarily as accurate as
something like the number of
people actually employed, which
would tell us, you know, I think
a little more accurate number.
That said, um, it is
historically, we've always been
lower um on the lower end of the
states. I think we went from 49
in the pandemic to 41-ish now,
so again moving in the right
direction, but um, we, the
reason we really need that money
that we're asking for for the
study is we don't know, nope,
and by we I mean nobody.
really knows why those folks
aren't participating. We all
have our theories and we all
have our beliefs, but until we
actually ask people in a
meaningful way, we're not gonna
know, we're not gonna know how
to target programs towards those
folks. Um, what impact is it
having on the economy? Well,
that's why we track that
estimated employment gap number.
So you can see, you know, when
you get a 28,000 person gap
between jobs that are open and
people who are looking for work,
that's not only gonna hamstring
the ability of businesses to
grow, but it's also going to
make the.
Uh, you know, it's a, it's a
supply heavy market. I mean,
it's a demand heavy market,
right? So you have uh people
hiring maybe candidates that
they wouldn't hire in a good
way. Maybe they're giving
opportunities to people they
hadn't before, but maybe in a
way where maybe, you know,
underqualified people are coming
in and wage inflation is the
other obvious result that we all
see, and again, like all all for
good living wages that people um
can take care of their family,
but it is a struggle say for our
department to hire.
we're asking people to do, you
know, really difficult jobs like
talk to people on the day they
lost their job and we're paying
less than um McDonald's. So
those are some of the impacts
that we see and why we think
it's so important to work on it
or less than Panda Express, we
were talking earlier, um, things
starting wages 18 to 20 bucks at
Panda Express here in Santa Fe.
Um, OK, well, thank you for
that. um, hence, I think the
importance of continuing to
invest in things like
apprenticeships, CTE, um, you
know, rethinking and retooling.
The way we think about public
education, especially those last
few high school years, um, so
that we can get those young
people into the workforce
earlier, um, and not just blue
collar professions, but also in
healthcare where we have a big.
Um, Mr. Chair, Madam Secretary,
um, you know, I, I'm thinking
of, of our sort of bigger
industries, bigger impact
industries, so obviously the
energy sector, oil and gas,
agriculture, tourism service,
um, and then I'm thinking of,
of, uh, and, and I'm, well,
first of all, I got to tell you
I'm really worried for those
sectors. Um,
Because if, uh, the incoming
president's promises to mass
deport 11 million people, um,
it's gonna have a huge impact.
On those industries.
Um, you know, we're the 2nd
highest producer of oil and gas.
Um, something that I think
everybody up on this diet is, is
proud of. Uh, I think we produce
very clean energy. Um, we are
making use of a resource that is
finite and the good people up
here have done a really good job
of taking today's money,
investing it so that it yields,
um,
Resources later on, um, you
know, when, when, um,
Whenever that market.
Um
Go down as as it usually does,
um, but I'm really worried that
if, uh, you know, on January
20th, they start mass
deportations of workers.
The impact that it's gonna have
on this state alone. Oil and gas
sector, one of them,
agriculture, another one,
tourism, economies like Santa
Fe, Taos depend heavily on
tourism. Agriculture that's
rural New Mexico.
Right? And we talked.
Ad nauseam up here.
Um, 10 years I've been a
legislator.
about how important it is to
invest in those rural
communities. Yet, if we are
going to undermine.
An entire labor force. I'm
thinking of hatch. It's gonna
pick that chew.
I'm thinking of, uh,
The ranches that exist all
across the state.
Um, so much depends on this
migrant labor.
Now
To be clear, Mr. Chair and
secret, we're all for secure
borders.
But they're two different
things.
9% of fentanyl is trafficked.
Through legal ports of entry by
US citizens.
You know what would have fixed
that?
The bipartisan immigration
reform bill that.
The Senate crafted over the
summer.
That ended up getting tanked.
I hope that the incoming
administration in Washington.
Revives that bill.
Passes that bill.
Because that will.
Better secure.
Those
Borders
And ideally, it will also
Reestablish
The
Line
That immigrants who want to come
into this country have to get
into. The problem is that
there's no line.
And so people just show up.
Uh, but I want to be clear that
it's two completely different
things.
People living here.
Worshiping in our churches next
to us, attending school with her
children.
Working, working for us or with
us.
Working for us or with us, um,
It's gonna have a big impact.
And I'll tell you what, Madam
Secretary,
you might
Um, you might just be back here.
In this committee, I don't know,
late February.
Maybe asking us for some sort of
emergency appropriation, because
mass deportations have begun.
And there are entire sectors of
the economy that might be on the
brink.
Of crashing down.
I pray that that doesn't happen.
But you should know that we will
be ready.
To ensure that
Those sectors very critically
important sectors of our economy
don't come crashing down,
whether it's the energy sector,
whether it's agriculture,
Whether it's healthcare.
Whether it's tourism.
You got my word that we're gonna
do that. We're not gonna
Allow
For Washington bureaucrats.
To undermine the economic
potential of the state.
Um, and seeing that there is no
chair, um, I will yield to
Senator Rodriguez. Well, Madam
Chair and and Speaker Martinez,
if I may, um, respond, I think
ready is the key word for us.
There's a lot out of our
control. Um, the timing of being
able to set up our Office of New
Americans and getting that
private funding to do that
couldn't have been better in
light of what we're seeing, um,
because we, what we don't want
to see is a an impact of
whatever policy to the
population.
that is here and authorized to
work or could be authorized to
work and and speaking yesterday
to our H-2A migrant seasonal
farm worker, um, folks down in
Dimming is where their
headquartered, and they said
they're already starting to see
a chill in the chili fields and
in all the places that have
legal, you know,
well-documented, uh, supported
by the US government,
immigration programs for those
seasonal workers, they're
already starting to see.
A chilling effect. People don't
want to participate in that
program and uh last time around
under this incoming
administration, there were
attempts to cut some of the
subsidies that go to that. There
was an attempt to change some of
the rules around um
transportation and, you know, if
the employers are not paying for
transportation from the border
to uh the field, they're not
gonna get participants in those
work in those programs. And so
we are trying to be as proactive
as we can about
that, um, Leo Castaneda, who's
going to be running that office
of new Americans is got his door
open for all of these questions.
We'll be tracking it closely,
um, in the oil field, of course,
we're doing a lot to work on
energy transition to be prepared
for all of the workers who are
going to be impacted by that,
uh, that change, so that they,
we can get ahead of the curve
and they have new skills for
when they need it, but that they
also have the skills to keep up
with the technology as it
advances in the oil patch
because we also don't want
workers to be left behind, and
we also
um have some uh ideas about
funding some um dual lingual,
dual language, uh, worker safety
trainings because we know that
that's a concern in the oil
patch as well. Um, so, again,
our door is open now to do this
kind of work cause historically
we've been hamstrung because of
our federal funding, but now we
have independent funding, um,
and I won't give out Leo's, uh,
you know, personal cellphone
here in the, in the committee,
but our, our doors are open to
have those conversations. Thank
you.
Thank you, uh, Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman, and
good morning and also to our
staff, you know, how very nice
presentation, uh, pretty much
what, uh, you know, I was
looking at this, you know, in
one way or another, it's being
mentioned, but on page 11.
Hm
Oh
One of the questions that I
would have is when would you
have the information for uh.
2024.
And then also maybe if at some
time we could get there.
2022, 2, we already have here
the 2023 and 24, just to see how
we're really faring, you know,
on.
That part, uh, there's many
areas, but one of the areas that
I wanted to ask is um uh as a
state, how do we fare with a
commercial driving license
compared to our neighboring
states.
And uh this is one question
that's um close to me quite
often by the New Mexico Trucking
Association.
You know, of how, you know, the,
the need and then you see um
also with our public schools
trying to get a school bus
drivers, you know, just a big
shortage.
And uh
So anyway, I'll let you respond.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Gonzalez,
I'm happy to provide the, the
multi-year data, we generally
get the state level data of this
nature, um, and and slide 11 in
August of the following year, so
we would be getting 2024 data in
August 2025 and it's, it's
obviously not ideal, but that's
just the cadence at the federal
level.
Um, in terms of CDL, uh, we
cannot train people quick enough
to keep up with the demand in
the state, um, and so we see a
lot of participation in CDL
programs at the Woa level. Um,
we see it in our energy
transition population. A lot of
them have gotten CDLs, um, and
it's, it's just with every new
like with the disasters, for
example, that have happened um
in the southern southeastern
part of our state, they all
spiked demand for um CDL drivers
to haul.
debris and to do that work
that's associated with those
industries and so the demand
keeps going up at a pace that's
really difficult to keep up
with. Um, that said, we promote
it very actively, um, in
addition to the funding through
our department, this legislature
invested the $20 million in grow
funds annually for those
non-credit certifications and
industry recognized credentials,
which includes CDL, um, so the
resources are out there, the
programs are out there, um, we
just encourage anybody who's in
the world looking for work to
to take that path. We also have
started some training behind the
fence in the correctional
facilities and partnering with
our local workforce boards so
that people are actually it's
actually kind of cool to see
because you have to have a
corrections officer, an inmate
and a CDL trainer in the cab of
that semi um behind the fence,
but that's what if that's what
it takes to get people out, so
that day one they can have
gainful employment in a place
where we really need it. It's,
it's worth the effort. So, um,
just all I can really do is
agree with you and say we're,
we'll continue to work.
on it and we need to encourage
in all our communities, we need
to encourage this almost as a, a
basic skill that we want our,
our youth to be coming out with
in a, in a more um regular way
because it's also being paired
with a lot of other jobs, you
know, CDL, carpenter, CDL
electrician. It's, it's part of
that larger trade package.
Thank you for that and um I'll
just end with this, but um very
much with the, the statement
that was made by Speaker
Martinez.
And uh in uh part of northern
New Mexico and part of southern
Colorado.
There's a family that uh plants
potatoes.
And they call it by pods.
And each part is 160 acres.
And they normally plant like 45
pods.
This year they went down to 11.
And the reason was because they
were just so afraid of not
having the the workforce.
You know, so we're seeing some
of those effects already, which
that just drives the price
higher for everyone, you know,
and I think we really have to be
very um.
Proactive and, and then I guess
the other part is um.
You know, how can we instill
back again, you know, to our
young people.
Um, I know that age difference
on my part to what it's today,
but God, we used to beg for
jobs.
And everyone, you know, as a
young person, you know, he just
wanted to have something too.
To be able to be tangible to
having a job and
And now it's like.
I mean that it's hard to
understand, you know, that why
someone would not really want to
even try or make an effort.
You know, to, to have a job but
um.
That's what it is, and we'll
work with it, and thank you
again to both of you.
Thank you. And, and Mr. Chair,
Senator Gonzalez, I'm glad you
drew that connection between the
price of stuff at the grocery
store in this upcoming potential
labor crisis we could have
related to immigration, we're
already hearing in the chili
fields that, you know, people
have to plan so far out, right?
So we're already starting to
hear them folks say, maybe we
don't plan as much next year
because we're worried that we
won't even have our H2A again,
legal documented labor coming in
because of the chilling effect,
and so it's something uh we
absolutely agree we have to keep
an eye.
And uh Mr. Chairman and um.
I don't think I have seen one
farmer's market doesn't matter
where it's at.
I mean, they're very
Well attended and very popular,
you know, so I mean, uh.
The interest is there if someone
wants to work with that, and,
you know, they could sell or
also the other part is that our
public schools.
Made a big effort to buy any
kind of produce homegrown or New
Mexico grown, you know, so
market is there, you know, for
commodity, you know, so it's
just a matter of um.
I guess good plan and uh.
Maybe a more emphasis in
teaching uh.
Some components to the business
aspect of, you know, how do you
follow with that. Thank you.
Yeah
Thank you,
Senator Woods.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I see here that uh
You know, the unemployment rate
captures the people who want to
be in the labor force.
And her unemployed looking for
work. That's what that, that
captures.
And
Our problem seems to be that our
Labor participation rate.
Has improved since the pandemic,
but it has not approved the same
as the national rate.
And a September of 2024.
The labor participation rate in
New Mexico was 57.5%.
While the US average was 62.7.
And that means
About 26,000 New Mexicans.
A prime working age between 20
and 54.
Are not participating in our
workforce.
206,000.
So, with that,
Basic understanding of that.
As today,
Is the number of employers in
New Mexico, staying the same.
Are they decreasing?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator was, um,
the number of employers and the
number of people working are
both increasing.
OK. The number of employers, and
can you give me not right this
second, but can you get me the
size of those employers.
Because I suspect we have a
whole bunch of employers working
10 people or less.
Um, I don't know that to be a
fact, but I'd like to know that.
Mr. Chair, Senator Woods, um,
historically you're looking at
almost 60% of the registered
businesses being that one
employee, uh, range, and then
the next, but the that that is
also just a very small number of
the people who are employed,
obviously. Um, it's really
businesses in the 11 to 20 range
that are employing um the, the
plurality of New Mexicans, not
the majority, but, and then of
course the, the 1000 and over.
Well, one time you testified
before me and Mister Chairman,
I'm sorry I'm leaving you out of
this conversation.
Uh, Mr. Chairman,
Madam Secretary.
One time you told me in a
testimony that we had
essentially for every 7 people
looking for work. We had 10 jobs
available.
Is that still kind of the ratio?
Mm
Mr. Chair and uh
Um, Senator Woods, that's maybe
a little past my mental mouth,
but here's, here's this slide is
where we are, so we have um
roughly still we're at about a 2
to 1, and I think the worst we
ever got was about a 3 to 1,
but, um, between, so we have
about 26,000 more jobs than we
do people looking for work. We
have 40,000 people looking for
work, so the math on that it's
about a 3 to 1, it's somewhere
in there yeah, it's less than 3
to 1, maybe.
So they've got they've got, uh,
uh, for the people looking,
there's 3 jobs that they could
look at, Mr. Chair, Senator
Woods, I think it's, it's
probably below 2 because 40
times, I mean, 26 times 2 is 50,
so.
Again, I, my mom would be so
ashamed, but I, I don't know if
that's the right equation.
you know, I went to school at
Grady, New Mexico and, and I
think that we'll just leave it
at that.
The question I have, uh, and
then I think you probably
understand what I'm getting at
is the question I have.
How is your unemployment
compensation fund doing, and how
are we rating powers are
employers ratings good, because
many times we
We, uh, have a big turnover on
people.
And that means those employers
are having to keep
Increases their ratings to keep
putting money into those funds,
so could you give me some idea
of that.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Woods,
yes, so the rates will be coming
out shortly, um, but the
unemployment, uh, trust fund is
not healthy.
Um, I would say that we we are
looking at a number of different
scenarios, um, because we're
anticipating, you know, always
ready, wanna be ready for a um
recession, right? Um, so the,
the measure that the United
States Department of Labor looks
at is called a solvency ratio,
um, lots of components to that.
They want to see a solvency
ratio of 1.0. Ours is sitting at
about 0.6, so not good.
Um, we actually ran the numbers
for um I, I was feeling like,
what would it look like to have
a Christmas where we didn't have
to raise the reserve ratio at
all for any employer, regardless
of their rating, that would take
a, a very significant infusion
uh nine digit infusion. Um, but
to just make it healthy enough
to get to that one.0 is a number
that we'd be happy to share with
you. It's still in calculation.
Um, this year there is an
increase in one of the
components of that very
complicated um calculation and
so as we run the numbers, we're
keeping an eye on how many
employers are actually impacted
by that, cause it's really only
the folks who are at the top end
of some of those other ratios.
We're not seeing a huge impact
due to what's going on in the
labor force right now. It's the
historical issues, and there is
also, I mean, there are a lot of
caps in in the rate and that's a
good thing for employers, but it
also limits our ability to
replenish the trust at the rate
that some other states with a
better solvency ratio can do.
So, um, you know, when we talk
about being ready for what may
come.
Um, we, we may be looking just
to, I, I always want to be
transparent. We, we're looking
at a future where a hard
recession would require us to
come back to you and ask for uh
either a one-time infusion to
the fund or um an increase in
taxes, and I think I know which
one everyone would prefer and
that's a direct.
cost to the employer.
Um, and the employee, let's face
it.
Yeah, both of them pay in and uh
We are not having the rate set
properly right now.
To fully fund the program.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Woods,
uh, yeah, I think my economists
would say that some of the caps
that are in there that that
prevent the rate from going up
more, um, than a certain amount
for uh high utilization
employers, high turnover
employers is preventing a a sort
of ordinary course replenishment
of the trust. We need to relook
at that then.
Is that a statute change or is
that a policy change? Um, Mr.
Chair, Senator Woods, um, that
it would be a statutory change,
my chief economist is smiling in
her office right.
OK.
Mr. Chair, um,
Of the programs operated by
The, the workforce solution
department.
Which are having the greatest
impact on the state labor force
participation rate and why.
And how do you measure that?
Mr. Chair, Senator Woods, um,
you know, again, because that's
a survey rate, we, we can't
quite do a direct measurement,
but in terms of just getting
people to work or back to work.
Um, the pre-apprenticeship
program has had a really strong
impact, um, because we actually
didn't see that as an employment
program. Most of those folks are
still in school of one type or
another, so we kind of
anticipated that the outcomes
for a lot of those kids would
be, you know, you keep going to
school, but you have a better
idea of what you want to do.
Instead, we're seeing about a 20
to 25% retention um hiring rate.
So that's been a really great
thing. That's another reason
why, you know, we're asking for
a little more money on that. Um,
the RESEA
program is the federally funded
program that puts people um who
were the most likely to exhaust
their UI benefits, so to take
the full 26 weeks. It takes
those folks and um gives them
intensive services mandatory
attendance at these workshops,
um, and we've gotten permission
to, to actually broaden the
scope so that we can really
include a lot more people in
RESCA and um we've increased
that participation in that
significantly. The rate of
employment of those folks isn't
that different than the
general population, but because
those are, it's sort of like
taking the worst kids in the
class and bringing them up to
the average. Um, so that's had a
really strong impact, and we're
doing some work in, in, I always
look to represent when we talk
about readjustment, but um we're
doing some work in Riodoso sort
of looking forward. I see too
many people still on um standard
and disaster unemployment. So
we're, we're taking them and
basically putting them through
the RESEA intensive case
management. Um, so I think the
other thing that that really
helps is um lay off aversion and
also, um, rapid response to some
of the bigger layoffs and I, um,
you know, don't have a crystal
ball, but I think, I think we're
gonna be seeing a lot more of
that as, as things change, so
yeah, that, that chair that.
Riodosa deal that that
catastrophic time there that
they
Wiped out housing, wiped out
jobs.
You know, those people, uh, that
do have a place to live there.
Uh, you know, they're waiting
for their job to come back,
that, that racetrack, that, that
economic drivers, you know,
whether you like to go to the
races yourself or not. The
amount of money that came in
state.
From that race track for
Riodosa.
And those, all those jobs, or
service jobs of all those people
that, that service those people
that come in.
And all that stuff left.
And
You know, those people are left.
Hanging, hanging there. They,
they may have a home and now.
Mr. Chair, I know I'm getting
wild here, but
Now they can't even sell their
homes because they may not be
able to
Have insurance to, to get a
mortgage.
The next, the next bar can't get
a mortgage cause he, he can't
get insurance.
And uh bank won't loan without
the security of the.
Replacement coverage.
were injured.
Uh
It's not that we don't have
anything to do in this state,
but we have some
We,
uh, I, I worry about the 206,000
people that are sitting on the
sidelines and prime age, you
know, uh, yeah, there's a lot of
Political baning going on about
how you're going to deport a lot
of people.
But
Why?
You know, the question time and
time again.
I
Why don't we have a job that
these people want to go to.
You know,
What what restrictions are we
putting on business to not
create businesses.
For those people to work here.
And, and it's not all about the
intels and the
Facebook books and those people,
it's, it's about the mom and pop
businesses out there too. How,
how do we not get the, the
startup business is going.
And labor, you can't have an
employer without an employee.
And that same way the other way
around.
And so,
I appreciate the work you're
doing.
Um, I know that it's an
impossible job out constantly
look at that unemployment fund
because that is a measurement to
me of success, prosperity.
If we're prosperous, we have
people working.
And in New Mexico, we're not
prosperous because we've got at
least 206,000 people.
That aren't working.
And that would be a, if that was
put into the unemployment rate.
Will it be catastrophic,
wouldn't it? It makes headlines,
and yet we don't make headlines
with it the way we measure it.
So, I'm beating the horse,
Mister chair.
Thank you very much for the
opportunity to beat him.
The Colombo of gravy
goes real quick because we're
gonna try to wrap up on time so
we can keep moving. Thank you,
Miss. I'll keep this, uh, so,
Madam Secretary, I appreciate it
earlier in the conversation.
You're talking about uh some
opportunities for training.
Uh, as we transition.
Uh, I appreciate the speaker
saying he appreciated oil and
gas. I don't feel it. I live, I
live there, uh, but in our
sector it seems like we're
attacked more than we're helped
by this.
Legislature, but I like the idea
where you're saying that there's
training as you transition away
from oil and gas. Who in Lee
County or Eddy County, are you
working with to train.
Our old gas sector.
Or other opportunities.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Senator
Gallegos, uh, you know, the
eastern, uh, area workforce
Development Board, that's your
local workforce development
board is, is just stellar out
there. So there are, are really
our frontline partner in
everything we do in the oil
patch, um, but we also work with
the, uh, mostly the community
colleges and two-year colleges
and um we also try to work with,
uh, you know, there are other
groups including some of the
folks in this room like Somapolo
andino, who have been doing
survey work in that part.
to the state to help us really
understand what the need is and
so, uh, a couple of years ago,
um, this legislature gave me
some money to the economic
development department to do
various advanced energy things
and one piece of that was money
for workforce development. So
we're really eyeing that as a
source of money that because it
was, it hasn't reverted um as a
source of money where we can
invest in that training and
happy to talk to you more about
what that um should look like.
I appreciate it,
Madam Secretary, uh, I'm, I've
not seen.
So they can win and sold, uh, I,
I run a construction company and
we built wind and solar. Uh, we
are there in masses for a few
weeks.
And then there's one person who
manages 2 solar projects. So I'm
trying to figure out how many
solar projects you're gonna have
to have a house all the oil and
gas.
You
potentially gonna train and move
away, and, and I'll, I'll visit
with y'all offline because I
need to get with the junior
colleges because I don't know.
Of any training.
Inley County
It is specifically for.
Uh, solar or wind, so, uh, but
I, I will get back to your
office on that because I'd like
to understand what you're doing.
Uh, as you're transitioning away
from
Oil and gas, so put that on you.
Thank you, Mr.
Thank you. Kind of wrap this up,
you know.
Evening at the high dollar Panda
Express last night and looking
at the door, right?
And in our training wages,
correct me if I long is uh
Prentices wages 11 something you
said, correct?
Uh, Mr. Chair, you know, that
that's the amount that we pay to
the programs to subsidize the
technical instruction.
Apprentices generally start at
around $20 an hour.
So we're paying $20 an hour for
apprenticeship program in Pa's
paying $20 an hour for labor.
Right? And, and how many hours
can they work in that
apprenticeship program.
Uh, Mr. Chair, it really, it
depends. I mean, it's usually
close to full-time work,
balanced out by related
instruction, and then as you get
into the advanced years of the
program, you're doing more work
and less training.
In in uh we paint him the $20 an
hour in the, in the apprentice
program for instruction too. Uh,
Mr. Chair, the employer
generally pays that directly,
and that's not what the, the
money necessarily goes to
offset. OK, I, I just, I mean,
that would be in a difference in
the market, right? And and so it
sounds like you're right in the
market range.
You're, you're exactly right
when the the labor force, I call
him finicky, right? But they
are, they are setting the rates
that we're gonna pay him.
Um, $20 and
Panda Express or McDonald's or
wherever compared to us paying
$20 an hour to run the shovel or
Or
Hailing Tyler or whatever it is
that day is a is a big
difference in the market and
it's, it's, it's hard to balance
that, um.
There's a presentation and then
we've talked about this all
week, but the out migration of
New Mexico is roughly about
4.7%, right?
Those are people leaving the
state and our migration. I don't
see those in any of your numbers
as a labor force moves, right?
The amount of number going into
the workforce and the amount of
men going into the workforce.
One is increasing, one is
declining. And, and so I don't
see that in your, in your
numbers and I don't see the
numbers on page 3, I think I'm
looking at. That's the one you
have up, I think.
I, I think there needs to be a
little more detail in there. The
other thing is, and I don't know
how you score this, on how you
chart this.
Um
People in the workforce are
completely different today than
they were.
5, 10 years ago, one kind of
COVID hit, it changed the whole
market of employment.
Um
Whether it's an issue of health
issue, uh taking care of a
parent, uh, whatever that issue
is.
Um, they need that time, right?
And, and when they don't have
that time then.
They either quit or they
Don't come to work or or or
whatever. And so,
I don't know how we calculate
that either.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, happy to
provide you, um, the migration
numbers, they lag a little more
than some of these other
numbers, um, but basically
between the years of 2010 and
2020, we lost net 30,000 people
in the state of whom about
25,000 were working.
So that, you know, when that
comes out of the numerator and
the denominator, it, it
definitely hits labor force
participation rate, um, in
addition, now, what, what, what
they saw for example in Louis
and after Katrina is not only do
you lose those people, but you
lose those families and because
they were families where parents
or both parents were working,
those kids are now more likely
to be working. We've lost them
too. So it is actually one of
the 4 goals of our statewide
workforce plan to attract people
to New Mexico cause it has to be
part of the equation. You're
absolutely right. Um, in terms
of
um, you know, the best data we
have, and again this is federal,
um, is up on the screen now, so
you see that, I mean more people
be um since the pandemic then
during our sighting family
responsibilities and ill health
and disability is the reason
they're not working, but they're
a very small piece of the
puzzle, um, unless we're, you
know, unless they're asking the
question in a way that people
aren't responding. Um, so it's
just another reason that we
really need to get out into
community and ask those
questions and the other thing
is, is there's a decline.
population in the US where
His his words were green and
browning, right? Our oldest
population is going to be a
majority of the population
leaving the workforce.
Or don't want to be the Walmart
greeter or for whatever reason
have made enough money and
they're retiring. And so that
greatest population is leaving,
right?
You can't. Everyone needed to
have 2.1 kids in order to keep
up with population growth and
employment growth.
and kids are not having that
many kids or people are not
having that many kids.
Right?
And, and so we're in this
conundrum across the US.
Of this declining workforce
population in those ranges and
brackets that we can't keep up.
We're not gonna be able to keep
up, and that's why technology is
growing at a faster rate,
especially.
It is, people saw this coming
for 10 years ago when they
started robotics and in the
workforce. And so,
I don't know how we solve that.
We're not going to solve it with
migration. There's you gotta
open the doors and there's not
enough workforce that's coming
in that that work.
Or if we let them work.
open the gates and say we need
workers.
That we can solve that problem
either.
So
We're gonna have to really dig
into to what it is in New Mexico
that those kids want to achieve
um, and every kid's different. I
mean nurses, doctors, and
Some kids may just want to be
janitors I want to be firemen.
How we target them.
Individually, and I think the be
pro be proud truck, I'd like to
see those numbers, but I heard
there were some numbers that
weren't tracking or they're
they're not and where kids are
targeting when they walk in that
vehicle, determine what pathway
they want to go down.
Or have interest in.
Uh, cause we're gonna have to
really dwell into targeting.
I mean, everybody likes to throw
the construction trade numbers
up, but I mean, that's the
easiest trade to get into,
because most construction
companies will start you out at
the bottom and, and train you
up.
No matter what, and you may
start sweeping the floors, but,
you know, in a week, you're
gonna be on the forklift.
You're kind of forklift driver's
license or certificate.
Right? And they're gonna keep
moving you up, so they, they can
create that workforce, and
that's why construction, I
think, is, is the easiest to go
to and the easiest.
Uh, to start in that, I mean,
you don't really swing a hammer
anymore. Everything's error.
Or automated, and so,
That's gonna, that's gonna
change too, but I, I'd really
love you to dwell into some
numbers.
Uh, about
Now migration.
What they're looking at in that
B pro be proud vehicle for those
in the audience who don't know
what that is, it's a semi
trailer and you can go in there
and.
You can
Do coding to be a computer. You
can pretend you're a nurse.
You can drive an excavator, you
can drive a semi, you can.
I forget what else is in that
truck, but it, it shows what
area you have interest in then
and how they're targeting that.
I mean, that's the CTE program
in that leads them into CTA CTE
program that leads him into a
career and college and then a
career, I hope.
Um, because I think college is
important for everybody.
Um
And, and so.
Those are the numbers I really
want to see as we come forward,
cause when you're requesting
this money, I mean it's gotta be
so targeted from here on out.
It cannot be a wide broom
stroke, it cannot be, um,
I saw this
Somebody working in Panda for 20
is not gonna leave there for 20
to go to.
There for, uh, well, they'll
leave me for 25 more cents or $1
more, um, but they're not gonna
leave there to go do a a a a a
backbreaking job, right?
They're gonna stay there where
where they're tossing rice and
cooking noodles where they're
not heavy lifting and that's the
work for sure.
That we really need to get
skilled up, but
Targeting is going to be a
requirement that I'm really
gonna want to see your financial
details, um.
One thing that interests me when
you talk about the
non-employment, the
unemployment.
right? You said it's 0.08 and
you need to be at 1.
And, and
so those calculations I'd really
like to see.
Um, I know when you hire
employees and you could hire
them and maybe it's a nature of.
What we do, you know, they show
up for 1 or 2 days and then they
don't show up again.
And then they go file a claim.
And then
sitting there and say the guy
never showed up, never called,
never did anything, and you guys
approved those claims.
And then our rates go up.
And those people that are
approving those claims are not
listening at all to the
employers, I mean.
I can tell you tons of different
stories and smoking weed on the
job.
Can't happen. I got no insurance
for you if something happens.
That can't happen. You get rid
of them, file a claim.
And they don't give the
employers the benefit of the
doubt. They give it to the
employees.
And that's what raises our
rates, and that's the
frustration, I think that
businesses gonna go through,
especially in unemployment.
Sure, someone you fire someone
for whatever reason, they're
unsafe or whatever, they want to
go file claim fine. But if
there's a reason why you
terminate him, uh, that was a
cost to you or a risk to you
that claim should not
automatically be paid.
In in
I, I'll give you an example, I
mean.
My son ran a crew picking up
trash on the side of the highway
had 18 employees, right?
Whatever reason, someone show up
someday, someone might show up
some days.
In the, in the end, he had the
highest number of claims and
over 100 claims going through
that crew, right? And shot his
number up through the ceiling.
A lot of it may have been they
were drinking at lunch.
Can't have somebody on the side
of the highway that's been
drinking, and they pay the
claims and you tell them the
reason they were terminated and
they just did not move on.
And, and so that's, that's the
reason why employers are gonna
really fight you on the, on the
claims and the increase, it has
to happen for people that
deserve it.
But there are certain factors
that
Or overly during COVID, we've
lost. What did we lose 500
million in unemployment that
just vanished and nobody knew
where they were and
Not you, but your predecessor
ran as quick as he could because
he didn't want to deal with that
cause everything, and that was
$500 million and we we
backfilled that, I think, with
some ARPA money, that means that
there's an instance where we
lost tons of money out of there
that we never even tried to
recoup.
We didn't look, we didn't turn
over a sampling. We didn't do
anything, we just.
Through 500 million out the
window and said,
Congratulations, you're, we're
not gonna look into that at all.
I mean, those are things that
affect us and businesses, um,
especially in the workforce.
I mean, I always had a high
school kid or or someone around
in the summer that was working
that we trained and and
Whether he ran errands, whether
he swept the garage, uh, always
did that and.
when those kids wrote me a
letter one time when he went to
Mimi, he says, I'm sure glad you
made me dig ditches and clean
out sewer lines that made me a
better person, and I know you
went to meet me too, but it's a
lot different than when you were
here, but you gave me.
character for what for what you
made me do and made me
appreciate it now I think he's
he's an engineer.
And so those are the success
stories he learned he didn't
want to do that. That's fine.
But in hiring those kids and
getting them into your, into
your work flow. That's another
problem.
If I take a, a kid that's under
16.
Can't drive.
Any of our vehicles, right?
So you got to send him the Seton
Williams to pick up 5 gallons of
paint and run into to job site,
you can't can't do that. I mean,
there's got to be in some of
these training programs, some
flexibility and I don't know how
we create that.
So those kids can discover what
they like and what they don't
like.
Um, workers' comp won't cover
them up they're 16, but
sometimes you get a 15 year old
kid that really wants to work or
do something for the summer.
Um
That means that help and
You know where they're headed
and they're young, and their
parents say, OK, can you put him
to work and make him cut weeds
one day and then he learns he
doesn't like to cut weeds, and
then comes inside the shop and
maybe really gets oriented with
uh computer work in, in.
I mean,
employers are gonna have to do
that, but um.
I, I, I want a lot more detail,
especially as the workforce is
completely changing.
And we keep saying we're gonna
do the same old thing, we're
just gonna target things that we
think are working, but we're not
targeting them as a person
directly of where they want to
head in that that has to happen.
Um
Um, have a different career path
but targeting is gonna be so
important in in this budgeting
process for me, cause it's not
just, we want to create a
workforce over here. It doesn't
work.
And I have 5 nursing students
that come and use my conference
room to study right the other
day. It was shocking to me that
they had to buy their own
insurance.
As students.
Liability insurance, right?
So are we opening them up if
something happens, because
they're in the hospital and
working that they're gonna get
sued in in the beginning of
their nursing career, cause what
other career do you have to have
insurance as a, as a student.
Those are all factors that that
lay in, it may not bother him
that much, but to me, it does
because, you know, the
underlying factors with.
What's gonna happen if something
happens when they're there and
I'll just change their career
path after we invested so much
in them.
Um
So, thank you for your
presentation. We look forward
and I'll, I'll try to try to
visit with you a little bit more
about presentation I see.
Thank you.
Um
Where's secretary Troy.
The speaker is headed southbound
if you guys want to know.
He's in the uh white uh
his license plate number is
Oh, did I say that out loud?
Mr. Secretary, we're not gonna
go through this whole
presentation, correct? You're
gonna hit 3 or 4 pages and.
Pitch your highlights and Scott
should have tuned you up.
It
If you guys can move out quietly
so we can keep going cause.
Yeah.
Even the state police can't
control him.
Huh?
Go ahead, start me, Mr.
Secretary.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, uh, good morning. Uh,
really appreciate it. My name is
Jason Bowie. I'm the cabinet
secretary for the Department of
Public Safety, uh, as I often
do, I'd like to just start
briefly with introductions of
the people who are in the room
with me from DPS, um, they
definitely deserve the, the
credit for the positive outcomes
of the organization, uh, more so
than, than I do. And so
presenting with me, Thori
Wiesler, deputy secretary, and
also Chief of New Mexico State
Police sitting to my right, uh,
Sylvia Serna, Deputy Secretary
for statewide law enforcement
support.
Uh, I'd like to just
acknowledge, uh, also real quick
as my ASD director, uh, Sheila
McDonald, sitting off here to my
left, manager of our budget
director who's worked very hard
on this presentation and, and
getting all these numbers
together, we appreciate you and
our CFO Roberta V. Hill, uh,
Kent Augustine, uh, sitting in
the front row, our CIO. We have
many more from DPS that are here
and I won't introduce them all
with many director level um
staff. And so, uh thank you for
allowing me a moment to just to
do that.
clear that out.
Um
Go ahead.
I need to borrow a siren.
We can arrange that. Uh, before
starting the presentation, I
just want to like to just thank
the committee, uh, as well. This
is my 4th year presenting here
for the Department of Public
Safety and uh it's been my
experience that not only in this
committee, we have had a
tremendous amount of support,
but also from the legislature as
a whole, I've been pleasantly
surprised with the support that
we get for our initiatives, our
bills, um, and it really allows
us to, to be able to serve the
state of New Mexico and in
public safety. And so, uh, I'd
like to just thank all of you
here with the legislature in
general for the support that we
get at DPS.
really very much appreciate it.
Uh, as you already pointed out,
uh, Mr. Chair, we won't follow
this, uh, this, uh, PowerPoint
slide for slide or verbatim, um,
as we've done a year past, we'll
provide a quick overview of the
program where we're asking for.
And this year a little
differently, uh we wanted uh
describe to this committee some
of the outcomes uh for the money
that we've received instead of
talking about what we do, we
want to talk about a little bit
more about, uh, the money that
we received and the outcomes.
And so we'll go over the law
enforcement program today. Uh,
we'll go over state law
enforcement.
support program and then our ASD
team program support.
If at any time we skip over
something that you, you know,
you want us to expand upon,
please do, um, but for the most
part, at the wheel of the chair,
I will go ahead and uh just keep
moving through the presentation
fairly quickly. So starting off
with slide 2, our budget request
and our priorities, our
legislative budget priorities
really are uh in 4 categories
really, staff recruitment.
Thank you.
Yeah, uh, staff recruitment and
retention, um, that really
focuses on the entire uh
Department of Public Safety, uh,
our category, uh, priority is
public safety for the Mexico
State Police, uh, techno
technological advancements, and
that's for the entire state.
That's just not for uh state
police alone. This is the
services that we provide and
then IT safeguards again, if we
fail in our cybersecurity space,
then we're not able to provide
uh for the entire state of New
Mexico. And so all of these uh
emphasis on all these, of
course.
are, uh, the goal of reducing
crime, violent crime across the
state of New Mexico.
Or working out the slides here
for you.
use.
Thank you, Chief
Chief my IT support over here,
uh, slide 3,
I just want to just touch on
this real quickly. This is kind
of just some factual statistics
of DPS support for local and
county agencies, uh, we all
answer to our constituents and,
and I think this slide is
interesting because it really
shows the funding alone
distributed by DPS and it's
really a high level overview
demonstrating the support that
we provide across the state of
New Mexico. And so, um, you can
look at this for yourself. I'll
highlight just a couple.
31 federal awards to sub
recipients, $4 million
distributed annually uh to
statewide law enforcement
agencies, and we think that's
important just to show how much
we do for uh law enforcement as
a whole, uh, $2.3 million
directly awarded for the fight
against violent crime in New
Mexico, uh, DPS distributed $5.4
million for the public health
orders. I think everybody's
familiar with uh 13 law
enforcement, uh, distributions
and, um, and, and also to the
fire department there. And then
for law enforcement retention,
for a fund our goal to retain
police officers across the state
of New Mexico. We had 73 law
enforcement agencies funded 25
counties served more than 1000
police officers receiving this
benefit and, and our uh
applications to the fund uh from
the first year when it was
instituted this last year, it's
up to 79%. So this is really
just a visual demonstration and
a portion of the support that
DPS provides. Uh, getting right
into our programs, um, as
requested, we'll not go over
every slide, um.
the, the next slide, slide 4
through 7, are for the law
enforcement program or domestico
State Police. And I guess what
really we're just pointing out
is that we're, we're piloting a
lot of different programs and a
lot of the initiatives um that
we have uh currently ongoing.
What we're asking for this year
is really just the maintenance
here. Uh, we're not asking for
new programs or really just
hoping to continue the programs
that we have in place, and some
of those continuous investments.
Uh, the slide, uh, 5 and 6,
we'll skip or I'll I'll skip 5
because we're gonna talk about
maintenance here in a little
bit, but we'll reference it
again. This is, uh, has to do
with our fleet and maintenance
costs. We'll get back to that.
I'll draw your attention to
slide 6 for just a moment, uh,
which illustrates extensive
Mexico State police-led
operations across the state of
New Mexico in support of local
agencies and community issues,
and you can see the hours there
in the left-hand column, how
many hours, man hours have been
expended in order to address uh
issues across the state of New
Mexico and so.
For the public health order
enforcement. Um, you can see for
that very first uh outcome off
to the right-hand side, for
example, 17 128 firearms were
collected, uh, 395 felony
arrests and 68 firearms seized,
and as you go on down, we've,
we've worked on house and
campment operations, border
security operations, and illegal
cannabis grows and, and what's
interesting on this illegal
cannabis grow, uh, just to point
out is that that was just a
single operation. It took us
1000 man hours, uh just to uh
have that.
impact and the approximate value
of $527 million as a result.
Let's go ahead and skip um the
next slide, and we'll talk about
it again in our roll up. So I'll
go right to our rollup page,
which is slide 8.
Um, these are just basically our
requests for our law enforcement
program based increased requests
total $11.1 million as you can
see, uh, I talked about some of
these are just for maintenance,
uh, starting out with the first
one. We want to continue our
annual step pay increases. Um,
we're not asking for raises this
year. These are just basically
uh to fix our step placement for
our officers and to fix the
compaction issues. So this is a
reoccurring cost, um, that we
would need supported every year.
Um, again, a continuation in car
body camera.
uh, as you know, you have funded
that in years past. This is a
continuation of the same
program. I, I do want to draw
attention just a minute to fuel
and maintenance.
We are seeing a tremendous
amount of increase in
maintenance costs of our
vehicles and costs are up for,
for fuel, and typically every
year we're having to borrow
money each year, uh, in order to
meet, to meet the shortfall, and
so we're asking for an increase,
uh, in fueling costs, uh, fuel
and maintenance costs, uh, to
address that issue. Uh, the next
one, and, and if you need
additional information regarding
this again, slide 5 really kind
of details uh what it's costing
us to, uh,
To purchase vehicles, what it's
costing us to outfit them, or
it's costing us to, to main
those, maintain those vehicles
and, and a replacement cycle
that we're interested in. So if
you need additional details, you
would find those on slide 5 as
an as an infographic.
Uh, aircraft maintenance, our,
our aircraft currently we have
one single helicopter. It's uh
more than 5 years old, and the,
the warranty just ran out this
last October and uh just the
last warranty year we saw
$800,000 in repairs. And so we
anticipate obviously, uh keeping
that uh aircraft's moving, uh,
that we would need, um.
Maintenance uh for that aircraft
and so we're requesting uh
$500,000 for it.
And again, vehicle placement and
upfit, um, that again, you would
find that in infographic on on
page 5, and, and I'm, I'm going
through this uh as you
requested, Mr. Chair, anytime
you want me to slow down and and
give more detail, I certainly, I
certainly can. Uh, page 9
special appropriations, they're
just for your reference.
And moving on to the law
enforcement program, roll up our
budget requests ask uh is 11.
$11.1 million dollar increase to
our operating budget, which uh
takes our FY 26 general funds to
163.8 million. This represents a
70% increase from our previous
fiscal year.
Moving on to our statewide law
enforcement support program. Uh,
I, I just want to say this, uh,
before you get into the slides.
You know, we get a tremendous
amount of support for our, our
forward facing piece and you
hear me saying this every, every
year, which is state police the
uniform, uh, DPS, uh, the other
half of DPS works just as hard
and provides all that support to
the state and so I wouldn't be
doing my job if I didn't
advocate for everyone else at
DPS and Mexico Law enforcement
Academy, law enforcement records
Bureau, ITER lab, all of these
people who provide a tremendous
service to uh to the rest of New
Mexico. And so that's what this
next portion represents. So
slides 11 through 16. Again, I
won't uh
I'll skip over them. Um, uh,
address those issues. I, I will
just real quickly point out on
uh slide number 12. Uh, we get a
lot of questions about where we
sit currently with our uh lab
DNA testing specifically. And uh
sexual assault kits. And so, um,
if you look at that little table
there in the middle off to the
left-hand side, the issue really
becomes that it takes 24 months
to certify a DNA scientist to
perform case analysis
independently. And so it's not
just
about funding it and not just
about the hire, you know,
currently we have uh
10 employed, 4 of those are
certified, 6 of those are not.
And so it's projected that those
won't be certified to be able to
do that DNA analysis
independently until 2027. Uh, we
have 4 more that are in higher
and 2 more that are in
recruiting. And so, it's not
just about funding those
positions. There's a tremendous
amount that goes into uh
preparing those people to do the
work. And so in the meantime, as
we're certifying people to do
DNA work uh cases are still
coming in, so cases are going
up. And so um this is a concern
for
us, but we're working very hard
to make sure that we can recruit
these people, train them, and
prepare them, uh, slide number
12 kind of uh gives you a little
bit of detail regarding that.
Um, touching on real quickly on
our intelligence-led policing,
uh, which will be slide number
14. Uh, very excited about this
project that you've heard me
talk about this in years past.
We have statewide data
compilation and a bunch of
different law enforcement
agencies. The that is basically
just sitting there, obviously,
for use for that agency only and
we want to get to a place in New
Mexico where we can take that
data and that intelligence and,
and shared, uh,
And not just analysts, but for
officers in the field.
We need to be able to do a
better job sharing with the
crime picture looks like in the
state of New Mexico. And so, uh,
someone who comes into contact
with someone here in Santa Fe,
we should be able to have at our
fingertips, uh, law enforcement
officers had contact with these
people in Farmington in Las
Cruces, and in Hobbs, wherever
it might be, and, and that is
what this, this program uh
details. We've seen a lot of
success with this so far. We're
very excited about this. We'll
be glad to expand on this
program as well as time allows
and as your questions uh come
up.
So I'll move on to the roll-up
page, which is page 17 for SLES.
Um, we have 2 requests for the
lab, 3 requests for LEB, 5
requests for information
technologies and one request for
the LEA, uh, and again, uh, we
talked a little bit about our
salary slow increases for the
lab, that was page 12 that I
that I talked about. Um, we need
admin support for, for our
forensics laboratories. We have
scientists currently doing
administrative work and just
like we've done on the state
police side, we take, we look at
the duties of a state police
officer has and what can we do
with civilian professional
staff, and this is the same
thing we need to do with
forensics.
sciences. We don't need them
doing administrative work and
lab or uh when they should be
focusing on lab work and so
that's what that request is. Um,
again, I won't go through every
one of these. There's a series
of different um requests here,
but I think what's common and
most among these, uh, most, most
of these requests is that um
this is just support for
existing programs. We're not
asking for, for new initiatives,
as I mentioned, this is really
just a maintenance here.
Flight 18 is a special
appropriation request for SLES.
And I'll go to 19, which is our
roll-up page, our budget
requests, uh, asking for $4.4
million dollar increase to our
SLES budget, which takes our
general fund from 29, 229.5
million, representing an 18%
increase, uh, from our previous
fiscal year.
Our last program that I'll touch
on.
Uh, is program support base
increased request of $984,000.
And uh uh the first one there is
really a match for positions
that was created under DFA
program, law enforcement
retention funds to assist uh
commissioned officers in crime
reduction efforts. We have a
match there, uh, we must provide
a, a 50% match in our last FY 25
and a 75% uh
General front match uh for this
up and coming FY.
Um
OLA office of Legal Affairs,
$313,000.
The workload of our attorneys is
just astronomical at DPS. I
don't know what it looks like
for other state departments, but
at ours, it is just, uh, it is
just a tremendous workload,
litigation, employee actions,
contracts, litigation for bill
uh legislation and build review,
um, costs, uh, for us uh hiring
contract attorneys, uh, we
really need to have an
investment there to make sure
that we're, we're prepared, uh,
our, our IPRs, uh, which is
largely taken care of, uh,
through our law enforcement
record bureaus that has a
crossover into
to OLA as well. And so we really
would appreciate some support
there at the bottom of page, you
will see some special
appropriation requests for, um,
for ASD.
So our roll up slide 21 program
support rollup represents a
budget increase of 984,000,
which takes our FY 26 general
fund uh for program support to
$7.7 million to represents a 15%
increase from our previous
fiscal year.
Our last sighed Mister Chair,
uh, slide 22 is really the
agency roll up our, our total
ask for DPS is a $16.5 million
dollar increase to our operating
budget, our total uh FY 26
request is $201.1 million which
represents a 9% increase from
the previous fiscal year.
And then, uh, I would just
mention that there are 3, I
believe 33 appendixes uh
attached to this are special,
special appropriation request
recap our C2 funding requests
and our capital outlay uh for
your references as well, Mr.
Chair, with that, uh, we'll
stand for questions. Thank you,
uh, everyone of these guys I'm
gonna mention want to get a
vision on the way home, uh,
represented Maca.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, uh, Mr. Secretary.
First off, I want to thank all
of you, uh, members of the state
police and all of our first
responders for the job that you
do, contrary to what you may
hear in the media, it may get
out there, many of us, most of
us actually appreciate and
respect the work that you do. So
I want to start off with that.
Um, so thank you for your
service. Uh, Mr. Secretary in
Chief, when we talked about it,
we, we had the last year when
you presented before the
committee, we asked about as far
as
anatomies, and how many
academies and how many uh folks
are entering the academy for the
State Police and how many are
actually graduating and
completing that course.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Baca, uh, no, we appreciate that
question and I can give you the
I mean, I have a pretty
extensive breakdown here, um,
that we can visit offline if
you, if you'd like, and that,
that's fine if you if you don't
have that number, uh, in front
of you, then I, we can
definitely do that. So, I, I do
have it, but um I just, there's
a lot of numbers and I don't
know how, how, uh, into the,
into the weeds we want to get
here. Uh, I know that the chair
is heading northbound supposedly
after this.
trying to make us look in the
wrong direction, but overall,
uh, recruiting.
So, last year we read um 2
regular academies and one
lateral academy. Um, and that's
been pretty consistent what
we've been doing in the last few
years. Uh, as far as state
police, um, the last 2 to 3
years, we've been fairly, uh,
Plateaued on, on personnel, um,
Now, that's not to say that we
haven't had a lot of benefit
from the uh retention portion. I
think the recruitment now is
coming. So,
State police had a, we have a
very uh senior departments. We
have a lot of uh personnel that
are eligible to retire, uh,
which hurt us a lot in FY 21 and
22. Um, we've since with the
efforts of the legislature has
gone to help with retention.
We've now seen that state. I
would say we've had about a 40%
reduction in uh eligible
retirements if it wasn't for the
retention, I think we would have
lost uh significantly more
personnel because we basically
have twice as many people.
eligible to retire now at any
given time that we did a few
years ago. Um, our current
academy that we have graduating
next month. We're hoping to
graduate, um, 20 but just for a
little bit of comparison, uh,
just for general interest here,
um.
Our last 3 academies.
Interest,
so this is what we started out
with.
Uh, we started out with 530
interest cards or 102nd Academy.
We
Start at 31. Next Academy with a
drop of interest to 470.
Um, like I say, I, I go a lot of
numbers here, but we, we are
starting to see an increase.
This current academy, we have
518 interest cards, which is up
from 477 at the last academy,
and we started this current
academy with 30, and I'm hoping
to start with 40 or more in the
uh Spring Academy.
Thank you, Mr. uh Mr. Secretary
in Chief, uh, Mr. Chairman, I
guess what, you know, because I
do think it's important we talk,
we have both a a recruitment
issue and retention issue. So I
think that we may have to be
shifting it is how do we
increase the interest cards. Um,
I'm gonna be, uh, Mr. Chairman
and uh secretary, I'm gonna be
looking at page 5 as far as the
vehicles. Um, you know, it, it
struck me when you were saying
that.
Most vehicles should be for
safety at 100,000 and most state
police vehicles that are
160,000.
Could you briefly talk about
what that means as far as for
our officers. How, what is the
request that is needed for the
10 to 15% replacement for this
year is because there's a couple
of different amounts. There's 14
million and then there's uh 3
million, what, what would be the
amount that would be needed to
support our fleet for the state
police.
Yeah
Um,
Mr. Chair, Representative Baca.
So we broken this down a couple
of different ways. Um, so the
total
That we really would need is,
uh, because after last year's
session, the, the, the chair
asked us to give a total
breakdown of what we would need
to get where we wanted to be.
Um, and that number's a very
large number. Um,
So
Really what we would need would
be the current request that's in
our operating budget, which is,
I think 3.6 million plus
Special appropriation that we
have, which I believe is 17.9
which would, which would get us.
Close to back to where we need
to be or where we would like to
be. Um, every year we have this
conversation because we're
constantly asking for fleet in
either special appropriations or
capitale, but obviously it's a
recurring cost every year. So we
always talk about trying to put
it into the recurring operating
budget, uh, because technically
that's like where it belongs,
but it's such a large
Number and would drive up our
overall increase of our
recurring budget, um, that
usually doesn't happen. So we
end up with this kind of year to
year.
Trying to get what we can out of
special appropriations or
capital outlay, and I mean, the
end result is
The mileage gradually creeping
up over time until we have the,
the current situation, if that
makes sense, sir.
Yes, sir. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, and I'm gonna look at
page 6, and it was interesting
to see about the support for the
state police for a small
agencies and communities, and I
know they were, I want to be
respectful to my colleague's
time, but one of the interests
that I would like to touch base
is the support that you have for
our rural communities and our
school districts and our school
sites, that's an important piece
to me is how the state police
support.
Our rural communities and our,
our school district. So, um, we
can touch base if you want to
briefly and uh, you know, a
couple, a couple sentence or
two, talk about that, um,
otherwise, I would be happy to,
because I think it's important
that to be highlighted and
people know.
That were more than just
patrolling interstates were more
than just serving these things
we're actually in the community
and helping with our small and
with our school districts as
well. So, um, do you want to
respond or you want to get off
the?
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator Balkan,
members of the committee, you
know, one of the things that
I've always stand really proud
of the organization is, is their
ability and their willingness to
respond to a moment's not
anything going on in our
communities. And, and we get a
lot of those calls. And so uh I
know that we don't certainly
don't please everyone. I know
sometimes people would like to
see more on the highway highway
or or maybe even within the
community. Um, but, you know, it
takes a tremendous amount of
hours and I would remind
everyone that say places down on
manpower like everyone else is,
uh, but there's not a single
community that they say no to at
the end of
day if there's a need, uh,
they're there, uh, whether it be
fires in the community, uh
flooding in Roswell, uh, as you
can see here on unhoused
operations, uh, cannabis, which,
which really falls on RLD where
where there to support every one
of these, um, we, we're
supporting the organized crime
commission through these border
security operations. And so
there's a tremendous amount of
uh this this is just a snapshot
of what they do each and every
day and so I appreciate the
comment and, and yes, um, you
know, we, we tried our very best
to support uh every agency that
we can.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and one
of the things I will not ask
questions, but I do want to
highlight it became very to me
uh secretary, page 13, when we
talked about technology of 2000
versus 20024.
And the increasing need of
technology which comes with an
increasing cost.
And so, you know, one of the
things I would really like to
just touch upon that technology
is communications and how that
helps us to provide.
Better service to our
communities.
So
Mr. Chairman, I'll go ahead and
I'll, I'll yield my time for my
colleagues, but I do, I do like
to touch base with you because I
think that's an important piece
about it is how you need the
technology to support your
efforts for our community and
our citizens. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Representative Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good
morning.
Uh
I, I was listening about the,
about how many people attended
the academy and I, do you have
more people on the street or
less people on the streets and
your poor last.
But
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Chatfield, we have
1% less than we had last year,
just under 1% of 6 fewer people,
I think, on the street today
than I had this time last year.
So Mr. Chair, why?
What, what can we, I mean, we've
been working on that.
I mean
Honestly, I think, uh, the, I
think what we're doing is
working. It's just a matter of,
it takes time, uh, to build up
the personnel with the recruit
schools and I think the biggest
drag for us personally as state
police is like I said, we have
a, a lot of people eligible to
retire and like I say, we have
had a drastic
Reduction in that, uh, from
where it was in 2021, 2022, but
really, it's just attrition at
this, at this point, um, and so
it's important that we've had
those retention incentives
because
If we all of a sudden had
everybody that was eligible to
retire decided they want to
retire tomorrow, we, we'd really
be in trouble, so, um,
I'm hoping that we can kind of
get the, over that hump here
this next year with the incoming
recruits and be a little, yeah,
stabler ground as far as uh
consistent um personnel level.
Let's chair, we interviewed a
lot of agencies here and, and
there's a lot of talk about
security at our schools, at our
courtrooms, and uh
Personally, I think
That's a good place that we need
to
Invite our retirees from the
state police into, you know,
whenever I look and think about
security for a school, I don't
want.
A 19 year old child that
Has never been a police officer
providing security for at our
high school, I would like to
somebody that has spent a
lifetime being under pressure
and and under and being able to
think clearly and has proven
track record and the same with
our courtrooms, you know, I
think.
If we're going to have security
there, it, it needs to be a
seasoned.
Officer, so I don't know how we
can never tie that in, but
that's just my thoughts on that
labs.
Uh, you talked about personnel
for your labs. Uh, do you have
the
The, what you need as far as
technology and
And uh
Go forth on your labs. Do you
have what you need?
Mr. Chair Representative
Chatfield. I'll turn it over to
my deputy secretary of state.
Thank you, Mr. Chair,
Representative. Uh, we do, we do
receive a decent amount of
federal funding for our um crime
lab equipment and supplies. Um,
however, the, the lab equipment
is extremely expensive. Um, so
many times, uh, the federal
funding is just not enough, um.
When it comes time to putting in
our budget request, we have to
decide between uh putting in
some large numbers, large
figures for um expensive
equipment or uh putting in a
request like we did uh this year
to um continue to fund our uh
increase in our forensic
scientists' pay. So, um, yes,
that's always an ongoing need
that we have, uh, and, um, with
our new laboratory, uh, the need
has increased because now we
have um uh a larger space to
Uh, so,
The, the continuity of that
funding for that purpose is
always a need that we have.
He had more equipment could you
go faster or, or are you limited
by your personnel at the lab.
Uh, I'm sorry, can you repeat
your question?
And better equipment in your
labs.
Did you cut that 24 month time
frame down, or are you limited
by the personnel. Mr. Chair
Representative, that's a very
good question. Uh, we are held
by FBI standards, um, the, the
24 time frame to certify a
forensic scientist, uh, is a
requirement by the FBI and so
that is not um we cannot uh uh
decrease that amount of time.
However, I will say we, we are
in constant contact with them
and always trying to um uh
Try to figure out a better way
because as you can see, that's
that uh really impacts our
ability to process these DNA
cases and we have a, we have a,
a large backload where that's a
large backlog where that's
concerned. So that's always our
ultimate goal is to, to work on
these DNA cases, um, the, the
court system can adjudicate
these cases timely when we're
backlogged and law enforcement
can't uh finish their
investigations when we're
backlogged. And so this is a
real problem, um, we, we
then also had to decide this
year between asking for funding
for the salaries or um or money
to uh outsource for the backlog
if we were to outsource our DNA
backlog, which is over 2000
cases right now. Uh, we would
need approximately $5.7 million.
Um, and as you can see with the
24 time frame to um on board a
uh or certify a forensic
scientist, um, by the time they
actually get onto the bench, the
backlog is even
3 times that.
So we never really get ahead
unless we are able to outsource
the cases that we currently have
while we're waiting for these 24
months, uh, to get these people
on the bench.
The chair, where, where do you
outsource them to?
Uh, we have, we have a, a, a, a
vendor, a couple of different um
companies that uh our lab has
outsourced in the past. We've
received federal funding for,
um, but it is important to note
that we can't outsource homicide
cases or sexual assault cases.
Uh, we, we outsource all of the
others, but those are the two,
the two that we would like to,
you know, we keep in house for
various reasons.
Oh, Mr. Chair.
I made a little run down to a
napra here a while back.
Yeah, and a lot of them folks
down there.
are really wish they had some
license.
cameras, they said they would
make their job.
Extremely more effective.
Uh, what's your thoughts on that
and
And I don't think it, you know,
My, I'll, I'll give you my
thought. If I'm not doing
anything wrong, I don't care if
you know where I'm at.
So
So, tell me your thoughts.
And is it, is it applicable?
Science in other places, other
What do you have?
That respect also.
Yes, sir, uh, Mr. Chair,
Representative Chatfield. So
that has been something that we
have uh expanded a fair amount
in the last few years. Um, we
were somewhat lacking as far as
our footprint for that sort of
technology in New Mexico until
these last few years and the
investments that we've made, uh,
that, that particular area, um,
it's interesting that you
mentioned because we just had
Not right there, but a general
southwest, we have several um
License plate readers that we
have had there as part of the
Stone Garden program originally,
and then we've expanded that
some, um, I just, when I was
sitting here waiting, I just
approved a press release for a
couple of stolen cars that we
got in Lordsburg off of, off of
that, uh, yesterday, and then
y'all might have seen a press
release for this weekend. We had
5, kidnapped kids from Texas
that we arrested their uh
kidnappers, and that was off of
a license plate reader, uh, hit
on iT10, um, in that same area.
Um, and we, and we arrested them
down there.
Um, last weekend. So we've had a
lot of success, uh, in general
from the program. Um,
Like I say, especially in that
area in, in the last week. I
mean, we've had multiple
recoveries besides just those
two that I, that I mentioned.
Oh, Madam Chair, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
I didn't see Madam here, are you
guys, uh,
Working in collaboration with
Arizona currently on the license
plate camera and some of those
technologies, I had the, the
talk was down there that Arizona
was willing to process a lot of
that, uh, information for us if
we just got to.
equ ip ment so
How, how's that working? Is
there some
collaboration going on there,
what's that?
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
so, uh, yes, not only with
Arizona but in a lot of fronts,
we are working to expand the uh
information sharing as it
relates to license plate readers
both within the state and with
the surrounding states, um,
there is a component of that
that is part of the
intelligence-led policing
project was the uh secretary
mentioned before.
Um, and a lot of that too, uh,
there might be um some things
that we want to look at in this
upcoming year. There's a lot of
the, the vendors, um.
are sometimes reluctance.
To share data with competition,
um, and so that's something that
we are trying to work around and
or uh
Possibly have to force their
hand on that for public safety,
uh, reasons, um.
Because we shouldn't have to.
Well, basically, they don't want
to share their data uh with,
with other companies and that's
impeding law enforcement
operations at times, so that's
something that we're trying to
work around as well.
So Madam Chair, I, I would ask
you all.
Mr. Chair, you kind of come and
Jerry, you come and go yeah keep
track of you. I'm gonna have to
get a license plate reader.
I'm gonna go get you some more
coffee and some glasses and I'm
gonna forget what my name is if
this continues, so Mr. Chair,
you know, but.
Um
You know, I want to live in a
safer state, and if those
license plates readers, they
look to me like they worked.
And uh please talk to me about
what we can do to help you guys
get, it doesn't seem like that
would be a very extremely
expensive.
Technology.
I know there's a little bit of
pushback on that, but, uh, you
know, I caught an Uber the other
day, I said, you, you know, if
I, I, Uber over to this meal,
you're gonna be here when it's
over to Uber me back. He said,
if it's after dark, I won't, he
said, some of us run till 9
o'clock and
After that, you're on your own,
you have to walk home because we
just don't pick people up in
Santa Fe after past 9, mostly
in, in, uh, that's sad. Uh I
want, I want this state to be
safe.
And uh so I think uh if this is
a technology that
That helps, like I say, uh if
you're not doing anything wrong,
you shouldn't have a problem
with it.
So, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you for
Tenders here.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I
Center guy goes you next
I, I was looking for it in here,
but I wrote this note here, uh,
this chair, about, uh,
IT and IT upgrades and things
like that.
Uh, a couple of related
questions. So the, the courts
came in here yesterday and said,
hey, we need our own, we don't
want to be associated with
anybody else.
Are you part of the the state do
it system or you something
special and separate.
I think it's best to probably
kick that question over to my
CIO if you don't mind, uh Kent
Augustine. Um, we, we work very
closely to do it, I know, uh.
Thank you
Mr. Chair, um, Senator, we do
work very closely with DI. Um,
we are a unique agency in the
sense that um we have our own
data centers, so none of our,
none of our systems are at do
its data center.
Um, that has to do with uh FBIC
requirements.
So we, and, and we are the CS
Systems Agency for the city of
New Mexico.
So there's certain systems that
every law enforcement agency
relies upon
EPS 4.
Um, so it does.
Proposed several unique
challenges to our agency that
other agencies do not have to
have.
So
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Secretary, so some of the
other conversations that we've
had this week is
The various, various people that
are involved in in law, can't
talk to each other. The courts
can't talk to the police, police
can't talk to the prisons. The
prisons can't talk to the
detention centers. Nobody can
talk.
Or communicate.
Do you see this as a problem?
So we have several efforts along
this line trying to do better
data collaboration. Our
intelligence-led policing
project that is all about
collaboration with other
agencies.
Um, and that's both on the
aggregate level, um, but also
more importantly, the officers
on the street, criminal
investigators, being able to see
data from other agency systems.
And this is something that up
until
very recently has just not been
possible.
Um, with advances in technology.
Um, we really have some
opportunities to take advantage
of technology advancements and
start doing this data sharing
across agencies across the
state. This is actually, we're
actually the first state in the
country to actually do a
statewide effort like this, um,
and it's, uh, we're very close
to actually going into
production,
uh, the plan is due in January
to actually go into production,
um, and then bring 17 agencies
on which was the original plan.
Um
through the end of this FY.
Uh, we have a C2 request in this
year.
For a little over $10.5 million.
That will bring on an additional
30 agencies into the program
over the next following two FYs.
So Mr. Chair, these agencies
include local sheriffs and OK.
Um
I, I just
It struck me
Add a few months ago.
When I was, uh, I was in Texas,
the border.
And one of the things that they
told us there is that the
cartels
are far better equipped.
In our than our than our cops.
They have
Better cars, they have, they,
they buy the best drug dogs in
the world so that they can sniff
their own stuff before they come
in across the border.
Um, but they also have all of
this communications, and that
was one of the points they were
trying to make. We don't talk to
each other.
They're an organized
communications team.
Um, and so I'm just, uh, and
then, and then when I hear the
courts, uh, yesterday or the day
before, talking about their,
their IT is special, and I, OK,
we can't, OK, so we're not
sharing anything, wow, OK, no
wonder the cartels were
overrunning us. So Mr. Chair,
uh, Senator, um, we actually
have a few projects working with
the courts to do data sharing.
And so our most recent project
was around warrants.
And we worked with AOC.
And, um, we are, this is a brand
new project that just we brought
online last year. And is it
going to be expanded? But um
there there's a lot of efforts
we communicate pretty regularly.
With the folks over at at AOC,
um, and there's a real desire to
to share as much as possible
intelligence of policing project
is actually going to bring in
court data for, for, uh,
dispositions.
OK.
Well, I would like
I don't know what's
I don't understand why people
are reluctant to work with
doing. Um.
But if for nothing else, they
need to be the coordination
center, so that we know how to
talk to each other if we need
to.
Um
Insurance premiums. I'm just
looking in here where there was
a 700 and some.
And find it now. There were huge
insurance premium.
Uh, issues in your budget here,
uh, on page 20, total includes
153,000 for insurance increases,
but there's another in here
somewhere 700 and some,000.
688,000.
Another one for 735,000. Wow,
page 17, bottom of page 17.
No.
What's the other one?
So what's going on the bottom of
page 20.
This seems like a lot of money
for insurance. What do we, Mr.
Chair, Senator share, I mean,
those are, are, are imposed on
our agency. I mean, I can defer
to uh Deputy Secretary Serna,
but
But
Mr. Chair, Senator Sheer, these
are, these are, um, insurance
rates that are imposed on our
agency by GSD. And so in order
to be able to afford them and
offset the cost, we have to ask
for them in our, in our increase
to base, um, unfortunately,
we're seeing these rates
increase more and more every
year.
So Mr. Che yeah, still, uh, and
Mr. Secretary, is this health
insurance or is this liability
insurance or?
It's Mr. Chair, Senator, it, it
is liability insurance. Chair.
Are we being sued out of the law
enforcement business.
Uh, uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Sher,
I'll try to answer that. I mean,
naturally, we have a tremendous
amount of uh liability in the
law enforcement agency and and
it's not uncommon obviously for
us to have lawsuits, we, we try
to mitigate that, but of course,
raising the professionalism of
law enforcement to make sure
that officers are properly
trained to make sure that we
have equipment in place for the
accountability of law
enforcement body worn cameras
and all of those things, but it
doesn't necessarily stop, um,
you know, people from
litigating. It's not the only
place where we get litigated as
an agency. Uh, we get a
tremendous amount of HIPAA
requests.
Um, sometimes, uh, there's a
slip up there where information
wasn't provided when it should
have been and and now we're on
the hook for for providing the
information. And so, um, we get,
we get, uh, litigated through
the domestic law enforcement
Academy for denials of people
who apply for the uh law
enforcement academy and who are
denied an opportunity to be
certified in the law enforcement
officers. Um, that generates
lawsuits. And so, you know, we,
we, as I mentioned here a little
while ago, we, you know, we were
asking for uh funding for our
OLA or Office of Legal Affairs
to to keep up.
with all of this, and so we have
a tremendous amount of
litigation. It frustrates me
quite a bit. I'll get calls uh
from OLA. They'll describe the
case to me in detail, and I have
a lot of times the decision to
make, whether to settle the case
or not, and what I look for
right away, of course, is what
is our exposure in the case of
if we're 100% correct and we did
everything right, I, I'll always
say I'll I'll spend 100,000 to
protect 10,000, right, if I feel
our officers are right or our
staff was right, and then we
will, we will go to bat for
them, but if there's liability
or we could have done something
better and we met him, we.
and naturally there's times when
we settle those cases, and so,
um, you know, we do our, we do
our very best, of course, to, to
minimize that on the front end,
um, but it's not uncommon,
obviously for, for lawsuits to
to impact DPS, um, uh,
particularly as well, uh, after
a couple of years ago when
qualified immunity was removed.
Uh, we saw an increase of, of,
of lawsuits against the agency
as well, and we anticipated that
as a state, um, but I think
that's what you're seeing in
your chair.
So, Mr. Chair, a comment on
that. It seems that we have
We've chosen sides here and
we've chosen not to support our
doctors. We've chosen not to
support our law enforcement.
We've chosen not to support uh
the state of New Mexico, um,
Because
We're, we're practically being
sued out of business completely.
And, uh, it bothers me the, the
amount of money, so you came in,
you asked what $16 million was
that the number that, OK, and
yet here we've got a million.
Just an insurance.
And I don't think that y'all are
worse than you used to be.
In fact, you're better than you
used to be.
So, uh, those things just really
bother me, Mr. Chair, and this
isn't a, this isn't that you.
This isn't us, OK?
Um, how many electric vehicles
do they, do they have, Mr.
Chair.
No
Mr. Mr. Chair, Senator, uh,
Senator Sher, um, the chief was
driving one for a while. I don't
know that we actually owned if
he was borrowing it, uh, but,
uh, we have one in Governor
security currently we do have.
Good
Yes, sir. So, uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
Senator chair, yes, we have one,
electric vehicle in the fleet.
We have several uh hybrids, um,
we did a study on that, so we
are doing an expansion in a
couple of districts on our uh
hybrid pursuit, uh, package
vehicles, um, as a cost savings,
fuel savings, uh, that we noted
during a, an earlier trial. So,
um, but as far as electric
vehicles, just one.
OK. So, Mr. Chair, you know,
we're gonna have this mandate,
actually.
Uh, pretty quick.
Uh, where the
The car lots have to have 46% of
the vehicles on the lot
electric.
You're gonna have 46% of the.
Vehicles on the highway electric
at the same time?
Miss,
uh, Senator Sher. I think our,
our first responsibility is
always going to be able, you
know, have the opportunity to
respond uh to our communities
for the things that they need
and and it goes back to what
representative Baca was saying,
and they were talking about
what's the impact if we don't
fund this and and your mileage
on police cars. Um, it's, it's
not just, you know, the safety
of our police officers and to to
his question, it's also, you
know, can we get to the
community that we serve and the
same thing applies for either
hybrid or electric vehicles if
they don't have the range or the
capability of char of recharging
a vehicle in a.
timely manner, then that's going
to impact public safety at the
end of the day. And so, um, you
know, I don't know if there
would be a public safety
exemption for, for those things
or until the technology gets
there, it's going to be a
challenge for us, and I think
that's part of what we're
currently exploring is, is how
feasible is this? And so we've,
um, you know, we've explored
hybrids, um, the chief literally
was driving one for a while,
drove me to, uh, to carry in
one. it was an interesting ride,
um, and, and so, uh, you know,
we, we're, we're trying to, to
assess that for the
organization, but I don't think
the
used there yet, for those
reasons that I mentioned.
Ah, Mister Chair, I'm stunned.
Stunned that the technology's
not there for electric vehicles
in the state of New Mexico. I
can't believe it.
Did you have a uh state police
follow you in the electric
vehicle out of curiosity
we did not, but we did have
radios to call for help.
Senator.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I'll
uh keep my
uh, I was just, uh, I got a note
from
The chairman said KISS lipped
over and said, Keep it short,
senator. I just, uh,
I thought he liked me a lot, but
uh anyway, I'll keep it short.
Uh, I did wanna ask, uh,
briefly, um,
The, the money that we gave you
for training last cycle, you
know where that's at, uh, as far
as we've done look or we're
looking at statewide training or
human trafficking. I was just
wondering, I didn't see it in
the file, just wondered if it
was being used or
Missed the chair, uh, Senator
Gallegos, um, we just did our
human trafficking training, uh,
uh, within the same place. I'm
not sure currently where the LEA
stands on that, but it is
something that we we've been
focusing on as a whole, not only
within the organization, within,
uh, as I mentioned through the
Organized Crime commission. And
so, um, do you have additional
information that you wanted to
share
with the.
Oh
Mr. Chair, senator,
we did actually have a joint,
uh, training where it was a
multidisciplinary opportunity
where we were having prosecutors
as well as local law enforcement
and victims' advocates, um, in
October that had kind of a
two-prong approach where not
only were these disciplines able
to have this training, um, for a
user level and recognition level
and to address it, but also we
had an instructor course, um, to
help push that out to other
areas of the state to help move
that initiative.
Beyond just that one. We also
have a conference that both the
teams are collectively working
on. We're hopefully gonna have
that in Rudoso is the plan right
now trying to get a bunch of
people. I'm understanding. I
believe we're aiming to have
about 300 attendees for that is
the goal, and that is supposed
to be in the spring of 2025. So
coming up, so we're working on
preparing that and getting a
bunch of different entities
involved, so not just on DPS,
some local agent.
season and continuing that
multiply, uh, sorry,
multidisciplinary approach,
where we can continue to have
healthcare providers, um, you
know, educators, local law
enforcement, and different
resources that would also be
able to recognize and assist in
dealing with this problem as
well. So, um, that's kind of
where we're at if you have any
additional questions. No,
turn, and thank you for that.
Uh, I do want to keep, be kept
in the loop if you need more
money for that, I, there's
something that I think it goes
back to
shares conversation of where the
organizations don't talk to each
other, and I think this brings
that
point in time where everyone can
start, uh, building the team,
uh, statewide team to be able to
look at some of these. Uh, I did
have just another real quick
question. Uh, I was gonna pull
out, uh, earlier we had a couple
of legislators representing Baca
and Chatfield talked about uh
school safety. I had a bill that
was not heard, not sure why, in
special session, but it had
dealt with school safety
division in DPS. The thought of
that being was that we'd build a
structure for you to be able to
manage.
Uh, school, um, staff, uh, you
know, uh, the, the original
thought is if we got retirees
and or military personnel that
wanted to go through your
training.
But would be placed in a, in a
school.
Uh, it takes away from our law
enforcement when they have to
come in and uh put someone in
uni schools.
Do you, how would you feel about
that because it's gonna be an
extra burden. We're talking
budget, so we would have to
think through the budget
implications on that, but it
would be a statewide instead of
just every district having to
find someone that's capable to
protect our students.
Just wondering what you thought
on that.
Mr.
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator Gagos.
I think at the end of the day, I
think we can all get behind
school safety, right? And so I'd
be very interested in having
that discussion and what that
would look like. Um, it's, it's
probably too early for me to
tell what the impact would be on
all of the current uh school
resource officers that are out
there in the programs that
currently exist, uh, but any way
that we can help with that
initiative, I would be very open
to having a conversation about
it. I think at the end of the
day, I don't think, I can't
think of anything more that
pulls their heartstrings than
then obviously violence within
our schools. And so, um, this is
definitely a discussion in DPS
would be willing to have to see
where the
Where that project would go.
Well, thank you for that, Mr.
Mr. Secretary, I think that
having a purview that you have
statewide already really
facilitates that. I do have one
other bill that I think I may
have to visit with you on
because I was gonna run my rape
kit DNA.
It tracking, but I understood
that would cost $5.7 million to
get caught up on.
Uh, I don't know if that was in
my budget for my bill, so I'll
probably go offline to visit
with you on that because I don't
want to cause you any harm. I
know there's concern.
As long as you guys are working
on that, I think I'm OK. I just
want to follow up. So with that,
are you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you all for what you do.
Thank you. I, I don't remember
texting you the acronym, but
that's a pretty good one.
Um
Let me kind of wrap up, you
know.
I don't think there's anybody,
Senator Rodriguez and I are
catching more hell for
Being the highest paid officers
of the state, cause when I go
home and to share agencies that
represent, say, you know, you
made it hard for us when you
made the state police the
highest played officers in the
In the state, but that's our
job, right? Our job is not the
cities and counties, if they
want to increase pay, they, they
have the ability to do that. Our
job is to make sure you guys
Uh, do your job and you have the
money and you have the resources
just FYI if the sheriff gives me
a ticket, somebody may have to
help me out. Um.
As, as we move forward and
You know, center guygos is
talking about other pieces of
legislation. How far would that
deviate you from your real true
mission when we keep, we keep
loading people up with stuff
and, and the cautionary tale is
you have something you need to
do, law enforcement and, in, in
certain times, I mean.
Enforcing the marijuana law, and
they've seen that slide set
right there is really not your
purview. That should have been
RLDs and, and they should have
shut them down early, so we
didn't have to do that. Um,
How cautious should we be as we
Say we want state police to do
this now, huh? We want them to
do that. How many more missions
can we send you, or task can we
assign you without
Watering down the agency.
Mr Chair members of the
committee, I really appreciate
that question a lot because I
think that's the impact that
we're seeing in DPS as a whole,
not just on the state police
alone, as the chief mentioned,
um, you know, the percentages
aren't going up. We have
attrition. Uh, one thing he
didn't mention in the attrition
is the accountability is high
and so we do terminate a few uh
police officers and on an annual
basis as well, and that goes
into the numbers. And so, uh, at
the end of the day, it's not
just about what the officers are
capable of doing. It takes all
the support behind it, all of
these people are there in the
room, do a tremendous job
supporting.
Um, you know, the financial part
of it, uh, OLA as you mentioned,
the litigation, all those pieces
and so, um, I think it's very
important for us to always
remain focused on our core
mission, which is why we're
taking a couple last couple of
years, you recall you were
taking.
Duties away from commissioned
officers that could be done by
professional staff. There was
non-commissioned, as example,
you know, running evidence
across the state and, and, and,
uh, civilian crime scene
technicians and so forth, and
we're we're doing that again
this year with alcohol
enforcement looking at to see
who could, uh, you know, we
could get civilian staff to do
that and so we could free up
uniforms. And so I think what
always hurts us is, is a
willingness to always say yes.
And, and we can continue, we
will continue to do that at the
end of the day, it's difficult
sometimes. I have uh we have
requests from
all across the state for, for
different jurisdictions and the
needs different in everyone's
jurisdiction, and we can't
certainly can't please everyone,
uh, some, uh, sometimes we get,
uh, sheriffs are upset because
they want to see state police
more on the highway. Uh, we have
others that are upset because
they won't see more in their
community and we get calls from
uh from the community members of
where to be other chiefs and
sheriffs, uh, as well as I get
it from my, uh, from my boss, my
executive of where we need to be
and so I, I'm, I would like to
be careful with that as well.
Uh, that said, I think, uh, you
know, we always want to try to
figure out how we can get.
Yes, like how can we make things
better and stay in New Mexico.
Um, I would say I'm not an idiot
either at the facts stare me in
the face that it just can't be
done, we'll have to say no, but
I would always like to start at
least from a position of how how
we can make it happen, and this
is my willingness to have the
conversation at least and start
it and look at why it's
possible, but I do share the
same concern, Mr. Chair. Since
you brought it up and, and you
said people want to see more of
the state police, and Senator
Sheer and Representative
Chatfield and Senator Gonzalez
get their tickets on the way
home.
What would their fine be for
speeding over 10 miles. Uh, it
wouldn't be much, uh, because
you know, last year, Mr. Chair,
uh, they took uh the associated
uh fees away from the fines. And
so I think it's a $25 about $25
or so, so.
Um, we need to, we need to
address that in legislation, um,
as we have removed the fees
associated with the fines. It
doesn't cost much to be speeding
in Mexico. The courts generate
more money than you guys, cause
you're gonna pay the court costs
on top of the, the ticket to go
to court.
I don't know all the ins and
outs of it. I just know that um
it's not a deterrent that it
used once used in the courts got
rid of their fines and fees, and
it's gonna have to come back in
some way, shape or form. Uh, I'd
like to see you build a scenario
that
Maybe does vehicle replacement
with you, depending on the, you
have to calculate your number
citations, right?
And to to offset that number for
vehicle replacement cause you
know, vehicles, they used to go
100,000 miles, right? They were
built.
If a vehicle doesn't make it
past its first year past the
warranty time. I'd almost bet 10
people in this room can stand up
that day my warranty in office
the day my vehicle broke down,
whether that's done
electronically or not. The
vehicles are not lasting long.
And if you do need a repair,
You may be 68 weeks. Who knows,
before you can get a replacement
part. And, and so we got to
start thinking about that
replacement cycle, a lot sooner
to lower our cost, maybe.
I don't know if you can trade in
a police vehicle, but I mean,
you're gonna have to start
thinking about lowering that
mileage on trading and saying,
OK, we're gonna lower our
mileage, but there's a cost of
doing this and, and if it's only
$25 I mean, it's pretty hard. I
mean, $25 is really not worth
the time and the effort, and
then the judge dismisses it or
whatever, and then you don't
collect anything. But we're
gonna have to start doing this
structure, and this is not you,
this is state parks, needs a the
increase, which they can't
manage environment departments
coming in for.
increases the livestock boards
coming in for fee increases.
These are all things that we're
gonna have to look across the
board at and say, OK, we're
gonna have to start funding them
with, with fees and fines. Lord
knows you could be.
Billionaires, if, if you could
just get litter under control
with fines. Um, yeah. Well,
we're gonna have to look at that
and I mean.
There has to be some change in
mentality, I mean, I try not to
drive over 80.
Um, I really try not to driver
because
Senator Shindo's waved his hand
that he, he drives over, but I,
I, that's where I feel
comfortable, right? And so,
Like some people the other day,
they passed me and I try to keep
up with them and I was at 94
coming up to Santa Fe and, and
they, I still couldn't catch
them.
But I mean, in Arizona, you
know, that's like $180 ticket.
Or more.
And they may even charge you
with wasting of the finite
resource, which is a very
interesting, I never experienced
neither one.
Um, but we're gonna have to
start figuring out how we do
vehicle replacement and how we,
how we fund that because
Uh, reoccurring money is
starting to tighten.
And as we flatten out on this
plateau, I mean, every, and had
looked at your 3 year increases
or what we increased over the
last 3 years, which some are
pretty high, the courts were at
90%.
Over a 3-year period. So that's,
that's a great, but we're gonna
have to figure out how we're
gonna handle some of this stuff
or helicopter maintenance was a
high number, 500,000. You just
look at that, do that on that
slide, 1000 our man hours for a
legal operation.
Um, I mean, that cost, what was
that cost, Troy? You told me at
one time you thought it was
estimated that.
Uh, realistically, I mean,
probably about 200,000 is
probably what that should cost
for that.
One world, world's most, most
expensive 4th degree felony is
what I call that, 00 man hours
and $200,000 143 felony.
And he was out on bail in 25
seconds. Yeah, no comments, sir.
I could do, I could do a lot of,
a lot of fentanyl trafficking
cases for $200,000 and 1000 man
hours. I, I mean if we're gonna
sign this and I was trying to
show the speaker uh uh uh
something I seen this morning.
It was very interesting to me
that
In Arizona, the governor set up
a fentanyl.
Um, task force.
That
They they captured 6 million
fentanyl pills.
I think about 6 million, I don't
know that's probably 1 or 2 for
everybody in the state of
Arizona, that's that's
ridiculous and, and we're gonna
have to get a handle on on
fentanyl.
But I think on your reoccuring
portion, there's, there's
outlying costs that we're not
seeing. And so we need to help
you on that. That doesn't mean
go out and give everybody a
ticket.
That means, you know,
Every semi truck driver in the
left-hand lane gets a ticket.
Um,
Because I don't think there's
been more than 10 issues, but
some of this stuff we're gonna
have to figure out. I mean,
500,000 for your for your
aircraft maintenance, right?
We, we can't just rely on
general for all the time. I
mean, other states are
Or other states don't rely on
general funds for so, so you,
you need fees and fines to to
support this throughout the
system, and so we, we need a
deep dive look, I think LLC is
gonna reach out to you, um.
If we're gonna draft that bill,
um.
And, and set a rate, then we
need your input if you guys want
to support that bill or you need
to shop it by the exact, that's
fine, but either way, I think
it's gonna be coming, maybe
coming in a package. Um,
So I think we need to do that.
Miss Miss chair, if I may, um,
cause I know this has been a, a
point of concern for you and so
I asked for these numbers, uh,
just for you. And so a left lane
enforcement for 2023, 433
tickets, uh, 459 of them in
2024, so I just wanted to make
sure that you had some, some,
uh,
Feedback on that. It should be
like 10 times that number on the
report.
I'll try, I'll try by next year,
so
that 70. I know in the shift
changes, it's from 7 o'clock and
so when I like to leave to go to
Santa Fe and that shift change
time cause I know I'm, I'm
pretty good from al to
the blend exit.
Um, but I, I think we got to
figure some of that out and, and
help you fund your agency
correctly. We're gonna try to
help you every way we can. Uh,
you may have to prioritize some
stuff, but
These unexpended costs, right?
Are, are really what drives
budgets down cause when you
don't see that $200,000 hit, you
gotta make it an adjustment,
whether it's gas, overtime,
whatever it is you gotta make
that, that, that request. It's
interesting to me. Have you guys
ever asked for this deficiency
or supplemental.
Mr. Cha, no, it's, it's been,
it's been quite a while. I, I
can't say that I recall ever
having to do that in, in my term
with DPS.
That's amazing.
You guys didn't ask for a
supplemental. You guys should
probably request the
supplemental and I'm asking you
to the 200,000 for the cannabis,
right? For the, for the border,
run those, those operational
costs and request a supplemental
coming into the session, so we
can backfill you, uh, on your
budget for what you spent, so we
can get you caught up for the
next 6 months.
You haven't asked for one,
that's amazing, but I mean,
you're having costs. I don't
know how you're managing that
budget because other agencies
can't even manage but headshots
and.
Deaths and
conference tables that you guys
seem to be able to do that in,
let's fix that problem.
Um, when you need that, I, I'd
urge you.
That you request supplementals
or deficiencies.
So that you don't spend your
operating budget on things that
you weren't.
See when your budget was done.
Mr. Chair would just like to
comment that we have a fantastic
budget team.
I know, but
I, you're what everybody else
and just write a check and, and
cash it and say, oh, well, come
back and we'll have a nice day.
Well, that's not the way budgets
work, but I mean,
Those people doing the right
thing and are getting hit in
their budgets.
That need to get fixed, that
need to be backfilled because
An operation like that happen,
you need to do that.
You need to fix that problem.
That's not something that
I
not attainable or is a waste of
money. That's a fix for what you
guys do, so make sure you get
that gathered up. I don't care
if it's 1.5 million, I don't
know what the total number is. I
mean, you're not, you're not
gonna lie to us or or fluff it
up, and get that number and get
an accurate number and get a
supplemental in, um.
John, make sure you see that in
the system maybe after
Thanksgiving. So as we move
forward and we look at
supplementals and deficiencies
in December that you're on that
list.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. That's
much appreciated.
Appreciate your time.
Appreciate your mentoring. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. I'm headed
north.
Be careful.
0.0 wait, we're gonna go through
minutes, uh, real quickly, John,
you're ready to go, what time
are we behind? Yes, sir, Mr.
Chair. Uh, let's go to tab J.
Ja, so, Mr. Turman.
Uh, we're asking for adoption of
the wild wildlife recovery
subcommittee, uh, October
minutes.
And they have a motion to adopt
the wild so Senator Gonzalez
second by uh Representative
Serana.
And then if you'll go to tab K,
Mr. Chairman, for approval of
the October meeting minutes from
LFC.
No
motion for do passed by Senator
Rodriguez. Do I have a second?
Representative Sariana.
Thanks, Mr. Chairman. So, uh,
then tab L approval of the um
subcommittee A October meeting
minutes from LFC. So can I have
a motion to adopt the
subcommittee meetings from some
of.
Motion by Senator Gonzalez
second by Senator Rodriguez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and then,
uh, the last action item for,
for you all is approval of the
LFC subcommittee B minutes from
October, Mr. Chairman, that's
under tab M
you pass, Mr. Chairman.
A motion for Du Pas second by
Senator Woods, any objection to
the motion?
no
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You,
you all acted on contracts on
Monday, uh, the remaining
miscellaneous business owe
through tea or informational
items, um, I, uh, the only one
I, I kind of have a few words
for his on tea, the program
evaluation work plan that just
gives you some um
Some heads up uh uh reports that
will be coming your way in
December, we'll have a um
program evaluation of
corrections and reentry,
that'll, uh, you'll be hearing
right before their budget
presentation a few progress
reports, um, one in particular
that you'll find interesting is
the progress report on school
transportation and that that
funding formula, um, Mr.
Chairman, and then, uh, some uh
ideas for the spring, uh,
that's, that's miscellaneous
business, Mr. Chairman. Any
questions on the program about?
Evaluation.
people should look at that, so
that they know what they they
need something targeted or
what's been looked not targeted
but what program evaluation
fromenator Gart Gonzalez. Oh,
thank you, just a little bit
more on that school
transportation, was it?
That is under tab M in projects
and evaluations. And so that's
the LFC, uh, I think Senator
Rodriguez has a lane there.
There's a copy in, so that's
what LLC has been looking at in
school transportation and what
projects inside the LLC that
they've been working on.
Joey, does that happen to be
your project OK, we'll have a
report for that for you in, in
December, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you.
Any other questions? See none.
Thank you.
Appreciate your time. Who's
gonna start us off, Mr.
Secretary to you or?
Mr.
Mr. Chair, good morning. Uh,
thank you for having us this
morning. Um, we're here to go
over our SI selection process,
how a project gets into the sip
and um some of the funding uh
priorities, federal and state
funding parties for our priority
projects. So if you go to the
next tab here. Um, the second
page of the presentation. This
is our car form, um, what
happens in this situation,
that's a conditional analysis
report, our districts utilize
this.
Uh, form, it's a weighted
analysis to help determine
project uh projects uh that will
get into the step. There's
several factors, as you can see
in that wheel diagram, um, that
contribute to it. They're
weighted the most important,
however, are going to be the two
on the bottom which take into
account our crashes and also our
condition ratings for our
bridges and our pavements. So
this analysis really does um
help the districts identify
their priorities and confirm
some of their um some of their
decisions when they're
prioritizing the project.
Within the step
Um, there's, there is a little
bit as far as the um asset
condition report as far as our
assets go, we, uh, keep track
of, obviously, you know, bridge
and pavement or bridge and
pavement assets are um bridge
bureau does a real good job, um
with uh NMSU to uh, get our
bridges inspected through the
various districts, so each
district has a bridge section
that assists with those bridge
inspections. Um, we inspect our
bridges on the NHS on an annual
basis, and
the non-NHS not NHS is our
national highway system, our
interstates, our US routes,
those major highways and
secondary routes are scheduled,
um, every other year, they're
inspected the slide up there
because it's hard for us to, my
bad, sorry. There we go.
So
On the right there, that's great
that's, there's a lot, a lot in
that flow chart there. Um, but
in, in a nutshell, we inspect
our bridges annually and
biannually if they're off
system. And then our pavement
conditions are um recorded
through this van here that we um
again on an annual basis on our
national highway system, uh,
assets we collect payment data,
um, we collect it through a
LIDAR, uh, we get the pavement
distress, rutting, roughness,
um, texture.
All of this goes into an informs
our decisions on how we want to
program our payment preservation
funds, um, whether they be state
funds to the districts and our
payment preservation program or
we, uh, program step projects to
get out and let.
Um, this is next slide speaks to
how a project can actually gets
into the tip when we're looking
at our, our long range statewide
plan or slurp, um, that's a 25
year outlook kind of details
what the priorities are for the
DOT over the next 25 years,
identifying areas that will um
need to be upgraded uh based on
future traffic growth or, or, or
um demands that that might be
coming, um, and then
What we do is we use that to
kind of feed into the stiffness
as well as working with our with
our several uh planning
organizations throughout the
state, um, there's several RPOs
throughout all the state and
MPOs that are districts do a
great job in coordinating their
project priorities as well. Um,
they meet with those folks on an
annual basis, um, a biannual
basis, excuse me, to get some of
their local priorities pro um
put into the stiff as well
through, what we call a zipper
process in the districts, um,
our planning liaisons, uh,
me quarterly with the NPOs and
RPOs, uh, giving them
information about potential
funding opportunities,
discretionary grant
opportunities that might be
available to them to help um get
some of their priority projects
advanced into the step a little
sooner, um, as most of you are
aware, are STIP is a six-year
step, um, the 1st 4 years of
which have to be fiscally
constrained, meaning we have to
have the money programmed. It
needs to be in the bank for us
to be able to program projects
within the 1st 4 years of the
STI.
We used the last 2 years of the
SIP really as a planning um tool
and districts uh will program a
lot of their studies, um,
preliminary engineering studies
for some of the corridor
projects that we do, um, in
those planning years, uh, we'll
fund the, the, the, the, the
studies and the designs in those
in those planning years, and
then, um, oftentimes those
bigger corridor projects are are
chunked up in a phased project,
you know, maybe 2 or 3 projects,
4 projects that will be brought
into the 4-year stiff on our
biannual sip, um.
Stiff amendment process, uh, and
we'll bring in those.
5 years 5 and 6 into the 4 year
step that happens biannually.
Now, there's some, there's
several funding considerations
that we that we have when we're
talking about um
When we're talking about uh how
projects do get funded, so we
get an annual apportionment from
um FHWA and uh we also have a
match to for that apportionment.
There's a lot, there's several
colors of money, um, a lot of, a
lot of different programs that
that are funded through FHWA
through their various, various,
uh, programs and, and colors.
So, uh, there are, um, we do
have some um funds that we have
to initially set aside for
planning.
research, um, you know, for
alcohol, alcohol penalty
transfers, um, estimated
obligation limits is also
calculated because even though
they say you have a dollar to
spend, well, you can really only
write a check for 94 cents or 86
cents, right? So we don't get
the full amount of our of, of
the of the uh FHWA distribution
we get an apportionment of that
amount. Um,
And then distributions and
solocations are also set aside,
local distributions are set
aside surface transportation
program funding large urban
areas, that's just basically our
Mr. Cog. They, they, um,
directly program those
particular funds for the Mr. Cog
area, um, and then we also have
some other programs that DOT
administers as far as our, our
safety program, our congestion
mitigation program, um, and our
transportation alternative
programs that we issue calls out
for local
and the districts to help, um,
you know, there can be some
colors of money that can help
them, um, you know, make sure
they can, they can get enough
funding for certain projects,
um, so as you're all aware, we
do have dipped several buckets
of money that we put into a
project, um, and, and can fund a
project. So, after that, we have
the remaining balance, which is
basically the, the step targets
for the district, and their
apportioned by um NHS lane
miles, population, etc. and each
district gets uh uh
An annual, an annual target to
plan their priority projects
around. They have a good 4-year
target um typically we keep, we
have them keep them flat, but
for planning purposes, it works.
Um, we, it'd be nice to be able
to plan a little further out,
but, but for, for that, for what
we have to do, I think it works
OK. And um
The next slide we have, well,
that's the end of the slide, but
part of your the presentation,
the handout you all have is um
our, our list of priority
projects that we received from
the districts, um, and these
projects were submitted to us uh
in the fall, or excuse me, um,
around September time frame,
August time frame, um, for
submission for, uh, requests for
this upcoming session.
You'll notice that some of these
projects, um, uh, they, you
know, are in various levels of
design. So that information is
gonna really inform our decision
on what projects we bring forth,
we aren't going to bring up this
full list for our budget
hearing. However, we are going
to um synthesize this and break
it down for you in the future.
And Mr. Chairman, just one last
comment on this is in addition
to everything that uh Mr.
Quintana was talking about in
terms of decision making
process. There's other things
that will drive moving projects
up into the queue and we added
some of those project, uh gap
numbers, um, on the 3rd to the
Of the project, the column
called Gap. So if you take for
example, uh, that very project
in District one at the very,
very top. That project cost $110
million and there's a project
gap of about 65 million in one
of the, the motivators that
moves that project up in the
queue is we received a $45
million grant for that project.
Ricky, can you have him put the
slides back up so we and what we
don't know what page you're on.
Tell us what page you're on.
There's this one, the handout,
yeah.
Yeah.
And so if you look at, uh, if
you look at that first project,
District one, the Border Highway
connector, what moves that
project like that up in the
queue is receiving a federal
grant that requires state match,
and then, of course, the federal
grant would have certain
milestones and completion
timelines that'll push that
project up. In the same
district, we recently received a
7, we recently received a
federal grant for the Noga
Bridge replacement also in
District one. And so the gap in
that project is about $76
million.
And so that project moves up in
the queue so that we can, of
course, leverage the federal
funds to get a project like that
done. And there's some other
examples peppered throughout,
for example, in District 5, the
3040 $34 million gap for the
roadway reconstruction of uh New
Mexico 14 has uh previous House
Bill 2 funds attached to it, so
we'd like to make that hole so
we can get that project, um, out
the gate, and then of course in
District 6, we have various
priorities at at various stages
of.
preparation for construction,
but one of the big priorities
for us is the ongoing pavement
preservation and rehab needs for
I-40. So we work with the data
that we have and then other
things come into the mix like
additions from an MPO, a cog, or
a federal award that says now
we've got to scoop this up into
the mix to meet the federal
grant deadlines. And then
lastly, of course, like with the
District 5 project is we may get
a project listed in legislation
that we also want to get
complete, so we'll start.
Scooting resources over into
those projects as well. So we
identified a few gaps for you
just to kind of call out some of
those other circumstances that
drive project priority.
Thank you all, Mr. Chairman and
thank you to both of you.
And the staff home.
Oh no, when you mention on the,
on the bridge inspection.
Is that, is that required or is
it done in basically because
As a policy from the department.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Gonzalez,
great question. It is required.
It's, it's a requirement from
the feds that we do have a
bridge inspection program, and
we make, make sure that we um
inspect our bridges on our
interstates in US highways on an
annual basis, and those are our
system, even local bridges,
right? We'll inspect those as
well, um, making sure that all
of the bridge infrastructure
within the state is in a
condition of good repair.
So, uh, Mr. Chairman, uh, so
that means that uh.
That you work with the counties.
Mr. Chair, Senator, yes, we work
with the counties,
municipalities to help them um
identify what projects need to
be perhaps maybe put a weight
limit on them or um even clothes
sometimes. Uh, but we do work
with them to identify some
funding to help them get those
bridges, uh, maintained or, or
replaced as needed.
And Mr. Chairman, at one time,
uh, this is like 3 years back,
and I don't know if we still
have that problem.
Yes, we did have some uh.
Of our school buses to and from
transportation.
That um there were not allowed
to go into certain areas because
of the bridge conditions.
Does that still exist, or we're
not aware of?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator,
on, on occasion, right? I mean,
as bridges, as bridges start to
lessen in their condition and,
and come to a state of, of, uh,
maybe we have to put a weight
limit on them, it'll, it'll
it would always be a situation
where having to be kind of
reactive if we have to put a
weight limit on a, on a bridge,
we'll notify the local authority
if it's our bridge, we'll make
sure that we, there's certain
weight vehicles that don't go,
that will not get through there.
But that will automatically
become a priority for us to get
them replaced as soon as
possible to, so we.
can get that weight limit taken
off.
No, it was the the last part is
so.
Uh, with the exception of our
interstate.
So does the federal.
Art
Do they have any, uh, they also
get involved with any of our
state highways.
Mr. Chair, Senator, absolutely,
yes, they do.
Very
Thank you. Thank you for your
help you, Senator Gonzalez, to
go to the buses McKinley County
had that issue, and then they,
what they did is, um, there were
so many bridges, nobody could
replace them for the cost. They
went and bought suburbans and
picked those kids up in and
brought him to school in in
suburbans and or me at the bus
point where they could all get
transferred.
Oh, Mr. Chairman, well, that's
what was happening is because of
The the regular school bus could
only come up to a point, and
then from there they would be
basically on a
On a feeder route.
Yeah, but sometimes they're only
picking up one student or 2
students and
Bridges are not cheap.
No.
Thank you. Uh, Representative
Ellison, tell him about 491
cause it council delegate called
me the other morning at 6 a.m.
and knocked his car out of
alignment.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, my
first question is, uh,
The bridge and shipwreck.
How far up
on the priority list to get it
replaced, is it because uh it's
older than the bridge that we
recently replaced in red was.
And uh what is the status on
getting it replaced or
Getting any work on it because
when the engineers were below
the redwashed bridge when they
were probing around a big
section of that bridge came
down, and I'm glad that that
project is now complete.
So what is the status of the
ship Rock Bridge. That's my
first question. My second
question, well, I got the floor
is uh, what is the status on the
hogback rockfall.
I've been told it's in
mitigation for the past 6 years,
and I just want to know when
it's gonna get fixed. I still
have like
Uh, another month to bug you on
that, so.
And then Highway 64 at one time,
I think you told me that.
By federal regulations or
stipulations, you have to finish
that 22.5 mile by the end of
2029.
So what is the status on those
three questions. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr.
Chairman, um, Representative, I
have a feeling that it's not
gonna be just one month, we'll
probably talk to each other a
lot after after December, which
is fine because these projects
are going to spend uh several
years in the future. So the, the
shipprockridge is still in good
condition, I believe, by our
recent uh bridge inspection, but
we're working with uh local
chapters from the Navajo Nation
to, uh, to identify whether or
not
The bridge will ultimately rest
on tribal property and
essentially become a bridge
owned by the Navajo Nation. And
so currently the bridge is owned
by the New Mexico Department of
Transportation, and the plan is
to keep the bridge um intact
after a new bridge is built. If
that new bridge is built on
Navajo Nation property solely
there right away, and it's owned
by them, then we are eligible to
receive federal tribal bridge
funding for that project with 0%
match. And
So we're working with Federal
Highway to get that
determination. Then what we
would do is enter into an
agreement with Navajo Nation to
be responsible for the bridge's
ongoing maintenance, which
doesn't change our cost position
now because we're currently in
charge of the bridge's ongoing
maintenance presently. So we've
met with, um, the chapter there
with Navajo Nation officials,
and in fact, we'll likely be
talking about it, our new deputy
secretary will be with Navajo
Nation on Monday, and I know
this is a big project for them.
And we're working with federal
highway, tribal uh liaisons.
the office of the secretary to
get that strategy in place so
that we can become eligible for
an opportunity that won't
require state road fund match.
Then I'll let Mr. Quintana, uh,
chime in on the other two.
Uh, OK, um.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Allison, um, so US 64, uh,
correct, we have to get all that
funding expended. We have to
have that project completed by
20 2029 and the 2029, um, you
know, that's just the
stipulation in the grant
agreements when we did get the
grant, that was um that was a
unique project because the
initial grant was going to cover
that 2 initial 22 miles,
however, with inflation, we had
to go after another grant. So we
were able to secure two grants
for that for that um corridor.
And it's on schedule to complete
that timeline. Um, it doesn't
include
in front of the shipprock
school, but that project is also
coming along, so it's along the
same timeline as well, 28, 29,
when we're gonna have that
entire corridor from 491 to the
state line completed.
Mr. Chair.
I had suggested one time and
taking advantage of the system
to the USDOT, uh, Mr.
Orlando Teller, being that he's
Navajo, I thought we would take
advantage of his position to
help us expedite the repairs and
the money for Highway 64 to get
it completed as any effort been
made to contact him?
Mr. Chair
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Allison, um, yeah, you know, I,
I would say that he probably had
a big influence in that grant
award for the 2nd time that we
went out, um, that was, you
know, I don't know how many DOTs
have gone after 2 grants for the
same corridor and were
successful, but um I think he
probably had a hand in that.
Mr. Chair and Mr. Secretary,
thank you for your effort and
thank you for strife and having
550 as soon as I called you.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Um,
On the
The Bridge for the Navajo
Nation.
You know, don't count on them
getting that done in the next.
27 years.
Uh, I, I wish we could get it
done really quickly, but I, I
mean moving slow and giving them
the management of the bridge
will be a cautionary tale for
them, but, uh, I, I, we need to
replace it, but
Right away just to get roads are
taking forever, so.
try to push, but
And push quickly, but we'll have
to figure that out. Send her
the.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and uh
thank you Secretary and Deputy.
Um, just a couple of quick
questions. So this coming budget
year, you're going to have, uh,
well, previously there was sort
of a big blob, if you will, of,
of dollars for local connector
streets and a number of other
things. Um, but that you didn't
have to name the actual street.
Are you looking for that level
of detail this time, uh, if we
want to get something inserted
in like, you know, a couple of
years ago as you know, I was
able to get quite a bit of stuff
done, and, but we called it out
specifically, so there's no.
h or s ing around when the money
actually reaches where it's
supposed to be utilized. What
what are you expecting to have
us give you this year in terms
of specificity or level of
detail.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Senator, I
think, and, and that was a, a, a
legislative-led effort and I
think we did a really good job I
wanna thank Rick and John and
our districts for taking that
list of projects, ensuring that
it kind of met with the spirit
of the legislation and got the
state portions of those roads
done if something wasn't already
planned. And so to be sure, what
we've, what we've tried to do
every single time, uh, a roadway
or corridor is listed in
legislation. If it aligns with
the, with the legislating
legislative language attached to
it.
try and get some work done on
it, understanding with that, you
know, with a lot of roads and
not a lot of resources, we can
do something as an interim
measure. And so what, what we'll
hope to do is work on uh a
strategy, a kind of a
two-pronged strategy, if you
will, that is some recurring
funding opportunities and if
we're tasked with presenting
district priorities for major
construction. We'll work with
our districts on getting those
major construction projects. And
then what we've done in the past
is talk about what we need for
maintenance. And that's what
funded a lot of those projects
and
And in the past where we've been
appropriated is 120 million in
maintenance, and we get that
split out about 20 million per
district and, and we try and
stretch out as far as possible.
And, and so chair and, and
secretary, you, you split it out
across districts equally.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator,
typically we try and do that.
OK. Um, and then just uh uh a
high level update if I could get
on the Rio Bravo Bridge, uh, is
that still, is it still on
track, maybe someone from the
staff can tell us where things
are, OK.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator I
don't want that thing to
escalate out of control and on
cost because it's already double
what I thought it was gonna be.
Yes, no, yeah, Mr. Chair,
Senator, absolutely it's on
schedule. It's going out to um
let to believe in March of this
year. So we're good to go. It's
um the planest um um severance
tax bond sale in June will will
um help that, in fact, the
severance tax bond that we are
selling this month is going to
um make that project whole, so
we're good to go. Thank you,
really glad to hear that. You
know, I will say that you've
done
a phenomenal job of keeping
everyone updated on how that's
going to go and, and, you know,
what to expect and that I hope
that you'll, people have very
short term memories, as you
know. So I hope that that you
will do a lot more community
education like you had been.
actually, so, thank you. Thanks,
J.
I, I think the last I heard that
they don't want two projects in
Albuquerque at the same time
because of the traffic on I-25
is why they held off on Rio
Bravo.
They're smiling at us, so that's
what the word was on the street.
Center, uh, Woods.
Thank you chair, um,
We did some, we did a study on
Highway 6084 last year west of
Clovis to Fort Sumner, and we
need to come back and
Good engineering design study
done on that, so we can do
something either super 2 or
Whatever we decide to do there.
So, uh
That's, that's what I'm trying
to accomplish this year is to
get that in there.
In the budget.
So, uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator
Woods, you know, and I think
that'd be great. I think the
timing kind of lends itself for
design funds at this point in
time is gonna be, it should be
the request, um, just because
the three-year appropriation
timeline is difficult if we
weren't asking for construction
funds.
Yeah, yeah, the design
engineering type stuff and, and
then we'd have it ready to go
and
When it is time to go. Mr. Chair
Center, exactly.
OK, well, I just wondered.
Square up one more time.
Representing Chatville.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Sorry, I
missed your presentation. I got
sent to the office.
That's for calling me madam
that might have had something to
do with it
uh.
But
Question I have is, you know,
over the past couple of years,
we've just struggled, you all
have struggled to have enough
contractors and enough engineers
and um my, my thought has always
been we need to keep some money
in the budget so that the people
know that if they go out and
borrow money to buy expensive
equipment and uh bring their
company here to our state.
If they get a degree in
engineering and they come to our
state, they're gonna have a job
on, on both, both cases. So I
think we need to fund our
infrastructure. It'll be here
years later. Are we gaining
anything in the way of
contractors, engineers, etc. We
get a few more of them, how,
where do we stand there?
Uh, well, Mr. uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative, I think, uh, we
have been making some inroads
with getting some engineering
staff vacancies reduced within
within our agency, um, it's not,
I mean, I, I, hopefully with,
uh, we recently had a new um
engineering salary. We're, we're
basically paying engineers more
now an engineer texts more so I
think we're seeing, we're gonna
start to see that really impact
our, our vacancy rate. Um,
we're, we're paying better than
our, our competitors as far
other DOTs in the region,
consultants right now are um we
are paying better then and um
we're competing pretty good with
the labs. So our hope is that
we're gonna be able to fill some
of our vacancies in that regard.
Um, and then obviously we have a
very robust, um, engineer
licensure program where we do a
lot of recruiting um around uh
uh universities both in New
Mexico, Arizona, um, and now in
Colorado and I'm trying to get
out to Texas Tech as well, um,
but we do go to UTEP, um, and,
uh, we are
In about 5 or 7, we're gonna see
a lot more people coming in from
the bottom up, um, you know, so
I think, uh, as time goes, we're
going to see our vacancy rates
go down.
Mr. Chairman and members Rick
Petty, executive Director,
Department of Transportation and
uh representative to your second
question there about contractors
in the state of New Mexico in
calendar year 23, we had about
90 contractors and um our
pre-qualification program in
calendar year 24, we gained
about 10 contractors. So it
seems like, you know, with the
uh with the way the program is
going and how we're, you know,
putting the money on the ground.
It seems like contractors would
be more motivated to come into
New Mexico. So we gained about
10 and 24. So that's a
a good thing.
And Mr. Chair Representative,
uh, we've met with AC&M last
year and one of the things that
they ramped up on is their
apprenticeship program for
bringing in apprentices with
contractors, I think last year
they had uh 11 different
contractors with apprentices and
so, um, I can ask for uh Jim
Garcia to send you those #2, but
they're understanding like we
are that they've got to start
creating opportunities to grow
in the pipeline and, and they're
doing that in with in stride.
So, Mr. Chair, 10 new
contractors is a lot. That's
good. That's what we want to see
and that's what, that's what I
personally was hoping for if we
kind of keep a little money in
the kitty, it'll keep growing
and, and uh when all this oil
boom is gone, our roads will
still be there for a long time
to come and, and so I think we
need to
To take care of our
infrastructure. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, uh, Representative De
la Cruz.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary, one of the activities
that's foundational to your
operations or studies, and, and
naturally so, but that being
said, it assumes that studies
are.
are good studies and that they
are accurate studies and that
they serve the location or the
function that's necessary.
And I've seen a situation
recently.
Or a steady actually did not
serve the population, the
constituency that would it was
predominantly um commercial.
And so, what do you do to ensure
that studies actually meet not
only the needs of of your
operations, but also of the
constituency of of the actual
users.
Uh,
Mr. Chair Representative de la
Cruz, uh, good question. We, um,
we do have a, a very robust, uh,
uh, location studies procedures
that involves heavy community
outreach, um, public information
meetings, gatherings, um, we
garner a lot of input from major
stakeholders in different
corridors that we're, we're
studying, um, to include those
impacted residents that live
along that corridor and that
might impact their properties as
well. So, um, in a lot of
instances,
Uh, that process, um, basically
what we call our phase AB um
studies, and that process takes
anywhere from 18 to 24 months to
ensure that we are gathering all
the information and data needed
to make these crucial decisions
when we create a preferred
alternative that we want to move
forward with, with uh
environmental clearances and
design. Thank you, Mr. Turner.
I, I think that's critical that
you have a review, especially
when there's some pushback by
the public because it's not
realistic.
necessarily in the ground, so I
appreciate that, Mr. Chairman,
um,
Related to the Rio Bravo Bridge.
Discussion that Senator Palia
brought up earlier, I had
received a call from a
constituent that is um I'm a
north of Real Bravo, north of
the bridge, and there were
concerns from the constituents
that you're staging area as work
begins on the Rio Bravo Bridge
itself could be problematic to a
particular community that is on
the north side of Rio Bravo. Do
have you, do you already have
plans for staging work for that
particular project.
Well, typically, um, well, Mr.
Chair representative, so what
we'll do is some oftentimes in a
project, if we are purchasing
some, if we're purchasing
properties, and there might be a
parcel that could be utilized
for contractors staging, we'll
make that available to them and
we'll put that in the bid
documents, but typically we
don't do that. Typically we let
the contractors identify their
own areas.
Mr. Chair Representative, that
may be part of the staging area
plans for the project that the
county is doing near the Rio
Bravo Bridge area and so we
could check in with uh Mr.
Archuleta to see if that that
project is tied to that staging
area, because at this point, we
have been awarded to the
contractor yet.
Thank you, Miss Sherman, that
would be helpful because people
don't necessarily know one from
the other, they just know what's
gonna happen. And so I, I think
that would be helpful to to the
affected legislators in in the
area so they can pass it on to
their constituents as well. And
lastly, Mr. Chairman, can you
give an update on what's
happened with the interchange at
uh uh for that would serve me
soul because I heard that the
money was moved from that
project, there was supposed to
be funding already allocated or
largely allocated and that it's
been moved to another.
area of of the city.
Or
So, uh, Mr. Chair
Representative, there was a part
of my uh coming to Department of
Transportation and commitment
for funding that project, both
on the private side and on the
Department of Transportation
side. And so it's been done now
as a study. And so now the
consultant and uh leadership
from Mrso del Sol and the cog
are working on the traffic and
gross projections for that
region so that they can finish
up the study. Those numbers are
going to be integral to
determining whether or not
the interchange is warranted
given the capacity of the
current roads, um, in that area.
And so that process is underway.
I've had several meetings with
all of those organizations to
kind of speed things up so that
we can get it done and determine
what kind of capacity needs we
need there, which will be
important for federal highway to
essentially um acknowledge that
the interchange is necessary at
that at that place.
So was German secretary, so, so
that I'm clear, there were not
actual capital dollars allocated
to that project only $30?
Um, Mr. Chair Representative,
the commitment from DOT was
generally for the project, and I
don't believe that it's limited
to study design or construction,
and so it could be utilized at
any point in the process,
including going to final design
on what the project would look
like. Lastly, Mr. Chairman and
uh secretary, if you would do me
a huge favor and email me the
funding that's, that's
Associated. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, Senator Shchindo. Oh,
thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Senator and the
Quintana for the presentation.
Just quick, can you give me an
update uh on highway 4 bypass.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator
Shindo, uh, we did in fact meet
with the, with the pillow this
morning, um, just kind of
strategize on how we're going to
move forward with uh several
grant applications that they're
that we're trying to go after.
um, and discuss where we are in
the design. So we're currently,
um, we're gonna move forward
with the design we, we're
working on a raised grant
application with them that is
due in December in December, end
of December, um, and hope, with
the hopes of that grant
application, and then I, I, I
believe they're going
another bridge grant for um uh
sovereign tribal bridge ground,
yes. So, um, with those two
grants, we're hoping to make
that project whole and move it
forward. And Mr. Chair, Senator,
this morning we volunteered you
to come up with the match for
the grant, and so we'll text you
that dollar amount a little bit
later. Sure, yeah, we're working
on the budget right now, so
that'd be good. Uh, just, just
uh, another follow-up question.
So I know that on this list that
you presented on the uh uh final
sheet uh on district.
It's not on the priority list,
uh, uh, so, and I know that
that's 90% design and you got
those that are, are dirty and 60
on the priority list.
So, how does that work? And then
I know that last year I believe
the governor appropriated
several million dollars to the
project. So where does that sit
in relation to, I guess, of my
referring back to your uh
The the chart, the, uh, I guess
the fiscal restraint, you said
something, it's a six-year
process. So are we, um, uh, Mr.
Chair and secret, we just kind
of putting money aside, you
know, uh, until that time period
where it moves up.
Or the other question I had was
like, I know that in your
comments with regards to your
example on
District one, you got 65
million, uh,
And then that moved up.
So I know that the tribe, I
believe my conversation with
them, uh, in September they
submitted a proposal for 25
million for the rich portion of
it. So if the tribe received
that.
Then there's that project move
up.
Because now there's money to
leverage.
Or if we put money up,
At least some torture, and when
we do our application,
Or federal funding does our
portion also help leverage that
piece. Does it work both ways or
is it just a one way?
Mr. Chair Senator, yeah, that's
a great question, and, and those
that question you asked relates
directly to the two examples I
pointed out in District one,
where we received grant funding
for new infrastructure and then
it floats that project up in the
priority list. Otherwise, what
you're looking at here in the
district is the priorities
around existing infrastructure
for the state of New Mexico,
right? And so one example of
that aligns really well with New
Mexico 4 would be the border
highway connector, because it
wasn't an existing piece of
infrastructure until the federal
grant, it probably wasn't the
district one priority. After the
grant was received, knowing that
we needed to come in to get that
project done for the federal
grant. It floats to the top as
uh infrastructure priority for
that district. OK, I appreciate
it. Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
just to make uh several comments
before I, uh, yelled.
You know, this project, you
know, it's been very important
to the Pueblo. We working on us
for 20 some years.
You know, this piece of road.
The state condemned basically
and just built the road.
Through our reservation lands in
19 whatever happened. So there
is no, they literally have a, I
think, or right away is really
From the end of the, what do you
call it, the pigment, not even
the fence line.
And, and so forth, so, so I
think to the reservation, so
this has been important. We're
working on it for 20 years. The
first money that came was from
the Feds Senator DeMini, and
Beerman appropriate, I think
like 5 million back in the early
2000s or maybe late 90, I can't
remember to get the uh the
design going in and then 4 years
ago, I think I appropriated 3
million to the DLT to get the
design complete.
Uh, and, and so in the meantime,
The federal government has in
the 90s, named Behemoth
Mountains of National Recreation
Area.
And then most recently you got
the virus because they are
preserved.
So that traffic through Highway
4 that goes right smack through
our village, as you know, and
it's a narrow village, and so
the only houses that can be
built are along the highway, so
it's just gonna get more
congested.
And, and, you know, we've had
people killed with people, we
got kids running across the
floor, I think the fastest a car
that has been clocked through
that it's like almost 8/80 miles
an hour on the 35 miles zone.
And, and so this is really
important, so I just want to
make that comment because, you
know, and yesterday, if you
listened to the uh state of uh
historical Society's report.
The number of traffic and the
visits to the Hamish State
Monument is 20%.
And the revenue they generate is
30% of their budget, if you look
at that chart again.
So the amount of traffic that's
going up on Highway 4 to the
Haus Mountains, and it's also
what they call the uh
Uh, trail or or the scenic route
between Albuquerque and Santa Fe
Los Alamos. So the amount of
traffic the, the, the Pueblo has
now been facing it's just, I
mean, I think a recent Fiesta,
it was cars backed up 6 miles,
literally from Santaido past our
village.
You know, it it it's just crazy
and of course when we have our
ceremony, sometimes we have to.
You know, block the road for
1520, 30 minutes.
We're not gonna tell people
what's going on, so they just
sit there and wait.
And so we've gotten a lot of
support from either the
communities that the bypass
would be great, so that way we
can do our thing and the public
that's going up and down the
mountains can just freely
You know, uh, go by and take
care of whatever they need to do
back and forth, so Mr. Chairman,
thank you for allowing me to say
that because I think this is
really important project for,
for the, for the community there
and for health, safety, and many
other reasons.
Thank you. And as we wrap this
up. How many in, and you may
have to get this data for and in
the house in in the
representatives of the house are
really into data, so we're gonna
get some data-driven questions
and follow up with where we're
gonna go. How many grants have
we applied for and how many have
we been awarded in in our grant
writing process, what's our
losses, what's our wins, what's
the dollar amount, um.
We're gonna want a lot of data.
Uh, I'm glad to see that you
have a LIDAR, um, a lot of other
states are requiring data
collection or data management,
right? So how many of these
vehicles do you have going down
the road today?
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, we currently
only contract with one, yeah,
this, this that one data
collection van is able to
provide us all the data we need,
um, like say annually on our NHS
and on every other year on non
HHS and and then.
Why doesn't the state buy their
own.
But Mr. Chair, um, I, uh, we
die, that's a good question. I
mean, right now we have the
expertise to, I mean, I, I don't
know that that this company
itself is, you know, they're,
they're the, they're the expert
in data collection of pavement,
um, collection, but I'll let Mr.
Padilla, Mr. Chairman, it's a
great question. So when the
company actually came and and
presented to the department, um,
we were in, we were actually
entertaining buying our own van,
but because of the, the
technology on those vans is
rapidly just
like every year something else,
we wouldn't be able to keep up
with it as much, so the cost of
owning our own van would have
been, you know, the, the annual
upkeep and all the new software
that we have to add and make
sure the cameras are, the laser
and the best cameras and to be
able to detect the how many
inches of the of deflection and
failures, um, was just a little
too much so we could handle at
the time. Now, as hopefully
maybe these vans kind of uh
stabilize and far as technology
goes, because I know we're using
LIDA and that's a pretty
stabilized um application.
I think maybe the price could
come down and we could entertain
it. But at the time we did, it
was just the cost was too, too
much. I, I mean, uh, this is the
most important tool that you can
use on a road. Yes, I mean.
Whether Fortnite, whatever road
you drive on, this is the most
important to other states are
requiring in statutes that you
do this data collection, I mean,
Arizona, Colorado have moved to
it, um, data on, on equipment
and vehicles, it's been
recorded. I mean, my son does
paving it's no secret, doesn't
do anything for DOT and paving,
but the way they can set grades,
all that, the quality of the
work, everything is recorded
electronically. if we're really
gonna get a real road report.
and not a, a step of uh like
this road and I like that road.
This is the data that
legislators want to see in their
district, right?
I think there's a payment where
the potholes exist, where
there's damage signs where
there's damaged guardrail, all
that. This is the technology
that's going to induce our labor
force. You weren't here for
other meetings, but, you know,
the labor force is shrinking.
It's not growing.
You're not gonna get people to
drive the roads and, and say I
counted 84 pieces of guard rail
broken or or 29 potholes and no
telling, it'll never get the
thickness.
And so technology is gonna have
to drive your agency.
And as we want to repair and do
maintenance on roads. I'd tell
you.
Data collection, data, this
vehicle right here.
It is the most important tool
you're gonna have to legislators
can see, you know,
My I-40 road trip from Gallup to
Albuquerque reports on the light
iron in this is where our
preservation work is being done.
There's a lot of work being
done, but, you know, the
contractors come in and there's
a pothole there, but they don't
know the soil needs to be
stabilized and they're just
milling and overlying and it's
nice and black, but the pothole
comes right back, and that's a
problem in and this is a piece
of equipment that, that you're
gonna have to need so that you
can.
Actually, GPS pinpoint.
Within 1 inch of where that
pothole is and, and fix those
roads correctly cause I don't
know if we're ever gonna have
enough money anymore to, to just
rebuild roads.
Mr. Chairman, I, I, I fail to
mention it's probably the
biggest part of the of the
contract with this vendor is
the, the resources needed to
scrub the data once you actually
get the information from the
van, um, and that's a whole
another piece that at the time
we didn't have internally to do.
I mean, that's pretty simple. I
mean, reports are generated. I
mean we can GPS track our
vehicles, you know, did you go
down I-40 at 65 miles an hour.
I, I know if my employee did
that, right? You went 105, I
know he did that. Know what
time.
what point in in disseminating
that information is just so easy
nowadays, you could just
promptly probably create you a
report, right?
It does roads maybe you could
send us all an email report
where this vehicle's been and
what the road conditions were in
those areas, so we know, you
know, if he drove down Rio
Bravo.
I mean, it may not give you
traffic congestion, but it'll
give you
Blain with and turning and
everything else, and so.
I, I just caution you on
technology is gonna have to
drive that, especially for the
legislature, because the
legislators, legislators love to
say I want this road fixed or or
I want this road done in in.
You know, hopefully it's not in
front of their house. Um,
But that has happened. And, and
so,
We're gonna have to fix the
employee prom that we have in in
technology is gonna have to
drive that.
I wish we could say we can
create so many jobs, but there's
just not the workforce out there
to do that.
Um
Let me ask you some other
questions. Uh, uh, you know,
every year we come to the
legislature and we want a back
balance and we want more money
for this and more money for
that. We don't have enough to do
roads and.
And so I think the legislatures
kind of
Kind of
Not forced it on the, the
department, but said, you know,
these are road suggestions they
wanted to do, but this, that
vehicle will tell us whether
that road needs to be done.
That, that will put us in, in a
place where you guys can operate
where you really need to because
You know, Ricky, and you, you
did this to me in Hobbs, you
told him move money from from
that area to do the Montgomery
Interchange and, and my phone
blew up from guys in New Mexico,
Migos saying, why did you move
the money? Well, we didn't move
the money, you guys moved the
money.
And that you hung in upon us and
he said, oh, they want 6 lanes
in I-40. I've never mentioned
that six wings. It will never
work in I-40.
We talk about grants and
studies, and there's a study for
another interchange in gallop
that lands at below grade and
the water will never flow when
you spend money on these studies
that
Aren't attainable.
Let's spend money on technology,
new technology, to, to get
things done so we can say,
really, is this really the best
use of our dollars.
Um
But I think you're gonna have
to, we're gonna have to do as
legislatures, especially in the
in the step that's the matching,
which is the matching one, the
skipper, the tripper, the
Chipper, the one where they get,
you get 5% they match. You match
95%.
Um, so Mr. Chair, the, oh, the
TPS TPF. I, I mean, Gallup never
applied and like you guys are
stupid not to apply when you can
get a million dollars for.
for
5%, 50,000, that that's, and
they finally started applying,
but they're not doing major
runways, they're doing roads
inside residential areas, um,
but grants applied and never got
anything.
And so as we look forward, I
think the legislatures now is
just gonna say, you know, here's
roads that need to get done.
This truck needs to be
everywhere. So you can
It does mean done, it doesn't
need to be done.
Well, what's the matter in the
area, what's not, but we're
gonna look hard, I think I asked
you guys the last time to give
me a list of where money was
moved from one road to the other
and transferred. I never got
that list. I, I like to see that
list so I don't have to subpoena
the list, um.
Mr. Cha, I, I did send you an
email about that, um,
specifically it was ARPA funding
tied in Mexico 31128, and the
development
The development schedule did
not, did not align with the,
with the having to spend the
ARPA funding. There was ARPA
funding on identified from
Montgomery Comanche. So we swe,
we switched funding, but we both
projects are whole.
Yeah, I don't think that was a
different question that was
like, oh, the ARPA money has to
be spent under contracting in
what, less than 30, 45 days.
That was the money that was
misture. That was the money that
was moved. So what I want to see
is a list of, of where money's
been moved and where money's
been transferred if it was set
with the study and it was going
to be built and it was the
Montgomery or Jefferson
Interchange and and money had to
be moved to another from another
spot to do that. I wanna see all
those, those movements with
money and, and
how it happened and especially
in the road construction cause
Mr. Chair, we can get to that
list but it's gonna be robust
because we, we do, I mean, we'll
move money depending on the
color and timelines of having to
spend it down or whether or not
a project gets delayed because
of some things that are out of
control of the design and maybe
perhaps right away or utility
takes critical path. At that
point, we do have to kind of
swap funds to make sure that we
don't lose those funds, bring
projects up in the stiff or move
them back to pending. We've been
having to do that. We, that's
something that we do regularly.
I, I completely agree, and I can
give you the perfect example
from got to hate to to Window
Rock, right? Once they pulled up
the road, they found the soil
conditions were not, but then
DOT held him up for a month,
making a decision on what they
were gonna do, and so that
road's now not gonna get
finished till probably the
spring of next year. And so
that's a major, that's a 4 lane.
road, it's not a highway, I
think maybe a highway, but it's
a 4 lane road that has heavy
traffic on it and then it
converts it to and goes back up
to 4 that. Those are things that
are not within your purview that
once you pull up something, but
it's something that LIDA will
tell you.
And so that technology would
have told you what you needed,
what, what the road conditions
maybe not the soil condition,
but you get a core sample of
that, um, that need to happen,
but I think we're gonna have to
get a lot more efficient. I
mean, we're gonna work hard for
you guys. I mean, every
legislator wants good rodents in
the morning. The council of
delegates from Church Rock, who
was
Coming home from Newcombe, who
hit a pothole at 6 in the
morning, I mean.
Who's the first person they call
their legislator, right? He
said, I don't know what I had. I
thought I ran over somebody,
something I pulled over and I
didn't see anything in the road
and in my car shook all the way
to Gal.
And he says, where do I apply
for the damage deal, and I told
him you gotta go online and
apply and, and, but that stuff
that that
Lydar would tell you.
And if it takes 10 units to
drive across the state, I mean,
those are, those are important
things cause the most dangerous
place for a worker is on the
interstate.
And so if we can keep them safe
and, and even if we had passed
quality control this year. Did
we get it set up with all the
counting so we could.
Reduce speeds and and what was
that issue where we had to do a
county by county so we can get
some safety for our state
employees working on the
interstates or construction
workers. Uh, Mr. Chair, we're
going to ask you this coming
session for the authority to do
that on any of our roads.
I mean, safety is, is so key. I
mean,
I, I just see it on I-40, I
mean.
How a semi turns over on top of
a bridge with chemicals and
shuts the interstate down, or
how it turns over between a
barrier and the bridge. I mean,
they got to have an art and the
skill to try to do some of this
stuff, and, and, but it just
shuts us down and and
And we got to figure that out,
but we're gonna help you as much
as we can. We know what your
priorities are, and I'm gonna
tell you lightDA needs to happen
in areas, so legislators can
pick areas.
That we really need and that's
really not our job, but
legislators love good roads and
in there, so we're gonna have to
do that. So just make sure that
I'm not a text message string of
25 businessmen and hobs in the
area that legislators are moving
money when we're not the ones
moving the money.
Uh, we're not the ones saying we
want, I'm not the one saying I
want a 6 lane road, it it, if
you just add the bridges from
Galop to Grants. I did the rough
math at 60 million a piece. I
mean, it's, it's almost 8
billion to do the bridges and
then
And then then you gotta build
the road.
And so just things that can be
attainable, let's worry about
what we can attain now a, a
dream that we have because it's
never gonna come to fruition.
Not the only other 6 lane
interstate on the I-40 maybe in
California less you're going
through a major city, I mean.
Um
So we're here to help this just
work together, but plan on
getting this a long list of
roads and getting those wool.
Maybe have LLC and Joey get you
updated with the list of roads
that's happening. Joey's not
listening to.
We'll see how long it takes him
to pick up.
Joey, did you say you're buying
lunch? Oh yeah,
um.
So get those to Joey, get those
swaps and, and so.
I appreciate your time.
OK. Thank you, guys. We're jo,
remember, we're almost back in
two weeks. Everybody have a good
Thanksgiving, have a safe trip
