get started because we don't
want to get too far behind.
Taking a lunch break has turned
out to be a little
Take a little more time than we
had anticipated.
But we have this afternoon a
presentation by the New Mexico
Chiropractic Association.
And I think, um, representative
uh Hochman B Hill.
We'll be making some comments.
Probably right after your
presentation.
She's in in Santa Fe at the LFC
hearing.
But she's arranged to do it via
Zoom, so we'll hear her
comments. I guess she's carrying
the bill for you? Yeah.
OK. Well, go ahead and get
started, introduce yourselves,
and we'll get started.
You, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you committee members, and
thank you for all the great work
you do for this uh great state
of New Mexico. I'm, I'm Doctor
Robert Jones. I'm a past
president of the American
Chiropractic Association and
chair, uh, a past chair of the
board of trustees for the
University of Western states,
one of our leading and
progressive institutions for our
profession.
In past president of New Mexico
Chiropractic Association. I have
practiced here since '93. I
practiced in the
multidisciplinary practice where
there is osteopath, nurse
practitioners, PAs, and
chiropractors.
This is Doctor Moore, uh, the
current president of the New
Mexico Chiropractic Association.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, thank you for your
time as Doctor Jones said, I'm,
uh, JC Moore. I am the, um,
current president of the New
Mexico Chiropractic Association.
I have a private practice in
Albuquerque, where I serve as,
uh, the clinic director and a
provider there and uh, we thank
you for your time today.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Doctor
Michael Pritham. I'm a
chiropractic physician in
private practice here in
Albuquerque.
Since 2010 and I work within
A federally qualified health
center called First Nations
Community Health Source, um, uh,
I treat patients in the homeless
outreach program there and uh
I'm credentialed within the
University of New Mexico's pain
clinic through the Department of
Anesthesia and I, um, chaired
the integrative medicine
committee for the New Mexico
overdose prevention and pain
management advisory Committee.
Thank you for having us.
Mr. Chair, uh, members of the
committee, I'm just gonna
briefly kind of go over why do
we want to build like this and,
and where is it going and um for
some of you, you know that this
is not the first iteration of
this bill. This bill has been
before you several times. The
last, the last time was in 2017.
So we all know that healthcare
is getting more integrated and
team-oriented.
chiropractic physicians,
especially our graduates are
choosing to become a part of a
larger healthcare systems that
are evolving and developing.
And for them, we need to also
evolve with our um skills and
the tools that we can use to
assist our patients.
Even the, the physicians that
are solo practitioners now are
getting demands on by their
patients to do more because it's
harder to access primary care.
And they know that we have
primary care training and we're
not practicing at the top of our
education.
So the intent of this bill is to
help with the shortage that we
have here in primary care. We
know that the medical schools
are only graduating 2 to 4% of
their graduate students in
primary care.
And I believe that it was in the
um Santa Fe, New Mexican just
last weekend there was an
article about primary care.
In, um, in New Mexico, and they
were talking that mid-levels,
there are 4 to
for them for every one physician
level primary care provider.
War
education is in primary care,
and we're tested through 4
different national boards and
all the conditions that are in a
chiropractor's office is a
primary care conditions.
And so we, we have intensive
training in this area already in
our first doctorate degree.
And
When I use the term first
doctorate degree at the national
level under the Social Security
Act. There's 5 listed first
doctorate degree providers.
There's the, uh, medical
doctors.
The osteopathic, the
chiropractors, the doctors and
chiropractic, the dentists and
the podiatrist.
So at our level, when you take a
look at those statutes, you see
that we're under the physician
category.
And the expansion that we're
doing here, the with.
Non-prohibition language is is
is also occurring at the
national level at this present
time, we do have some
prohibition language within our
definition of physician
nationally that.
Is getting great support
nationally to to pass and change
that to have it just occur
through scope at individual
states.
I believe that every county in
New Mexico is underserved in
primary care.
Including the Albuquerque,
Bernalio area. And so we have to
think outside of the box of what
pathways can we have and what
pathways can we move forward
with to help with this shortage.
I remember in 2017 when we
presented in front of you and
then we had the opposition said
that we don't need any more
primary care that we can handle
any situations that come.
And because what we were saying
at that time is we already have
a shortage and it's projected to
even have more shortage and we
can step into that role for
those in our profession who want
to do that.
Well, COVID-19 came and we saw
that this state is severely
underserved in primary care. And
so I think we have real time
knowledge of the crisis
situation that we're in. And so
looking at other pathways in
which to help out with primary
care, um, is something that
everyone's looking at and to
that end.
Um, Janice Torres, the president
of Blue Cross Blue Shield
reached out to me before the
last session and said, Hey, Rob,
are you guys gonna do that
primary care bill again because
we need it.
We need
Physician level providers to
step up to the plate and do more
primary care, and we know, I
know, she said to me that you
guys have that knowledge. And
so,
For you to take some more
education.
To be able to use more of the
tools that they use in primary
care only makes sense.
So the bill that you see before
you.
was actually drafted in the last
session, um, we had sent it
through Blue Cross Blue Shield,
um, and their lobbyists and
their medical um team looked at
it and they were quite happy
with it, and they said that they
would support it.
We weren't able to get it on the
call and so we're moving forward
to do it in this session right
here.
So what is in this bill? There's
uh lots of discussion about it
and I'm just not going to get
into the weeds. I'll let you ask
questions if you want, but
basically what the bill is is
there's no mandatory language in
here whatsoever for any
chiropractic physician to go
down and do any advanced
procedures like going into
primary care if they're happy
and want to practice in the
manner of which we have
traditionally practiced.
That's great. All professions
have many pathways in which they
can practice. The nurse prac,
the nursing has regular nursing
and nurse practitioners at the
master's level, PhD level, we
have the medical community, the
osteopathic community, have
many, many different types of
provider groups within their
profession. There's no reason
that our profession can't have
the same.
I think it's really important,
um, that everyone understand
that our first doctorate degree
is already at a doctorate level.
So that's greater than the nurse
practitioners and the PAs and
the total amount of educational
hours which with with regards to
the didactic hours and the
clinical hours. So we even
within our first doctor degree,
we have at least 1000 hours of
clinical experience.
And like I said previously,
every condition that a that a
chiropractic physician deals
with is a primary care
condition.
So we have a lot of base
knowledge in primary care just
with our regular practices.
The evolving um primary care
shortages allowing the
chiropractic physician to enter
into other, um, health systems.
So they have now entered into
the VA system. They've, um,
entered into, um, the Native
American um system in in
different parts of the United
States to help out within with
primary care conditions.
We have now had a section where
we've been doing, um, advanced
practices that gave us a uh a
limited formulary and the
ability to do certain and
injectables. And that's been, I
believe that passed in 2006, so
it's almost been 20 years in
which we have been doing this,
and I can remember when we first
did this, it was a concern about
the safety of the citizens of
New Mexico. To my understanding,
the last time we looked, there's
been one.
Reportable event in 20 years.
And the other sign that shows
that we are very safe
practitioners is that our
malpractice hasn't changed.
Our malpractice is still the
same as if we were not doing any
of these advanced procedures,
and the reason is, is the
malpractice is not having to
deal with adverse events that
are occurring within our
offices.
So we are very safe option also.
Our profession.
Naturally is conservative first
before we go into more advanced
type of procedures or advanced
type of planning. And so with
that,
We're a fairly safe option.
This new bill adds a second
level of the advanced practice,
and that would be those that
could practice in a primary care
setting.
So under the first it would be
the same, um, continued didactic
hours that we had for the first
program for the APCs.
And the second would be in an
increased 500 hours of clinical
experience within a primary care
setting. So along with our first
doctorate degree with primary
care training and examination
through our four national
boards. We're going to put on
top of that another 500 hours.
It's very specific to just using
in the pharmacology that we
would be expanding into, and
that's the only area that we're
expanding into. We already have
the rights to do.
all the other things. No, no,
this description says is this
current that you have 1000 hours
of supervised clinical training,
you would be adding 500 for this
new level and the new level
would be is a new level the 1 or
the 2, right? Um, Mr. Chair,
that, that would be level 2,
level 2, OK, thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Um
You'll see that language in
there is that our education
would be through, um, an
incredited institution of higher
education that language that I,
that we put in there was how
drafted by Doctor Joe Brimhall,
who at the time was the
president of a health university
and sat on the chia, um, board,
which is the national regulatory
Board.
For the regulatory boards. It
was also the uh the president of
the Northwest regulatory Board.
And he said, this is the
language you want to use. And
the reason why to use that
language is that our education
then could be in any institution
that is accredited for the type
of education we want. That means
We would be able to through our
board be able to do it at a
medical school, osteopathic
school, nurse practitioner
school, chiropractic school. Um,
we didn't want to have it
limited to one environment,
because we know that the
healthcare systems are changing,
and they're all integrated and
there's cross pollination. So
that's going to be the future.
And so the language that we put
in there is to represent that
futuristic view that we know is
coming down on health care.
The trends within my profession,
especially the um progressive
schools is to increase the
clinical experiences and they
are now developing, um,
New experiences that in the
medical community, they might
call, um, residencies. We don't
have classical residencies in
our, in our institutions because
we haven't branched out like
we're doing now, but that is
something that is occurring. I
chaired a national committee on
residencies and still sit on
that, um, committee and so.
Our whole profession and the
leaders in our profession and
the institutional leaders are
all moving in the direction of
having these more clinical
experiences.
The other thing that I want to
say to everyone here, uh, is
that we're willing to talk with
anyone, um, with regards to the
stakeholders and we all, we
always have in all our bills, we
have talked to um the medical
society and I believe we have,
they've reached out to us and
we're going to be talking with
them soon.
And any other stakeholder who
would like to talk to us about
any concerns that they have.
Um, so I think in a nutshell
that's, uh, that is without
getting in the weeds, the, the
bill. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Did
either of you want to add
anything, or you're just
available for questions.
For questions, OK, very good.
Well, let's go to the committee.
Um,
Representative Chasey, why don't
we start with you? Do you have
any questions on this or
comments?
Just a reminder, 3 minutes for
questions and answers as close
as we can.
Thank you, Mister Chair. Um, I
think what I heard you say is
that no chiropractor will need
to be one way or the other. He
or she can practice exactly how.
Here she wished to do so, right?
If this were enacted.
Mr. Chair, um, Madam
Representative, um, that is
correct in this bill, everything
is voluntary. They can choose to
go to stay at where they are
right now or if they want to do
any of these advance. My, my
belief is being part of a, the
trustee of a university in
health sciences that the newer
graduates want this, and the
schools that I have been talking
to, this will become a program
with them. They will, they'll
just continue on.
the institution that they're
graduating from to fulfill these
requirements that we were, uh,
recommending here. Thank you.
um, and I just want to mention,
um, two things, Mr. Chair. One
is that like Senator Bill
O'Neill,
I've always felt sort of
frustrated about our being the
arbiters of the scope of
practice. We really aren't
capable. I we're not, I don't
guess we're capable. We can do
it, but we're really not the
ones who are qualified to do so.
And uh I remember Representative
John Heaton always said we
needed some.
Expert panel. I'm not suggesting
turning it over to regulation
and licensing, however, um, and
I, I, I had um my 2nd knee
replacement in Milwaukee this
summer because my doctor from
here went to Milwaukee and so I
followed him, but in Milwaukee,
um,
Oh, the PT clinic, the clinic
that I went to when I was still
there, um, the owner of that
clinic had practiced in, I
believe, Arkansas, and he was
telling me that.
And some states, they follow the
model of the US Army. However,
recognizing that's a limited
population of healthy, mostly
young men, but they use the PTs
as the first entry into the
system. And the physical
therapists are the ones who say,
uh, this one needs to see a
physician. This one needs an
X-ray and, and so forth. And,
um,
They, they're not the only
state. Arkansas is not the only
state that does that. But, um,
I, I, I do think a lot of um
different kinds of practitioners
have a lot of value to add to
primary care. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Representative Martinez, you're
next.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Very interesting presentation. I
have a couple of questions. I've
had 31 years in the veterans
system.
Where exactly?
Or your colleague's practicing
in the VA system.
Mr. Chair, um,
Mr. Representative, so there
throughout the VAs we do have um
a chiropractor in the VA here.
It's Doctor Alan Dunaway, um.
They have been, there is a law
that passed.
I think around 10 years ago,
maybe over 10 years ago, that um
stated that all VA's had to have
chiropractic physicians as part
of their team.
And so over that period of time,
they have been hired more and
more and more.
Um
I'm sure that there's some VA
hospitals that don't have a
chiropractic physician, but my
understanding that almost all of
them have at least one at this
point in time, the major senator
centers like um the ones in
Minneapolis, um, on the east
coast have multiple
chiropractors.
I, I agree with that. There have
been chiropractic care.
Throughout the country for the
last 20 years.
What I'm asking is you made
reference that.
Advanced chiropractic care is
available in the VA system.
And I'm trying to find out.
Where the advanced chiropractic
care is available. uh, Mr. Chair
Representative, um, I did not
intend to give that impression
when I was saying that. I do not
know of any that's not true. I
think there is advanced. I know
there's advanced practice
chiropractors and the VA doctor.
Dunaway is one of those. I do
not know whether or not they're
able to practice to the top of
their education, um, with regard
to that advanced practice, so I
apologize if that seemed to
misleading.
It was not intended.
OK, thank you for that. I'll
move on to my next two
questions. Um, you said that.
You go through a 100,000 hours
of training and if you want.
To be level 2, it's an
additional 500 hours of
training.
Compared to
Medical doctors are going
through between 6 and 7000
hours.
So I don't, can you tell me why
the discrepancy in in the amount
of training.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative,
that's the total hours within
the medical community. If you
look for ours is between 5000
and 5500 total hours, so.
Um, I don't mean to cut you off,
but she's about to buzz me and I
wanna get my question.
I had a long discussion with my
primary care physician last
week.
He talked a lot about
residencies and having to go
through residencies.
Or you telling me that these
chiropractors are gonna do a
residency somewhere.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative, I
would consider that 500 hours of
clerkship. We can, you know,
talk about semantics of what
residency versus his clerkship,
but that's what the intent of
that 500 hours is a clerkship,
which is what a residency. Seems
like quite a shortcut, um.
But I'll leave that for further
discussion.
Uh, thank you, sir. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Senator Sudiolous.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. This is a
really um interesting proposal,
um, and I think it does, I
I'm a fan of chiropractic care,
um, but I don't really have any,
any questions about this
particular proposal at this
time, but thank you, um, I'm
gonna give it more thought and
more research. Thank you.
Thanks, Senator Representative
Chavez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, um.
I really haven't had a chance to
go through the whole bill.
Um, but one of the questions
that I do have is in terms of um
injecting.
Dispensing dangerous drugs. What
a dangerous drugs are we talking
about?
Mr. Chair, um, Madam
representative. So we have
already for 20 years been doing
injectables. And so, um,
anything that you inject into
the skin, under the skin,
including water is considered a
dangerous drug.
And so that's by classification
because of the injectable.
So the.
Things that we, the agents that
we have been doing now is for
things that will help with
tendonitis, um, injuries to
muscles, trigger points, things
that um are very common injuries
that we see within our primary
care settings as a chiropractor.
Um, and so all we're saying is
we would might do more things
than that as in the primary care
setting. And a good example of
that would be like vitamin B12,
which is a common injectable.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I'm, I'm going to go now to, uh,
Representative Hochman v. Hill,
who is apparently available now
to make some comments.
On this bill she's the sponsor
or will be the sponsor. Is she
on?
Thank you very much, uh, Mr.
Chairman and members of the
committee, um, Madam Chair as
well. Uh, thank you for the
opportunity. It sounds like the
doctors have made a, a, a great
case for why this scope of
practice bill is uh necessary
and and a very important time
for our state. It's no secret
that um we have a dearth of a
primary health care providers
and health.
healthcare, especially in the
rural areas of our state
generally, and uh this bill
would essentially help us to
fill that need and to ensure
that New Mexicans throughout the
state have access to primary
care, wherever they are,
whenever they need it, and we
feel that this is a um good
compromise in a way that uh
allows the chiropractors to
expand their scope, but in a
very safe and and proven manner,
and I appreciate
the committee's time this
afternoon in considering the
bill and um I look forward to
presenting it, uh, as we grow
closer to the 60 days 60 day
session.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Representative uh.
We, we'll go ahead and make sure
that this is one of the bills
that gets considered for
endorsement. Is that, is that
something you'd be seeking?
Absolutely, Mr. Chairman, we
very much appreciate that. OK.
Thank you.
So we'll go now to
representative Ferrari.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, can
you tell me, um, the
chiropractic board is not
overseen by the medical board.
Is that correct?
Mr. Chair, Madam Representative,
that is correct. We have, I
believe, the oldest board in New
Mexico. Our board was developed
before the medical board.
OK, I'm sorry, just yes or no is
fine because I've only got a
short amount of time. OK, we do
not have oversight
and so also there's no one
overseeing, um, you know, uh the
process of procedures, the
certification, your clerkship,
things like that from the
medical board.
Yeah.
Mr. Chair, um, Madam
Representative, that is correct.
OK. And is one of the drugs
dangerous drugs you're talking
about is injecting like
steroids. Mr. Chair, madam
Representative, that would be
not the case within the first
level of advanced practice, but
in the second level what we're
requesting is anything that
would be used in a regular
primary care office, and I do
believe that steroids would be
one of those. OK. And then also,
you're talking about doing
surgeries to
you.
Mr. Chair, Madam Representative,
again, the term surgery, um, is
used even with.
Using an injectable, they use
the term it's under the surgical
codes, at least it used to be,
or if you take a skin tag off,
it's considered surgery or
address a wart that's considered
surgery. So our language in
there again is anything that's
appropriate within our training
in a primary care setting.
OK, um, I'm sorry, I think this
is, um, as.
Uh
Representative Martinez pointed
out that um.
This is kind of skipping a step
and that um,
Giving, you know, trying to
accomplish, you know, having
more a scope of practice, um,
without the oversight of a
medical board and, you know,
making sure that things are
going to be safe for people. We
don't want to increase the risks
that are already, um, you know,
medal is, you know, um.
Going to, you know, go up again,
but also to make sure that um
people are safe in their, um,
Healthcare, it's kind of like
we've seen other things where
you know you're saying even with
social workers, if you can go
down to high school level and
not have the experience and the
training, um, then we're going
to have a plethora of problems,
so I, um, don't agree with this
and
think it's just going beyond.
Thank you.
I
Representative Herndon, we'll go
to you.
So thank you, Mr. Chair, and,
and thank you presenters as I
listen to your presentation,
you, you align the additional
500 hours that would, that um
Chiropractors would be utilizing
to what is currently received in
a residency program.
So my concern and, and I would
like for you to explain in a
residency program, you're still
over, there's oversight by a
licensed certified medical
doctor.
Um
And I am trying to understand
how you think those two are
aligned.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Madam
Representative, again, I want to
be very clear. I did not use the
term that we are doing a
residency. The term is clerkship
that I'm using. It would be akin
to already the nurse
practitioners and the
physician's assistants are doing
the exact same thing that we're
proposing here.
And so if you all feel it was
safe for the nurse practitioners
and for the, the physician's
assistants, they have less
overall hours of education than
we do within the thousands of
hours, and so we're not skipping
anything. We're just adding on
to a knowledge base that we
already have. And the clerkship
hours were adding on very
specific to the areas that we
feel that.
would pose questions of our
skill level for the public.
for their safety. That's the
reason of adding that extra 500
hours after we already have 1000
hours, um, within a clinical
setting.
And so, um, I hope that answered
your question.
Well, it did not because I think
you use the term that the
additional 500 hours are
equivalent to what a resident
would be receiving, not that you
are asking for residencies, but
I, I think I understand. The
other item that I'm asking you
is for a chiropractor. Tell me
exactly what is the level of
schooling? How many years are
you there?
For
No,
but I haven't had the
opportunity to read it, so I'd
like you to tell me and Madam
Representative, the typical
chiropractic uh program today
has a 4 year undergrad and a
five-year calendar equivalent
once you get into your doctorate
degree. What does that mean a
calendar equivalent.
Um,
within some of our programs, you
can choose not to take any time
off.
And so you could finish that in
3 1/3 to 4 years rather than 5
years. And, but under the
accreditation, it's considered a
five-year calendar.
One other item that you brought
up is that with respect to
malpractice, you indicated that
that had not changed in the in
the number of years. Why do you
think it wouldn't change if you
were to expand your practice.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Madam
Representative, I was pointing
out that we've already been
practicing with, um, controlled
substances and, and dangerous um
chemicals with regards to
injectables and our malpractice
has not changed, and when I'm um
intending when I say that is
it's, it's reflects the industry
believes that we are safe,
because if they not are
malpractice would be going up.
And it's not and so we've been
doing a level of advanced
practice already and there's
been no change in our
malpractice. That's what I was
pointing out, so I guess my, uh,
if you are already doing the
level of work, then why do you
need to come to ask for advanced
practice if you're already doing
it.
Mr. Chair, Madam Representative,
because we have a limited
formulary at this point in time.
And that limited formula
prevents us from being able to
treat conditions that we could
help out in with the primary
care shortage.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
Representative Kate.
Senator Pope.
Thank you, Mister Chair. Um,
And, and thank you for the
presentation. Thank you for this
information, um.
I'm gonna want to really dig
deep into this and understand
the bill and, and what we're
talking about when it comes to
scope of practice, I think.
We all understand the need of
care.
In New Mexico
But we also want to make sure
folks are getting quality care
here in New Mexico and I really
want to understand what this
entails. I, I think you've made
some great arguments and talking
about the education number of
hours and things that you're
doing and then the care that
you're providing right now.
Um, I understand that fully as a
biochemistry major going to
school with guys that were
pre-med, chiropractic, physical
therapy, totally understand
that.
Um, but I just want to dig
deeper into this, and I have
some of the concerns from the
representatives over here, but
on the other hand, I understand
the need.
And really the care that you can
provide, and I think
It's not just chiropractors,
pharmacists, there's things in
certain roles that I think a lot
of our healthcare providers
could be doing, um, but I really
wanna understand specifically
what the scope is and what we're
really talking about here.
Um, before I could really get
behind it, that's not a no, but
I just really want to
understand.
So thank you, thank you Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Senator, uh,
Representative Thompson.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So my only
question is, uh, if.
Some years ago there were no
chiropractic schools affiliated
with medical schools. Is that
still the case or are there any
chiropractic schools affiliated
with the medical school.
Uh
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative.
Uh
That was the case back then, but
starting in 2025, the University
of Pittsburgh, uh, through their
physical therapy department is
offering a chiropractic program
to uh graduate.
Um, doctors of chiropractic,
that institution, those students
in their, in their pre-course
early classroom times we'll be
sitting next to medical
providers or.
Students that are going to
medical school, students that
are going to phys physical
therapy school. It is the first
one in the country that's going
to be offered at a state school.
So, Mr. Chair and doctors, um,
so that will be basically for
the undergrad program or will it
be the full doctor of
chiropractic that's at that
program.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative, it will be, uh,
they will be graduating doctors
of chiropractic.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um,
uh,
Thank you for bringing this
forward. uh, I, I won't have a
chance to vote for it because
my, my term ends before the
session begins. I've, I've
supported it in the past, and I
would support it again if I
could. Uh, the shortage of
primary care physicians in this
state is staggering.
And if anybody has tried to get
a doctor's appointment lately
with your primary, uh, you, you
know, you're looking at 6 to 8
months out in many communities.
Other communities you can't get
one because they're not taking
any new patients. So the thought
that we would have a skilled
group of practitioners available
to add to that pool of, of, of
primary care resources.
I can't understand any reason to
turn our backs on that, uh, but.
As you can see, there are some
questions that still remain.
People still have doubts, um, I,
I have.
No doubt that right now there
are people going to
chiropractors for their primary
care cause they haven't been
able to get in to see a, a, a
physician, a, uh, an MD, and so
it's not like, are we gonna do
this? This is so we're doing it.
It's happening. And, and in many
communities, the chiropractor is
where everybody goes to get
their, uh, some of those rural
communities, it's, it's the
doctor in town. There's nobody
else. There's no nursing, uh,
uh, uh, you know, uh, advanced
practice nurses.
There's no physician's
assistant. There's only a
chiropractor and his office is
where everybody gets their
health care, so the issue to me
is almost moot, but the factors
that until they get.
Fully accepted in the licensing,
uh, insurance and, and Medicaid
and other payment mechanisms
will, will have problems with
it, but
You know, when people can get
that care now using their own
check.
Or their own credit card, um.
It, it just seems like uh we're,
we're missing the boat if we
don't accept the, the offer,
basically that's being advanced
to greatly expand the pool of
primary care in the state.
So I don't know. Did you have
anything else you wanted to add
before we close?
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I would just like you
to, I know that there's a lot of
trepidation around scope of
practice issues and I, I would
just like to, to throw out that
I, I believe the the
legislature, legislated the
nurse practitioner's scope of
practice 30 years ago and had
you, had they not?
We would been in a much worse
situation now and we are already
are and we kind of modeled our,
our legislation off of the nurse
practitioners.
So thank you for having us,
you're right, and, and I could
add to that the the uh nature
path.
The physicians and the.
Um, uh, prescribing
psychologist, uh, other efforts
we're making to respond to a
need that's, that will not be
met otherwise. I mean, it's, we
will have a presentation in
November from the School of
Medicine suggesting a 10 year
plan for doubling the size of
the school of medicine.
But that is an incredibly
expensive, and that's over 10
years, and that wouldn't begin
to produce physicians who would
be in primary care for another 3
or 4 years after that. And so
you're really looking at, at, at
terrible shortage by that time.
And, and here's a way to fill up
some of that gap.
But thank you for bringing this
forward. Good luck with it, uh,
and, uh, I think you can, you
can see the, the issues that
you're going to have to deal
with as you advances. Thank you
so much.
How to, uh, the second item on
our afternoon calendar.
Uh, hunger in New Mexico.
And we have uh Jill Dixon from
the Food Depot.
Katie Anderson, the vice
president.
Of strategy partnerships and
advocacy at Road Runner Food
Bank.
And somebody else.
two other people. So you can
introduce the other people too.
Let's go ahead and get started.
Um, microphones just one at a
time, yeah.
Got it all.
Good afternoon, Mister Chair and
members of the committee. Thank
you so much for having us today,
um, I know you're furiously
running in 25 different
directions, so we really do
appreciate the time. Um, I'm
Jill Dixon. I'm the executive
director for the Food Depot, um,
newly minted, if you're looking
at me like that feels crazy. You
spoke with Sherry Cooper last
year who did move on to the
glory of retirement over the
summer, um, so I'm just excited
to be here and this is my
colleague.
Good afternoon, everyone. Thank
you for having us. Uh, my name
is Katie Anderson. I'm the, I
know it's a very long title,
vice president of strategy
Partnerships and advocacy with
Road on our Food Bank. Uh, we
work incredibly closely with
Food Depot, uh, hand in hand um
and addressing issues across the
state as well as other
incredible partners across the
state.
We are here today on behalf of
the New Mexico Association of
Food Banks, which we'll talk
about in a little bit more
detail, a little later in our
presentation, there are 5 food
banks in the state of New
Mexico. We represent the two
largest, but we have 3 other
partners who are in the Clovis
area, the Gallup area, and the
Farmington area serving counties
up in those areas and wrote on
our offer supplemental support
in those communities as well, so
the ask that we're putting
before you today is on behalf of
all 5 of those food banks and to
benefit our work.
I'm sure that you know that the
wheels are constantly changing,
so what we had here on on slide
5, we are actually talking about
first where we wanted to
identify what it is the food
banks need to be good partners
to you in creating a healthy New
Mexico.
Last year, y'all approved $5
million for food purchase for
the food banks, which was
heartily spent relatively
quickly in the pursuit of
providing nutritious food into
communities in every corner of
our 33 counties, um, we're so
deeply grateful for that. We
know that that was an uphill
battle last year. We really
appreciate finding that funding,
um, we had an agency in our
office last week who was talking
about how that free food bolus
has really made their operation.
more sustainable, and I think
there's no greater viewpoint
than the front line folks who
are doing that work.
This year, um, I understand that
there's a, a change, a shift in
the proposal that's coming
along, but, um, there is a
proposal that's being formed, um
by the LFC to talk about a 3
year strategy, um, moving
towards a recurring funding for
food banks to help guarantee um
a certain amount of funding per
year. I understand the numbers
are in flux, um, but we had a
great conversation with several
members of the LFC about what
our needs were and one of the
gaps.
For food banks was the
uncertainty around funding from
year to year, and the truth that
the gap that we need to fill of
food insecure people.
Needs infrastructure development
in order to address properly. We
need expanded cold storage, we
need more trucks. We need hub
warehouses to help us do that
work, and it's so incredibly
hard to get a board of directors
at a nonprofit to commit to
infrastructure development and
scaling when funding is
uncertain.
So I understand that the current
proposal looks at a hybrid of $5
million for food purchase and $5
million for infrastructure
development within the fiscal 26
budget.
To be followed in the 27 budget
by perhaps something like 5
million $7.5 million for food
purchase an additional $2.5
million to finish infrastructure
development to scale and in year
3, having $10 million for food
purchase with a report to follow
that would demonstrate our
effectiveness in closing that
meal gap that you've all heard
so much about.
Um, if we meet muster, um, there
would be a consideration to make
that $10 million recurring, and
I can't say enough about what a
thoughtful solution that is, um,
to address both our needs to
scale to really reach
communities that are currently
underserved despite our best
efforts, um, but also to really
guarantee food purchase funding
for the future so that we can
optimize and strategize
effectively as food banks.
So that is sort of what's on the
table ahead, um, again,
relatively new, but Katie is
going to orient you a little bit
around the issue that still
exists, um, even though great
progress is in motion, um, we
still have a gap to fill, and
she's going to give some details
about that.
Thank you, Jill so much. Uh, so
I'll move on to slide 3, for
those who are looking at that,
um, and really talk about at
this point in time how how food
insecurity is measured, um, and
what kind of language is
utilized, um, so hunger versus
food insecurity, I'm sure
everyone has heard those two
terms. They're oftentimes used
interchangeably, um, hunger, of
course, is the physiological,
uh, feeling that we all
experience, um, that was, you
know,
at at Dion's at lunch today.
We're not hungry anymore, um,
but it, um, it's an issue that
exists for families where an
entire, entire household is
experiencing hunger, and then we
move into food insecurity that
there is some issue existing for
that family, that, that uh
household that is creating these
issues. So when we talk about
food security or food
insecurity, there is high food
and food security, which of
course means, you know, people
have the access to the food that
they need. It's nutritious. They
can purchase the food.
They need
Moving down to marginal food
security, which means that there
are times, oftentimes during the
year, where a household may
struggle to get access to the
food that they need, sometimes
that's due to availability. Um,
oftentimes that's due to funding
not being able to to purchase
the food that they need below
that is low food security, um,
and that's where you're getting
into, to issues for a family of
pretty regularly having issues
with getting access to the food
they need, um, and having much
lower
access to nutritious foods in
particular, um, and then at the
very lowest scale, they're very
low food security, um, and when
you get to that point, that's
talking about families who are
consistently daily, you know,
monthly, annually dealing with a
lack of food, um, in many cases
too, that can mean situations
where, uh, grandparents or
parents are choosing to not eat,
so their children can eat, um,
there are a lot of situations
that come out of very
low food security, uh, very
thankfully as a state, we're
seeing those numbers drop a
little bit, so that's really
good news, um, but the numbers
are still a little bit high, and
we'd love to see them drop even
more, particularly for very low
food security.
I have butterfingers today.
So in looking at uh hunger in
New Mexico. I want to be very
clear that this data is from
2022, typically data runs at
about a 2-year low, um, so
oftentimes we don't necessarily
know, um, exactly where we are
until 2 years after, but what we
can see are trend lines, um, and
what we saw, um, in 2022 data
is, you know, kind of back into
the pandemic, very thankfully as
we were beginning to move out of
that. Um, there was an increase.
In in food insecurity in our
state, um, that was true across
the entire country. New Mexico
was not the only state to
experience that.
And in our state at this point
in time, there are about
321,000, maybe a little bit less
at this point, let's hope, um,
but roughly 321,000 people um
who are facing hunger, food
insecurity issues, or 1 in 7 New
Mexicans.
Uh, of that group, there are
100,000 that are children.
Um, that number is continuing to
drop. I wanted to call that that
out uh for a number of years,
New Mexico was in the top 2 of
states with the highest rates of
childhood food insecurity, um,
and we actually have dropped,
according to this data, down to
7th or 8th and are continuing to
drop, so things are really
looking out for children in our
state in terms of having access
to the food that they need, um,
and we're very excited about a
lot of the work that has
happened in our state to ensure
uh, that children have what they
need.
Another group I want to call out
interestingly enough is, uh,
older adults in our state, there
are about 32,000 older adults
between the ages of 50 and 59
that are dealing with food
insecurity, that's 1 in 8.
Uh, people between 150 and 59.
So are there opportunities
there, uh, for us as a state to
better address those issues.
Oftentimes, those are people who
are caretakers, uh, whether for
children or for aging parents.
Um, there are a host of issues
that exist there, um, but
oftentimes for 50 to 59, they
are not eligible to receive, um,
many of the benefits that come
into play, um, once people get
um into their 60s. So that's
also one of the challenges that
exist.
there.
And then 1 in 14 seniors are
experiencing food insecurity,
although that number is getting
better as well, um, because of a
lot of the great work that's
happened in focusing on seniors,
so we wanted to come and tell
you a true story, but also, um,
a story of hope today that
things are getting better, um,
and, and I think the big thing
that that tells us is we can't
let off the gas. We got to keep
going. We gotta keep working on
this, um, a state doesn't end up
in a
situation of having high levels
of food insecurity quickly. It
typically is over a long period
of time. So moving that needle
in the other direction is also
going to take a little bit of
time.
There are particular groups that
experience higher levels of food
insecurity, and we wanted to
call that out on the next slide.
Uh, specifically 35% of Native
American children are 1 in 3
experience food insecurity. Uh,
so that is absolutely, uh, a
group that we're being, we're
very aware of, um, and also
working hard to get more food
and um programming to them and
then we're talking about uh 4
groups I wanted to call out
here, 25% or 1 in 4 of uh Native
Americans.
Hispanic or Latino community
members, black community members
and active duty military members
experience food insecurity in
our state, and this is across
the whole country. It is not
just in New Mexico. This is
something that's happening
across the country, but these
are all groups that we can
absolutely focus a lot more on
and how do we reach, reach them,
um, and get them the programming
and food that they need.
Thank you, Katie. I think well
put, um.
Definitely a message that what
we're doing is working and I
just really commend, you know,
this body for making very
strategic choices about how we
support people, elders,
families, children, um, to help
create food security. We always
say that hunger is a policy
choice, and that's either a
policy choice to a food secure
future or towards a food
insecure future and I think
we've, you all have regularly
demonstrated your interest in
seeing.
seeing people in our communities
be food secure.
Um, there are challenges facing
our state. We know that that is
true, um, specifically families
with young children were making
great policy headway in that,
but there's work to be done.
Food banks need to continue to
support, um, those folks and
what we want to call out here is
that it's so important that the
programs that you have put in
place like Universal school
meals, expansion to snap.
Affordable childcare initiatives
that those need to remain in
place and fully funded while you
help the food banks scale the
capacity if we really want to
put this meal gap as close to
zero as possible. Um, we can't
do it alone, so there are
definitely folks like Katie
mentioned that need help in
being taken care of that 50 to
59 year old gap are taking care
of parents and more increasingly
children.
Um, specifically in certain
counties in our service areas.
There's a huge going to the next
slide intersection between
hunger and health, um, food is
medicine is getting to be the,
you know, hot button term that's
getting floated around out there
and the food banks are deeply
invested in that because we've
been partners in food as
medicine for a very long time.
There's a strong correlation
between a person being food
insecure and having poor health
outcomes, um, typically folks
will make choices toward
calories and away from
nutrition.
Um, when hunger and food
insecurity are an issue, and
that has a cumulative negative
effect over time with comorbid
health conditions and poor
health outcomes.
But there is that cycle involved
in it all how a high cost of
living may create a food secure
in situ situation of food
insecure person ends up with
type 2 diabetes, comorbid health
conditions, the cost of their
healthcare goes up. That
exacerbates their poverty
situation, which in turn
continues to contribute to poor
health. Um, so we're really
looking at ways that food banks
can participate in the food is
medicine landscape to get the
nutritious food to the people
who need it most.
And help interrupt those
systems.
So if you're going to the Food
is medicine summit on November
12th, you're going to see us
there, um, for precisely that
reason. Um, we also know that
you're stretched incredibly
thin, so, um, we'd be happy to
talk about it any other time.
The key to this is really that
we need interventions in
multiple systems simultaneously
in order to see the needle move,
as Katie described, were making
great progress. We need to keep
our foot on the gas and keep
driving towards that.
Um, but it's so important that
the interventions that you all
have had the foresight to
consider around childcare have
an impact on someone's ability
to enter the workforce, um, and
work consistently and reliably
and remain employed so they can
provide for their families.
We're also deeply in favor of
SNAP expansion. We love it when
folks can use their SNAP
benefits to choose their own
food and contribute to the local
economy. That's a win-win for
everyone.
Um, and at the same time we're
going to respectfully ask for
your consideration of funding a
scalability plan for food banks.
Help us scale up to be ready for
food as medicine, help us scale
up to increase service to areas
that are still underserved and
will help close that final gap
and do our part in this
landscape.
We all know that there are
numerous effects to food
insecurity, um, it's worth
saying that as we look at total
health, um, in our communities,
the social determinants of
health have been thrown out
quite a lot. There, of course,
is a significant link between
poverty and emotional health,
mental health, physical health,
and overall well-being. Um, and
it's not hard to imagine that
children that are living in
families that are struggling
economically where food
insecurity may also be an.
you are growing up in
environments where there's
conflict present and stress, and
we want the best possible future
for New Mexico, so making sure
that food is accessible to
families is one of those pieces,
but you all are doing an
excellent job of making policy
to support those other factors
as well, um, we wanna see
students in school ready to
learn. Um, and as a former
educator, I know that that was
usually the first barrier that
we had to overcome in the
morning.
Um, and a wall I could fix that
with a universal school meal
burrito.
I couldn't fix the fact that
there wasn't electricity in
their house the night before, so
they didn't get the reading
assignment done, and I couldn't
fix the conflict that they had
witnessed between their parents.
Um, and both of those were
affecting their ability to be
their best selves in the
classroom environment that day
too.
Um, going to the next slide,
you're going to see a very
beautiful map of the state of
New Mexico that's color coded. I
mentioned before that there are
5 food banks working together to
do this work with over 300 other
nonprofit partners, those would
be our food pantry partners,
shelters, day programs, after
school programs, 1000 different
iterations of that, um, that
roughly lets you know what our
geographies look like there, um,
what I would like you to know
about food banks.
Today, uh, we have experienced
profound change like everyone
else across the pandemic.
There has been a pro
A really dramatic need to
purchase food at levels that we
never have before. You likely
heard this last year. It's not
getting better. AI may be a
miracle for writing that
difficult email.
Um, but it is also causing a
dramatic drop in donations at
the national level, and that
affects us too. Food companies
are getting better at predicting
how much food they need to put
in the ground, how much they
need to harvest, how much they
need to take to market. And as
that efficiency and reduction in
food waste that we all want to
see happens. The natural
recipients of that food
abundance and overage that
normally would have been waste
used to be the food banks.
And now it's gone, and we have
to buy the food that we need to
fill the gap, which also
explains why we're here today.
Just speaking for the food
depot, our budget this year is
$11 million. We expect to spend
5 million of that on food
purchase. That's unheard of.
Pre-pandemic, we were spending
maybe a quarter of a million
dollars on food.
That's how profoundly our
landscape has changed. And as I
was listening to the doctor
conversation before we started,
I was thinking about publisher
parish, um.
And for food banks, it's really
that we need to innovate or
perish.
And that's part of this need to
scale towards a different
future.
Food is medicine has the
potential to bring
Unbelievable federal dollars in
to support our work here in the
state and food banks in many
other states are already getting
reimbursed through federal
dollars through the Medicaid
program for doing what we're
already doing, which is
providing nutritious food to
food insecure persons who've
been referred to them by the
healthcare system. We are ready
to take that step. We need to
scale a little bit to make sure
we can do it in all the right
communities, but that's going to
help our state tap into those
resources at the federal level
which can
Offset the burden on the state,
ultimately.
On the last slide that I'm gonna
talk about for the moment, um,
you'll see a pyramid, um, that
shows the hierarchy of food as
medicine and the way that it
shows up in our communities.
Currently, your food banks are
sitting in the middle. We flirt
a little bit with the top of the
pyramid, but we haven't scaled
to be there yet. That's part of
that 3 year multi-pronged
approach strategy that's being
put before you. We need to be
ready to do medically tailored
meals, but to do that, we have
to talk about freezers and
trucks and partnerships with
people who have the kitchens.
to produce those meals, um, but
we are here, we have incredible
logistics systems already in
place, and I think you all saw
that across the pandemic.
This funding structure that we
put before you really does help
us prepare for that future and
helps us prepare to close that
meal gap that still exists
today.
Katie is by far the most
qualified to talk about all the
nitty gritty of the data, so she
takes you to your next slide.
Thank you, Joe so much.
Uh, so this next slide, uh, that
you're gonna see here has a
beautiful map of our state that
we all love so much, and you're
going to notice some different
shading there. You're gonna
notice some darker orange and
some gray colors in there.
Uh, one of the conversations
that we've had ongoing as food
banks is how do we become, um,
even more data informed and data
driven in the work that we do.
And so what we did is we took,
um, previously looking at 33
counties, um, and I know all of
you know well that some of our
counties are massive, uh, 6000
square miles in some cases.
And wanted to drill down a
little bit more deeply so that
we're really understanding
what's happening at a more
granular level, uh, for our
state. So we looked at zip codes
first, and they're about 300
plus zip codes in our state.
And we thought, well, that's
pretty good. And then we dug a
little deeper and looked at
census tracks. There are 612
census tracks in the state of
New Mexico, and that really
begins to drill us down in some
cases to neighborhood level
understanding of what's
happening. So we took that data
and I'll share with you the, the
pieces of data that we utilized.
We utilized, uh, by census
tract.
Uh, percentage of food insecure
individuals, number of food
insecure individuals. We also
looked at life expectancy, um,
which has become, uh, more and
more utilized in terms of seeing
what the overall health of a
population looks like.
Uh, we also took information
from the area deprivation index
and the social vulnerability
index and what came out of that
was this map that you see before
you, the darker the orange
color, the more need exists or
the higher need exists in that
particular area, and we're happy
to send you a link afterward if
you're uh a map of file like I
am, um, and digging a little
deeper and look a little deeper.
Um, we've also layered over all
of your districts in this. I'm
It's not in here, but we're able
to look at it at that level as
well, which is very helpful too.
um, but that, this is really
what's going to guide us in
moving forward and understanding
where do we need, where does
service need to happen and
where's the greatest need and
where do we need to go first?
So I know there's a lot of
slides on this next one, a lot
of maps coming up here. Um,
wanted to share with you one of
the other things that's
important to consider in our
state is that food access is a
challenge and an issue and we're
talking about the expansion of
SNAP is a wonderful and fabulous
thing. The challenge there is do
people have access to a place to
go spend their snap dollars.
And there are a lot of places in
our state where access to SNAP
is not an easy thing. It's not
easy to get a hold of those
foods. So the maps you see
before you, there are a couple
of pages of this, uh, the green
dots represent farmers' markets
that accept SNAP in the state of
New Mexico, um, and again, happy
to provide you all with a map
you can play with a little bit
more um after the fact.
Um, as you can see, there are
some parts of our state where
there isn't a lot of farmers'
market representation. Um, so we
talk about the importance of
that both for local farmers, um,
as well as people in the
community having access to
healthy nutritious foods. There
are just some parts of our state
that don't have it.
Um, next to it we have orange
dots and red dots. The orange
dots are actually small grocery
stores, which you could also
call uh convenience stores on
steroids, maybe to some degree,
but they're not full service
grocery stores. Uh, the red dots
are, and I think you'll notice
the same thing here, where there
are places in our state where
there is little to nothing
available for folks that need
access to to food.
Move on to the next map mapped
you all up today.
Um, on the left on this next
page with the pink dots, um,
you'll notice there are a whole
lot of paint dots. Those are
convenience stores that that
offer snap.
Um, so there are a lot of places
in our state where the only
option that those who are
receiving SNAP have is a
convenience store. It's pretty,
it's a fairly common thing in
many parts of our state. And on
the right-hand side, you have
dollar stores.
In yellow, so we have some of
the same challenges there. We
have a lot of dollar stores. We
have a lot of convenience
stores.
And not a whole lot of full
service grocery stores. I won't
go too far into this one, but I
wanted you all to be able to
see, um, a map of northern New
Mexico with all of the dots on
there, um, so you can see when
we take into account all the
convenience stores, all of the
stores where there are still
some real challenges in getting
access to food.
And this comes into play in our
infrastructure conversation,
where are those places that
don't have easy access to food,
those might be great places for
there to be some infrastructure
investments.
And then uh the southern part of
the state, and I will tell you
all that there is inequity in
our state in terms of what is
available in the southern versus
the northern part of the state.
There's a lot less availability
of food overall in the southern
part of our state as compared to
the northern part.
And then last but certainly not
least, the last map, I'll throw
at you today. Um, all of these
dots represent where there are
food distributions in the state
of New Mexico through um the
wonderful relationships that the
food banks, uh, get to have, and
I mean that very honestly with
wonderful on the ground
partners. We have 496 partners.
And the reason I like to share
that number.
Is that in the state of New
Mexico, we have 228 full service
grocery stores.
There are 496 food distribution
partners across our state that
are serving their communities.
Um, the industry average, I want
to share this real quickly for
grocery stores is 5000 people
per store with our population
that would indicate
Roughly 420. We have 228.
So what opportunities might
exist there in terms of
encouraging uh even small level
grocery stores to be in some
communities that don't have
access at this time.
Thank you.
Thank you, Katie. I can see you
all wanting her linked so you
could play with those maps
immediately. I do too, um, but
you might not see me for a
couple of days.
Um, bottom line is that we have
challenges that we need to
overcome. Um, there's a reason
why food banks haven't
necessarily been able to get to
some of those most underserved
communities and it is just the
nuts and bolts like
infrastructure.
There's roads that have a huge
challenge. When you go out there
to buy $150,000 trailer that
operates like a mobile grocery
store, but it only sits 10
number of inches off the ground.
That's a no go in some places,
um, we have to think about
things like, can you turn it
around once you get it in there,
um, and get it back out, which
is a real problem that you don't
know you have until you play in
food banks for a little while.
Um, so there's definitely issues
around the distances that we
have to travel, the number of
hours that someone has to be on
the road. There's issues around
the infrastructure of those
roads and what it means for
maintenance and repair.
There's definitely an issue
around lack of broadband, and
that seems so simple, and why
would it be connected to food,
but if we're to register clients
and really track how people are
getting services in different
areas. Almost all of those
platforms are web-based.
And they don't work in half of
our service area. So we have to
find different strategies and
there's a profound lack of
healthy food access. I think
that out of all of those maps,
the one that struck me was the
convenience stores.
When we talk about food as
medicine, is that where we want
people redeeming snap dollars.
I think we all agree that the
answer to that is no, but what
if there were partnerships and
incentives to bring a more
robust number of healthy food
options into existing
infrastructure at convenience
stores and dollar stores. I
think our question is at this
point, what's possible?
Um, and some of that sits in the
food bank space to bring those
ideas to you. Um, it's our job
to know this really intimately
and bring those suggestions
forward and that's what we're
committed to, especially as we
start to scale our
infrastructure to close that $25
million gap.
OK. Speaking of which, that's
the slide we're on, which I
think is number 20.
Um, there are still 25 million
missing meals in New Mexico. Now
don't say that to be the downer.
That's actually a better number
than it was several years ago.
Um, but that is a meal that is
missed by a person because they
didn't have the means to cover
that gap, and that's the number
of meals that are missing after
snap and Wick and Universal
school meals and the work that
the food banks are already
doing.
There is work to be done, and we
recognize that it is our role to
do some of that work, but we
need help to do it.
There are gaps in our service
area. We need to help have some
help scaling to meet those gaps.
There's inequity. We know that
it's true, um, for example, the
Food Depot is looking right now
at adding a hub warehouse in Rio
Riva County, so little
communities like Vallecitos that
only get a few distribution once
a month, can get a food
distribution twice a month and
maybe that second distribution
can just be produce.
Mhm
And protein and focus on the
absolute essentials. We need to
be able to deal with our
frequency, our breadth, and our
depth at the same time.
Um, and that's what the
scalability is going to be and
there's work to be done and
we've always been here to do it,
um, the Food Depot's been in
business for 30 years, rodent or
just about the same, um, it's
our job and we want to do it
well, but we need your help to
do that. Um, we are committed to
closing our part of that gap,
um, but it's worth repeating
that we need the other supports
that we've talked about that are
helping family economies. We
need them to stay fully funded
and in place because otherwise
that gap gets
Um, I can speak specifically to
this. We have a Thursday
distribution at Siler Road in
Santa Fe. We clog up all the
traffic. Nobody likes it. The
people who receive food there
really do like it, and around um
the May timeline, probably from
February to May. We'd seen an
average of
600, 650 households coming
through that distribution on a
given morning. That's over 2500
people.
Um, the distribution operates
every other day.
When we got to July 11th for our
first distribution, that number
dropped to 420 households.
Sun books.
There was an intervention that
came into place, supported
families, the number dropped. It
stayed down.
Until
Other things came back up and
sunbos did its thing, um, and
went away. And now the numbers
back up in the 600s. It was at
750 last week.
So we know that these
interventions work. We watch
them play out in real time when
Additional snap comes into play.
There are fewer people in the
food line and that's what we're
here for is to work together
with you as partners to find
ways to shorten the line.
Um, and again, it is vastly
preferable that a family be able
to go choose their own groceries
and contribute to local
economies than to get free food
at a distribution line on a
Thursday morning.
Um, but we have to overcome the
grocery store barrier too. We
have to be able to use those
snap benefits, um, on the next
slide you're going to see a
little note about the regional
farm to Food bank, um, don't get
whiplash, Ag and food banks are
connected. It's a whole thing,
um, the New Mexico Association
of Food Banks thanks to the
federally funded LFPA program
has been buying from small and
mid-scale growers in the state
of New Mexico for the past 2
years.
after being built from the
ground up, um, just a couple
short years ago we were
purchasing about a million
dollars a month through the
growing season from these
growers, which of course is
enriching our local food system.
It's also bringing the most
beautiful produce in the world
into food banks to be given to
folks who definitely don't see
produce like that, not ever.
Um, and that's a pretty awesome
thing, um, when you get a, a
bunch of microgreens or radishes
or foods that food banks don't
buy because quite frankly, it
doesn't last that long in the
fridge, um, and getting those
out to distributions every
single day. There is a threat to
the regional farm to food banks
sustainability, um, because the
farm bill keeps getting kicked
down the road a little, um.
But there's hope that from news
that came out just a few weeks
ago from the USDA that there is
actually going to be funding for
the regional farm to food bank
program from the federal
government that's going to come
through.
Um, I will just say for
transparency there's some big
questions about whether the
administrative funds are still
going to be there, which is a
big question mark and concern in
our minds, but we're going to
wait for more information before
we panic. Um, it is worth noting
that local agriculture and food
banks do have a place together,
um, and we definitely see
Healthy food systems, including
food banks as major purchasers
that are supported by
governmental programs as a major
part of how we
Provide for ourselves and create
a self-sustaining New Mexico.
They're getting very close here
to when you put us in the hot
seat, um, the problem is large.
I wish that I could come to you
with a silver bullet where I
gave you a number and said if
you give us this many million
dollars we'll solve this problem
permanently.
The truth is, it's not like
that. Hunger is fundamentally
rooted as in poverty. It's just
a symptom.
And I think that tremendous work
has been done to address those
underlying root cause issues, we
need to continue the really good
work.
Uh, we need to have
multi-faceted strategies for how
we're going to intervene there.
All right, I'm gonna move us on
to slide 23.
Um, so I wanted to share with
you all that some of the work
that is happening right now that
we're very excited about. Uh, we
have a a Roadrunner Coalition to
end hunger, and we are working
on creating a blueprint to end
hunger in New Mexico and to
publish it in fall of 2025 and
make it available to all of you
as well as the general public.
Uh, this is a group that is made
up of 76 kind of a combination
of uh agency partners,
collaborative um organizations.
Individual members from across
the state. It's actually nearly
100 people represented there,
um, and then on top of that, an
additional 75 folks have been
pretty regularly engaged with
that work, um, in talking about
a 3 year plan and the funding
potential there that will
absolutely be a part of helping
to guide us along that pathway.
What does that look like? How do
we do this in the right way, um,
and really building that plan
out very clearly. How do we
address these issues in our
state.
So moving to slide 24, what can
we do? That's the big question.
Um, we do come with solutions,
uh, first, please continue to
fully fund those intervention
programs, SNAP expansion, ick,
um, childcare, um, even hits
that space for us, but New
Mexico grown universal school
meals, all of those things are
creating tangible.
differences in people's lives
and shortening the line at food
banks, which we all want. Um, we
definitely
are enthusiastically behind food
is medicine work, and that has a
place for creating sustainable
food banks in the future and
bringing in those federal
dollars. So please support Food
is medicine expansion.
Um, we would love to have your
support toward that multi-year
funding approach to support food
distributions into areas with
low food access and low current
service and to invest in that
infrastructure development. Um,
we don't want to build a cold
storage unit that we can't fill
with food in 3 years when that
funding is gone. We want to
build a cold storage unit that's
regularly filled by us and by
local growers as part of a food
system.
Please, um, pay attention to the
issues around food sovereignty,
um, and invest in those in
native communities. There's so
much work and healing to be done
there.
Invest in unique and
Innovative place-based
solutions, um, one size fits all
approaches don't work in New
Mexico, they truthfully don't
work anywhere. Um, it's so true
that the South is not the same
as the North, and what works in
Santa Fe does not work in
Springer.
Um, all of the factors and
considerations are different,
and please invest in local food
systems, including regional farm
to food bank and programs like
it, like New Mexico grown, we're
guaranteed buyers are on the
backside.
And I promise you all I will not
read every single one of these
to you. I'll let you do that,
uh, but, but really talking
about some of those higher level
addressing ways to address some
of these issues, you know, what
are opportunities for us as a
state to talk about, uh, tax
incentives for grocery stores.
Um, what are our opportunities
in, in speaking to Jill's
comment about are there ways we
can utilize the already existing
infrastructure with convenience
stores, for instance, there's
some really great programs out
there like uh funding for
healthy.
community stores, healthy corner
stores, um, and the idea there
is to bring healthy foods in and
have them available in places
that already exist and where
people are already visiting. So
there are some great
opportunities out there as well.
Um, are there opportunities with
mobile grocery stores and food
trucks that bring nutritious
foods to some of those
communities that are really out
there and perhaps infrastructure
would be a lot more difficult to
make happen.
Um, obviously investing in food
hubs with cold storage. We were
talking a lot about the lack of
cold storage that exists in our
state in general, um, really,
honestly, outside of Santa Fe,
uh, Albuquerque, and Las Cruces
area, large cold storage is not
easy to find. Um, what, what
kind of opportunities exist
there that is also going to
speak to the resilience of our
state. Um, I don't think any of
us wanna see a pandemic anytime
again in the near future, um,
but the
reality is we saw the breaking
down of the supply chain there
and so many of the issues that
we had around the fact that 95
to 97% of the food we access in
the state of New Mexico, all of
us comes from outside the state.
So what can we do to build up
that resiliency within our
state. So, God forbid, in the
case of something terrible
happening, we're not reliant
upon all of those supply chains
bringing food in. Um, so those
are just some of the things I
wanted to put forward.
And I'm gonna pass it out, pass
it back here to Joe.
So again our ask that's before
you, which is emerging in real
time, um, in whatever form it
comes next, um, we would be
grateful if you would endorse
and support.
$10 million for food banks in
2026, um, split between food
purchase and infrastructure with
a 3-year plan to move towards
food only with infrastructure
already built and then have us
prove to you that we do the work
we do well, and we're confident
in that, um, so that those
funding, that funding can be
recurring and we can help to
close that 25 million male gap.
Yeah.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for this wonderful
presentation for all of your
research. I'm so impressed. I
have so many questions. I'm just
gonna say them all and then you
can think about them and I don't
think you'll be able to answer
them all. I, I've often thought
that our prisons ought to be,
um,
Um
Growing their own food so that
people learn how to do it and
make do the preparation and take
care of it there because that
would then give them, uh, folks
who are exiting something that
they can do legitimately. I'm
concerned about the full service
grocery stores.
Our representative Anya Nornu's
district and, and Senator Sidia
Lopez.
And there, in that district,
there's no full service grocery
stores since Walmart closed, but
we learned representative Aurnu
tell me, Walmart had some kind
of a clause in its contract that
Because we were trying to buy
that site for the city to have
another grocery store, but
Walmart's exit clause prevented
it. As far as I'm concerned, we
should just build one and let
them sue us because they're,
they probably got a tax break to
open the store. Then they have
strings attached to what you can
do with their vacant store. I
mean, I just think that is
outrageous and very inhumane.
As far as the neighborhood goes,
We're short 192 full service
grocery stores, um, are co-ops
looking at any of those needs or
we're working with those and
what about trying to create a
food security fund at the state
level when we have one time
money with the thought of it
becoming a future revenue
stream. So those are, um, my
questions and I probably used up
all my time. If, if you wanna
try answering one until the
ballot goes off, that would be
good.
I, I don't know,
uh, the, uh, food security fund,
maybe, um, co-ops and, and other
Homegrown industry like the, the
prison system. Thank you.
And the prisoners write to us
all the time about how rotten
their food is. So, and I believe
them cause I've eaten there.
Even though when we eat there we
get better food, so.
OK, in order of priority.
We don't currently have any
prison related programs. I'm not
sure that the food banks would
be the right place to drive that
forward, but I think the
conversations are incredibly
interesting. Um, we definitely
have other food bank partners
who have worked on employment
pathways for justice involved
folks, um, post-release. So that
model exists out there in the
universe and who knows what
we're capable of with a
sustainable line of funding.
Um, as for full service grocery
stores, go get them. Um
the grocery stores that we are
short and whether co ops fit in
that space. I think our
intention is to have really
robust relationships like we do
currently with Ag. I know that
agricultura, for example, is
very interested in having
conversations about what it
takes to get local foods into
local grocery stores, um, at the
co op and other levels. So I
would imagine that there are
bills and
other priorities coming forward
from them and we would be
throwing our support behind
those, um, and as for the food
security fund at the state
level.
Bring it on, um, our ultimately
the food banks would like to
have a stable, reliable source
of substantial funding of $10
million at minimum per year, um,
to allow us to help close that
$25 million or 25 million meal
gap. Um, that's sort of the
threshold we need to be at. So
we need to figure out what size
corpus would generate at 4.7% to
10 million that you need.
So we could turn that over to
our LFC experts for.
Thank you.
Oh, and
do you ever do farm farmers'
market leftovers.
OK.
Representative Martinez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, I
have two questions. I'm, I'm
real curious on.
Slide 4.
Mm
1 in 4 active duty military
members.
I remember 15 years ago we tried
to do a study.
For veterans and active duty
military and DOD would not share
that information with us. Where
do you, where are you getting
your numbers?
Uh, chair, Mr. Chair and um and
Representative Martinez, uh,
that data is coming from the
military family advocacy
Network, um, and they have done
uh quite a few studies across
the country, um, and that has
been found to be the, the
average of what of what they're
seeing, and that's particularly
focused in on enlisted
personnel, uh, typically E1 to
E4 in particular, um, I think we
would, we would love and
welcome, you know.
a study like that, we have
reached out to that group to see
if there's an opportunity to do
a study like that in New Mexico,
whether it, you know, Kirtland,
Cannon, um, Holloman, wherever
they would prefer, but um we
would love to see there be some
more information about that, but
that is the that is the data
that is is ringing true
throughout the country
currently. What was the name of
that group again? Military
advocacy military family
advocacy Network, I believe, and
I'd be we'd be happy to forward.
That data and information to you
because people would be shocked
with an E2 gets. It's, it is
shocking, absolutely about below
minimum wage. The other question
I have is um.
On slide 26. Does that, is there
a program like that in effect
now, or would this be a new
program with $10 million in the
HCA budget.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee, um.
The $10 million wouldn't enable
us to expand beyond the programs
that we're already doing, um, so
the food banks are already
providing millions of pounds of
food, millions of meals, um, so
the 10 million, we got $5
million last year. Thank you
again for that. That's already
sort of in rotation with
programs that have already
expanded thanks to that influx,
so the additional 5 million on
top of that would help us to
bring some of the food into
those underserved areas, double
up on distributions in areas
that are only getting
items once a month start new
distributions in places that
maybe didn't have the
infrastructure before.
Does that answer your question?
Yes, ma'am. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Um, so it's just
adding money to the fund so it's
not.
Cause I, I think the hard part
would be to create.
The, the, the line item in the
HCA budget, but if we could just
expand that, I think it's a lot,
a lot easier, and we do have the
money, so it needs to be done.
Thank you very much for all the
research. I appreciate that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Martinez, Senator Cedillo Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, Mr. Chair, on the, on that
chart about who's facing the
greatest challenges in our
state. I was surprised that
homeless individuals wasn't
listed.
Um, where are the homeless in.
In this and how are there?
I mean,
It's, it's big.
It, it absolutely is, and I
think one of the, one of the
greatest challenges in
determining, I think we can, we
can all make the assumption that
anyone who's living, you know,
is in an unhoused situation is
very, very much food insecure.
Uh, the greatest challenge, and
I'm sure that you've all heard
this many times is actually
determining how many people
we're talking about is a lot of
the data out there is point in
time data um and may not be
fully reflective of of what is
happening. I will tell you that,
um, as food banks we work very
closely with a number of
partners across the state, um,
that work very specifically with
the unhoused population. Um, I
don't know of any shelters or
meal sites across the state at
this point in time who do not
work with a.
bank so um in terms of the
funding that we're talking about
here, there is food from that
fund that goes to or from that
pot of money that goes to those
partners, um, and we're very
supportive of them in whatever
they need.
What percentage would you say,
Mr. Chair?
Go to to announced individuals
what percentage? I'd be happy to
go back and get and get a real
number for you, um, out of our
inventory system and and and get
that over to you. Would that be
would that be OK great I was I
was really moved because I've
really been trying to talk, um.
Talk to them and I had just been
to the farmer's market and had a
bag of peaches and you should
have seen the joy in this man's
face when I gave him a peach,
um, and so I just think it's
really uh.
I just missed that here and I
think it'd be good to keep track
of it because it's a group that
we should be keeping track of
and and seeing how.
How we can ensure that they get
meals.
And
Thank you Mr. Chair.
Representative Chavez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um
So I have a a a few questions.
One of them, you talked about
SNAP expansion, and I'm assuming
what you're talking about is
because you gave the example of
convenience stores and dollar
stores, really expanding into
what other stores or creating
resources where people can go in
their community, um.
Is that right?
Mr. Chair, remember this is the
committee. We meant the SNAP
expansion for eligibility to
200% that took effect on October
1st, um, that expands not only
who's eligible, but how much
different populations get
relative to their income,
specifically seniors. Yeah, I, I
would absolutely support that
and I think that's necessary,
um, the other piece is in terms
of, so there's Road Order Food
Bank and then there's a regional
food banks.
Correct.
OK, and you all work together?
OK, um, so then the other
question that I have actually
it's not really a question, but
it's sort of, you know, off of
what Representative Casey talked
about in Socora we had a
presentation, um, from, um,
Doctor Sanjeev Aurora, um, and
they were doing some, uh, work
in prisons um around health for
prisoners and one of the
questions that I had asked was,
you know, whether, you know,
whether or not nutrition, you
know, has an impact and of
course it does. So even though
it's not part of
What you all do. I just wanted
to make a comment that I think
that that's also something that
we, you know, really need to
address in terms of um you know
healthy outcomes, right? Um,
because you, you know,
Representative Casey is right.
Food, uh, prison food is
horrible, um, and it's not
nutritional, um, and I think
that if we can bring up the
nutrition of the food that
everybody in New Mexico is
getting, we're going to have
better health comes.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for this wonderful
presentation, um, it's so
comprehensive and it includes
everyone that has been working
on this, not just the food
banks, but all the other
partners that are coming
together and um tomorrow they're
going to be celebrating, um,
the, um, food and farm day, um,
with all the different groups
who are the uh New Mexico grown
and and.
Uh, providers of, uh, the
ranchers and others, um, at the
Indian Pueblo Cultural Center
tomorrow afternoon, but, um,
this is just amazing and I know
the 10 million is mostly for
your programs, correct? and or
is that including the overall,
you know, what we need besides,
but Snap is separate.
And some of the other, um,
providers that bring the fresh
produce in the um.
The protein and things like that
to food banks to be able to
distribute, and I just wanted
to, um, uh, also mentioned that
um.
The uh dashboard is that's,
that's still up, right? The
food, um,
Can you tell me what that is the
name of it again so people can
look it up, Mr. Chair and
Representative Ferrari, that is
the, I believe the DFA Food
initiative dashboard, um, and
it's on the DFA site, um, but
we're also gonna gonna forward a
link to the map that we shared
with you all today, um, so that
you can take a look at that at
your leisure.
And the dashboard includes the
budget and different things that
we're asking or the needs, um,
so people have that in mind as
we're working on these issues
and um I know locally that um
the food banks that you provide
for, um, to Casa de Perregrinos
and we're um providing as
legislators capital outlay to
expand. We already expanded
their, um, uh.
Facility, but then also working
with the soup kitchen and having
kitchens where people can come
in and learn how to provide more
nutritious foods, um, and I
think that goes well with.
The, um, food is medicine so
that people, uh, working, uh, to
resolve diabetic, you know,
problems, and their nutrition
will be really helpful and so
I'm really excited to see that
happen, and that's incorporated,
um, Senator Sidia Lopez, that's
incorporated with our um
community of hope, uh, the
homeless, uh, camp, and then
also the provisions that they so
it's just amazing how everyone's
working.
working together and thank you
for bringing, you know,
everyone, um, to be able to work
together.
Thank you.
Uh
Let's go to,
you want to go next? Oh, did
they want to respond or
something.
Did you want to say anything
more?
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I wanted to say thank
you for that, um.
Food banks really do try to take
the lead and encouraging
organizations to work
collaboratively. Um, so, I think
I had a puzzled look on my face
like no food banks don't do it
alone. We have 423 partners, um,
but I did mean our partners in
that, so our network of food
security experts, the nonprofits
we work with um are all part of
that picture that we utilize and
benefit from that $10 million on
a recurring basis, um,
certainly, we definitely rely on
all the other folks doing.
The good work like New Mexico
grown and all the farmers and
these other incredible programs,
um, thank you.
Roadrunner either needed fans
for refrigerators or
refrigerators that would make
produce, and I know I gave some
money, but I don't remember if
that was capital outlay or
junior money.
OK, so can you accept, do you
have a fiscal agent that you
can, if.
We can get capital out way
through.
Yes, Mr. Chair and
Representative Thompson, we are
able to do that. Um, we've
worked with the city of
Albuquerque, we've worked with
Bernalillo County, and we've
also worked with the Midd Region
Council of Governments yeah
thank you um and then just, I
mean convenience stores and
dollar stores are better than
nothing, um, but they're very
expensive and they don't have
the best choices, so and I
wanted to let you know that um
I'm working with the New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty on
having the health care.
authority develop an outreach
plan to promote access to SNAP.
And so what the bill says at
this point is that um HCA is not
responsible for implementing the
plan unless they can get federal
money or private money or
whatever, but it's a start and
if you would like, I will send
you the, the, the draft bill and
um let you see if it.
Works for you all.
OK, thank you, thank you, Mr.
Chair. Mr. Chair Representative,
I just want to let you know that
um my wonderful compatriot back
here, Jason Riggs. I think he
was in Socorro for the uh in the
discussion about that and we're
working very closely with New
Mexico Center on Law and Poverty
and absolutely in support of
what you have put forward, so
you can count on us. Thank you.
Let's go to Representative
Herndon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
presenters, thank you for all
the work you do and, and
everything that you're doing to
Help to um
decrease hunger in our
communities. I'm just, I'm, I'm
looking at these numbers on page
4 of the, your
Hand out and so, um,
Have these, uh, have these
demographics and these uh ratios
change in the last two years.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Herndon, we are hopeful that
those numbers, um, have
decreased. We're fairly, we're
very positive that the children
numbers have certainly
decreased, um, and we're going
to be, uh, looking at that more
closely in hopes of finding some
data that is gonna give us a
little bit more of, you know,
what's happening today, um, or
at least a little closer than 2
years ago, um, but we'd be happy
to communicate with you, uh,
what we're able to find, um, we
do know that.
That for children, the trend is
is moving in a very positive
direction. Um, so we're hopeful
with all the great work that's
happened in all the programs
that have been put in place that
that is true for for all of the
numbers on this page.
So, um,
As I look at the use of SNAP
benefits, you can have them for
between 1 year and 3 years. So
depending upon how long a family
has been utilizing SNAP
benefits. Is there anyone who's
evaluating whether or not
they're food insecurity has
Decreased
Mr. Chair Representative
Herndon, uh, there have been a
great number of studies done
across the country around the
impact of SNAP um on families
and food insecurities showing
that yes, it has a great impact
and a wonderful impact on
families. If there is a desire
for our state to dig a little
bit more deeply into that. I
think we absolutely could if we
wanted to look at particular
communities in our state, um,
but I will tell you, even from
on the ground experience, um.
We, we see a difference and we
saw a difference when Snap
allotments were higher during
the pandemic and when Snap
allotments, of course, were,
were dropped down to previous
levels. We absolutely saw the
difference and heard from so
many folks saying, I didn't need
to come to you when my snap
dollars, when I had more SNAP
benefits in place, and now that
they've dropped down to, you
know, for some families, $50.60
dollars a month. I have to come
here again.
get access to food.
I just think it's really
important that as we continue to
support the program that you
all, I think you've been in
existence since 1979 and that we
are seeing some data that's
showing how we are actually
improving people's insecurity on
food and I, I don't know that
I've seen that data, but it
would be really helpful if you
would start producing it.
OK, uh, and thank you very much.
One last question, uh, it says 1
in 4 active duty military
members.
Why don't they have
food security.
That one if that'll take long. I
just find that highly um
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, quite frankly, it's
an issue of wages.
Um, we're talking about E134,
um, particularly when a service
member lives off base with a
family and children are part of
the equations, um.
Any time that we have children
in the equation, we see a
deepening of economic insecurity
in general because kids are
expensive, um, but the wages in
E1 through 4, are, are pretty
low and they're definitely not
keeping pace with the cost of
living, um, particularly in
those areas where there's a lot
of competition for housing and
you know, folk, anybody living
off base may pay a really high
premium, um, to rent a place. So
it gets eaten up pretty quick
and
There's just profound food
insecurity, particularly in
those ranks.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Senator, um, Pope, thank you,
Mr. Chairman and thank you both
for being here. It was great
having this discussion in
Almoordo really focusing.
Uh, on the veteran side, um.
I think
Um
Not great about the situation,
but the fact that we're just
highlighting the fact that so
many folks are dealing with
hunger.
Uh
You know, politically folks want
to talk about inflation, all
these issues and just not
understanding that they just
exacerbates the issue, right?
There were people.
Dealing with food hunger and
situations and, you know, we try
to do things with Snap, we try
to do the work that you're
doing, um.
You know, you even go to schools
nowadays you go to UNM they have
food pantries for students,
right?
Um, this is something real,
something that many of us don't
deal with now, you know.
When I was in college and many
of us, right, you know, we
bought ramen noodles and did
things to kind of get by, right?
But you literally have students
now, especially grad students
making a decision when they're
gonna eat their meal because of
inflation because of rent where
they're gonna live how are they
gonna fill their tank and so uh.
We have to do something and we
have to make sure we're giving
you the resources to meet that
need and help our communities.
When it comes to our military
and our veterans, um, you know,
they are a reflection of our
communities dealing with the
same things when it comes to
our, our troops, our military
folks, those E1, E4s I just want
to let.
Uh, many on the committee know.
You know, when you come in
usually uh E1, E2, E3, in some
cases if some folks have
experience and Rosi or whatever
and they, you know, get
promoted. They're still not
making a lot of money and in a
lot of cases, you're staying in
the dorm.
Unaccompanied
And so when you're living in the
dorm by yourself, you're gonna
get a meal cart. So you can
basically go eat 34 times a day,
eat as much as you want in the
dining hall.
What ends up being a problem is
if they end up getting married
or if they hit E3 E4, and
they're like the dorm's full,
you need to find a place off
base, then they get a housing
allowance, right on top to pay
for that. The reality is though,
that housing allowance always
lags behind. They're usually
paying out of pocket and then
you got the utilities and they
don't get that meal card
anymore.
Now they gotta get their own
groceries.
So think about that and think
about an E1, E2, E3, that's
married.
Has a spouse that.
maybe doesn't have the ability
to work because she's taking
care of the kids or some of the
issues we're dealing with with
compacts and licensures, they're
not able to go back to work or
there's the childcare issues.
Um, now they have 34 kids.
And a wife and then how are you
gonna pay for the food when
you're already paying out of
pocket for the rent only
utilities.
So that's really the big issue,
um, I know DOD is always looking
at that and looking at what they
could do, but a lot of it is a
shortage of housing and all that
lags behind because they always
look at the year before what
that cost of living is and, and
the cola.
But I just want to let folks
know that they're dealing with
it, um.
I think we can all agree it's
kind of shameful that anyone in
our military, right, would be
suffering.
food insecurity?
But folks need to know what's a
reality and that's happening.
And you have folks on base that
qualify for SNAP.
There's some that don't want to
take it.
Just because of the pride and
they, they just don't, they're
just like, you know, I'm OK, I
don't want to take that. I have
a job, right? Um.
But we got to find ways to help
them and not put a stigma on
this, so I think that it's great
that we're just having these
conversations.
So, um, no questions at all, um.
I'll let you make a comment. I
might have 10 seconds left, um,
if you'd like to. I'm over, so
I'm over. Well, I appreciate it.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, thank you, um, for
offering the deeper perspective
on that, um, it's just one small
little microcosm of what so many
people in our communities are
experiencing, um, but
particularly shameful um that
folks that are enlisted that are
willing to defend our country.
Live in this
conditions, um, where they would
be food insecure. It's just kind
of unfathomable to me.
Mr. Chairman
Just as a point of reference,
point of information.
An E4.
Married two kids.
Making $3,066 a month.
That's not a lot of money.
And we expect them to pay rent.
The utilities they make a car
payment.
By the time that's over, there's
not a lot left over for
groceries, so.
It's, it's, uh, concerning.
Mr. Mr. Chair, I'm sorry, um.
And Representative Martinez was
at, was that just base salary
was that with BAH?
It's base salary, OK.
So, so to be clear, it's still
not a lot. They're going to get
housing, but it's still not
enough. I just want to clarify
that.
Yeah
Just real quick too, um, my um
step-grandson is in the military
in California and um he barely
has enough and he misses a lot
of meals because they'll be out
on different, um,
Uh duties and then Miss KP and
then they have to spend their
own money and gas to go into
town to get food and so their
budgets are really, um, depleted
quickly.
And that goes along with if they
had that available in California
too.
Thank you.
Anything else? Anybody, any
other comments? I want to thank
you for the presentation. Good
luck with the, uh, legislative
session and, and you have a lot
of allies on this committee. So,
uh, uh.
Chances are good. Rubyen did
point out that if we created a
fund,
That would generate revenue.
Annually that could be
sustained.
Well into the future, it would
have to be at least $200 million
the fund of $200 million.
To generate the
4% a year basically is what
they, although I think they
probably in the future it'll
it'll be generating more than
4%. But at a minimum, the, the,
the, to be safe, they would
create, which is a big, it's a
big lift to get 200 million. Uh,
there may be ways in which you
could get a fund of, uh, you
know, 80 million and then an
appropriation each year, uh, and
hope that that fund over time
builds up so that by the time
the oil and gas bin ends is over
and we can't give you that.
Money annually you'd have some
from the fund. There could be
ways of structuring it, but at
any rate, now is the time to
create such a fund. We've got
money now, and, uh, we've
created a lot of others like
that.
So good luck.
Hope you have better luck with
that than I've had with my rural
library permanent fund, which
after 5 years is halfway to its
goal of 50 million
right good thank you.
Um, members, I, do we have the
uh.
Developmental disability
planning council folks here? OK,
good,
come on.
I mean developmental disability,
what is it? Just counsel just
developmental disability
counsel. Yeah. I still call it
that. Yeah.
But Alice isn't here. Yeah, she
wasn't. OK, no problem. That's
what I was looking for. Right,
yeah.
Ellis is doing her budget right
now. Oh, that's fine. Oh.
It was darn LC people over us.
How dare she?
Yeah
Thanks.
I
Uh-huh.
Oh, this is the
Good
He doesn't like splitting your
brain.
OK, so I, so I see that's
substituting for Ellis is uh Eli
Frescos, good, good to see you,
but we also have, um,
Uh, Joe Turk and Bashad Frink.
Good, so I'll turn it over to
you whoever is gonna lead off,
go ahead.
That one? OK, thank you a
reminder we should only have one
mic on at a time or Leo looks
panicked and we get feedback.
Thank you. Thank you, members of
the committee, Mr. Chair. Uh, my
name is Joe.
My name's Joe Turk and I'm the
legal director for the Office of
guardianship. Um, Alice Lou
McCoy, she sends her apologies.
She's actually at the
Legislative Finance Committee
hearing up in Santa Fe right
now, so she couldn't be here.
She's trying to get down here as
soon as possible, but um.
In the meantime, I'm sitting in
for her with me today are Bashad
Frink, uh, who works with the
Center for Self-Advocacy at the
Developmental Disabilities
Council and Eli Fresque from
Accessible New Mexico, um, when
we, the legislative Health and
Human Services staff communicate
with us. They wanted to hear
specifically about two
particular programs supported
decision making and accessible
state government. And so Bahar
and I are going to speak to the
supported decision.
Making section of it and, and
Eli Fresque is going to discuss
accessibility and state
government. And so I'll start
off with supported decision
making, and we had a couple of
handouts regarding that. I think
we're just passed out, so I'll
just jump right into it. Um.
The first
Slide is just the intro slide of
uh our agency.
Put that there.
OK.
To start off with, I just wanted
to go over what the legislature
has asked us that TDC to do with
supported decision making over
the past several years, um, and
that began in FY 22 when we got
a $15,000.
Award to conduct a supported
decision making task force,
which we can thank Rep Ferrari
for in particular. Um, when we
conducted that task force, we
had members of the community who
are from the DD waiver uh
service providers community,
people who were under
guardianship, professional
guardians, family guardians,
family members, um, members of
the judiciary and attorneys who
practice in uh guardianship and
the outcome of that was a bill
that was presented.
to the legislature in the uh FY
to the legislature in the uh
FY23 legislative session. Um, it
would have codified the and
legitimized supported decision
making agreements in New Mexico.
It's um made it through one
hearing, but unfortunately
didn't make it all the way
through the, the Senate
committee hearings and so it
didn't, it didn't succeed then.
But uh since then, we've gotten
additional funding to
Begin working on alternatives to
guardianship programming
that we worked on last year in
FY 24. We received $75,000 to do
that, and what we did is, uh, a
few things. First, we put
together a legal clinics slash
presentations that we put on in
Albuquerque, Las Cruces, and
Silver City to explain to the
public the alternatives to
guardianship that already exist
in New Mexico like powers of
attorney and uniform healthcare
decision.
maker, um, surrogate decision
makers, uh, all the other
options that are available and
the, the benefit of having a
supported decision making act
passed in New Mexico. And we
also had attorneys there from
disability rights New Mexico who
could help people from the, from
members of the public who would
come in to write powers of
attorney or any um other
alternatives to guardianship
that people might need and also
explain and kind of go over even
begin the process of creating a
supported decision making
agreement.
Um,
we also are put together some
videos for social media
explaining the benefits of
leaving the decisions for a
person in their hands rather
than turning them over to a
guardian to be made, um, we are
working with the Office of the
Special Education Abad on
training for people in
transitions who are moving from
high school age to adulthood and
the benefits of them retaining
their own decision making
powers.
Um, we are also working with
DDSD to create videos that DD
waiver service providers that
they are required to, you know,
um, watch some videos, maintain
some training every year, and we
worked with them to update the
training videos on guardianship
to explain the importance of
leaving decision making powers
in the person with a disability
and how that can promote their
independence and autonomy and
their overall outcome, uh,
health wise.
Uh, although our bill was not
successful in 2023, we have
continued working on um
increasing support for supported
decision making act support
decision making act in New
Mexico. Um, we now have support
from the wings Committee. We
have judges who have already
indicated to us that they're
willing to testify at the at the
during the legislative session
in support of supported decision
making and a supported decision
making Act. um, and they'll talk
about the benefits, how
They, when they are addressing a
guardianship petition, how
beneficial it would be for them
to consider.
A step down from guardianship to
see if it's a successful
alternative rather than the
current situation where it's
either you have a guardian or
you don't have a guardian, and
that's, that those are the only
two options.
The next slide, I
I was suggested I not spend too
much time, but these are just
general information about
guardianship. Um, the decisions
that a guardian is typically
left to consider or ask or
tasked with considering our
healthcare decisions, personal
care decisions like who is going
to help someone with their ADLs,
um, and deciding which people or
which companies will help with
that residential placement, um,
which typically can be, um, in
the DD waiver uh realm. It's a
group home independent living or
family living.
Making that decision is
frequently left up to a
guardian finances and how
someone's Social Security
disability benefits are used or
any trust money from family
members or earnings are used.
Um, and also how to make sure
and report abuse, neglect,
exploitation, and fraud that
people with disabilities
experience.
Uh, the next slide number 4,
just explains the difference
between a guardian and a
conservator guardian is.
Given the authority to make
decisions about someone's life
regarding their care, custody
and control of the person, a
conservator makes decisions
about someone's property and
finances.
Uh, and the next slide number 5
is
The current state of the law,
which
Does
Express a preference for
alternatives to guardianship
before a guardianship is put in
place that courts and the
petitioning attorney, the
guardian ad litem, and the court
visitor who are all involved in
a guardianship petition are
required to look through steps
short of guardianship before
making a recommendation and for
the court's part, uh, uh,
creating a guardianship, so that
alternatives can be explored and
tried before someone's rights.
are
Taken from them and put in the
trust of a guardian, so a powers
of attorney, um, any other
alternative setup that might
support the person with a
disability, short of.
Placing them under guardianship,
um, what will we find at the
Office of guardianship is a lot
of times this is aspirational
that a lot of the um
A lot of the alternatives are
not fully tried and we would
like to improve the ability with
the supported decision making
act and through increased use of
powers of attorney, other
agreements to give someone
leaves with someone the ability
to make decisions about their
lives before a guardian is put
in place.
Uh
Next slide. So this slide 6.
What level of support do I need
is, um, what we, the steps we go
through to think about what
decision making support someone
needs before a guardian is put
in place. Um,
You're looking at a specific
task like where can someone live
or what kind of medical care or
healthcare, what kind of
treatment they should have.
These are the questions that we,
we ideally would sit down and go
over with and ask someone to go
through. Is this a decision that
you can do and you can make on
your own and you're comfortable
and you you you feel secure in
making that decision, or is it
something you need a little more
support with. You feel like you
need more um community
involvement, maybe you need.
a BSC or an OT or a PT to get
involved and help you with
making that decision, or is it
something entirely that someone
else you would feel more
comfortable letting them make
the decision, um, and
Then from from the outside
perspective, the, the, for
example, the Guardian ad lite or
court visitor would look through
this next, this next range of
capacities. Is it something that
someone is just unable to make a
decision, like someone who is
comatose, cannot make a
decision, cannot communicate a
decision. Um, they absolutely,
unquestionably would need
someone to make a decision for
them, then there are.
Tears above that. Maybe it's
someone who can say I like.
This seems to be this way, but I
don't like things to be this way
and the Guardian would make a
decision within those contours,
or maybe it's someone who has a
higher uh capacity higher
ability to communicate and they
can say, I like that, I don't
like that. Can you help me
figure out how to make this
happen. And then there are
situations where guardians are.
Um, they don't need to make a
decision about something like
someone who has the someone can
have a limited guardianship
where they, the guardian makes
healthcare decisions because the
person isn't comfortable or
certain about the healthcare
decisions they want to make, but
they are totally fine with
financial decisions. They, they
work part time and they get
Social Security disability
benefits, and they are totally
comfortable deciding where they
spend their money, they pay
their bills, they pay their
rent, they put the the money
that needs to go to to bill
collectors, you know, where it
needs to go, but they
Don't have the comfort to make
medical decisions. That's what
someone who would fall into that
highest category of.
of decision making with a
guardian.
The next um the next slide is
kind of a just a description of
where things stand right now as
far as alternatives to
guardianship, um, I won't go
over every little item in here,
but right now, the 4 general
areas where there are
alternatives to guardianship in
New Mexico are medical,
financial, mental health, and
then kind of a catch-all
specific decisions area, um,
each of those has subcategories
where the choice is left up to
the person in question, maybe
um.
Before they become
incapacitated, they put together
a power of attorney that says
this is what I want to happen
with my money or they put
together a uh health care power
of attorney that says, I want my
brother to make decisions for me
medically if and when I become
incapacitated. Those
alternatives leave the decision
up to the person in question.
There are others, uh, typically
in the financial realm where the
decision is removed from someone
like a representative payee
through Social Security or a
Veterans fiduciary through the
Veterans Administration. In that
situation, the, the person is
entitled to funds, but the
agency that distributes the
funds decides they're
incapacitated enough to not be
able to make decisions about
their money. So we're going to
give that power to someone else,
a rep payee or a VA fiduciary.
But the overall picture from,
from the current state of New
Mexico alternatives to
guardianship is it's, it's more
of a haphazard like patchwork.
They're like places here and
there where alternatives exist,
but there's no comprehensive
cohesive system like a supported
decision making agreement could
provide.
Um, and that the next slide is.
Very briefly, um, it, it's a
Look at what supported decision
making does, how it provides
that framework. Um, at its core,
the act of supported decision
making is a set of social
interventions and accommodations
to assist the person in
understanding and implementing
their own decisions. People
would choose their supporters
and help them gather
information, then discuss their
options with their supporters
and then communicate their
wishes to.
The hospital, the bank, the DD
waiver service provider who
whatever.
Agency or institution that that
you report your decision to, um.
The, the benefits of this are.
Are
threefold. One,
The person in question retains
the right to make decisions
about their own lives, and
that's, that's critical, that's
paramount. The research shows
that when someone has the
ability to make their own
decisions to decide the
healthcare they're going to get
to decide how they're going to
spend their money or where
they're going to live. Their
outcomes are better. They feel
more empowered. They are more
invested and they are more
productive member of their
community. They're more engaged
and involved, um.
The
I always think back to, you
know,
We get a lot of applications in
the Office of guardianship from
people who are in high school
because they are receiving
special education classes. They
have an IEP and they're
encouraged their their parents
generally are encouraged. You
should apply for guardianship
because there's a chance you
like you won't be invited to
the, you won't be allowed to
come to the IEP meetings once
your child turns 18 and
We all go through that
transition to going from 17 and
having parents who make all our
most of our decisions to being
18 and all of a sudden having
the ability to make all these
decisions and then going through
the experience of making bad
decisions and learning from
them, and that learning process
is how you develop the ability
to make good decisions. It's
like, it's like exercising. You,
you make better decisions by
learning from bad decisions
you've made along the way. If
someone, when someone is placed
under guardianship.
And they, they don't have the
ability to make that. They don't
have the chance to exercise
their decision making abilities.
They, their decisions are all
made by some other person. It
can be a family member. It can
be on a lot of professional
guardians, a lot of parents, a
lot of family members, they do
support independence and
autonomy, but there are
situations where someone is
placed under guardianship and
someone just makes decisions and
Tells the person this is where
you're gonna live now and this
is where you're gonna go during
the day and, and I don't think
you should get a job or I don't
think you need to go to school
for that. They make decisions in
place of the person and
The result is the person never
develops that ability to make
decisions and learn how to make
better decisions that everyone
typically goes through.
as you grow into adulthood.
Supported decision making
agreements, give the person who
has a disability, the chance to
set up their own network of
supporters, people in their
life, and the areas they would
want those supporters to help
them with, so that they can
formalize what basically is the
way we all make decisions about
things going on in our life. If
I have a medical decision that I
need to make, I, I'm gonna talk
to my sister-in-law who's a
nurse or my friend who's a
doctor, uh banking decisions.
' s financial decisions. I'll
talk to my friend who works for
a finance company. We all have
these supporters that we rely
on. We just don't have a formal
agreement that memorializes
exactly who we're going to go to
and the areas we're gonna talk
to them about. That's what
supported decision making is,
it's a formalization of that.
Process of relying on people you
know and their expertise to make
good decisions about your own
life, and it's needed in New
Mexico because it would be a way
to leave people without a
guardian to let them retain
their own decision making
abilities, make their own
decisions, learn from those
decisions, and, and
Basically
become full citizens, full
members of the New Mexico
community.
So one of the, one of the
Things that we've been doing in
this past year and we really
working on this, this fiscal
year is the supported decision
making ambassadors program. We
have a group, a small group of
New Mexicans who are working who
have created supported decision
making agreements, and they're
working to implement them, and
we're, we're hoping they'll
testify at the legislative
session coming up in, in the
winter, um.
But I'm pleased to.
Turn the floor over to Bashad
Frank, who is our lead
ambassador for the supported
decision making.
Ambassadors
Go ahead here, I've got to pass
this over.
Thank you, Joe, so much and
thank you, but but it was enough
and chairs and sanators um.
Um
In addition, um, to what, um,
just ascribed, um, we have been
looking closely with many um
many um directors and for
example, with booking on with.
A senior from DC name name um
John De Martinez and from, from,
from DC and and during that time
with him, we have attended the
2024 um conference for the
Arexico and as later a casino
and during that time, um, we
were also like you know, um,
we and other ambassadors will
also part um a parael doing
time at the conference at
Athleta this
this.
June this year, um.
So it was me an ambassadors and
John Marin who who is who who
who who's the lead presenter
doing the panel and he explained
to his audience, um, what, what
The SDM she's making meant to us
and what can, what can mean for
others that want to be
independent and so much more.
I know for me as a.
As the ambassador, um, um, best
overall, um, I know for me, uh,
I didn't always have, I didn't
always have the free will to
act, um, what I want for myself
and for others.
For example, when I was really
young, um, my teachers, um,
they, they did not, um, ask for
what I needed directly to asking
my parents.
And even on the eye,
No I wanted.
Um, they went to my parents for,
um, for, for, um.
Questions and answers and so
many additional information
about me that I could myself to
the teachers.
Um
Uh, sometimes today has been
like that for me because my
disability, um, I do. I have
autism syndrome and speech
impairment. um, I, I, I, I, I.
take my words clearly and
specifically so that impact on
understanding as they can, but,
um, but, um.
Sun goes these days or before
just less likely today to some
go, you know, I cannot seem to
address because of my disability
or some goes I can't really um.
really, um, Billy.
Um, address.
I believe that this plan or this
agreement.
Can really benefit not only for
adults.
Buffer but for children too.
Um, because, um, at the end of
the day, you know, we're all one
big family.
Well, I actually, one big family
and we all deserve the same, the
same, the same voice and the
same.
the same attention in the same
uh in the same um same same
power basically to, to, to have
to have be and do our goals and
for our lives and as the DDC,
um we we we we we we.
We explain that to other um
the council members are the um
other government officials that
came to the conference and what
Joe has explained too about the
video and the SDM too kit, um.
We, we did see also have
Used
Of
the project of the videos for
for my, my decisions.
And we have a co-worker of mine
and a, and also a volunteer, we
did a video about this, um, my,
my decisions on project and
expose like each episode like
you know what, how we can as
individuals make their own
decisions, but regardless of
who's um who's in our
environment like at a bank, you
know, we had one about a bank,
you know, about how, what to do,
what we're gonna say to the
cashier.
When, when, um, when we want
that amount of money, you know,
and, and in a video that cashier
was like, you know, um,
Yeah, so, so this person cannot
do because she hasability as
this person next to him
or he's supporter.
And
That is an example of the video,
but, um, but overall, um.
We did so much stuff with with
with this project and um we'd
love to, um, see this, um,
spread, spread out um as a you
know, and we love to um see um
this this awareness, this
product be just be like, no,
over over must go because like
Joe says over the global base in
California and I must have then
um then
I you places so I'm so I'm so
um.
Um
Anyway, um, thank you so much
for your, for your, for
listening and um and, and um I
really appreciate all that you
do and um.
And thank you so much for for
your for your time and for your,
and for your presence.
And just to
To tag along with what Bashad
was discussing. The next slide
shows the states were supported
decision making has already been
passed. There are 29 states
where supported decision making
is already an alternative to
guardianship that's codified in
the law and available to to
people living in those states
and we, we would love to see it
also in New Mexico, um.
The, the other, one of the other
handouts we've also provided is
a one page just a.
fact sheet about supported
decision making and the bill we
would be presenting to the
legislature this, this winter,
um.
I know there's another half of
the presentation coming up, so
I'm just gonna speed through
this, but it explains the
benefits and how a supported
decision making agreement would,
would benefit New Mexicans with
disabilities. It would be a
written in plain language, so
it's easily understandable for
the people who would see it
banks, hospitals, doctors, um,
anyone, anyone else who would
need to look at it to, to
understand that this is a person
with disabilities, but they have
the right to make their own
decisions and if they bring
people to a
doctor's visit or to a meeting
with a loan officer, whoever,
what have you, um, those people
are there to support that
person, um, then the person
whose agreement it is would
retain full decision-making
authority. Um, it, it would
formalize and legitimize the
The idea that people with
disabilities don't need a
guardian in place to make
decisions for them, that there
are situations, hopefully lots
of situations where those
decisions can be left to the
person with a disability and
they can make their own
decisions, um.
It's particularly important
because there's been a dramatic
increase in the number of
guardianship applications we've
received in the last 3 years and
um.
The ability to point people in
the direction of alternatives to
guardianship and to supported
decision making agreements would
allow people to retain that
decision making authority, um.
And so I'm not sure if uh the
committee would like to ask
questions about supported
decision making separately or
just do the whole?
OK, yeah, let's go ahead and
hear from Mr. Fresco, and then
we'll ask questions about both.
Great. OK.
Great. Good afternoon, Mr. Chair
and members of the committee. My
name is Eli Freskas. It's a real
honor to be here today, uh, to
talk about accessibility, uh,
solutions for government
services. I want to thank Alison
McCoy and DDC for asking me to
come and talk a little bit about
accessibility and state
government and.
Uh, this is a rather new
presentation, so I'm gonna try
to work through it pretty
quickly, uh, but I'm excited to
be here. This is interesting
stuff and fun stuff, I hope. Um,
so the first thing is on slide 2
is, uh, accessibility, and I
have 3 boxes here. The first one
is physical accessibility, and I
think most of us know what that
means. That's, you know, ramps
for wheelchairs, accessible
restrooms, grab bars, things
like that, universal design.
Digital accessibility is a new
realm and this one is just as
important when you think about
how do we now deliver services
to our communities, how do we
deliver our services to our
constituents, and that's largely
on your phone, right? So we want
to make sure that our digital
platforms are accessible,
usable, and functional by people
with disabilities and that
includes apps as well.
And I wanted to include a 3rd
box here about attitudinal
barriers because I actually
think this is the biggest one.
These are barriers that are
created by our own biases, our
own stigmas,
our uh ableism that often
happens in our communities when
we think about how to provide
effective services to folks when
we break down the barriers to
attitudes when we break down
those barriers in our minds. The
other pieces come into the other
places uh sort of get worked
out, the digital.
Physical, even the financial
barriers that we create.
On site 3, now this is a very
lawyerly slide. I have a list of
the different requirements of
the Americans with Disabilities
Act. Before I go there, I just
want to mention that the ADA,
which was passed in 1990, so
we've had an entire generation
of folks that have grown up with
the American Disabilities Act
transformed the way that we
looked at people with
disabilities the way we serve
them. Now there's a lot of work
to be done, particularly in
employ in employment.
But it changed the world. The UN
and a number of other countries
have copied and pasted a lot of
the ADA, um, ADA, of course,
comes from federal
rehabilitation Act which was
passed in the 70s, but the
American Disabilities Act really
is the civil rights bill for
people with disabilities, um, in
the country and in really in the
world.
So one of the requirements is
that they appoint an ADA
coordinator. So this is part of
the ADA rules, and it's really
to appoint a person who's a
public point of contact to help
administer and support the
agency with ADA issues. And this
is a federal requirement for any
agency of 50 or more employees.
Second one is a notice of
rights. So every state agency is
required to post publicly a
notice of people's rights with
disabilities.
The third is a grievance process
and procedure. Um, this one is
up up.
public place of where a person
can report or file a complaint
with the city or state agency,
um, and that should be
prominently posted, uh, usually
on a, on a agency's website.
Self-evaluation and AGA
transition plans, so this is
number 4. this is a requirement,
of course, comes from the 1990
Americans with Disabilities Act,
and it requires our government
agencies to evaluate any kinds
of physical barriers, digital
barriers, or other kinds of
barriers to programs and
services. So it requires them to
create a self-evaluation plan to
do maybe a punch list when it
comes to any kind of physical
barriers and then maintain that
list for the city.
The city or state agencies.
The 5th 1 here is digital
accessibility, and I'll talk a
little bit more about this one.
This is a new rule that had just
come out, just published in
April of this year that requires
websites to conform with
international standards for
website accessibility. Many
people don't know about this,
but it's, it's coming. It's very
important.
Number 6 is effective
communication. This one is
really kind of what it sounds,
making sure that if people were
to request an ASL interpreter or
captioning that those be
available. Also Braille, other
kinds of alternate formats. And
finally, as reasonable
accommodations, and these are
requests to make policies or
procedure modifications to any
kinds of uh programs or services
that are being provided by a
state agency.
All right, so slide 4, I did
want to just mention some of the
benefits and impacts of
disability, uh, and
accessibility services. Uh, when
we look at social benefits,
there are many, many studies
that have looked at the physical
universal design, digital
accessibility, and how it
improves quality of life for
people. Also, it sparks on
innovation and through
adversity, um, that has led to
many different kinds of new
technologies. When you
think of a voice recognition and
other kinds of touch interfaces,
those are all things that we
often sparked by uh people with
disabilities looking for access.
Economic benefits, uh, there are
61 million people right now
currently with disabilities,
adults in the United States,
that's $420 billion of
disposable income, $17.3 billion
spent on tourism each year, so
there's a huge economic benefit
to making things accessible.
Legal and ethical benefits,
avoiding litigation. There's
often litigation around the
American Disabilities Act and
the second piece of that is also
Department of Justice, Federal
DOJ enforcements through
settlements and other kinds of
actions by federal DOJ who
enforced the Americans with
Disabilities Act.
And finally, the ethical
benefits, uh, you think that as
People who work in state
government as people who are in
government in New Mexico, we
have an obligation to our people
to make sure that our services
are accessible to things like
program access, digital,
physical, accessibility is
something in in in our minds and
also being provided as a
service.
Site 5. So this is the one that
I uh really wanted to touch and
let folks know about these are
the new rules that were passed
and published through the
Department of Justice who
enforces the American
Disabilities Act Title II.
And this requires that all state
and local governments make their
websites accessible, including
apps, uh, depending on the size
of the jurisdiction. So if it's
50,000 or more, the requirement
is by April of 2026. If it's
under 50,000, it's April of
2027, so they have an extra
year. State government is larger
than 50,000, so we would be
required to have our websites
and apps accessible by 2026
conforming with the web content
accessibility.
guidelines WCAG 2.1AA. It's a
little bit nerdy, but those are
the international standards.
They're actually 50 conformance
standards. So what does this
look like? So if you have a
website and you're somebody who
is blind low vision, you may
have a trouble viewing the font.
You may have color contrast
issues. These are all things
that are embedded within the web
content accessibility
guidelines. If you're somebody
who is blind or has a cognitive
disability, you may also be
using a screen reader which
manipulates the screen, and puts
it into spoken text.
And you can see it, you can hear
it, um, and that way you can
maneuver around the website
through your assistive
technology, but if the website
is not coded correctly, you
cannot use assistive technology.
So these are all part of those
standards. Another one, and it
was mentioned earlier was plain
language to make sure that we
utilize the best practices
around plain language, which is
uh to
communication informs that are
7th, 8th, 9th grade reading
level, get rid of jargon, things
like that.
Just sticking on slide 5 I'll
mention one last thing is it's,
it's pretty robust. So even when
you have an app that may be run
by a third party vendor. So
examples of this could be if you
have a public benefits program
and it's being run by a vendor
who has an app that the
government service is
contracting with that vendor
also has to be uh provide
accessible services so that app
has to be accessible. The DOJ
gives examples, so for example,
a city municipality who has an
app
For parking, that parking app
also has to be accessible.
All right, slide 6. So in 2022,
realizing that accessibility at
both physical and digital was
something we wanted to uh bring
heads together. We created a
state of New Mexico digital and
inclusion collaborative with the
help of do it, a number of other
state agencies who work with
people with disabilities, the
commission for the blind,
commission for the Deaf or Hardy
Hearing, of course, DDC, uh, we
come together, week, monthly,
sorry, uh,
we have workshops and we talk
about accessibility. We give
some trainings on the web
content accessibility
guidelines, those 50 conformance
standards. We've talked about uh
cybersecurity. We talked about
AI and its potential for
assistive technologies we've
talked about.
Governance policies, programs,
different ways of managing uh
our different uh vendors that we
have. We work very closely with
our PIOs and CIOs, and it's been
a really great experience and
it's something that uh I'd hope
that the legislature and other
folks would help to, to support
and and build that kind of
conversation where we can talk
about those best practices.
All right, through the collab,
The accessible
The digital accessible and
inclusion collaborative. Uh,
we've come up with some
recommendations and some ideas
around what's the best practices
could be. Uh, the first one is
to develop either a program or
an office of accessibility and
innovation. It's a place of
technical assistance. Now, we
wouldn't be alone. In fact, most
states have a
Office or a program that is
really that technical place,
right? So many people,
particularly PIOs who run and
manage websites. They're not
necessarily gonna be coders. In
fact, they're usually not.
They're working with the vendor.
How do we give them the best
practices and tools they need in
order to make their websites and
apps accessible.
The other places training and
collaborating with other state
agencies. So we're looking at
ways of developing training
programs in order to make sure
that our programs and procedures
are accessible, physical
accessibility, right, the ADA
standards for accessible design
and then like I said, also the
website uh requirements based on
the web content accessibility
guidelines.
Not to forget, also employment,
accommodations, best practices.
October is uh disability
employment Awareness Month. Um,
so how can we look at how can we
employ more people with
disabilities.
Legislation. So, New Mexico is
one of the few states that
doesn't have a digital
accessibility law rule or
requirements around the
particular standards, so
Arizona, Colorado, Texas, they
have laws that require state
government to uh provide their
websites, uh, with based on a
particular standard like the web
content accessibility
guidelines. Unfortunately, we
don't have that. Uh, there's a
lot of opportunity, um, now,
however, um, and also
The federal government has
decided for us that those web
content accessibility guidelines
are going to be required, um, in
about 18 months or so.
ADA coordinator program. So,
like I said, like I mentioned,
if you have 50 more employees
under the federal ADA, you are
required to appoint an ADA
coordinator. We think it would
be really great if we could have
state agencies appoint their ADA
coordinators, many have. I think
there's a huge opportunity to I
get a list of the ADA
coordinators, find out what
they're doing, help them develop
a network, uh, look at best
practices, share resources,
there's some efficiency there as
well.
ADA transition plans asking our
state agencies about what
barriers to access do they have
in their facilities. Also
thinking about uh what digital
barriers they may have in their
facilities and forming again a
network in a way of managing
both now and into the future
accessibility.
And finally, uh, accessible
public notices. I think we could
do a bit better job often of
having information out there to
the public about the
accessibility of our meetings,
our public events, letting
people know that, for example,
it's wheelchair accessible or
maybe it's not wheelchair
accessible, that American Sign
Language is an option for folks
or or captioning uh as well.
Uh, and finally, I'll conclude
by thanking everyone for letting
me talk a bit about
accessibility today. I will say
that there's a huge return on
investment when we uh work on
accessibility, uh, the
Department of Justice when they
passed the web, when they, when
they passed the new standards
for ADA Title II, they're
required to actually do an
analysis of how, what are the
costs and benefits over a period
of time for accessible websites,
and they came up with a number
and I was playing around with
some numbers and basically for
New Mexico.
If we have fully compliant WCAG
2.1AA websites, we will save
about $11 million a year on time
spent going back to websites and
fixing them, remediation,
potential litigation, the time
spent on our consumers are uh
folks in New Mexico trying to
figure out how to use the
website when it's inaccessible,
they can't fill out a form, for
example. So there's a a huge
return on value and really what
it, what it takes is just
awareness uh investing some time
and effort.
And having place of technical
assistance in the state in order
to help our state partners and
our, our allies across the state
make our services more
accessible. Thank you.
Any other concluding remarks,
Mr. Turk?
Uh,
turn off your mic, one of you,
yeah, there you go.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, uh.
No, that concludes our
presentation. Thank you and
we'll stand for questions.
Thank you.
Thank you, uh, all three of you
for, for your information and,
uh, let's go to the committee
for questions. We'll start with
Senator, um, Pope, do you have
any questions? Uh, Mr. Chair, I
don't have any questions, but
thank you for being here.
OK, Representative Kate.
Uh, thank you, Chair. Thank you
very much for your presentation,
um.
Uh, uh, Eli and uh Joe uh Alice
would be very proud of you, um,
and I wanted to also say Baha
any other ambassadors have done
an excellent job being
ambassadors throughout the year.
I really appreciate your
advocacy.
I have two quick questions. One
is when we go back to the
supportive decision making. What
is the process if, if, um, if
somebody's in a guardianship, so
it's, uh, they're just
supportive, they're supportive.
What is the process to ensure
that they are supporting that
decision making and not making
it or manipulating it or guiding
it. Is there a process where
when an individual makes a
decision about medical or
financial, is there a way where
they also step away from their
guardian to be able to
communicate it to someone else
to ensure that there is no undue
influence.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative Kates.
So, just so I'm
Just to make sure I understand
this is a person who would still
have a guardian and then and a
supported decision making
agreement, so they'd have a
limited guardianship that
excludes
or they wouldn't have a
guardianship they would have
supportive decision making, so
I'm, I'm just want to know what
the process is to ensure that
the supportive decision making
is not decision making.
That the supporter isn't making
the decision and putting it
apart,
that's a great question. Um,
the, the bill that we're
envisioning would include
funding for DDC to be involved
in innovating and um,
There's a
of words on our one pager that I
slipped my mind and executing,
implementing or terminating the
supported decision making
agreements and it would be.
Our office would be involved in
kind of helping to set it up,
finding the supporters, and then
We're envisioning that there,
there's not just the one
supporter, there would be a
couple and they would, you know,
watch out for each other and
this is, uh, these are people
who, who are agreeing to be
involved in this, in this person
with a disabilities life. And um
I I think it would be self
correcting, kind of the same way
that we all have checks and
balances on the decisions we
make in our own lives. So thank
you very much. Thank you for
that answer, Joe. That is
exactly what we're trying to
see. Do we have a process
in place to make sure that um
undue influence is not being
acted. Thank you so much, Eli,
for your presentation. I'm all
about accessibility. I can't
wait for this office to be open,
uh, at the government level, but
as October disability awareness
Month.
How are we going to get these
state agencies to diversify
their workforce. What's your
great plan on that?
Um, we had a really great event
last week, last Thursday, um,
called the Disability Employment
Awareness Month, uh.
And part of the deem event, uh,
was bringing together a number
of federal, state, and college
representatives to speak on
disability and letting people
know both the employee and
especially the employer, know
that many reasonable
combinations that are needed for
people with disabilities in the
workplace are no cost to low
cost, and then it's really about
um creating that interactive
process so that one.
on one process. So it was as
much as a training, I think for
the employees as it was for the
employers. So I would, I would
encourage um agencies to uh in
the disability community, so
thinking of the Governor's
commission on disability
Developmental Disability
Council, the other commissions
to work with our state agencies
and train them and inform them
about what a reasonable
accommodation is. It's not
something scary. In fact, it's
an opportunity to build that
connection with.
employees, but it, it is a huge
challenge.
OK, thank you. I'm out of time,
but I just wanna say as an
employer of individuals with
disabilities, anyone who is a
potential employer is welcome to
reach out to me to, so that I
can talk them through the
accommodation gets you a class A
employee, so thanks.
Thank you, Representative Case.
Representative Herndon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you all for your presentation
and Mr. Frescos, I'd just like
to ask you to turn off your
microphone is, uh, with respect
to the supportive decision
making. What I sometimes have
done with individuals who have
uh needed some support in making
decisions. I've encouraged them
to engage in a durable power of
attorney which would still give
them the ability to make
decisions on their own, but to
also have somebody there to help
them. How will this decision?
A supportive decision making law
make a difference in how that
has been working.
Thank you, Representative
Herndon, um, the.
The benefit would be that, uh,
the durable power of attorney
has the notarization
requirement, the supported
decision making agreement is
more of a collaborative process
to develop uh as and for that
specific person, what the
specific areas that they would
want help making decisions on
and who they would rely on, so a
durable power of attorney.
It kicks into effect once the
person loses capacity.
And that the person they've
given the power of attorney gets
to make the decisions from that
point forward. The supported
decision making agreement tells
the the the hospital, the
doctor, the bank, these are the
people who are going to help
this person make decisions. So
they're allowed to be in
meetings, they're allowed to
have access to records or
finances and, and help that
person make the decision, but
then that that person in
question makes the ultimate
decision.
They get to keep the right to
make the decision and, and
communicate it to the, to the
bank or doctor or.
or whoever it is. It also would,
um,
Allowed we've heard from judges
that they, they
When they face petitions for
guardianship and they're on the
fence about what to do. Right
now, it's a binary choice. You
either have a guardian or you
don't, and that's it with, with
a supported decision making
agreement, the judges would be
able to
Not go as far as putting a
guardian in place to take away
decision making rights. It would
be a collaborative process where
the person has the supports to
get the information and
communicate a decision rather
than someone making that
decision for them. And rather
than
Um, I think judges feel
uncomfortable if they know
someone has capacity issues, but
um they, they don't want to
just, you know, leave them
alone, not and deny a petition
for guardianship because that
feels like there's no support,
there's no formal system or
structure to help the person
make decisions.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh
thank you very much.
Let's go here, uh,
Representative Thompson.
Thank you so much. um, in full
disclosure, I am the guardian of
my son, um, and I believe he.
Totally needs a, a guardian and.
My concern is, I mean, I like
the idea, but as a mom, it's
like, oh my gosh, we hear about
all the financial scams and all
of that and I could see a family
or caretaker or whatever's fear,
I mean, we all get taken in by
scams and so let's say, you
know, some the somehow the
person signed up for, um, a, uh,
they, what do they call those
timeshare and so that would
lock.
into horrible fees for, for, so
if, if, if there is no
guardianship or, you know, you
don't have, um,
over financial and they get
taken in by a scam, as many of
us have. Is there any recourse
or is it kind of you're out of
luck.
Thank you, Representative
Thompson. um, I, I think the
person.
Is they still have all the
protections that the rest of us
have when we are scammed. They
are, you know, recourse against
the, the.
The wrong act, the bad actor,
um, it.
We see situations where even
when someone has a guardian,
they are scammed. They are
talked out of what money they
have, they're convinced to, you
know, give away their money and
a guardian can't stop that from
happening. If a person has a
$100 bill, a guardian can't stop
them from just handing it off to
someone else. Um, a guardian
just doesn't have that ability.
This is, um,
So a person with a supported
decision making agreement who
who signs a bad car loan or
something like that. They, the
Guardian, there's no one there
to stop that from happening,
unfortunately, but they have the
same recourse that we all have
to pursue a
Concerned with the DOJ's office
or
other recourse, I understand,
but what if it's I mean
timeshares are a scam as far as
I'm concerned, but they're not
illegal.
And you can bind yourself into a
contract for your life and the
life of your offspring and that
those are, I mean, it's a scam
in my mind, but legally it's not
a scam.
Right, right. You're, you're
correct, yeah. So if someone
were to just sign up for a bad
financial deal, something like
that. The, the supported
decision making agreement. I
think the, the benefit of it
would be that because the person
with a disability would be
involved in making it, they
would know before they.
And into a transaction, these
are the people I've, I've
written down and designated as
those I will talk to you about
financial decisions. So they
would.
The thinking is that before they
sign on that dotted line and
agree to a timeshare agreement,
they would talk to the people in
there supported decision making
agreement about whether this is
a good idea, so they can get
information and
Ideally, no beforehand if it's a
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I mean
people make bad decisions. I
mean, it's just, and that really
worries me, um, you know, and
those sales people are very, you
know, if you just give us 500
today. Oh, if you just give us
$5 today, and they're really
pushy and people fall for it
regardless of their disability
or not. So that as a mom, that
would be really concerning to
me. So thank you so much for all
you do. I used to chair the DDPC
years ago, so thank you.
Thank you. Thank you, thank you.
Representative Ferrari, thank
you, Mr. Chair, and um thank you
panel for um.
Bringing this forward as we've
been working on this at the
wings, um, I don't if anyone's
noticed it stands for working
into justciplinary network of
guardianship stakeholders. So
the wings committee, um, having
the support of, um, uh, all the
different um entities that have
been involved in the
guardianship and then having
this alternative is so important
and especially with um judiciary
and the Supreme Court.
courts approval of this and
going through their process is
something that we've been
missing in the past years trying
to bring this forward. So now we
hope that with that stamp of
approval that um this will um
get the approval of the
legislature because it's been so
well, um, screened and thought
through and and include all the
different aspects, um, that this
will, um, be able to become law.
It is.
so important because we've seen
such disasters with
guardianships that didn't need
to be implemented by the courts,
especially, and um, so this will
add um another alternative and
so thank you for bringing this.
Just to comment
Senator Lopez mentioned that
she's on the wings committee, so
she's a member of the committee.
She's not here this afternoon.
She had other, but, uh, she
ordinarily is, is, would, would,
would be here bringing up the
role of wings played in all of
this. She and I both are yes.
I just wanted to say thank you
Representative Ferrari. Yes, the
wing support is really critical
having the judiciary's support
of a sportive decision making
act we hope will.
Help push it over the finish
line.
Thank you.
And thank you for um presenting
this so well too and uh and
Alice, I'm sure sorry she can't
be here.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Representative Chavez.
Senators of the Olous. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you again
for bringing it. I, um,
Of course it feels like it's a
long time ago, but it was just
last, was it last session or the
session before where we had a
real spirited discussion, um.
In in Sack about legal issues
concerning this, and I was just
wondering if you changed it
since then based on the legal
issues that were raised.
In that committee, as I recall,
um, and I, one question, and I
honestly don't even remember if
I asked was whether we could do
this without enabling
legislation. I, I understand you
want it, um.
Uh
To, to sort of raise its
profile, but is it possible to
to just create these contracts
with with individuals that would
be.
Um, give them power.
To help, not power, but.
Authority to help.
Got it. Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Senator Sadil Lopez, um, I think
it was 2 years ago it was in
that's OK, that makes me feel
better because I thought I, it
was foggy and I thought well it
was it just in in January. Good,
good, that makes me feel a
little bit better, OK. I think
the, the reason a more formal
act is is preferable is because
the, the outside institutions
that
That the, the person with the
disability would be going to
unless it's formalized, we're
we're not confident that they'll
they'll honor it like a bank or
a hospital would, you know,
just.
Allow someone to be in a, in a
to get access to medical records
to help the person make a
decision or same with banking
records, um, so on a, on top of
um
What we've heard from judges and
on the wings committee, the the
formalization makes it more of
an option for a judge to rely
on. And so that they don't have
to go to the last resort of, of
creating a guardianship, they
can.
They can count on a suborded or
they can try a supported
decision making agreement and
see if that provides the
supports necessary for the
person.
So that do you anticipate this
would be more mostly for people
who aren't relatives only
because I feel like in our
family family members have taken
on this role without needing to
go to a guardianship because we
accompany appointments, you
know, to appointments and do all
that kind of thing. So you
anticipate that really it's
necessary.
for people who aren't
Relatives
I
Thank thank you for that
question. I think we
I think it would apply across
the board just um.
We haven't, you know, thought
about it, separated it out like
that, I think the a lot of the
guardianship applications we
receive our requests for
professional guardians because
there's not someone, uh, a
family member or a friend who is
willing to be the guardian.
Maybe that those situations,
there are people who would be
willing to have that lower level
of in involvement or like formal
authority, they don't, they're
not comfortable being an
official guardian, but they're
OK with being a supporter.
Showing up at appointments thank
you. I look forward to it, um,
I, I know you didn't have the
bill, but I remember we had a
very spirited discussion and um
I look forward to seeing it. I
think this sort of halfway
thing.
is helpful, would be helpful to
a lot of individuals.
Thank you, Senator, uh,
Representative Martinez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'll be
very quick with my questions.
Um
The discussion with the judges,
I'm, I'm curious how much input
they've had in the process.
The
The discussion with the judges
has been primarily through that
the wings committee. Um, there
are
My
Uh, director Alison Lou McCrory
attends the meetings, but my
understanding is there are at
least 3 judges, including 1
justice of the Supreme Court
who's involved and who um, who
have, who have looked at the
supported decision making
proposal and supported it. We
also um had judges involved in
the task force 2 years ago that
created the first bill that um
that was unsuccessful a couple
of years ago. So we've had
I would
I'm
ballpark estimate 5 or 7 judges
who have been involved in, in
the supported decision making um
discussions we've had for the
past 3 to 4 years.
I think, uh, Mr. Chairman, as
major
Stakeholders in this process,
uh, you've done a great job and
And bringing them to the table.
My next question for Mr.
Frescas.
On page 7 of your presentation.
You made the comment that the
feds have already made these
decisions for us.
Um, if they've already set the
standards, why do we need to
come in and duplicate the same
thing.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative Martinez, um.
Yeah, that's a great question.
And I think what it comes down
to is it's setting up uh an
extra.
platform and foundation for
meeting these standards because
they're, they're pretty hard,
they're 50 conformance
standards, um, and it's not
something that is easily
digestible. So this is a way of
being that place of technical
expertise. It's not necessarily
going to be a place where
they're going to tell the
agencies what to do, as opposed
to giving them guidance on how
to meet those standards. There's
also 5 exceptions that are
written into those um the WCAG,
the wayA that has been
incorporated into the federal
requirements, um, and these 5
exceptions there, it's not
really clear actually on how
they interrelate with websites
and apps because it hasn't been
um executed yet. So this could
also be a place where um there
could be some conformity with
the different agencies on what
the exceptions could be. So for
example, archived documents and
websites. Those are things that
are outside of the new
requirements. So it's just
explaining what that means.
with the different state
agencies. Um, so, short answer
is, I think it's a place of
providing technical assistance
because these rules can get
pretty complex. It's not just,
hey, meet these standards, it's
how do you do it? What's the
most efficient way? What are
some sharing of resources,
training and expertise to meet
those standards, and it's an
evolving process. Technology is
constantly changing. What's the
impact of, of AI, for example,
on these requirements, that's,
it's, it's always, it's always
evolving.
Thank you I appreciate the
clarification makes more sense
to me now. Uh, thank you all for
the presentation and your time.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Representative and
Representative Chasey.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you very much for your
presentation today. I was
looking through your handouts
and I actually know one of your
ambassadors for this um
supported decision making. It's
been a long time since I did any
of these guardianship cases, but
I generally did them.
And privately, as the Guardian
ad litem and it turned out I
couldn't contract with the
Office of Guardianship because I
was a state legislator. And it
was kind of
You know, I understand the, the
law not to reward people, but
because there wasn't um uh bid
process by the agency. I, you
know, it would be viewed as
favorable to me to just contract
without any con. I could be a
court appointed attorney because
there you have to apply and go
through the whole review
process. But, um,
I guess that I, I, um, I really
can't think of, um, the clients
I had and there were not a whole
bunch of them. Um,
I, I hope that every guardian ad
litem, who's appointed in a case
like this, has the guidance to
help the individual.
More clearly than I could, and I
came from the field of special
education, so I wasn't without
any knowledge, but, um, I think
it's hard, and then you have to
try to explain that to the
judge.
What exactly, um, the family
needs to be responsible for and
what the individual, how the
individual can have input on
that.
And, and clearly there's a wide
range of abilities there, so,
um, good work and I'm wondering,
do you take care of all of them,
The public applications in-house
now or do you still have to use
private attorneys. Thank you,
Mr. Chair and
Uh
representing Chay, um,
We, we do contract with uh.
A handful of attorneys
throughout the state, but we
have, we actually now are fully
staffed attorney wise we have 3
staff attorneys in addition to
me and
Director McCoy. And I think
probably back then when I did
this was over 10 years ago. Um,
it was probably, um, there was
only one attorney in the office,
so, so, and you, you're not
waiting for lengthy periods of
time to get these processed.
We, we still have uh some
There's a delay of about 5
months between when we get an
application and when we can
assign it to a legal team, um,
just because of funding issues
and thank you. That's all, Mr.
Chairman. I have to take a phone
call. Sorry, on that point.
Um, there, uh, is it, uh, ask
for an increase so that you can
have more, um,
Uh
Legal support for the Guardian
items, which is different and
not what's necessary for the
supported decision making,
correct.
Thank you, Representative for.
Yes, that's correct, yeah.
Thank you.
Thank you. And I had just a
couple of questions, so you'll
have 2 bills that you're gonna
be proposing, one for the
accessibility and one for the,
the.
Decision making.
Thank you, Mr. Cha. Yes, that's
correct. And, and do you have
sponsors lined up for those?
That I believe we do, yes.
So, so the issue
you're doing the supported
decision making and who's doing
the accessibility, you're doing
both. No, OK. Oh Kate
Representative Cates, OK, so,
um, if you'd like endorsement of
this committee of those bills,
sponsors, make sure you include
them in your, in your memo to
the staff before October 31st.
It's not, it's not life or death
to get endorsement from.
this committee, our, our power
is admittedly not.
What we'd like it to be
but, but it doesn't hurt
sometimes to have an endorsement
from this committee, the one
dilemma is that if you have our
endorsement, you lose it as soon
as the, uh, the bill is changed
in any way. Uh, we, we endorse
it as we read it.
Just a technicality, not a big
deal.
Um, my other, I did have a
substantive question though, and
that has to do with, um, now.
Your office is involved when
somebody needs a guardian, a
public guardian appointed. If a
family goes directly to a court
and wants a, a guardian
appointed. Is there some way of,
of intervening then with this as
an alternative to that?
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. I
think.
In that situation, they wouldn't
have come through our office
they'd go straight to a district
court judge, and he could name a
guardian even though it would be
more, uh, appropriate to have
some form of supported decision
making. Are we doing a real
education campaign with judges
to try to get them.
To, to bypass.
Naming guardians if, if, if
there's a less intrusive way of
doing things.
Um
I think until there's a
supported decision making act,
we probably there, there isn't
they like the judge wouldn't
know to suggest this in the
family wouldn't know about it.
We are, um, we're working with
disability rights in New Mexico
on training for for judges and
GALs on um when guardianship is
appropriate, more more to
Promote more evaluation of
whether alternatives are more
appropriate than guardianship.
So we're working on trying to
educate about the the
The opportunity to use
alternatives, but until there's
an STM act. I don't think, I
don't think a family or a court
would know to recommend, you
know, an alternative like a
supported decision making
agreement OK. Although there are
those patchwork kind of options
existing already, but
You know, if somebody comes and
says, I'm willing to be the
guardian and just name me as my
mom's guardian. The judge isn't
probably gonna.
venture into that territory of,
well, have you thought of this
other alternative instead. He'll
just sign it probably.
Yeah, uh, Representative Kates.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
because we've moved the
education and training of judges
over, uh, you know, under the
Supreme Court instead of out of
UNM, uh, Carl Reichste I believe
is in in charge of that as well,
so this might wanna I understand
you don't have a bill to show
him yet, but give me a heads up
this is curriculum that you
would want to incorporate in
that in that chain. Thank you.
Then I had one other question uh
for you, Mr. Frescos. The, the
thing about accessibility of a
website and things like that,
the font and the color contrast
and so.
Who's gonna check all of that? I
mean, uh, how would, how would
How would that be reviewed? Is
there, is there going to be some
kind of authority that goes
around checking websites is
that?
Yeah, uh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
That's a great question and I
think there's a couple of
different models and how that
could work. We could outsource
it to the different agencies to
do their own self reporting and
the report out. You could also
have a centralized um audit
system, um, I would recommend,
highly recommend this is another
reason why a bill like this
would be really important was
to, is to bring that technical
assistance here to New Mexico
because there are many national
vendors out there who provide
these kinds of services. Some
are much better than others.
and some are actually um not
that great but very expensive.
So they come in, they provide
all these services, they give us
the bells and whistles, uh, then
they leave and we're stuck with
a website that literally can
change that day and become
inaccessible, so bringing that
brain trust here and creating
something in-house to create
that culture of accessibility is
what I would recommend. So I
think there's a couple of
different approaches, like I
said, one is to have the report
come out from the agencies to
one center or to have
Um, and in office or task force
or division actually go in there
and do the auditing themselves.
Anything else anybody wants to
bring up?
Thank you all and make sure you,
you convey our greetings to uh
Ellis who's, you know, somebody
that has worked with this long
and, and, uh, who we have a
great deal of confidence in so
thank you for the work you're
all doing. Thank you for the
ambassadors and the
accessibility work and for your
work with the legal division.
Thank you so much.
So members, 3 quick
announcements before we go,
before we, uh,
Recess, um, first, don't forget
the DA Aus reception at 7708 4th
Street. As soon as you leave
here, if you have a few minutes
to stop by the, they're really
eager to show us their facility
and their program.
7708 4th Northwest, yeah,
apparently it's right off of
Paseo del Norte. As soon as you
leave Paseo and get on 4th, it's
there somewhere.
On the east side of the street.
And um
Second thing is don't forget
that August, I mean August,
October 31st is the
A deadline for getting your, uh,
legislation that you'd like the
committee to consider, uh,
endorsing, you get that into the
staff.
And then the third thing is the,
the schedule calls for us to
begin tomorrow morning at 8:15.
We're going to change that to 7,
no, no, uh
8:45. We're gonna move it back a
half hour to 8:45.
And with that, and some other
Uh, the people who aren't here,
they, they don't get here on
time anyway, so don't worry is
there a way to text them or
Something to make sure that they
know that it's it's 8:45. OK,
thank you.
Anything else? Anybody else?
I mean, if they get here at
8:15, they can just have a nice
leisurely I think there's still
4 or 5 doughnuts left and
and those burritos and the
burritos will still be, you
know, poisonous by tomorrow
morning.
All right, well, thank you all
and thank you again presenters.
