Thank you and just a reminder
and for me too, um, please
silence your phones and um so we
have behavioral health providers
association of New Mexico,
Maggie McGowan, Stacy Romero and
Pamela Stanley. So ladies, when
you're ready, take it away.
Just a reminder, one mic on at a
time where we get feedback.
How's that?
Great
So good morning.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee.
Madam Chair asked me if I was
nervous and I asked her if I
needed to be, and she assured me
I did not. So we're here to
Hopefully share some really good
information with you.
I'm Maggie McCellen. I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico Behavioral Health
Providers Association.
And joining me today are
A little.
Little clusive to you.
OK.
see.
To do this
How's that?
And I'm gonna introduce my
cohorts as they get to the part
of the program that they're
going to be talking about.
So the
Presentation today is gonna
cover several things. We're
gonna start with an agenda over
on the agenda with an overview
of our behavioral health
provider association we have a
local provider spotlight, um,
uh, for this area. We also have
several slides and several.
Pieces of information about the
changes that are facing us in
the state and in the nation and
what they mean for behavioral
health and we're gonna end up
our presentation with a
discussion of a project that
we've been working on at the
Provider Association for 3
years, the metrics that matter,
and it's pretty exciting
whenever you see the results
that we have from that project.
So, just to talk a little bit
about the provider association
was we were organized in 2014.
This was a year after the, the
great um
Uh, shakedown that occurred in
2013, which I know some of you
will remember very well, and
some of you may not be that
familiar with it.
But essentially the state
governor's office, uh, alleged
that behavior health providers
were committing serious Medicaid
fraud.
And shut down the whole system,
uh, significantly. I don't want
to go into all the details
because I've worked hard to kind
of get my members past that, but
those things die hard. The
reason I'm bringing it up this
morning is we are facing what I
think are, and many of us in the
provider community consider to
be as serious, if not more
serious challenges to our system
that occurred in that, at that
time, but I do want
to go over a little bit about
what who we are now and what
we're doing because I think it's
important that you understand
that we're not just providing
services to kids and families,
so we definitely are, but there
are many other things that we're
involved in.
So I've, I've categorized them
as why providers joined the
association and there's a list,
I think on pages 5 and 6 of
different reasons why they
joined and I'm gonna just
briefly tell you what we do in
that uh regard. I wanted to
share with you everything we do,
but if I shared everything, we'd
be here for a long time and
you'd get really bored, I'm
sure. So these are the hotspots
really good. First of all,
networking and research resource
sharing. I interview every
potential member of our
association, and I can tell you
a common message I hear from
them about why they want to join
is they want to connect with
other providers and understand
what's going on and how other
providers are doing. So we've
developed a pretty strong
network of providers that do
that in 2014 when we started
this association after the 2013
debacle.
So we had 26 agency members and
right now we have 69 with
several pending, so we have just
real steady growth and
involvement, our providers
represent FQHCs. They represent
community behavioral health
centers they represent hospitals
they represent for profit as
well as not for profit, mostly
not for profit, uh, but we have
a substance abuse, drug and
alcohol, children and families,
adult mental health.
We have a wide range of
services. We don't have any
restriction on
What providers do other than the
fact that they are committed to
and involved in actual service
to the community.
Um
So another reason, another thing
we do with um resource and
network sharing happened.
Coincidentally, out of the COVID
um experience where we started
meeting 2 to 3 times a week to
just just to hear about the
changes that were being made,
what codes are being authorized,
how we were supposed to be able
to
Function in that environment.
And that process has whittled
down to once, uh, twice a month
we have a provider meeting which
is an open meeting. The agenda
changes on the list here. I
showed you that last year we
held 21 of these meetings where
we actually invited in members
from state agencies. We had
state legislators, we had a
presentation on SB 3 before it
was even SB 3, and we have a
tremendous investment of our
providers in that.
meeting. I've tried several
times to say, do we need to meet
this frequently and the answer
is always yes, don't stop
knitting. So if you ever want to
talk to the providers, all you
have to do is let me know what
Tuesday afternoon at 4 o'clock,
you're available and we'll get
you in there. It's a, it's a
really valuable experience. We
have the official meetings as
well, but these are just purely
discussion, open discussion and
information sharing meetings.
Advocacy and representation, we
have two standing committees in
our association for legislative
and Policy Development and we
work try to work collaboratively
with other organizations on
matters that are of concern to
all of us, visibility, uh, so
this is a pitch I'm gonna make
for our upcoming conference, we
have as an example of visibility
been been offering and a
statewide conference for 6
years. This will be our 6th
year. It's scheduled for August
4th and the
the, the theme this year is
claiming our power and what that
doesn't mean marching in the
street, although
And we haven't ruled that out,
but what it means is when we
were thinking about this back at
the turn of the year after the
end of last year. I was thinking
about
Where we would be at this point
in the year.
And we didn't know at that point
what it was going to be, how it
was going to be, but we
anticipated it was gonna be.
Interesting. And so we really
focused our agenda and our
presentations on.
How our providers gain power
from the work that they do from
the clients that they serve,
from the values that they have,
how they gain their own personal
power and our whole conference
is really focused on that and
you were invited if you're
interested, uh, all you have to
do is contact us and we'll get
you set up to attend. We've got
some really interesting things
on the agenda this year.
On the next page, research and
data. We have conducted at this,
as I mentioned, the metrics that
matter pilot project for for 3
years. Some of you may have
heard about it before we talked
about it during last session,
but this session we're gonna uh
On the next page, research and
data. We have conducted at this,
as I mentioned, the metrics that
matter pilot project for for 3
years. Some of you may have
heard about it before we talked
about it during last session,
but this session we're gonna,
this, this time we really have
some significant information to
talk to you about in terms of
the basic model for evaluation
that evaluation of quality that
we have developed and that
is available because the state
really supported the original
development of it. So we're
gonna talk more about that.
Pam's gonna talk about that, uh,
uh, later in our presentation.
Member communications, another
thing that we do that's really
uh been helpful as we started
meeting with, I think about 5
years ago with one of the MCOs
where we were having one member
was having a lot of difficulty
getting payments processed. And
over the years that has evolved
into a
A standard
process where we meet monthly
with every MCO and with the
state agencies that are, um,
managing the Medicaid
reimbursements and we problem
solve whenever there are issues
on the table that we can't get
out. The Thursday meetings where
we prepare the agenda and
probably I have 40 to 50
providers attend and they bring
up issues like we were gonna get
this, this claim resolved.
but we haven't seen any payment
yet and the MCOs are there and
the state agency people are
there and we problem solve those
and get them on the agenda. I
can't make any changes, but I
can call people and say, hey,
what about this that's going on?
And it's been, it's, it's, uh,
it's a key part of our
relationship with the pro with
the providers as well as with
the MCOs.
Most recently this year, you may
have heard about it, um.
We were in a meeting, I think it
was probably in April and the
providers were all really upset
because of the implementation of
the new provider enrollment
system in the US New Mexico
portal.
It didn't work and it didn't get
In fact, we couldn't get uh
providers could not get their
providers registered so that
they could process payments. It
was a huge, a huge issue.
Fortunately, the state was
already aware of it and was
already beginning to work on it,
but we ask for a meeting, a
public meeting to talk about it
and get all the issues. The
state responded Medicaid managed
care, responded strongly. We had
a meeting with 175 providers and
state people to identify what
the issues.
were, you know, one can argue
the issue shouldn't have been
there, but the reality was they
were people were not getting
paid. Agencies, a couple were
looking at possibly closing and
that networking and
communication we had with each
other was significant and some
one of the things I'm most proud
of with our organization. And
then another uh benefit of being
part of our organization is that
the NMBHPA is a full 100% member
of the
National Council on Mental
Wellbeing and every member that
joins our organization.
Automatically becomes a full
member of the national council.
That's a $5500 investment and as
soon as they sign up with us and
we our dues are not anywhere
near that, I can assure you.
Maybe I should think about that,
but at any rate, um, what this
means is, is that all of our
members, all of our 70 some
members and their staff have
access to the information that
we get from the National Council
on National Policy initiatives
for.
For example, we get weekly,
sometimes more than weekly
updates on what's happening on
the hill and with advice to who
to write to and how to process
that information. Thousands of
responses have gone from our
organization and other
organizations like us and we're
connected with that national um
energy and activity.
So that's kind of a thumbnail
scale. There's a lot I left out,
um, about our association, but
we're very active, we're very
involved. We're 100% committed
to continuing what we're, what
we're doing and hoping that we
can continue it and we're gonna
talk a little bit more about
that and those challenges when
we move on.
So we want to, I, I'm aware that
whenever your committees go out
into the community, you like to,
this is what I assumed that you
like to hear what's going on in
the community. And so I, I asked
Stacy from Kids counseling here
in Las Vegas to do a kind of a
more of an in-depth review of
one of our organizations and so
she's gonna talk about kids
counseling and I'll tell you
that she, what I found out is
that she is a native Las.
Megan. Is that, is that the
right term, Las Vegas? She's a
native from Las Vegas and uh has
a passion for the services that
she provides, so I'm gonna let
her talk to you for a few
minutes about kids counseling.
So Meg, I thought it might be a
lost vegan. That would be how it
would spell in Las Veggangan is
that it? No, well, B E G A N is
vegan.
It's early, never mind.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Stacy Romero. I am the
CEO of Kids Counseling here in
Las Vegas. I'm actually, I was
born and raised in Mora County,
which is a neighboring county,
so I don't know if that makes me
a moron, but
Here I am. Um, I have been in
the field, um, for, I'm starting
my thirty-sixth year, um, 28
years postmasters. Um, I've done
every job from the floor up, um,
in our community, um, I've lived
my life serving my community and
I love our culture, our people,
and, um, kids counseling is an
amazing, amazing asset to the
community.
I've been a kids counseling
since, um, 2018. In 2018, um,
The CEO at that time, Bria
Tafoya was approached by BHSD,
um, to take over the core
service designation for
children's services for our area
because the agency um that held
that contract, um, was closing.
That was La Familia Namaste, if
any of you are familiar with
that agency.
So, um, Mr. Foyer stepped into
the ring, um, and took on that
responsibility and that
designation. And so I joined her
in that, um, as a clinical
director at that time. And so,
um, the core designation really
means that we provide a vast
array of services in the
community. We do outpatient
therapy, psychiatry, family
support, services, um, we've
added high.
Fidelity rap, we are currently
adding family peer support. So
we have a lot of different
programs under one umbrella
within our program.
Um, with that being said, um,
you know, we, we serve.
Las Vegas, obviously San Miguel
County. We also serve Mora
County, um, but we also serve
outlying areas because um
there's a lot of rural frontier
here and there are not enough,
um, you know, access points for
people in the rural frontiers,
so we do, um, we do offer
telehealth services and try to
extend that support to other
communities as appropriate and
granted, you know, if there's
any clinicians here, we all
know.
So that telehealth is not
appropriate for every single
person, but if it is
appropriate, we, we absolutely
extend that support.
Um, with that being said,
You know, some services, um, go
to the families.
Um,
CCSS, that's community support
work, they actually go to the
families, they go to the
children, they provide service
across settings so they can go
to school, they can go into the
home, they can go into grandma's
house after school and help with
homework. They can do different
things, so there's different
layers of support also built
into the system, um, today I
wanna highlight though, um, high
fidelity wraparound program.
It's one of our newer programs.
Um, within our system, it, it
turned a year in June, so it's a
newer program, um, this program
was actually built out of moneys
historically from, you know.
The legislature um and it was a
pilot project.
For a few years in certain
communities, um, our community
did not was not part of the
pilot project, so when it
finally um became a Medicaid
billable service recently within
the last year, we decided to
step forward and start a high
fidelity wrap program because we
saw so many of our children that
had higher needs, higher acuity,
we're being sent out of the
community, and let's face it,
out of state.
And spending years of their life
in care in out of state
facilities away from their
families, away from their
support systems, um, away from
their most important
connections.
And we felt like high fidelity
rap, um.
was a fix for bringing those
kids home and you know
supporting them and supporting
their families and helping them
build a system of natural
supports so they could be
managed in their own
communities.
So high fidelity rap has really
focused in the last, you know,
year, um, we've trained.
All of our staff, um, we have a
supervisor who, he's been in our
system of care for a while. He
was actually a community support
worker, um, he went to school
while working at our agency, um,
just finished his master's in
May and he's now a supervisor
for, for the High Fidelity rap
program. So, um, we are really
working hard because we all here
in mental health, how hard it is
to hire staff, right? We are
trying to support.
and build a really strong
infrastructure with our staff
and we support them going on and
we support them, you know, going
to school and and we wanna see
them come up the chain we're
always looking for our own
replacements. So with high
fidelity wrap,
Um, you know, it's really nice
program because again, it pulls
that.
Youths
Community together.
And, and it's different in that,
you know, I, I consider high
fidelity Rob. It's care
coordination on steroids is what
it is. It's pulling all of the
people at the, you know, to the
table it's, it might be a
therapist, but it might be a
pastor. It might be the neighbor
next door that the kid goes and
and talks to, it might be an
aunt, it might be a grandparent.
It can be just about anybody. It
might be the science teacher
that really helps that youthro
ground in science class.
It can be anybody, but it is
really about building natural
supports that allow that child
to get the support, the family
to get the support, so they are
not just reliant on a mental
health system.
They have immediate supports
when they need them. They don't
always have to have their
therapist, you know, on speed
dial or calling someone,
whoever's on call that day.
They can navigate it.
You know, with some independence
and it's a beautiful program
because we don't see this a lot,
you know, mental health through
the years was about strong
arming.
You know, this is a clinical
recommendation and you have to
comply. This is not that way.
This is about their voice and
their choice.
A lot of motivational
interviewing involved. What are
you willing to work on today to
make your life better and more
stable.
And so, that is, that's a really
different tone and um I think
for our community.
It's super important because
You know, we we have in recent
years we've survived COVID.
Um, 3 years ago, we went through
horrific fires.
Our community is severely
severely still traumatized.
Yesterday I was dealing with
flooding at my house.
Um, we, we are not out of the
woods, and I think when we look
at the big picture of what's
happening.
You know,
In our country and legislation
and what that what that really
means.
I think that
Now more than ever.
We have to come together if we
are going to survive this.
And I think, you know, I, I'm,
I, I'm a self-professed nerd. I
follow things, OK? So I've been,
um, reading and reading and, and
I keep kind of a, a log of
everything I read, and it's from
different media sources. I don't
just go to one and say, oh, this
is the holy grail because I
don't believe the media's always
on point, um, some of it's very
fear-driven, some of it is just
blatant lies, so you have to be
able to decipher what is and
what isn't, but this is clear.
We are gonna, we are about to
experience.
critical disruptions in care. We
are, um, you know, there's going
to be, you know, I know in some
pockets the, the focus is on
substance use disorder and how,
you know, millions of people are
gonna lose their coverage in, in
that group.
The reality is everybody stands
to lose.
Um
Our rural hospitals stand to
lose.
You know, and I know that that's
gone back and forth in the media
because, you know, somebody
posts, one of, I wanna say it
was the New Mexicans said, oh
well these rural hospitals are
gonna close and then a medical
director came back and said
that's not true. The reality it
is true because if we don't have
Funding sources to pay for those
services, guess what?
We all go away.
And it doesn't matter if you're
a hospital, if you're a CBHC if
you're a community, you know,
center, it does not matter if
you don't have a funding source.
You're at risk.
And so I think that we have to
be realistic about, you know,
making sure that we understand
what those risks are and, and I
think it's one of those things
that
You know, local providers are
gonna have to really pull
together with our stakeholders
and, and with our partners in
the legislature and really start
having hardcore conversations
and figuring pieces out.
Because this is going to take
the entire village.
It's not just gonna take the
legislature coming through and
saying oh we we can we can be
the band-aid, we will fix this.
It's gonna take each and every
one of us at the table.
And I, you know, my, my thing is
that
You know, again, Medicaid our
own New Mexico Medicaid
Authority is reporting that we
are, we have a potential
shortfall of $2.8 billion.
Coming our way.
We stand to have 92,000
individuals.
Who are jeopardized with regards
to access to
Insurance and care.
And
Those who do have it are going
to pay higher copays. They're
gonna pay higher costs.
So, you know,
The reality is.
We're all talking about SB 3
lately, right? But the reality
is these dynamics potentially
sharply undercut the foundation
of SB 3.
And so, um, you know, it could
ultimately be the dismantling of
the pilots that are potentially
upcoming as well as the housing
support, the Medicaid con
continuing the um.
Just the tracking, you know,
we're working on performance
tracking. We've put a ton of
money into that and all of that
could be just washed away.
And so my hope is that um.
We can all come together and.
You know, not allow.
The historical separation that
has happened between the
parties.
To devastate the people who need
us the most.
The poor.
The people that are barely
making it.
And my hope is that, you know,
we can figure it out together.
Because again, it's not gonna
lie on one side or the other.
It's gonna take the whole
village.
Thank you.
Thanks.
Thank you, Stacy.
See, that's what I'm talking
about regaining the power, you
know, the passion that Stacy
talks about is what's driving so
many of our providers.
I want to talk briefly about the
uh federal um funding impacts.
We're gonna, we're shifting
gears a little bit now and
talking more specifically about
them. And in their their um and
in your packet.
They are divided into several
different categories. They're
divided into short-term impacts
and the short-term impacts as
you look at them.
are really things that are gonna
make it very difficult to plan.
So we've been facing this
already for the bulk of this
year is anticipating what's
coming, where it's coming from,
and thank you.
And I actually have some. I just
need to use it.
A lot of providers have already
received notices that their
funding is being cut. We're
anticipating the, what I, what I
know is that the state agencies
are
are very vigorously looking at
options and trying to figure out
what the options are. To my
knowledge, they haven't released
those yet or they haven't talked
specifically about what
direction we're going in. Last
Friday was a big blow whenever
it was announced that, that we
no federal funding could be used
for any indigenous people that
work in the, that live in the
country, and that is, that's a
game changer. I mean, people
that I talk to, other providers
and policy makers.
see that as a devastating
Step that is being taken and
that providers are not in any
way, shape, or form.
Ready to figure that out on
their own. Um, I think we're
headed towards a place that is
gonna be
Well, in, in a minute, I'm gonna
have Stacy talk a little bit
about this long, the effects on
the long-term planning. But the
other things that we're looking
at is changes in the population,
for example,
Individuals who are going to
have to have me work
requirements, uh, and reg and
registrations for Medicaid our
providers are, want to know how
that's going to be managed,
who's gonna, who's gonna do the
paperwork. Is that all going to
rest on the income support
division of the state Medicaid
office. Um, are they funded? Are
they staffed to be able to take
on this responsibility. There's
a great concern that the
requirements that are being
pushed out and down.
Our requirements that there is
an administrative burden that
cannot be met. So it's another
expense. It's another problem
that we're gonna have to face.
There isn't a solution.
And then finally,
Now finally, but in addition to
that, as, as individuals lose
their Medicaid coverage.
Payments for care, payments for
service to the providers are
going to be cut as well. So it's
a loss all the way around.
I mentioned uh I'm on page 17
and I mentioned the Medicaid uh
program requirements changes and
the increasing eligibility
requirements to every 6 months.
I think it's a year now. And so
that's gonna double the
administrative burden on the
agencies that are responsible
for that.
Um, we talked a little bit
about, I mentioned already the
unsustainable work requirements.
And people losing Medicaid
because of the challenges that
are, that are um
The challenges that are embedded
in these directives. On page
I'm not sure which page it is,
but on the next page, potential
long-term care.
If you would, uh, Stacy, if you
would talk a little bit about we
had a discussion yesterday about
what this means. I mean, there,
I'm trying to show that it has
impacts in a lot of ways, short
term changes that are gonna
affect the administrative burden
changes that are gonna affect
individuals. Stacy talked a lot
or she started today, but if you
would share with you, share with
the committee your concerns of
the long-term concerns about
being able to sustain
Something
456 years from now that we have
to make decisions about today.
OK. So with regards to um
Potential long-term impacts,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, um, again, I'm gonna
go back to reiterate there's
gonna be reduced access to care.
So, um,
With regards to Northern New
Mexico again what that's gonna
look like is pretty much
potential loss of every small
hospital in our entire region.
So we are talking, um, the local
hospital here, Alta Vista. We
are talking Holy Cross and Taos,
and you know, miners in in
Ratone, um, that's Colfax, but
it's still our area because we
cover that when needed. So
there's those um.
are really at risk with regards
to um
The communities that they serve
because people are not gonna be
able to get emergency or or
crisis care in their own
communities and what that's
gonna mean is more people are
gonna die die trying to get to
Santa Fe.
Um, we are, our community has
already seen some of those hits
in the last few years. We do not
have, um, OB or maternity care
currently, they're trying to
rebuild that program, but we
have actually had, you know,
community members.
Di
On the way to Santa Fe, trying
to get care, um, those, those
incidences are gonna, you know,
just rise and continue because
access will not be available in
our community, um.
The other thing that's gonna
happen is.
costs are really gonna probably
become higher because people are
going to um delay care.
And what that means is acuity is
going to go through the roof.
And by the time they do get
care, they're gonna need
critical care. So it's not gonna
be ongoing, you know, just touch
base with my PCP once or twice a
year and check my blood
pressure. It's going to be much
more chronic and much more
severe.
And providers are gonna be very
taxed by those complex cases.
They're even going to be more
taxed by the fact that they are
going to have to provide crisis
care in a community-based
setting that they are not set up
to do.
Um, the other piece that is
going to, you know, hit hard is
if, and this is a big if, if our
emergency rooms are hospitals
actually do find a way to
survive.
They are going to have to do way
more with less because their
demand is gonna be so high.
And the reality is currently in
our area.
We don't have a lot of
providers. I mean, most of our
providers at our local hospital
are traveling providers, OK? So
they come in for rotations and
there's a lot of nurse
practitioners on the floor in
the ER. There's a lot of, you
know, other, not, not
necessarily MDs, OK? So we're
having to pull from, from
different places just to get
those basic needs met already.
Um, that is likely going to get
worse if, again,
those
The pay goes down and, and the
stress goes up and the level of
acuity is through the roof, um.
They, you know, regardless of
How great a provider is. We all
have a threshold to what we can
deal with and do, and that's
going to take a hit on our
providers and we're gonna see
more burnout and we're gonna see
bigger holes in and being able
to fill those positions.
Um, and then of course provider
sustainability is gonna take a
huge hit.
And we've already
2018 to today, we lost La
Familia Namaste. We lost all of
our TFC provider in in our
region, not just in Las Vegas
for the whole region, for Taos,
for Sanofi, for Las Vegas. We
lost that. We lost almost
familia, almost familiar with
substance abuse, they did, you
know, um, they did visitation,
they did all of these other
things, gone.
And so we have these, these
holes in, in what you know the
community needs and that
providers sustainability is only
gonna get harder because there's
gonna be so many things that are
now going to be uncompensated.
And um, you know, the reality is
most agencies may be at risk for
going under because of that.
And our areas already severely
underserved.
So I think, you know, these,
these are all um
For our community, these are all
big ticket items that we have to
And I, I don't even know how to
say it nicely, so we have to be
aggressive in addressing it.
Because
Our people are going to die.
Our children are going to
suffer.
And I think, you know, it's one
thing to know it on paper.
It's another thing to look at
that person and say sorry, you
can't get what you need today.
And we need to, we need to be
diligent and we must work
together.
Thank you.
OK, so that's the bad news,
right?
So we're gonna wind up with some
good news, some hopeful news. I,
I hope it's hopeful.
Um
I want to reiterate and say
again.
We really think what's coming,
what's here, what's coming.
is a big deal.
is going to be
Longer lasting than we can even
imagine. And the question I ask
in our discussions is what, what
did the legislators want to
know?
So, what we came up with is, I
mean you can, you can tell me,
but what we came up with is what
you may want to know is what can
you do about it? And the answer
isn't crystal clear, as it laid
out except as Stacy said, we
need to focus on the things that
are going to make a difference,
and one of the things that's
going to make a difference is
our coordination and our
collateral work with each other
or sharing with each other. It's
a community problems that
That are going to be uh
challenging.
So a couple of positive things
that I really want to talk about
very briefly because I think the
other stuff is taking a lot of
time is really understanding and
supporting the state behavioral
health reform. It's been
mentioned up here, you know that
it's passed this last session,
um, that it's underway and
there's some really positive
things about that.
Um, there's a lot of
opportunities for providers to
support effective collaboration
within their regions and to
showcase their impact with data
and evaluation.
Um, and this is a moment to
celebrate and embrace effective
evaluation and enhanced
accountability for behavioral
health, quality of care.
We cannot afford to lose one
penny that is not going to
produce results. It has to
produce results. We have to stay
on top of it, and we have to
track it and enable that to
happen.
They're also challenges with the
new with the new model, and some
of the challenge in the said
it's not clear exactly how
everything is going to work.
Now, I, people that are working
on it know this and they're
working on it. We're in touch
with them, we're communicating,
but it's, there's, there's some
concern it's going a little bit
slow, but it's, we're learning
what it is, and there's also
some really specific concerns
about um
How small agencies are going to
be impacted. In your, uh, in
your packet.
At the
Come on in.
In your packet in the appendix
is a map that shows the current.
Um, regions that have been
designated by the SB 3 project
and those regions are
I'm gonna get this
representative cell.
Those regions are designated.
As you know, by judicial
district, they've made that
determination. So we took our
list of providers and overlaid
them onto judicial districts to
see what our list to provide in
our association. This is not all
the, this is not the entire uh
state, but in our association,
there is an overlay of where
we've fit and covered the
judicial districts and what
you'll see is that many of our
providers are covering in
multiple districts.
So there's going to be some work
that has to be done to assign
providers to, uh, to assign
providers to judicial districts
where they can. Did you need me
to break or do anything? OK,
sorry.
So that's, that's a big concern.
Uh, you could take a look at the
map and you can see we're well
covered. Obviously, Bernalio
County District 2 is going to
have the most providers, but um,
Uh
This is one drawback to the
program that we see, um, having
to really work towards.
And they're, um, there are
other, there are other um uh
issues involved in this, but we
are actively participating in
it. There's some opportunity
that we need to take advantage
of and mostly take advantage of
the commitment that the state
legislature has made to
improving behavioral health
services and the funding that
supports them.
So now the last part of our
presentation is on metrics of
matter, and I'd like to
introduce Pam Stanley, who has
been a practitioner, is a
practitioner, uh, behavioral
health practitioner and has
extensive experience in program
evaluation and Medicaid managed
care. I first got to know her
when she was working for one of
the MCOs and um
It's been, it's been fun ever
since. So when we started this
project, the metrics That
Matter. We started this with
funding back up I want because
it's important to know the
background and uh about 2018 or
17 around there, the, the um
What is the name of the group?
I'm sorry, I lost it. There was
a national study, a national
project done uh that involved
behavior health providers and
primary care provider
associations working
collaboratively to develop
value-based purchasing. So our
association and the and Eileen
with the primary care
association, joined hands and,
and did, uh, you know, and
provided that project.
But, um, came out of it was a
lot of training and information
about what value-based care is,
but in retrospect, not a lot of
technical or or technical.
Supports that would um
Excuse me.
It's the total
The Delta Project. I've got a
great team. The Delta Project,
which was the first, the deal
that I lost my notes, but the
Delta project was one of the
first national projects to
really aggressively go after
value-based purchasing, but we
didn't find transformative
change. We gave a lot of good
information. We oriented people
to what it is, but there weren't
a lot of changes made to bring
on board value-based purchasing.
One of the changes that we
needed was a, is, was
The statement about what a
behavioral health metric is. A
lot of the value-based
purchasing projects focused on
metrics that are unique, not
unique to value but to
behavioral health, but are
unique to physical health. So
behavior health providers were
frequently frustrated at having
to, having to gauge their
success by medical model
metrics. So our project that we
proposed whenever the money
started.
Blowing out of COVID, our
project was, we proposed to the
state Behavioral Health Services
division that we developed.
Behavioral health metrics, and
Pam is gonna talk to you about
where that project has been
where it is now, and
I'm really gonna encourage you
to ask questions about it
because it's, it's significant
work that's been accomplished.
So Pam
This one.
Good morning.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee.
Um, I'll talk about the metrics
that matter project. I've
actually been involved in the
project, um.
For quite a while, um, and as
Maggie said, I am uh Pamela
Stanley. I am an LPCC in the
state of New Mexico and
certified cognitive therapist. I
am a consultant with Health
Management Associates, and we
have actually helped the
association stand up this
project metrics that matter.
It's a substantial project, uh,
where we have laid over the last
3 years, significant
infrastructure, um, in
Interoperability for providers,
um, as well as quality metrics
through a dashboard.
And also now looking at
improving health outcomes. So,
uh, in your slide you can see
the slide that talks about the
goals of the metrics That Matter
project, as Maggie mentioned,
one of the first goals was the
providers coming together in her
leadership team to identify
metrics that they know are
clinically relevant to improving
outcomes with clients or members
or patients. Um, the goal was
also to
look at access to care, which is
a significant issue both in New
Mexico and nationally, um, and
so there were metrics developed
that look at access to care and
timeliness to access to care,
and I'll go through some of
those measures shortly.
And then, of course, the
ultimate goal is to improve
outcomes, um, and really elevate
quality within behavioral health
within our state.
So the metrics, um, fall into 4
different categories, the
providers were required to
participate in 6 mandatory
measures, um,
We asked them to participate in
two process and 2 outcomes
measures as you see on this
metric slide, um, and we added
later, uh, 3 measures related to
access to care, um, and those
are follow up um for aftercare,
um, after an inpatient
psychiatric hospitalization, um,
follow up after an emergency
department visit for a mental
illness diagnosis.
and then follow up after
emergency department visits for
substance use disorder
diagnosis.
You will see a population risk
overview slide, um, this
particular slide is essentially
aggregating all of the data of
the 17 organizations, um, with
multiple clinics who participate
in the project. Um, it is a
predictive analytics dashboard
using risk stratification logic
across multiple categories. So
predicting uh a, a patient who
is going to have very
high costs.
Um, it can predict inpatient
admission risk.
Emergency visit risk, uh,
mortality risk and
significantly uh members who are
high risk for suicidality or
suicide.
Um, one of our measures, in
fact, is death by suicide, so
that we are monitoring that
particular measure.
Um, in, if you look at the, the
graphs of each of the different
categories.
You see the risk stratification,
um, where members are
Put into categories of uh low
risk, moderate risk, high risk,
and very high risk. Um, those
are very important categories
from a clinical perspective as
we work with and treat patients.
We look to those categories,
one, for those who are very high
in acuity or high risk, um, to
be able to manage those members,
um, they can often be the most
expensive, um, but their quality
of life, um, is often poor
because they're in the emergency
rooms frequently, um, and not
really getting the right care
from an outpatient perspective.
On the low end, um, that is
really a key area as well. We
Look at low and moderate
patients. We want to work and
manage their treatment plans so
that they don't fall into a
higher risk category. So the
more we look at those patients,
um, as, as clinicians, um, were
able to actually evaluate a
treatment plan, revise it and
improve those outcomes.
On the next page, you see.
A model, a model of practice,
and, and this is a bit of
brilliance of from the project.
It's a natural evolution um of
each step of the way that we
took in the project. So first,
you know, as we've mentioned a
couple of times, providers
selected measures that they know
to be clinically relevant to
improve outcomes. Um, we wanna
monitor depression or anxiety.
On a continual basis in what is
known as measurement-based care.
So that we know whether or not
that patient, that client, that
member is actually improving.
Or not improving, and that gives
us a chance to re-evaluate and
revise our treatment plan so
that they do get better.
The next step in the project
was, um, having the providers,
even in very small clinics, um,
work within their electronic
health record systems to pull
data.
Into the most basic Excel
spreadsheet for those of you who
know Excel, um, and to be able
to put it into um files and
transfer them over to the health
information exchange system, uh,
known as synchronous in our
state, um, that actually teaches
providers interoperability. How
do I take my data and transfer
it to a place where it can be
aggregated and collated with
many, many other.
pieces of data.
I want to say that one of the
most significant aspects of that
interoperability being
implemented.
Is that as a clinician, um, if
you are signed up with
synchronous, the HIE, you
weren't able to see data for
anything that is reported within
the health information exchange.
You can see where the member has
been most recently?
You can see how many times they
may have visited the emergency
room. You can see medications
prescribed and lab work. Um, and
I know all too well, uh, sitting
across from a, a patient, um,
that it's very helpful to have
that background information
because sometimes patients or
clients, as we call them in
behavioral health, um, are not
always forthcoming, or maybe
they're afraid to share um what
has been going on with them
fully. Um, so that is a huge
success, um, having
behavioral health providers be
part of the HIE. That's actually
kind of an anomaly, uh, mostly
physical health providers and
lab providers and hospitals are
part of the HIE, um, but
behavioral help providers, um,
it's a little bit innovative
really to have them be part of
the HIE, the synchronous system.
So next with that data that's
transferred over to synchronous,
um, they're able to pull the
data and populate a dashboard of
the quality metrics that you saw
on the prior slide, um, and so
providers then get trained to
look at that dashboard, to look
at their outcomes, um, and to
see where they're at. With that,
we asked the providers to pick 1
or 2 interventions.
For 1 or 2 quality measures to
say,
Where do you want to focus to
improve your outcomes, your
quality, um, pick something that
relates to your patient
population, um, or that you
really want to improve even
more.
So providers pick those uh
particular measures, and they
have implemented um different uh
outcomes or, or uh clinical
workflows, um, into their
practices.
With that, we've been able to
have them focus on those
outcomes and improving the
outcomes. Um, the project is
sort of
There at this point where we're
just turning the corner and
delving much more into what we
call practice transformation.
Um, and I'm gonna, if you uh go
to the next page.
What is practice transformation,
so a little bit of definition of
practice transformation is
looking at prevailing best.
Uh practices within a community,
uh, and within behavioral
health.
Um, using evidence-based
practices, uh, in treatment, uh,
which is really important,
right? We know that if we have
fidelity or consistency to a
particular evidence-based
treatment protocol that that
actually improves outcomes.
That's Manuel study, um,
treatment plans, uh, what we see
is a shift in mindset about
using measurement-based care,
looking at those depression
screens and anxiety screens.
Doing those on a regular basis
when you see a patient to see
whether or not they're actually
improving in outcomes. Um, so
that's very important. Um, that
creates a mind.
A set shift in looking at a
measurement-based care and going
back to the treatment plan.
That requires in clinical
workflows, a lot of change
management tools within a
clinic, um, so lots of education
for staff all the way to the
front lines, all the way up to
leadership. Um, and that's what
some of our practices are now
turning the corner and moving
into using the data that they've
collected to report to their
board and their leadership and
also what they've been doing in
the way of implementing uh
practice transformation.
With that, I will turn it back
over to Maggie to talk about the
future of metrics that matter. I
don't know if you were excited
about that as we have been. It's
pretty astounding. I mean, that
we've been waiting and looking
for this and all along, I've
been thinking how does what this
project team, and by the way,
the project team had first year,
1st 2 years had first year had
10 agencies. We added 7 more
agencies, so the current
Network is 17 agencies statewide
that are working on this and
My goal, our goal was to see
what does it take to move this
to all organizations because the
opportunity for getting the data
and seeing the changes is right
there in front of us. So that's
what we're looking for and I
mentioned this before that we
cannot afford to lose in this,
in this time.
I hope it's not too late, but
with the changes that are
coming, we really cannot afford
to lose any revenue on programs
that don't work, and we are
committed to enhancing quality
and behavioral health across the
state. I'd love to see every
provider using the same system.
I mean, if we wanted to go that
far, we'd have one EHR. I don't
know if we're at that point yet.
But the next thing is that we
See this as a foundation. This,
there's information in your, in
your packet about how much this
cost and the pilot project, and
it was not cheap, uh, you know,
it took a lot of effort and a
lot of work, but we figured it
out and we put it down into uh
building a foundation. So we
have a foundation in place that
we think is workable and
manageable and could be useful
to building quality outcomes in
a variety of programs. And we
know that this is an opportunity
to engage with partners.
Such as managed care and
counties and we're already in
communication with several
managed care organizations in
one large county organization to
see how this project, this model
of practice can be implemented
in their systems and their
behavioral healthcare systems.
So, um,
We think that it's, I mean, I, I
think it's a great program.
We're very excited about the
outcomes. The other thing I
wanted to say about it, that I
couldn't get Pam to say is that
We did, uh, she's, she's pretty
good.
We didn't know at the beginning.
I, I, I'm not a statistician.
I'm not the research person in
this project. I'm just a social
worker who has a concept like we
need behavioral health metrics.
That's what we need. So the
original proposal to the state
was first year we're gonna build
metrics in the 2nd year, we're
going to analyze them. Little
did I know what analyze the
meant, but the team came in and
was really able to do that and
all along we've been building
and building and seeing more
opportunities.
you know, the meetings would
there'd be a an aha like oh with
this it also could be used in
this capacity.
The principal that we really
want to emphasize is that
We have a really strong.
Model of care and practice.
That could be implemented
throughout the state and the
state has already invested in it
with the research to the, with
the project that we're
undergoing, and we hope that
there's opportunities to invest
it as we go forward.
So that concludes our our
presentation and um I wanna
leave you with that, what I
started with is that times are
gonna be rough, and we need to
look at all of our available
resources and opportunities to
collaborate with each other and
not to separate and, and go
independent ways. Um, we're
happy to answer questions if you
have any. I hope you do, and
really want to thank you for the
opportunity to, to be
here and to speak with you. I
have one more thing to say.
Thank you.
I am very impressed with anybody
that makes a commitment to be
serving the public service, and
I want to thank each of you for,
for doing that. Some of you've
been doing it a long time. I've
seen no seen some faces for a
long time and other faces are
relatively new, but what a
commitment you've made and so
that's just for me personally,
that's not an official part of
the presentation. So I'll turn
it back over to you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Maggie, um,
and I guess in uh in all
transparency, Maggie and I
served together on the
synchronous.
So,
um, so we will start with
Representative Royal Caballero,
come this way, start on the end.
If you weren't here for the
presentation, I'm, I'm not gonna
allow you to ask questions
because you don't know what,
what's been covered.
You, you, no, not, I'm not
talking to you, feeling a little
guilty, are you?
No, if you heard part of it,
but, but some folks, so it
but, but some folks, so
just, just realize that things
may have been covered when you
weren't here and I, I don't want
to cover, and if you are new,
which is that table except
Senator Stephanic. Oh, introduce
yourselves when I get to you.
New to this meeting, not new to.
OK, Representative Robo
Caballero, 3 minutes. Thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you very
much for your presentations. I
wanna go back to um
a couple of statements and on
page 5 and and then also
reference page 32 in your
appendices, and so I, I
been around long enough through
all the ups and downs of, of um
uh cuts and federal problems,
state problems, so I'm, I'm well
aware. However, I'm curious as
to, I know you talk about shared
resources on a professional.
Um, level, but I'm wondering if
you all have.
Had a discussion about how
you're going to leverage um
sharing resources as it relates
to funding, since that's what
we're facing as one of the most
critical impacts due to federal
the federal cuts and the fact
that you've referenced the
number of patients um and
services that rely on Medicaid.
So I'm interested in knowing, as
you know, sharing resources
helps optimize access as well as
delivery.
And so it requires a lot of
collaboration and I know there's
private sector, there's um fund
development that incorporates
the private sector as well as
leveraging.
Public money, so can you address
that just a little bit if
You have addressed that or if
you plan to do so in the future.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Representative Caballero, I, uh,
we have not.
In my mind, in my area, we have
not started that discussion. I
mentioned that the state is
looking at um alternatives and
We are pending, working with
them to they're uh my
understanding is that they are
going to
Identify potential sources of
change and that they will be
sharing that information with
us. I haven't seen it. What we
are, what we are looking at is
really trying to be active in
the implementation of the uh of
the SB 3 so that we are involved
in the selection of of uh
services and opportunities in
that model, but
I don't have any information and
adequate information on that.
It's been
Every time it's been discussed
in our meetings, it's been like
We're not sure where to go.
We're not sure where to start,
and that's been a, that's been a
challenge because the, the, the
concern is that we started and
invest on something, and then
the rug is pulled out and we're
not gonna do that any longer. So
if I may, Madam Chair, my, my
suggestion is then as a fun
developer, I spent a great deal
of my career, um, helping raise
funds, I would please put that
on your agenda so that you can
talk.
about how you can help leverage
whatever state funds are
available, whatever federal
funds are left and be able to
then create a strong fun
development effort, um.
That would be uh included in
your shared resources. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
thank you very much.
I'll call you Herndon.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you presenters. So looking at
data and metrics, could you
please tell me what percentage
of your clients are on Medicaid
and uh the the percentage that
are on other insurance companies
are and are all insurance
companies excepting your
services.
Um
Representative Herndon, Madam
Chair. I think our Medicaid
coverage is about between 60 and
70% of our clients.
And
The question was, did the, like
the for profit privates accept
our care. Are there any that
don't?
I'm not aware, I'm not aware of
any. There are providers that
will not accept certain
coverage, but I don't know about
the, I don't know about the
insurance companies.
OK. I'm, I'm just gonna jump in
here. This is a provider
association, so there are a
bunch of different individual
providers, so it may vary who,
and I paused your time, who, who
accepts what so I think that's
kind of a hard question to
answer for.
But most of your clients are
Medicaid clients, for us, yes,
absolutely. I would say ours are
even higher than the 60 to 70%
we're, we're probably more
closer to 80%.
OK, thank you. So, Madam Chair,
make sure I get my time back.
So it
So I, I asked that question
because as you talk about how we
all need to work together. I
wanted to see what the metrics
looks like with respect to
Medicaid. And then I would like
to look at your wraparound work
services, and you talk about
these teams that meet regularly
most often in family's home or
community. So how do the
families find out about your
services, and I bring that up
because we look at students and
mental health rooms and places
outside of Mora and outside of
Las Vegas. So tell me how
they're finding out about you.
Madam Chair and
Committee, um, the, the reality
is we have done a lot of
groundwork in in getting, um,
you know, the information to the
community. We have done PSAs
locally. We go directly into
schools we've met with local,
uh, you know, providers, um,
we've met with local JPO office,
CYFD, um, a lot of our, our
stakeholders and so we've done
actual trainings for them to
explain the process, the
program.
how you make a referral, what
the um what process as far as um
who's the qualifier, what the
qualifiers are for the service
because, um, there are certain
qualifiers that you have to meet
in order to be accepted into
high fidelity rap. So we've done
a lot of groundwork in that
respect of, um, we, we partner
very strongly with the schools
in Mora, with the sheriff's
office. We are part of the
health council, um, so
We've, we've hit a lot of those
stakeholders.
Because those are our referral
sources.
All right, thank you. And I
just, I guess my real my other
question was if students
themselves could come to you and
say, look, we're having these
behavioral health problems
because we don't have a mental
health room in every single
school, and you do provide this
service and we want to make sure
that every single child gets the
service that they need. So I
don't want this sheriff to refer
it. I want them to come to you
they can absolutely do that.
Alright, that is that is that,
you know, it doesn't have to
come from a professional. It can
come from the family, from the
youth, from wherever.
So it doesn't have to be a
professional.
Alright, thank you, thank you,
Madam chair.
Representative Block.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Thank you all for being here
today. Thanks for your
presentation. So I am just
looking at your slide on page 17
pertaining to the Medicaid
individuals who are not
currently working, and I think
it's probably about 29% I'm
sorry,
can you turn off your mic? We're
getting feedback. Sorry. And uh
so yeah, I'm on page 17 and I'm
just wondering if you might know
of the individuals who are in
your association of the people
they provide services to. What
percentage of the population is
able-bodied working, so 19 to
like 60, I, I don't know what
the federal mandate is. And then
what percentage are undocumented
individuals, and since those are
being phased out with the
current cuts, it's not
immediate. It's gonna be over
the next few years. Can you tell
me what, what percentage of
individuals you provide care to.
Maybe this is from Ms. Romero,
uh, what percentage of those
will be pretty much cut in your
budget on, on what you get from
Medicaid.
I try.
So I think that is that's really
a tough question to ask because
most of the people that are on
Medicaid within our system. So
again, 80%, um.
Most of them, I would say
probably.
75% work.
So these are, these are not, you
know, people just kind of, um,
living off of the system. They,
they work, they have jobs, um,
they are lower income,
obviously, um.
So I don't honestly, I mean, I
have a lot of grandparents
raising grandkids. Um, so that's
a whole other populations that
with a whole other set of, you
know, income.
piece to consider there. Um, so
I think that, you know, by and
large, the bulk of the families
that we serve are actually
working families that are just
struggling to get by. Um, so,
again, depending on where these
cuts hit and how deep they they
hit, um.
It's, it's really hard to say
right now. We're really not
gonna know probably what that
looks like till 2026, when, when
that first round comes in and
those things are put into play,
um, because right now,
You know, we don't know where
where that percentage is gonna
be that cut off in a direct way
and I appreciate that. I'm so
sorry. I only have 3 minutes.
OK, so I, I'm just wondering
because I know the cuts, they
can they completely exempted
individuals who are raising
children. So like you said, and
then also elderly. So those are
the two points that we're kind
of focusing on. So I'm just
wondering if that is a majority
of the individuals who are being
served. I just want to know what
percentage of the individuals
are going to be cut off.
I mean, it's still significant.
I mean, because the reality is,
if you have, if you have, um,
In our, in our situation, in
our, in our community, there's,
you know, again, just in, in our
area, we have such high numbers
on Medicaid. Um, it is gonna be
significant, and I don't know
that it's just gonna be the cut
on that end, um, representative
block, but more so the lack of
service providers because we
will be lo losing service
providers as well. OK. Thank
you, Madam Chair. I have a bunch
more questions, but I ran out of
time, so I'm sorry, ma'am. No,
I'd like to speak to that if I
may.
Um, I, in anticipation of this
is, as well as other names. I
did a survey of my directors
just to find out what are the
answers to some of these, what
are their major concerns. And
the issue is we're not tracking.
We don't ask people when they
come in the door if they're, if
they're a citizen, if they have
papers, we don't do that. That's
not part of the process if they
have a need and they come in for
service and they have coverage
or even we arranged if, if they
don't.
That's, that's enough. So one of
the real concerns for the
provider managers and directors
is that they're going to have to
implement this process of
tracking people in a way that we
never had to do that before.
So the answer to your question
is coming. I'm sure there will
be requirements that we have to
report that. That's gonna be
just so you'll know to get that
data is going to be a huge
expense and as Stacy said, it's
gonna be problematic getting
people to respond to those
recommendations.
Thank you for your question.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I, I
wish I had like 3 more 3 more
minutes, but maybe we'll go on a
2nd round. I'm gonna be praying
for that. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Um,
just a reminder for
Members and the public
non-citizens do not qualify for
Medicaid except in emergency
situations, so they are not
going for counseling using a
Medicaid number. Um, what, what
Maggie talked about is, is
people who are not insured or
who, so, so I wanna put a stop
to, to that, that, that uh
undocumented folks are on
Medicaid and very, very rare
circumstances can they.
Can they be on Medicaid. So, um,
so with that and and just for
you folks over there, if you
were listening or have um
questions that don't take us way
back, that's fine, um, but so we
will go to
Someone called me vicious at the
last meeting. I'm trying to be
less vicious in an infection.
It's, it's a term of endearment,
vicious. So go ahead,
Representative Kate. Thank you
very much, Matt.
When you're not speaking, please
turn off the mic.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you very much for and, and
thank you very much, Madam
Chair. This was, um, a very
in-depth, um, terrifying.
Uh, but, uh, a detailed report
and I wanna thank you. I do tend
to, and I please forgive me, um,
kind of uh condense the
presentations just to clarify
for especially our online users.
This is an echoey room.
So what, what I'm hearing is you
today's presentation is you're
trying to let us know, um, what
the current challenges are for
service providing what you
expect them to be in the next 2
to 5 years, um, you are very
clear that people will die
because of lack of access or
lack of clarification and that
we have a clear uh successful
path based on metrics.
not policy or political and that
you would hope to be able to
follow such a path in other um
ways. Is that a clear, I know
that's a 32nd which you did a
year of education, but I'm uh
synopsizing what you just
presented in the last hour. Is
that correct?
Yes, Representative, that's
excellent. Thank you. Thank you
so much. I want to, um, uh, just
ask two quick questions. One is
I, well, I'll talk about several
things. One is I wanna let you
know what you may already, we as
a legislator has been trying, we
understand that there is a lack
of OBGYNs in rural areas. We are
trying to uh provide incentives
to be able to bring birthing
centers. I know that it's only
good for low risk births, but at
least
it's something I wanna make sure
that you know about that. Um,
you're 29% of non-working. I,
and I, and I have run programs
for I know what questions we ask
and what we don't ask, but I'm
assuming that you might have a
percentage of how many are
already have qualified for
federal disability based on
their abilities to work out of
that 29% that it's not working
and so if you could find that
for me, do you have that now?
Federal disability that are
already on disability that are
not working. And then my other
uh thing is I am very concerned
you were talking about um the uh
the qualifications to show
employment. Um, I just sat in
for a proposal for a DD waiver
um for the upcoming DD waiver,
and they're talking about
removing employment supports.
When we would need, we always
need employment supports, but
especially
When now there is an
administrative burden, um, uh,
on these as well and so I just
wanted to be able to bring to
the public's view that this is
especially uh difficult problem
and, and thank you very much for
my
Madam Chair, Representative, may
I ask a question, clarifying
question.
What was it that you wanted to
find out in terms of disability.
Yes, so you said that there are
29% of the individuals served
that you are not working. How
many of that 29% are on federal
disability. So they've already
been uh qualified at the federal
level as individuals that cannot
work.
Thank you.
And, and I, I would add to that
people who are retired.
And people who are um taking
care of, of either someone with
a disability or a child.
Because those are exceptions, I
believe.
So there's a concern there could
be double counting, right? I
think there's a concern that
that's a high number. It looks
like, oh, there's 29% who are
going to lose their coverage
because they're not working, but
they may not be working for a
variety of reasons. OK. All
right. Thank you. I'll, we'll
get on that. Thank you. Senator
Stephanics, no, OK, uh,
Representative Chavez.
You could, we introduce yourself
even if you don't have
questions.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Eleanor
Chavez. I represent House
District 26, which is the west
side of Albuquerque and uh
Pajarito Mesa in the South
Valley. I don't have questions
because I didn't listen on the
way in, but maybe Maggie, you
and I can talk later cause I
have some other questions.
After the presentation.
And, and Representative Chavez
is a retired social worker,
including time at CYFD.
Although it wasn't CYFD yet, or
was it? It was as I was leaving,
it was becoming CYFD.
Thank you. Senator Pope. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Senator Harold
Pope Jr. representing District
23, Northwest Albuquerque,
Bernalillo County, uh, Ventana
ranch area, the petroglyphs,
Volcana Vista High School, uh,
pretty much west of Coors and
Unser. Thank you.
Representative, I mean, Senator.
Uh,
thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
Antoinette Cedillo Lopez. I
represent District 16 in
Albuquerque, which is kind of
the southeast heights,
Southeast, Northeast Heights
near the university CNM, the
base, um, that area. And I did
have a question about your
presentation and I really love
the wraparound services ideas. I
love the measures. I love that
they're mandatory access
measures process measures and
outcomes. I think it's so much
better than just having outcomes
because some of the, the
processes are as important as
the outcomes, um, and one of
them that's been very important
to me is language access, and I
noticed, I know that you uh have
that being organization
specific, but I'm just wondering
how are you doing uh with
language access, um, and I also
want to take this time to thank
Madam Chair for correcting some,
uh,
Misinformation,
mispron implications, um, and a
false narrative about
immigrants, um, language access
is more than, than, than
immigrants, it's people who
prefer a different language,
whether it's Navajo, Vietnamese,
Spanish, whatever, so anyway,
that's my question.
Madam Chair, Senator Lopez,
um
sorry, I know I have, I have to
project my voice to correct you,
it's Lopez because we have
another Senator Lopez, uh,
Senator Cedillo Lopez, thank
you. um, in response to your
question, we have collected
social determinants of health or
health-related social needs.
It's also known as that's more
of a CMS term. We've been
collecting that data, uh,
consistently. It's one of the
mandatory measures.
Um, some of the organizations,
only a few have selected
language, uh, access, um, but
what we are doing is having
collected on various social
determinants of health forms or
survey instruments like prepare,
um, we are collecting that, the,
the graph goes like this, um, so
it's substantial. And one of our
organizations is actually
looking at
Uh, both language and finance,
uh, those barriers to care.
And they're actually, um,
they've implemented in their
clinical workflows, asking those
questions upfront, training
staff, um, to Fidelity, meaning
for consistency in how you ask
those questions, right? And
they're collecting the data, um,
now they are going to be looking
at the outcomes. What did they
do to reduce those barriers when
that member came in or had a
language or finance or whatever.
barrier. Maybe it's housing, um,
so we're actually just now
delving into that, and that's
kind of idiopathic or unique to
the clinic if they choose to
focus on that measure.
So it's not everybody focusing
on that. We are collecting the
data, some of the organizations
will actually be looking at
practice transformation with
that particular measure if they
picked that.
Thank you. And as you know, we
worked with Asian Family
Services and many other
organizations that specialize in
providing language access, um,
to, to their communities and it,
it's just so important, um,
because otherwise they're just
cut off and, and that's
inconsistent with federal law,
which is still, still the law
right now, um, and inconsistent
with state law, um, and so I,
I'm really glad to, to know
about it, looking, looking at
your measuring it and
Also, hopefully we'll get some
more data about how successful
uh we are providing it. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Anaya.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you to the presenters as
well, um.
First, thanks for highlighting,
of course, the financial piece,
especially everything that's
coming down from the federal
level. We all know this is gonna
be absolutely devastating. Thank
you for also straying from the
presentation to say like, look,
this is for real and this is
serious. It's not on this sheet,
but I will straight up tell you
what the truth of the matter is.
Um, I also, uh, worry about,
not, not just the financial
piece, but also the data risk
piece. And so I'm wondering
like, as you all work as a
cohort together, right? You
share information.
Um,
how is it that you're talking
about um sensitive communities.
I'm talking about abortion,
gender affirming, care, um, and
the potential of being
undocumented, having ice raids.
Is there any kind of information
that's being shared in terms of
best practice for notes because
I'm really worried that a lot of
our private
Um
Health data is going to start
just.
It, it already has, right?
We've, we've already been told
that um, Medicaid information is
now being shared with ICE, and I
would imagine the same is going
to be true for abortion, gender
affirming care, or anything that
the administration deems
political, so I'm wondering, are
there best practices that are
being shared amongst the cohort
right now in terms of
I'm thinking notes in particular
to protect the, the safety and
sovereignty of that data as best
possible.
Madam Chair Representative
Benaya, thank you very much for
your question.
Um, I
I think there's, there's
probably some informal
conversation going on, but
you're raising the question, has
automatically put it on our
Tuesday meeting agenda.
You know, that's be there invite
me you definitely, we will do
that, um, that's exactly how
this works is because it's hard
to keep up with everything, as
you know, you know, so, uh, I
have several, several, well,
everyone in our association
knows that they can bring a
topic and they can do that, but
we'll definitely do that because
that's a really good question
because
From my perspective, a lot of
the information is
misinformation and we need to
share that with each other, not
just the information, but uh,
what, what people are doing
about it, how they're
responding.
And because all of that is
changing so rapidly.
You know,
Any rate, yes, definitely we
will get you invited to do that.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. uh, senator.
Lopez, vice chair.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
again, I appreciate your sharing
of information, um,
The, uh, when I was reviewing
some of uh um one of your pages,
it didn't have a number, but you
were talking, you shared
information about um
Or you've had meetings with MCOs
and state um representatives to
resolve Medicaid reimbursement
delays.
I just recently had a meeting,
Madam Chair, with some private
providers in Albuquerque, and
one of their biggest concerns is
the, um, how would I say, the
reimbursement.
That is still um
It's slow coding, um, apparently
there are, there are some new um
Companies that are the
go-between, right, that
facilitate information from
providers and go between um the
Medicaid providers or actually
working specifically with um
healthcare authority, behavioral
health division. Um, are those,
is that something that
You all are working on, is that
something that is, you know,
that that is very much um
a hindrance for providers, um.
I just, it was just Madam Chair
was, it was interesting to
listen because, um, especially
with the potential cuts coming.
Um, you don't work for free, but
how do we, you know, in other
words, what can we do, um, if
you've been working with uh at
the MCOs already.
What, what is the outcome?
Madam Chair Representative
Lopez, thank you very much for
that question. Yes, we work with
that and we do that a lot, um,
but we, the members, the, the
providers that participate in
those meetings and those
discussions with the MCOs are
members of our association. So
if they're not members of our
association, they're just not
invited to those meetings, but
I'd be happy to share with you
the contact people at, at uh at
uh the
MCA the Medicaid what's the name
of it? ACA Authority who, who
works in that area because they
do have they do have staff that
help problem solve those issues
and that's the best place to
take it. After years of trying
to figure out how to do it, we
finally got a good, a good
tracking going.
So I'll be happy to share with
you, um, we'll send you an email
with the name of the contact
person and any, I'd be happy to
help facilitate your contact
with her, um,
We specifically
Don't invite non-members. I
mean, there's a cost for
joining.
Do you know what I'm saying? You
just said you have to eat. Well,
so do we.
So, I'll be happy to do that.
No, and I appreciate that, Madam
Chair, um, just some information
that I, of course, I can share.
Um, and the other I think was
already referred was mentioned
um is with regards to referrals,
which of course is so important,
whether it's through the schools
and even Madam Chair from the
presentations yesterday, um, for
Mr. Probst and others, right, in
the community, um.
Working together is so important
and it's, it's um hopeful to
hear what's happening here um in
the community between Mora, San
Miguel, and other outlying
communities. Um, Madam Chair, I
just hope that, um,
Other communities are maybe
using, utilizing the model of
what's happening here, um, for,
for that, and then I guess, um,
another question and I didn't
see anything written in here and
of course, you don't have um
specific tribal communities
here, uh, close by, but are
there tribal um entities that
are membership that are
participating within your
association.
I met a representative.
Not specifically, but we have a
very collaborative working
relationship with the New Mexico
Tribal Authority, um, uh, Cindy
Sacomman is the coordinator of
that group, and we collaborate
with each other. We've talked, I
mean, we, we've talked about how
they're structured, how we're
structured, what, you know, what
similarities there are, uh,
she's on a meeting scheduled
with us. We regularly meet. We
have a regular monthly meeting
with the director of BHS.
Nick and uh she participates in
that, so we don't have members
specifically because they're
part of that other organization,
but we do collaborate with them
and try to share initiatives and
resources to the extent we can.
And thank you Madam Char, just
one more comment just to see,
um, when you're talking about
collaboration and lack of funds
and you'll be the
Um
Indian Health Service and others
are being cut also. So, madam
chairs, we have dwindling
resources which we know is
happening and will continue to
happen, is how I think
communities continue to work
together, not, that's not yours,
this is mine. But I hope under
your organization that you are
willing and to do some outreach
and make sure that, you know,
we're all working together as
New Mexicans. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. I have a few
questions and let me preface
this with saying all the members
here know that I come from an
IDD world in, in, in
intellectual and developmental
disabilities, so a lot of my
questions are um kind of coming
from that, but when, when you
talked about um
Uh, let's see, uh.
Oh, OK.
You can't hear me?
That's the,
oh, OK, OK. That's unusual. No
one says they can't hear me. Um.
This is is not the best acoustic
room. So in terms of there was
some talk about kids who were
being served out of state. Are
those, I mean, the first thing
that comes to my mind is kids
with autism, and which we've
been doing for 30 years. Is it
those kind of kids or is it kids
with, you know, psychosis, etc.
do you have a kind of a sense
of, of maybe what percentage
are, are.
Or what, what diagnosis.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, so the, um, most of
that population is um children
that have um higher need
diagnosis like psychotic
disorder, um, severe mood
disorders, um, you know, locally
we don't have a single provider
that um directly provides care
for autism spectrum disorder.
Um, we do treat those kids, we
do.
provide support to those
families because we feel like it
is unjust just because, you
know, we get our, our staff, you
know, whatever training's
available within the state so
they are able to adequately
support the families and the
child, um, but most of those
kids that um or youth that go
into higher levels of care that
are out of state are, um, your
more severe higher acuity. They
are often frequent flyers in.
out of hospitalization, um, and,
you know, we have a really
severe problem in our state with
that frequent flyer system. Um,
we have kids in our community
that get hos we've had one that
was hospitalized like 7 times in
about a 4 month period. Um, and
so it's, you know, it's
unfortunate because um we don't
have enough access to that care
within our state. Thank you. And
then you're on the page that's
children.
core service agency. The second
bullet is community support
services and then again looking
through the DD lens, that's
services so that the people can
be out in the community. Is that
what this means or does this
mean resources within the
community, Madam Chair and
members of the community, that
means um that means they're in
the community, the service can
happen across settings, OK? So
if again, if a child needs
support in school, they can go
to into the school and offer
support there if they need
resource
is in the home, if mom needs
help with finances, um, if we
need to help grandparents with
after school care. It can be a
lot of different things, um, but
it is across settings.
Thank you for that. And then,
um, there was mention of, I, I
believe, I think it was CB CBHC,
but I, I think it's CCBHC were
you, were you discussing a CCBA
CAPHC as far as the cuts could
hit that, and, and that's a new,
fairly new term. Can you very
briefly describe what that, what
that means. So in our community
we have El Centro who gets
federal funds and so they have
many programs under there, you
know, under their um
umbrella. So as the CCBHC gets
federal funds to to meet certain
program requirements and so
those are some of the funding,
um, that are potentially up for
cuts and members of the
committee that that's a fairly
new um federal program and for a
while New Mexico only had one.
We are getting to have more and
more which which is um.
We have 12.
Wow, that's growth of which 10
are members of our association
very and Maggie that leads me
into the next question.
Do you have a sense of what
percentage of New Mexico's
behavioral health providers are
members of your association.
I do not. I have, uh, I did not
sure how to determine how many,
how many organizations there
are, but we are initiating a
survey of our membership to to
to generate more of the
demographic data, so as soon as
I get a, a, a question as soon
as I get an answer to our
questions, I will let you know.
And once again, all payers
claims data could help us with
that if we had a robust claims.
I feel like a broken record, but
um, here we go again. So I, I
just have um just a statement
that is one of you talked about
the medical model, um, and, and
we find the same thing in the
IDD world, it's like, well,
their temperature's normal.
Well, yeah, they, they have an
autism spectrum disorder, so, so
I'm hoping that we can move away
from that fully medical hospital
model and realized that health
care is much bigger than than
your temperature and your
blood pressure. So, so ladies,
thank you so much for your
presentation. It was wonderful.
Um, I can tell you Maggie is
very reachable, um, and very
open to um answering questions,
working with, with folks, and
just one more thing, um, we had
a, I had a bill this past
session to make synchronous the
official medical record and um
electronic medical record of the
state because we need to do
that. It didn't pass, so it will
be back so I need all the
champions.
I can get to help us meet a
federal requirement that we need
to meet. So thank you again
ladies.
And next we will go to um
This is a very exciting
presentation, Dorothy Moeller,
she's been helping us on a
variety of issues and um I
personally can't wait to hear
from her, um, so welcome
Ms. Mueller and um whenever
you're ready, we wait anxiously.
It's a song. It's on now.
Uh, Dorothy Mueller, an
independent consultant who's
been working with the committee,
um, a little, we, we are
webcasting.
So a little louder, uh, just
pull it closer to you. You can,
you can move it. You don't have
to necessarily rearrange
yourself.
Um, Dorothy Mueller, independent
consultant, um.
Working with the committee, I've
also worked with LFC on a number
of issues as well and have
previously worked with uh
Senator Hickey and a couple of
others, uh, on, uh, this and,
and issues related to um
Uh, to, uh, benefit.
Uh,
purchasing for the state, um
benefit procurement. Uh, I would
just add real quickly that there
is also a very long report, uh,
and a very long appendix, uh,
several 100 pages for those of
you who don't have anything to
do with your time that goes
along with this. Uh, it, it is
the first part of the, of the uh
report from this work and it's
not, there, there's uh another
piece of work that will follow
this dealing primarily
with recommendations. Um, so
just real quickly, um, I would,
I, I'd like to prefer the
preface this by saying, uh,
unlike the previous presentation
and, and, uh, over the last
couple of decades, I myself have
done a fair amount of uh
behavioral health work. Uh, so
I, I fully appreciate the
challenges that they're facing
in particular I'm sorry, could
you please take your
conversations out. It's, it's
hard to hear in here. I'm so
sorry to interrupt.
I'm just, I, maybe it's just me,
but I'm being distracted by, go
ahead.
Um, so, unlike the previous
presentation where they're
dealing with some very, very,
very significant challenges that
are going to be made, uh, even
more challenging.
Uh, with some of the new, um,
federal legislation and
budgeting. Uh, I would say that
the area of pharmaceutical
expenditures.
actually presents the state with
an opportunity to reduce its
costs and potentially redirect
some of those monies to other
places. It will in fact require
significant change to the way
that the state is currently
procuring.
Uh, and pricing pharmaceuticals,
but a number of states have
undertaken changes that have had
a, a very big impact on their
expenditures, and those are not
just the large states, uh, it,
it includes small states like um
Oklahoma and West Virginia, both
of whom, both of which, uh,
disintermediated the managed
care organizations in the PBMs
altogether and took over the
purchasing of pharmaceuticals
themselves.
Uh, and, and, and also includes
some states like Vermont, as
well as larger states like
Massachusetts, Maryland, and
Pennsylvania that have
undertaken significant delivery
system transformation and I
think you probably know from the
last time I presented to this
committee and a very big
believer in the opportunities
that uh are could be afforded
New Mexico with delivery system
transformation, although it's
not entirely clear what level of
funding will be available at
Federal level to support that. I
would add that one of the, one
of the, the
Uh, potentially favorable budget
provisions in the bill that was
just passed at the federal level
is uh a significant amount of
money for rural health
transformation, uh, the time
frame for qualifying for that
money is very, very short. I
believe it's the end of the, of
this year, so there's no time
for kind of uh waiting around to
figure out what you want to, to
do on that. It does take fairly
rapid action, but there is
funding at least available for
rural.
uh health transformation that
could be part of this. So just
real quickly then, uh, let me
walk through my presentation and
leave time for questions. Um, so
as you all know, uh, you've
passed a number of pieces of
legislation over the last
several several years, which I
would describe as foundational.
Uh, so not unlike many states
and other parts of the country,
you've passed the transparency
bills and, and uh PBM uh
regulation and
A whole series of additional
things. I would also add that
New Mexico was a an early
innovator in the area of
pharmacists scope of practice,
um, which hasn't gotten quite
the uptake that I'm guessing you
originally, um, were, uh, we're
hoping for, but you were an
early innovator, which other
states have since followed um
and expanded on. So for example,
Idaho is uh just recently passed
a significant very
broad-reaching, um,
Pharmacist's scope of practice,
uh, bill that expands the
availability of pharmacist
services and what pharmacists
can do, um, as a way of
addressing, um, the, the care
deserts that occur all over the
country and rural and frontier
areas. So you've, um,
So you've, you, you've created a
very strong foundation to build
on, uh, but what, uh, the, the
bills that you have passed with
the exception of the those that
target specific
Uh, types of, of
pharmaceuticals. They, they
don't significantly, they don't
have the the potential to
significantly impact cost and
access, and that's where the
next challenge really uh lays is
uh affecting the availability of
medications, um, in particular,
the affordability of medications
for, for everybody, really. Um,
it is not just an issue for
Medicaid. It's not just an issue
for private.
It's really an issue for all,
all individuals.
Um
So, the other thing that I would
add is that um we did look at um
as, as part of the scope of the
work of our work, we did look at
the um underlying demographics
and health characteristics of
the population. I've done over
the last 30, 40 years. I hate to
say it, it's that many decades,
that, that long, but um I've
done a fair number of projects
looking at New Mexico's
underlying health
characteristics and demographics
and they're well known, but
even looking at this and
analyzing the Medicaid
pharmaceutical data which we
used as a proxy for the entire
population. We were able to
determine that, um, there's some
very specific characteristics of
the population that allow for
targeted interventions or
targeted programs, um, using,
you know, good old fashioned
market competition and strategic
sourcing, which is what every
well run business uses, um, s
Strategic sourcing um principles
to really procure your um
pharmaceuticals in a way that
you're benefiting the
population, you're linking
things to your population health
goals and you're known needs in
the community.
Um, and, and so that, that,
that's actually a plus. It may
seem like a minus, but it's a
plus because it allows you to be
very, very targeted with um what
you're doing.
However, I will add that
probably the most significant
thing about um New Mexico's
procurement of pharmaceuticals
and, and you're not unique in
this respect, many states do
this, is that your procurement
of pharmaceuticals is extremely
fragmented, as you know, each
one of the Medicaid plans has
its own mechanisms for procuring
um uh it's pharmaceuticals, your
fee for service plan has its own
mechanism. We had, uh,
previously done.
work on the IBA, even though
those are supposed to be
consolidated, they're kind of
sort of consolidated but not,
not completely, uh, more so on
the pharmaceutical side than on
the benefit side. Um, and so
you're not really leveraging the
value that you have with the
very, very large size of the
population that you could be
procuring for in a much more
targeted fashion.
Um
Uh, at any rate, um, so what all
this really points to is that if
you look at the data and we
looked at, um, we did an
exhaustive review of
international models, um, of,
uh, state innovations of state
models. Uh, so we have a pretty
good idea of how uh New Mexico
fits in with those other models
and where the opportunities
might be there, as I've said,
very big. We believe very big
opportunities for the state to
reform the way that it's
procuring.
uh, pharmaceuticals save itself
money, save the federal
government money through the
federal match, um, and
potentially redirect those funds
to other places at the same time
that you can also support
population health goals and
needs of the state.
So, just real quickly, um, as
part of that, it is very
important to understand the
evolution of the, of the, the
pharmaceutical market.
In uh in in and they're kind of
astounding. It's kind of
astounding data when you look at
it and um in 1960, uh, the
pharmaceuticals were primarily
purchased out of pocket. They
were almost exclusively retail
and occasionally delivered in
and uh uh in an inpatient
setting.
They were around $27 billion or
healthcare spending was around
23 $27 billion. Now it's 5.3
trillion. We all know that how
crazy, um, you know, the growth
has been, it's healthcare is now
approaching 20% of GDP.
Um, and the important thing
about that evolution, the
important element about that
evolution is we've gone from
largely out of pocket in retail
to a much more expansive model
for how pharmaceuticals are
purchased and delivered and the
kinds of pharmaceuticals that
there are. Almost all of the
reforms that have been
implemented, certainly the
reforms that have been
implemented by this legislature.
are directed at the, the um
large on a unit basis, um,
portion of the, of
pharmaceutical spending but
small on the cost basis and not
growing.
Uh, as significantly, um, so
it's uh almost exclusively
directed at the retail piece of
the business, which is where the
PBMs largely operate.
Um, the problem with that is the
real growth in the industry is
coming from, um, specialty
drugs. You also have compounded
drugs.
Uh, and you have a, you know,
that again is one of the places
where New Mexico was uh out in
front of others that you do have
very good like uh regulation of
compound, of compounding.
Uh, pharmacies and compounded
drugs, um, but it's very
difficult to um to, to manage
within your existing
procurement, um, model. The
Uh, a couple of things that I
need to point out about that
evolution of uh the
Of the types of pharmaceuticals
that are being purchased is that
for the most part, the Medicaid,
the, the, the bulk of the
Medicaid purchasing as well as
much commercial purchasing of
drugs is directed at that retail
piece, and that's where you have
the repay, the rebate, um, model
that is required under federal
law. Um, uh, and, however, that
growing and very costly piece of
special
specialty drugs and compounded
drugs is not covered by that.
And is, is most often bungled as
part of another payment. You
have the state has recently
secured a waiver to develop um
or included in its most recent
waiver application.
The ability to develop
value-based reimbursement models
for um capturing that the
specialty drugs that are
typically uh delivered in
another setting. They're,
they're an inpatient settings
there in outpatient settings,
they might be in a physician's
office. They may sometimes be in
a pharmacy or at home. Um,
New Mexico, like most other
states, doesn't have a defined
definition for a specific
definition for what constitutes
a specialty drugs, so that's
part of the problem of trying to
figure out what falls into what
categories, but it's largely
outside of your normal
procurement process, um, in
terms of the ability to really
affect the cost of those drugs
and manage utilization because
the other thing that has
happened as the market has
evolved.
is um
Is that, um,
You've seen um a very large
increases, you know, we've
talked about it previously, um,
in the development of all kinds
of uh of um
Intermediaries, PBMs, um, now
you have a specialty, um,
providers who provide specialty
pharmaceutical providers um who
deliver services in their
offices. Uh, you have
distributors, you have, uh,
rebate aggregators you have
managed care organizations. Each
one of those intermediaries, uh,
is involved in the process of
purchasing all of these uh
medications and delivering these
patients in the case of
specialty drugs, it's compounded
by the fact that these drugs are
also then provided in a
non-retail setting and you have
a whole series of additional
parties that are involved in
that, which make it very
difficult to understand what the
costs really are for those drugs
as, as well as what the um what
the profit component might be of
that and potential innovation
and efficiencies. Uh, and I
apologize, I hopefully I'm not
jumping around here, just on
Uh, page 6 real quickly. It's
also important to understand
that um that the other thing
that is really driven the
current state of, of, uh,
pharmaceutical spending and
pharmaceutical use is um just
the explosion of chronic
illness, right? Uh, and we all
know about that, uh, in New
Mexico is not exempt from that,
um.
And, and part of what comes with
that is also a very high rate of
polypharmacy, uh, surprisingly
in the US, polypharmacy is
designated as
An individual who is receiving 5
or more medications which, which
is just almost a little
terrifying, but that is the
standard definition. Once you
get beyond 2 medications, the
risk of complications are
significant. The reason why it's
important to understand that you
have individuals taking these
kinds of, you know, that have
this level of utilization. Is
that, that also drives up your
healthcare costs because it's
one of the most common reasons
why people present in, uh,
especially for the elderly, for
presenting in an emergency
department.
Uh, so it results in a, in not
only wasted medications, but it
also um can uh result in, um,
in, in all kinds of downstream
health effects.
Um
There's a on page 7, there's
kind of an important uh quote
from Deloitte that or, or uh
Element from a uh
Uh, from a Deloitte report that
kind of drives home the point,
um, according to a recent
analysis that they completed,
um.
The, the balance of health care
spending has recently shifted
away from inpatient, which is
traditionally been for, you
know, the last 70 years has been
the largest area of expenditure
to um pharmaceuticals, so it has
become one of the largest
components of costs.
Uh, and for certain populations,
especially for commercial
populations, it now has, um, it,
it has now become the most
significant.
Uh, uh, component of cost of
health care costs for
individuals. So to not manage
pharmaceuticals as part of your
healthcare delivery system and
as part of your overall delivery
of care really leaves you in a
position where um your, uh,
you're really not effectively
managing the overall delivery
and management of, of a health
in a population.
Um,
as I mentioned on page 8, and I
think we, uh, presented this
diagram previously that the
market for um for
pharmaceuticals is just become
incredibly complex. There are so
many intermediaries that so many
points, um, that, uh,
That it's almost a little bit
difficult to kind of peel away
each piece and understand what
each each element of the of the
um distribution channel and
sales channel and delivery
channel is really contributing
to overall costs. The one thing
that I would also add from my
four decades of working both,
you know, with managed care
organizations with providers,
with um with policy makers with
pharmaceutical organizations is
that
When you have that level of
complexity and I, I know many of
you are bus have business
backgrounds as well. When you
have that level of complexity in
these very, very large
organizations. What that also
does is it obscures things
because you have transfer
pricing and you have cost
allocation models, which means
that the true costs for things
can get moved all over the place
and it makes it very, very hard
for you to really understand
what you're paying for things,
um, in a way that.
um,
that, that allows you to manage
it more effectively.
Um, so let me just talk on page
9 real quickly, uh, and I
believe we made uh some of these
points in an earlier
presentation.
But uh we did much uh more
detailed analysis with this
report.
There, there is often talk about
the fact that um that drugs are
significantly less expensive in
other countries, and they are.
Um, but it's important to
understand that the way that
drugs that pharmaceuticals are,
are purchased and managed in
those countries is completely
different. It is a completely
different model, and that's not
to say I know many people
believe that other countries
have socialized medicine. They
actually don't. They're,
they're, they're, um, most, um,
European, most developed
countries actually have some
form of of a um
Of, uh, for profit, um, medical
model or, or healthcare model.
What they do though is they
manage, they tend to manage with
global budgets so they have more
control.
Um, they said global budgets,
much in the way that Maryland
and Massachusetts and
Pennsylvania and Vermont are
trying to do right now. And, and
when they purchase and, and uh
deliver pharmaceuticals, they're
doing that within that global
budget.
So they try to manage within
that global budget, they, they
try to manage their
pharmaceutical expenditures
within that global budget. What
is also very different about
what they do, but again, there
are states that are doing this
now, is they, they um employ
what's referred to. It's a
terrible term, but it's referred
to as health technology
assessment.
Um, it isn't what it sounds
like, it's something different.
If those of you who know about
value-based reimbursement or
value-based purchasing, we'll
see similarities there. It's
essentially in the, in the case
of, of pharmaceuticals. It's
looking at every pharmaceutical
in particular new
pharmaceuticals, um, looking at
the value that it delivers to
achieve the health outcomes that
are desired.
So if a new drug comes on
online, um, the, um, the, the,
uh
The drug is evaluated for its
effectiveness within that
therapeutic class and pricing is
set based on the effectiveness
of the drug.
So new drugs come on they in
most countries, they get an
initial exemption. So whatever
the manufacturer is asking for,
that, that's the price paid for
some period of time and con
countries handle it differently
in different places, but that's
essentially the model, um, and
then the drug is evaluated for
effectiveness and typically
formularies and the cost to the
patient is actually built around
that um that therapeutic class.
So for a therapeutic
class, the least cost
therapeutic cla uh
The least cost most effective
drug within a therapeutic class
becomes the base for pricing of
pharmaceutical.
And what they don't do then is
they don't have the formulary
constraints that we often see in
the US, right? I mean,
Everybody loves and hates
formularies or preferred drug
lists in the United States. They
tend to have open formularies
and they use the pricing of the
drugs as a mechanism to affect
demand for the drugs. So people
can get access to the higher
cost drug, but it may cost them
more out of pocket, and that's
based on this health technology
assessment. The other than this
thing which we've also talked
about previously is that most,
most countries, most other
countries in the um
Non-US country developed
countries also use some form of
reference pricing and it might
be internal reference pricing or
it may be external pri uh
preference reference pricing.
The internal reference pricing
is exactly what I was talking
about when I was talking about
the therapeutic class, um.
Uh, assessment, um, external,
um.
Reference pricing really looks
at other countries it may look
at some kind of external
database of prices there can be
a, a number of mechanisms used
to do that. And again, there are
a number of states that have
adopted reference pricing
already for their, for their,
uh, pharmaceutical purchase
purchasing, um, one of the, the
first and most important of
those states was Arkansas that
went literally ended up battling
um the use of reference pricing
all the.
way to the Supreme Court.
Uh, and, um, and they have been
able to demonstrate significant
savings with the use of uh of
reference pricing uh on their
pharmaceuticals. They were also
one of the first states to uh
implement many of the same PBM
regulation and, and limitations,
regulation and limitations, uh,
similar to what you've done
here.
Um
So for states, uh, on page 10
then, let's just kind of talk
about the range of innovation in
the states. Um, you have, uh,
and this is literally, this is
just a, a small subset of the
states that have undertaken
significant pharmaceutical
redesign, um, Colorado, um, did
many of the things that you have
done with your transparency
board and, and things like that.
The difference with Colorado is
that they also implemented
upper.
lo bi t s and notification
requirements for drugs. Um, so
they are actually attempting to
set uh an upper payment for, for
specific pharmaceuticals. The
one thing that they also have
along with that though, uh, and
I heard the reference to the
APCD, um, is that, um, they also
have built in most of these
other states have built robust
analytics and data capture and
reporting to support what
they're doing because
as I get to the, the um some of
your pharma some of your
Medicaid pharmaceutical data,
you'll see that there are real
opportunities for strategic
sourcing, if you have the
analytics to, to do that
targeting.
Um, California, some of you
know, um, has gone even further.
They are actually, um, they,
they have actually, uh, uh,
entered into a contract with a,
a manufacturer to manufacture
certain drugs for them.
Uh, West Virginia, as I
mentioned, completely carved out
PBMs. They just, they did away
with them. Oklahoma has done the
same thing. New Hampshire is
reviewing that, uh, I think
we've talked previously about
Connecticut, uh, not only
getting rid of PBMs but also
getting rid of MCOs, um, and,
uh, Vermont is also, um,
pursuing that, that model. The
benefit of doing that, first of
all, you do need to do a
cost-benefit analysis because
you either have to purchase some
of these services.
separately, you need to do an
insourcing outsourcing analysis
or you need to, um, you need to
build some of these
capabilities. You do have the
HCA though, which is a great
foundation for building some of
these capabilities if you choose
to. Massachusetts, as I'm, as I
mentioned, is kind of the
The granddaddy of all um
delivery system transformation,
they include, um, so they have
followed more of a European
model with um managing
pharmaceuticals as part of.
The um
Of their overall delivery
system, they are attempting to
set global budgets for
pharmaceutical expenditures and
they have many of these other
elements in there as well.
Vermont fall is a very, very
similar model, um, and, um,
Uh, and they've also achieved
very significant savings and the
significant thing about Vermont
is it's, um, it has many of the
same characteristics as New
Mexico, you know, very large,
um, very significant portion of
the population that's in rural
and frontier areas, and they're
a small state, so if a small,
you know, a small state like
that can do it.
Um, New Mexico can do some of
these things as well.
There are also a number of
targeted significant targeted
reforms and as I mentioned, the
very large report that I had
provided, um, lists in detail
what some of those other
targeted reforms are, um, and a
lot of that is program
consolidation, so, you know,
we've talked about the
fragmentation of your purchasing
in New Mexico. Other states have
taken over a number of years
have taken, uh, taken on that
issue and have consolidated
purchasing. New Mexico has
established one.
has, uh, you, you implemented
legis legis you passed
legislation to implement one of
those first requirements to do
that, which is the creation of a
common PDL, common, um,
preferred drug list or
formulary, um.
What other states have done is
they've expanded the PDL to
cover, for example, all of their
state purchasing, which you have
not, and I believe that I, I, I,
I don't know the exact status of
the PDL development, but I
believe it's still in it's
relatively or um early stages.
Um, I've talked about, um, PBM
practice, um, reforms you
implemented, um, uh, many of
those, um, and pricing reforms,
some of those you implemented as
well, um, you've, you know,
you've, uh, implemented uh
clawback.
limitations and requirements for
fair pricing, fair competition,
etc. One of the places that is
very significant where
significant savings have been
achieved is actually in
purchasing reforms, and I don't
specifically deal with it in
this presentation, but um I do
discuss it some in um the
report.
Is that um as an example, uh,
again, another small state, New
Jersey, small state but fairly
large population and fairly
densely populated and was one of
the first to implement reverse
auction.
Uh, for its PBM services as well
as a number of its other state
services and, um, achieved very
significant savings and there
are, I believe, 5 or 6 states
that have now followed New
Jersey with the implementation
of reverse auction. It does
require a certain amount of
technology that you need to
purchase and it does require
changing the way that you're
procuring things, but the
savings have been significant
for um New Jersey and the other
states that have implemented it.
And then
Um, a couple of other places um
where states have implemented
targeted reforms is really in
marketing, uh, and sales, uh,
marketing and sales is actually
a very significant piece of
overall pharmaceutical costs.
Uh, it's anywhere from 5 to 20%
depending on what data you look
at.
Um, and that includes, uh,
marketing to physicians, uh, and
of course some of uh some of the
uh marketing is, you know, tele
television and TV and I mean
television and radio and other
places which you can't um really
affect significantly, but you
can affect marketing to
physicians, um, and that has a
couple of impacts, right? It,
it, it, it, um, it has, uh, it
has an impact on uh on
prescribing practices.
For individuals and it also adds
to overall cost, um, so, and,
and what many states have done
is they've used the, their
academic resources to um engage
them uh to fine tune and develop
better practices around
marketing that achieved both
savings and um better health
outcomes from through their
academic detailing programs. And
then the last place is really
340B program.
s
Uh, and, uh, and I would add to
that 340B as well as um as a
discount programs so that also
includes SPAPs, which are the
state, um, uh, pharmaceutical
affordability programs, they
don't receive federal matching
funds, however, they do have
some benefits, uh, drugs that
are included in an SPAP.
Uh, are exempt from the
limitations on best price for
Medicaid Pharmaceuticals, so you
can actually achieve greater
discounts in an SPAP, then you
can for your Medicaid program.
You can also wrap them and
there's, they're also
requirements too, and you can
wrap them around Medicare
benefits, uh, so some states use
SAPs to actually uh offset the
cost for low income
beneficiaries for their Part D
coverage.
Uh, and, um, one of the most
innovative programs, which is
kind of uh top, it should be top
of mind for New Mexico and is
consistent with what uh the
prior presentation, um, uh, a
couple of states with uh
Pennsylvania being really the
premium example have implemented
SPASS that are targeted to
specific diagnostic categories
and in the case of Pennsylvania,
they've created an SPAP that
actually is part of their
Behavioral health programs.
So it provides a mechanism for
discounted access to drugs
needed for behavioral health
treatment.
Um, there are, and, and the way
that SATs are actually
structured is, um, their
structured uh based on uh on
need. So it's, you know,
they're, they're adjust, they
adjust based on income levels,
um, New Mexico, I believe had an
SPAP at one point, no longer has
an APAP. You do have uh drug
discount program, but that also
is, um, of, uh, kind of limited
scope and effectiveness, um, but
that along with.
340B and making sure that 340B
pricing actually gets to the
patients, that's something that
New Mexico has not done and it's
340B reforms SAPs and um and
medi uh and uh uh.
Discount cards, uh, really can
have a big effect on um the
availability and, and, uh.
Um, availability and the uh cost
of drugs for individuals. So
just
Um, I'll get real quickly to the
potential reforms for the state,
uh, and, and then open up for
questions.
That if you look at the entire
population of the state, there
are, by our estimate about 1,
about almost 1.5 million
individuals who could benefit
from improvements in state
purchasing.
Now some of that is over, is
double counting because people
uh qualify for multiple
programs, um, but you have your
very large Medicaid program, uh,
hopefully not harm too much by
some of the changes you have,
you know, almost 200,000 state
employees, um, uh, and, and
state and local government
employees, um, but then in
addition to that, you do have um
a relatively large small group
and
individual, um.
Uh, insurance market.
Uh, which then can benefit from
things like um uh medical
discount programs, uh, we've
talked about that previously.
That's one of the way that uh
many of the states have
initially gotten into the array
RX uh program is that they've
started with the drug discounts,
which are then available to
everybody. And then,
Likely going forward, you're
going to have a, a larger
uninsured rate than you have had
previously, um, because what I
know from 3 decades of working
with Medicaid programs is that
Even individuals who are working
will find it very, very
difficult, even if they meet,
even if they technically meet
the qualifications for um work
requirements, etc. It's gonna be
very difficult for them to
comply.
Uh, it, it's, it's gonna be
administratively cumbersome.
It's going to be um very
difficult for them to provide
the documentation they may have
episodic um employment, etc.
etc. Data shows that 92% of
Medicaid recipients actually are
working.
Uh, those of us who've worked in
the industry for a long time are
aware of that.
Even, even with that though, I
would anticipate, I would expect
that you're uninsured rate will
grow significantly and
particularly in programs like
behavioral health where people
are already dealing with.
Behavioral and physical,
physical and mental burdens that
um that may make it difficult
for them to meet certain
requirements, so.
One of the things that you
should be thinking of as you're
looking at pharmaceutical reform
in particular, anything that you
can do with, you know, your 340B
program, your discount programs,
your SASA program, um, that can
actually allow people who lose
their coverage to continue.
Excuse me, at least getting
their medications makes a whole
lot of sense.
Um, I won't go into detail on
slide 14. Let me just say this,
this is all data that you know,
you have very high rates of
poverty, high rates of high
percentage of the population
that lives in um rural
communities, um, you do have
very high specific rates of
certain illnesses, and that's
significant for purchasing of
Uh, did I just lose the, can you
still hear me?
Um, that's significant for
purchasing a pharmaceuticals
because um it allows for
strategic sourcing or the
implementation of strategic
sourcing principles to, to
really target what you're doing
with pharmaceuticals very
quickly.
Um
We did look at medication
utilization, um, hard to get for
New Mexico as it is for many
states primarily because you
don't really have uh that data
available through readily
accessible.
Um, uh,
Claims databases, um, but
looking at the Medicaid data, we
analyze that, um, and what we
found is, you know, the top, the
top 100 products account for 83%
of all your volume.
Uh, 18 products represent 80% of
your volume, um.
To the credit of your, of your
um of your Medicaid program,
what that suggests is they're
doing a pretty good job of
purchasing and managing
pharmaceuticals that, that, that
doesn't mean that there aren't
opportunities to improve, but
the, what the underlying data
suggests is that um you have
high rates of generic use, you
have fairly concentrated um
utilization of certain drugs,
etc. um.
However, um, what that, um, what
that points to then is um
significant opportunities again
for strategic sourcing. 1818
high volume products really
could be targeted for specific.
Uh, negotiation, uh, and
purchasing of those drugs.
That's something you can't do
when your programs are when
you're purchasing a scattered
across multiple programs. You
have to consolidate your volume
to be able to take advantage of
that.
Um
And um one of the other
important points here is, um,
what kinds of drugs are used,
and that's also on page 15 and
16.
The highest
Um, the, the highest cost.
Um, category of drugs for you or
mental health drugs.
Not surprising given the burden
of, of mental health, um,
conditions in the state.
That what, what that means is
again that you have the
opportunity to implement
targeted purchasing programs,
targeted pricing programs,
discount programs, etc.
specifically around um mental
health conditions.
And then you have a fairly
limited set of additional um
diagnostic categories that are
very, very high value and high
impact for you. That's
respiratory conditions, no, um,
uh, no surprise there
hypertension, diabetes, and pain
management.
Um, so based on that, you have
the ability again for very, very
um, targeted, um.
Uh, interventions to again put
best practices for purchasing of
anything, even if, if I were
speaking to you as a business as
opposed to speaking to you as,
as a legislative body, I would
say significant opportunities to
do things differently in a way
that actually, um, yields
greater value for the
beneficiaries of all these
programs, uh, and lower cost and
greater access, um, I won't, uh,
won't, uh.
Drive home all of the things
that you've done, um, on page
17, it's a long list, um, so I
would say that the legislature
deserves a pat on the back for
having tackled um the area of,
of, of drug purchasing and
procurement, um, there's a long
list of, of changes that you've
made. One could make an argument
that, you know, it's it that it
may make sense to see how some
of those things play out. I
would, I would, would say that.
Um,
that, uh, a couple of things
about that. First, um, things
have changed, right? Uh, the,
the availability of funding, the
financial burden that the state
is going to um be experiencing
in that.
Uh, the population of the state
is going to be experiencing it
has changed, um, and I would
also say, as I pointed out at
the very beginning of my
presentation, the, um, much of
what you've done kind of has,
has established a base for
better business practices.
But it doesn't really drive
toward reducing costs, and
that's the next challenge for
the state.
So, um, going on to, um, page
19.
Uh,
we've laid out 3 basic
scenarios, uh, for what the
state can do going forward. I
would say that those scenarios
are really not exclusive,
mutually exclusive. Um, I would
also add that timing of these
timing of anything that you
choose to do is limited by a
number of things. So for
example, with IBAC, it has its
own contracting time time
frames, right? Um, you, there
I also work that still needs to
be done to consolidate
purchasing across the IBA. Your
Medicaid program has its own
procurement cycle. Um, you have
the work that needs to be done
on the PDL to actually get a, a
common uh preferred drug list um
completed.
Uh, and ideally to get that
accepted more broadly, I would
suggest that if you're going to
take on um broader changes as
well. You would also want to do,
um, even more to expand
stakeholder involvement, uh, in
these actions, uh, and at the
very end of this document, I've
laid out some.
Recommendations for changes uh
to the approach for stakeholder
involvement to make sure that
you're designing solutions that
really address the needs of all
of these populations, including,
you know, your commercial
purchasers and, uh, you know,
your, uh,
Small groups, a small businesses
who are so critical to the
state, um, but, um, and as well
as um specific geographic
groups, uh, groups in different
parts of the state that may be
less represented or may have
particular issues that they need
to address. So option one is
really uh just kind of a
targeted uh set of uh of
initiatives, um.
One of the things that we were
asked to look at was multi-state
collaboratives and and
cooperatives. New Mexico doesn't
really participate to any large
degree in those.
Part of the reason why um
doesn't participate in those uh
collaboratives which have been
shown to actually reduce costs
for some of these states is the
nature of how you actually
procure those services, right?
If you've got all of your
procurement under your MCOs, uh,
and then, you know, your, your
fee for service program separate
in your IBA separate.
It's very hard to really get the
benefit out of those programs,
um, and many of them, uh, many
of them really deal with
additional rebates and, and, um,
but they also do deal with joint
purchasing of drugs and some
other things. The one place
where you do, um, it appears you
um participate is in one of the
collaboratives that deals with
supplemental rebates for your
fee for service program, um, but
I couldn't find any data on what
that.
has actually achieved, so I
don't actually know if it's
benefited um the state, but I, I
would.
Suggests that the state really
needs to look at what's, what
it's actually participating in
and expand that participation,
especially since they are so
much more active than they used
to be.
Um, you need to complete the
common PDL. You need to, uh,
complete an analysis develop a
plan, and select technology we
would recommend uh implementing
reverse action.
Uh, and reverse action could be
applied to not just the purchase
of pharmaceuticals, but a whole
lot of other things that the
state is purchasing, uh, to the
benefit of the state in reducing
overall costs.
Um, we would, um,
We would also suggest that um
that the state actually take a
look at and analyze what his and
there's some initial work that
was done a couple of years ago
to really look at why there
hasn't been better uptake of
your clinical pharmacist
program, which is your, your,
um, uh, pharmacist program that
expanded scope of practice to
allow pharmacists to do more
than they do in many states. Um,
you, I think there are 200 plus
clinical pharmacists, you use
it.
what's referred to as a
collaborative model, um, the
research across the country
suggests that the collaborative
model doesn't work very well, so
that may be part of what's
affecting it, but again, states
like Idaho um have significantly
expanded scope of practice for
pharmacists, and again, this is
very similar to what you do in
other countries, what happens in
other countries to allow
pharmacists to, you know, to,
to, uh, deliver um prescriptions
without uh
person needing to certain
prescriptions to without that
person needing to go to a
doctor, um, in some instances to
actually help assist in managing
um chronic illnesses, to do
testing, etc. So there's some
very good models that have
emerged, um, and New Mexico was
the first state to do this, um,
so there's an opportunity there.
Expand your 340B program, look
at alternatives for your drug
discount program. We've talked
about ray RX before that's
obviously a very good.
Um, uh, place to start, um.
We would recommend that one of
the easy things to do with
specialty drugs is to implement
again, other states have done
this site neutral pricing.
That does away with the
differential that you see when
drugs specialty drugs are in are
uh delivered in a hospital
outpatient or inpatient setting.
So that automatically typically
automatically reduces the cost
of drugs.
Um, and then, as I mentioned,
expanding um stakeholder
engagement that
That none of this comes without
an investment, um, the, uh, uh,
and we know what that investment
is on that, um, uh, that
alternative, again, these are
ballpark figures because we're
not doing detailed analysis, but
it's probably, um, you know, a
good $5 million for technology
and some other things that you
would need to implement and
there's the work with the PDL
and other things that would need
to be done.
The next level of reform is
really kind of, um, is a, is a
higher investment. Um, it does
not go as far as the farthest
states have gone, um, but it's
includes consolidating your
purchasing across all of the
places that we talked about
evaluating insourcing versus
outsourcing, um, for health
technology assessment. There are
established organizations that
other states are using that do
the health technology assessment
that I was talking about.
Um, and, uh, in New Mexico could
be taking advantage of those.
Um, again, evaluate
opportunities for collaborative
participation.
Um, you need to design distinct
pricing models for each type of
drug.
There's one pricing model for
retail drugs. There's another
pricing model for specialty
drugs, there's another pricing
model for compounded drugs. If
you do not have those different
pricing models, you can't price
them effectively, um, and again,
the state did get um approval of
a waiver for value-based
purchasing for specialty drugs.
It's not clear how much progress
the state has made and and and I
would add again if your
mechanism for doing that is your
MCO.
That obscures the benefit that
you're going to get.
Um
We would actually recommend that
you unbundle PBM services.
And I would add that it is not
just states that have done this.
Blue Shield of California, which
is one of the largest
purchasers, uh, uh, health plans
in the country unbundled all of
its PBM services and what it
does then is it purchases the
individual components of what a
PBM does separately.
And they've achieved significant
savings already and they're
still not fully implemented, so
it is not just a state
initiative to do this. It is
also a large purchasers that are
uh private purchasers.
Uh, yeah, repeat that, please.
So yeah, so again, this is not
just an initiative that's being
undertaken by states. It's also
an in an initiative, um, that is
being undertaken by private
purchasers.
The whole concept. So the whole
concept is to unbundle
completely unbundle.
what PBMs do. And the question
is how far that goes, right?
Because typically, right, it
could go all the way to the MCOs
because most PBMs made the major
PBMs are all owned by NCOs. They
also very often own the
specialty drug providers. Um,
they own, um, the, uh,
The rebate aggregators that, uh,
you know, they own, they own the
mail order companies. Um, the
problem again is somebody who's,
uh, you know, I've done a lot of
strategy projects for a lot of
companies over the years, not
just, I, I don't work just with
public entities. I've worked
with a lot of private entities.
What I can tell you is what that
allows you to do is it allows
you to move money very easily
and obscure where spending is
actually occurring.
It's also not a perfect science,
um, so as an example, cost
allocation models are not, um,
you know, accounting cost
allocation.
Excuse me, cost allocation
models are not a perfect
science. So you get a lot of
very squishy, not really, um,
clean allocation of models
across products. It is very
common in the, in the multiline
insurance world where they may
have a line of Medicaid
business, a line of Medicare
business, a line of, of um
commercial business to allocate
cost based on, um, numbers of
members. Many, many parts.
of costs.
Um, what that means is very
often, remember, Medicaid is
mostly moms and kids.
Um, so you have.
You, you may have a certain
level of cost, but on a unit
basis, uh, you have many more
units because kids aren't very
expensive to insure, um, so
you've got a large number of
units in a Medicaid plan, which
means that within a multi-line
insurance company, the Medicaid
plan very often gets burdened
with much higher costs based on
its actual, what the
reimbursement rate to the
insurer is. So you have those
kinds of problems that occur
when
um just because again, counting
allocation models aren't very
good.
Um, and it's a very complex
science to design them, um, you
also have the issue of transfer
pricing, right? If I own, if I'm
a managed care organization and
I own a PBM and a mail order
pharmacy and uh uh rebate
aggregator and specialty
provider. Um, I can allocate my
costs very, I can, I can um
transfer price, the, the cost of
goods or the cost of services
between
those entities multiple times
and that obscures the true cost.
So what
Both public and private.
purchasers are doing is they're
unbundling all that.
And they're saying we're we're
going to take all of the
activities, the specific
discrete things that we can buy
from you.
And we're going to buy them
separately.
The benefit of that is that you
can see really what you're
purchasing, what it costs. The
other benefit of that is that if
done correctly, you can also
implement things like reverse
auction for each one of those
things.
And you can purchase best of
breed in those things, for so
for example with Blue Shield of
California. They've got, um,
they've got um.
The, I, I forget the, the guy
who does the, the basketball guy
who uh has the.
Mark Cuban, they have Mark
Cuban's company, um, doing one
portion of their business, they
actually have one of the
traditional PBMs, I believe it's
CBS doing another portion of
their business. They have um
another PBM alternative doing
another portion of their
business. So I believe they've
got like 5 or 6 different
Um, vendors who are delivering
what the PBM used to deliver.
And they maximized what they're
getting for each one of those.
That's also what.
West Virginia did, that's also
what Oklahoma did.
Right, um, and, and it may in
some instances mean be building
capabilities internally that you
don't have right now or
purchasing them externally. I'm
a very big believer in
insourcing and outsourcing
analysis if you're, before you
insource, you really need to
look at what the cost is going
to be same with outsourcing,
right? Um, it may or may not be
more efficient for the state and
more cost effective for the
state to build some of those
things internally.
We happen to believe that the
state that there is the, the
dollar spent on pharmacy across
all of your programs. We tried
to figure out what that is, but
we think it's around a billion
dollars.
Um, very hard to get at that.
You might be able to help me get
at that. Um, but it's not an
insignificant amount of money,
um, and to support additional
investments by the state.
So that's the 2nd pathway, which
is the interim. The third
pathway is really kind of
following a model very similar
to what, um, Vermont,
Pennsylvania, Massachusetts, um,
and several other, uh, uh,
organ.
Colorado to a lesser degree, um,
have done, which is to really
bundle what they're doing with
pharmaceuticals, um, into
delivery system transformation.
The problem, the potential
problem with that as a solution
is we really don't know what
kind of funding there's going to
be for that going forward. Um,
the, the, um, it's, it's unclear
what grants have been canceled.
Um, but, um, but we would
expect, uh, except for the
additional funding that was been
um provided for rural health
transformation that it may be
hard to get federal dollars to
drive that transformation, which
has really been the engine for
doing that since literally since
the Bush administration.
Bush was the first to actually
implement many of those
transformation programs and then
it was followed by each
successive um
uh administration with a lot of
it being supercharged with the
passage of the ACA, so not clear
how many of those dollars are
available, but we do believe at
a minimum, the state should be
literally dashing down the
hallway to try to pull together
some kind of application for at
least rural health
transformation and as part of
that, we believe there's an
opportunity to bundle in some of
the things that you would want
to do with pharmacy.
Um, and of course in, in a prior
presentation, um, I made a very
strong case for even considering
the creation of ACOs, um, to
shore up your, um, rural health
providers.
Uh, and, and, and actually
creating an alternative to
delivery again from 4 decades,
uh, in the, you know, uh,
working with managed care
organizations, I can tell you
most managed care organizations
don't want to try to deliver
care, deliver managed care in a
rural market. It's just too
difficult to do, so it makes
sense to build a transformation
model around your world, um,
your rural communities.
At any rate, uh,
Thank you. Uh, to all the
committee members, we actually
really enjoy doing this work. As
I said, I've uh done work with
New Mexico literally since my
my first healthcare project with
Saint Joseph's Albuquerque, a
long time ago, so, um, it's nice
to continue.
Having the opportunity to
hopefully get back to the state.
Thank you, Dorothy, and uh I've
worked at Saint Joe's. Did you
really in the PT department
back.
Way back, we won't talk about
how long, madam, I'm assuming
you remember Sister Celestia,
right? Yes, yes, yes, she was a
rock star,
yes, so just, just, um, just for
the, the um members that you
heard Dorothy talk about the all
pair claims data, the fact that
we don't have data.
Affects our ability to save
money, to serve patients better
to serve providers better and I
keep throwing this out in the
universe and hoping that the
people who are supposed to be
doing this, will take a hint,
um, and I would appreciate all
of you.
Turning the screws a little bit,
any, any opportunity you get.
And also I got a text from Ruby
Anne, um, and she's asking what
year of data you were, you were
using for this and, and let me
tell you why she said in the
last two years or so in
Medicaid, GLP ones took over as
the lead cost driver drugs, not
behavioral health or respiratory
any longer and
Her point is well taken about
leveraging market share
purchasing, which we've been
trying to advance for 20 years,
so this is uh we've, we've been
at this a while and it's time to
uh.
Really get serious now, but so
do do you, do you know what um
I'd have to go back and look at
the report to see it, but it
would have been, uh, it would
have been the, the latest
available data from the federal
government because your data
isn't accessible to somebody
like me, um, on the point of
GLP1s Ruby, or there you are
over there, um.
The, uh, they're, they're
actually some very, very good,
uh, innovation occurring uh
around GLP1. So I mentioned
health technology assessment. If
you, if you, if you use the
concept of health technology
assessment to look at the cost
of GLP ones. The um the, the,
the implications for additional
non-pharmaceutical healthcare
costs are significantly
positive, right?
They reduce all kinds of health
risks and health costs. Uh, I
believe it is New Jersey. I can
double check, but I believe it's
New Jersey is actually at the
forefront with a couple of other
states of the uh of developing a
value-based purchasing model
based on the concepts of health
technology assessment and
evaluating the value of GLP
ones, um, for overall health
care costs, they're, uh, they're
looking.
to develop a different way of
purchasing GLP ones. So very
similar uh to what uh Louisiana,
Louisiana was always um uh put
up as uh an example of a very
good innovation with high price
special high priced new drugs
with what they did with the,
with the hep C medications. Um,
so it's a very similar concept
to what was done with the hep C
medications previously where
they're looking at either
something.
like a subscription model or
value-based reimbursement model.
Again, part of the problem for
the for the state is unless
you're going to carve that out
of your managed care plans or
you're gonna carve out drug
purchasing from managed care, it
becomes very difficult for you
to do that and you certainly
don't want every single managed
care plan negotiating that
separately, right? But I
wouldn't be surprised if GLP
ones have proven to be um very
cost.
costly. However, the analysis
that's been done and I believe
in, I believe uh we included
some information in our very
large, also very large appendix
and Ruby Anne, if you haven't
gotten copies of that, I can
provide both of them to you.
Um
That, uh, where, um, we showed
some of the analysis of GLP ones
and the benefits to other costs.
Again, this is where when you
follow a much more uh
comprehensive um approach for
pharmaceutical management.
You can make decisions that seem
counterintuitive, but actually
both improve health outcomes and
reduce overall costs, um, that,
you know, that, that we wouldn't
otherwise make and GLP ones are
the perfect example of that. A
number of states have dropped
coverage for them.
Um, they, and
counterintuitively, they still
cover bariatric surgery, so.
Thank you for that and, and I
want to apologize to the
committee, I know this was
technical and I should have told
you beforehand if at any point
there's a uh abbreviation or
something that you didn't
understand to, to raise your
hand and my mistake, um, so
again, my apologies and we will
go to questions and we will
start with representative Anaya
and worked that way and then
come back around this way. So
again, 3 minutes uh.
And uh
Go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair. This was
so exciting. I know it's
technical, but this is so
exciting, um, especially the
last few slides. I feel like a
lot of folks come with
recommendations and there's not
necessarily like the next steps,
so I really just wanna
appreciate you for adding those
in here. I think one of my
questions in terms of steps is
actually related to page 20
which is kind of like the
moderate risk plan number 2.
Um
Unbundling.
The PBMs and essentially trying
to figure out a way to eliminate
them. What does that look like?
Like, I, I know you, you
mentioned.
Um
Needing to make sure that we're
able to replace some of the
services, so what would that
kind of step by step look like?
So representative Anaya, Madam
Chair, um, they're actually
again are some very, very good
models, in particular the state
of Oklahoma, uh, and the state
of West Virginia that, that, uh,
and you can uh look, we can pull
in information for you, um,
showing exactly what they did to
to to do that unbundling and
while we can also pull in what
the, uh, there's a lot of
information on what Blue Shield
of California did. Um, it really
requires looking.
at the specific groups of
activities that they perform,
and I believe in um a
presentation that we did to the
committee a year plus ago, we
actually broke out what some of
those activities are, they're
fairly discreet, so, um, uh,
contracting for your network,
um, managing the formulary, um,
managing pain, um, each of those
individual activities can be
broken up and procured.
separately or they can be
bundled in smaller bundles,
right? Um, so it really, it, it,
it starts with just looking at
what the different components
are, in your case, it would also
look uh require and I did not go
back even though I uh
participated in the last
Medicaid procurement. I didn't
go back and look at the
contract, the most recent
Medicaid contract. It would also
require starting with looking at
what your Medicaid contract
allows you to do in terms of
making changes to the PT.
or PBM practices, so that would
be the starting point for that,
then it would, it would require
um doing the, the necessary
actuarial and other ana and
financial analysis to develop
separate RFPs for or
RFPs or whatever your
procurement vehicle is for each
one of those pieces, and again,
not required, but we recommend
the implementation of reverse
auction. So the reverse auction
actually is built on a
technology platform that really
optimizes purchasing.
So, um, you know, strategic
sourcing is a, is an actual
discipline within business. It's
built on the concepts of
strategic sourcing, um, and so
you need to select that
technology and again they're
good examples of uh.
Uh, New Jersey, Minnesota, I
believe Colorado, a couple of
other states have already
selected and implemented them,
um, and I, I think they're all
pretty much on the same
platform, so you would need to
do that so that it, it would not
be a, it, it wouldn't be
something you could just turn on
immediately. Um, you would need
to take those individual steps,
and then you'd need to go
through the procurement process.
In the case of Medicaid as well,
you also need to make sure that
you're complying with
drug pricing requirements, um,
You're not specifically excluded
from doing other certain things
with uh Medicaid, but you are
required to participate in the
national, the MDRP, the Medicaid
drug reimbursement program.
Um, and or rebate program, so
you, you have to go through that
process and in some instances
you may have to, uh, there may
need to be a waiver application
or a state plan amendment.
So, multiple steps. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Gonzalez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. No, no
questions.
So ask
Senator
Senator Di Lopez.
Thank, thank you, Madam Chair.
Um,
You know, the, the, the
pathways, um, are interesting
and and important for us to
think about, but I had trouble
understanding the value, um,
Like, how do you figure, for
example, that we'd get.
300 to 800% return on investment
within 24. I'm just looking at
page 19. Within 24 months.
Um, with, with only a 3.
3 to $8 million savings, but a 5
to $10 million dollar. I just
had trouble with the numbers,
um, and there's something I'm
missing, I'm sure.
Uh,
senator Sidillo Lopez, Madam
Chair, uh, just real quickly,
uh, these are not, let, let me
just add these are not hard and
fast.
Projections. Um, in order to get
solid numbers, uh, we would
really need to look at a, what
things you wanted to do and,
and, um, and what the likely
cost would be and benefits. The
benefits are based on what other
states have achieved, so there
is nothing in any of these
3 scenarios that hasn't been
done by another state, so we
know what those states have
achieved in terms of savings. We
also know we have a pretty good
idea of what it has.
causes them to implement some of
these things.
Um, so again, not hard and fast,
we would need in order to get
hard and fast numbers we need
again to pin down exactly what
the state's going to do and, and
do more detailed estimates. OK,
um, I, I appreciate that because
the numbers just didn't jive for
me, so it was like uh.
How, how do you figure this out?
Um, I appreciate that and I
think that these pathways
forwards are, are really
important. I had another, I know
it had to do with PBMs. Let me
find the boot.
Um
OK, the, the platform on page
17, you talk about the platform
and then um
And I think you mentioned it,
but I, I still didn't feel like
I understood, uh, separate drug
procurement through MCO provided
PBMs for each.
Um
Could you talk a little bit more
about that. I, I feel like I
didn't understand that and PBMs
have been so problematic.
Um, so I, I just, I didn't know
what.
Was that like limiting them, was
that requiring them to like in
California, requiring them to
pass through all the benefits
or, or what is that?
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Senator Senil Lopez, Madam.
Vice chair.
Um,
what that's referring to is
actually um it it it's the fact
that you have your, your PBM or
your drug purchasing dispersed
across all of these different
programs. So it's not actually
making a recommendation. It's
referring to a gap that you
have, so again, you know, with
any kind of purchasing, you want
to consolidate as much as your,
of your volume and your
activities, um, it, it in as
many places as
Possible and with
pharmaceuticals any kind of
healthcare, but especially with
pharmaceuticals which are so
complex, not consolidating that
purchasing, then also disperses.
Your ability to invest in the
capabilities and infrastructure
that allow you to manage those
purchases as well. So if you've
got it.
Built around a bunch of
different programs, you've got,
you know, this health plan that
maybe has a part-time analyst to
look at some of this stuff,
maybe not, maybe they can't
afford it. You've got another
over here it's got a little bit
more volume. They've got
capabilities. So really what
what having it so broadly
dispersed its doing for the
state is it's affecting your
competitive positioning for
negotiation. I see, so I was
conflating the solution with the
gap, which I tend to
too. Like that's my nature. Um,
but I didn't even understand
what the gap. So what you're
saying is, since we don't, we
since we don't bring all this
together, we've got these PBMs
doing their own thing with each
different plan and so if somehow
we
Is the only solution of
Uh, increasing our negotiating
power, or is there something we
could do with the PBMs like
California, I understand,
requires that the PBMs pass
through this.
The savings at a certain rate
and not pocket them like they do
now. Is that something, uh, in
one of your strategies and where
is it?
Um, yes, I actually would be
with the first one if you were
going to do that, how, uh,
excuse me, Senator Cedillo
Lopez, Madam Chair, um.
I didn't go into detail, uh, on
that.
In particular, because the, the
political dynamics and the
complexity of making that happen
are significant.
A lot of pushback, right?
In requiring that.
And your time is up. I know this
is, this is really complicated,
really, and
And, and I wish we had 6 weeks
to sit here and figure it out,
but uh.
And just a reminder, only onemic
at a time. So thank you, Senator
Pope.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I wonder
if you could
talk a little bit uh uh just a
little explanation on, you
mentioned ACO accountable care
and what
What is that actually?
Senator Pope, um, Madam Chair,
uh, ACOs are accountable care
organizations, so it is um
So for
us all who've been in the, in
the healthcare business for a
long time. And what we used to
call integrated delivery
systems.
Um, and, and what they, they
can, they can be any, any level
or type of provider, um, so it
can be an ACO that's based on
clinic that's uh where it's core
is basically clinics. It can be
an ACL where its cores are core
is basically hospitals. It some
ACOs actually have as a core uh
uh physician providers.
Um, and it's, it's, uh, it's a
mechanism for the all of those
different types of providers to
come together, share resources
and um and create an entity uh
in the old days we would create
MCO we, we are not MCOs, we
would create um MSO so
management services
organizations that provide
administrative services,
allowing them to function almost
as a single entity.
Um,
and without actually having to
combine, um, what it, again,
what it does is it allows
everybody to share resources.
ACOs also have benefits within
the Medicare program. So there
are certain things you can do
within the Medicare program as
an ACO, um, there are a couple
of states, um, North Dakota is
one, for example, uh, that and,
and this is really the principle
of the Vermont program and the,
and the Pennsylvania program
where they're looking at
specifically at using ACOs to
shore up your rural delivery
systems. So an example would be
taking one of your critical
access hospitals or a group of
critical access hospitals in a
particular region of the state,
combining them, encouraging
them, typically there's a
process to actually support the
providers to do that,
encouraging them to come
together, providing them the
resources to do that sometimes
providing financing. I know the
committee has looked at, for
example, at uh
you know, the, the involvement
of private equity in, in the
state. Often the reason why
small hospitals and clinics and
others have to go out of
business or sell themselves to
private equities because they
don't have access to capital.
Uh, that they need for
investment, so it, it may
involve providing mechanisms for
them to get access to capital
through bonds or whatever the
mechanism is. And then, and then
that allows them to negotiate um
and to manage populations, um,
separately.
There are states such as Oregon
and Colorado that use the ACO as
the mechanism for managing care.
Not the managed care
organizations. It's the ACOs
that and that's the whole,
that's what they were intended
to do.
Thank you, Madam. It's a while.
Thank you. And just, just a
reminder that this is, this is a
preliminary report, uh,
Representative Chavez and I put
our grow money into this study.
So um once again I'm gonna throw
it out there that we need to be
this committee needs to be
funded by the LFC so that we
can, what we've heard for the
last two days what we hear at
every meeting is we don't have
the data. We, we don't know
we're shooting in the dark, so,
um, just not, not necessarily
to give credit to Representative
Chavez and I, but just, just
that, that's what we had to,
that's what we had to do with
our girl money was to do what
should be a basic function of
this committee. So
Representative Chavez.
Uh, thank you. Just one more,
and she will be back with the
final report and Zander and I
were just talking and said we
probably need her every month.
We could have the Dorothy Muller
2 hours every, every meeting
that we have, we're not gonna
ask her to do that necessarily,
but we know that it would be a
good thing.
The final report is due.
Uh, Madam Chair, I believe we're
targeting for the end of August,
right? That's when I think
that's when the contract.
Um
I thank, thank you. Go ahead,
Representative Chavez. Thank
you, Madam Chair. So I have a
couple of questions. Um, uh, one
of them is around the whole
issue of data. You said that
that Medicaid or the data wasn't
available for this day you had
to use federal data.
And so my question is, if you
know, um, having access to state
data, would that have been um
much more helpful and given us
maybe diff um, you know, better
specifics in terms of what the
report um was able to look at.
Representative Chavez, uh, Madam
Chair.
Probably not. Um, but only to
the extent that you're not
identifying something like GLP
ones, uh, again, because I've
worked with the state for so
many, uh, in, in New Mexico for
so many years.
The underlying characteristics
of population in the, in
particular, the underlying
health characteristics of the
population really haven't
changed that much.
Um, except to the extent that I
would.
Say that
Perhaps, um, mental health
conditions have, have increased.
Um, and some of that has to do
with drug use, some of it
doesn't, right? Um,
But uh,
I doubt that there would have
been significant changes in the
data. It would be critical,
however, if the state in order
for the state to do any kind of
strategic sourcing, it needs to
do that detailed analysis of its
data.
So that it can target
effectively.
Um, thank you. Um, the other
question that I have is that
you've mentioned a number number
of states that have um
implemented some of these
programs. So just off the top of
your head, um, I'd actually like
to take a look at some of those
states, but are there states
that
Um, have done it longer so that
we have more a better idea in
terms of what the experience has
been, the outcomes, those kinds
of things.
Representative Chavez, Madam
Chair, uh, the, the, um, the
states that have been at it the
longest, of course, it's, it's
Massachusetts, right? Maryland.
Uh, which you talked about in
that uh last hearing when you
talked about global budgeting.
Um
Organ.
Washington state to a lesser
degree. They haven't done as
many innovative things, uh,
except for the creation of ray
RX, which is big innovation.
Um, Colorado.
Uh, but Massachusetts and
Maryland, um, are, are probably
the longest term and they were
also the beneficiaries of
Medicare and Medicaid
transformation money.
Um, so they've had multiple
funding rounds and then of
course, Vermont and Pennsylvania
received moneys in the most
recent innovation rounds, um, or
the one immediately prior and I
again, I think those are some
the most recent ones are some
that were frozen.
Uh, with the grant funding
freezes at the federal level.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Were you finished Representative
Chavez? Perfect timing. Senator
Stephanics.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you for the report today.
Um, I would, uh,
Recommend or request a panel in
the future that would have the
HCA.
Um, this report
And the IBA.
Uh, pharmacy contract to talk
about how uh they might be in
alignment or not with some of
the recommendations that are
coming forward because, uh, last
year, um, I talked with Madam
Chair, the secretary of the HCA.
To see if she needed a bill to
do um
All pharmaceutical purchasing
for Medicaid, and she said they
were actually studying it and
looking at the cost savings,
the, because she was aware of
what other states were doing as
well. So it might be good to
have her come and talk about why
they decided not to pursue it or
if they are pursuing it, um, she
was pretty open in discussing it
with me as
Not need legislation at that
time, so I think she would talk
about it.
I think that some of the new
information, uh, we were having
a sidebar here, but you know,
our Madam Chair, our GLPs are
tied to so many uh chronic
diseases, you know, diabetes,
stroke, heart, etc. and so our
Medicaid does cover it, but my
information is that perhaps
Medicare has stopped covering
it.
And I, I do think that when we
look at outcomes, we need to
identify what will save us money
in terms of treatment overall,
and not just be concerned with
that.
Teasing the MCOs away from the
PBMs.
could be done in a contract. I
mean, for the Medicaid
contracts, but
I don't know.
What payoff or standoff there
is. When you go to Madam Chair
to stakeholder meetings, you
have a lot of people say, oh,
wait, I'm on a specialized drug.
That can't happen to me. Well,
we have protections. We have
passed laws that have said if
your healthcare provider says
you need something under private
insurance and Medicaid has said
they will respond to the same
thing.
That they will honor and respect
that. So that's why I think we
need to have more people at the
table.
Discussing these recommendations
and saying we're in the process.
Here's why we don't think we
could do it or yes, we're
totally open. But I think
stakeholders
I'm a stakeholder.
And I'm sure I'll object to
something.
But
We need to move ahead. Thank you
very much, Madam Chair.
Thank you. So Xander and I were
just um strategizing, so maybe
with the final report we could
have Dorothy give her final
report and then follow it up,
um, there's another mic on
somewhere
um, sorry, I'm, I'm also the mic
police, um.
So that's something that we
will, we will work on and I will
tell you that I did get a text.
Um, from Gaspar Loca, and he
says the state already has a
Medicaid single formulary, which
the department has not
implemented. The law also
requires pharmaceutical
companies to provide a
supplemental rebate to place
their drug on tier one, the
state is not collecting.
Um, while supplemental rebates
must be shared with the federal
government, it is revenue the
state is leaving on the table.
Senator Feldman, which uh those
of us have been, it's been gone
for a while, sponsored the bill
which was signed into law, and I
checked with Ruben and she said
that um healthcare authority is
looking at these things, but um
maybe they need a little boost
to look a little harder or a law
to um cause we don't know what's
gonna happen in, in uh
We have a new administration, so
just, uh, and so when you think
I'm not paying attention, I'm
getting input from the outside
world, so Representative Roel
Caballero.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you so much. I have a few
observations that I think are
critical for us as legislators
and policymakers to move ahead
on page 7,
the, according to the recent
analysis by Deloitte, the, the
statement is, is really telling,
uh, because ultimately it's
saying um
That we're moving from inpatient
or at least that's 2 more
prescriptions. And so I would
argue who benefits from this? I,
I would say that's an important
question for us to ask because
in my opinion, big pharma uh
obviously uh benefiting, but it
also is concerning because I
understand from the medi my
medical professional world that
I um engage with that.
Oftentimes the.
The more prescriptions can
either conflict or compound
existing illnesses, especially
in the autoimmune area. And so
it's very concerning to me and
also I understand that more of
our population is relying on
alternative, um, care, uh, in,
in to avoid that compounding
effect. And so I, I, I would say
that we really need to pay close
attention to this. On
then, uh, the other area that
was concerning or had particular
questions that you may not be
able to answer, but you could
provide later on page 12, uh,
we're there, I'm interested in
knowing what those population
characteristics are and how they
break down in terms of age,
race, ethnicity, income, rural,
urban, and then how are we
tracking these uh as they, as
these populations grow,
particularly our aging
population because as we
No, Madam Chair, our aging
population is growing and so my
fear is that if we're not
projecting that growth, then uh
we lose out in terms of
addressing critical questions
that have been raised by my
colleagues here, and I think uh
Senator Stephanics, because I'm
in agreement with her, uh,
recommendations, uh,
wholeheartedly, so I really
would like to see how that's
tracked and maybe you can
provide that information.
To, to us, um, supplementally.
I'll move on to the final but
you can answer however way you
wish to. Um, the other
Consideration, I would recommend
would be, and this is the
community organizer in me that
oftentimes we miss out on
reference to page 23, 24 when
we're engaging our communities,
we miss out on including our um
community health centers, rural
health care all of that are in
tier 2, we miss out if we don't
include them in tier one because
they, they are essential to the
early engagement.
process. From the very
beginning, because it's they who
will dictate the next steps. So,
and that's the same with um uh
page 24, so I just, if, if we
could, Madam Chair, I, I believe
you want to respond quickly.
Representative Royal Caballero,
um.
Uh, Madam Chair.
100% agree with all of the
comments that you made, um, I
will add that in the report, we
have a more extensive list of
some of the stakeholders to your
last point, uh, and I do believe
that we've included them there,
um, again, for all of my many
years working in the field, um,
I can tell you that, uh, that I,
that the, um, the.
Uh, rural health centers, the
FQHCs, the community health
centers, there's a question I
asked earlier about CCBHCs which
are the new certification level
for our commun uh for um uh uh
certified community behavioral
health centers as well as other
kinds of um behavioral health
centers, the full scope of
providers really need to be
represented and, in particular
in your rural communities, that
may be the first line of care
for a lot of these.
people. It will also point out
that again in our report that we
deal with the fact that in
addition to
Excuse me. In addition to other
kinds of provider deserts, um,
many states and New Mexico is
one of them also have um
pharmacy deserts, um, and, and
it's looking at those two in
combination and what each type
of provider can do, uh, and
ensuring that their scope of
practice is effective and
obviously accepted by other
kinds of providers, um, uh,
maximizing their scope.
Practice so that they can
provide the appropriate type of
care in their community is, is
critically important. So you
really need to include all of
those. And to your point about
inpatient care, yes, that's not
necessarily a good thing. That
is the way that many people are
receiving their cares. It's
their pharmacies, right? It's
pharmaceuticals, right? We see
that a lot with kids with heavy,
heavy, um, utilization, for
example, of medications for ADHD
and things like that without any
kind of um
Provider input. Just one last
comment if I could just respond
to something that Senator
Stefanik said as well, um, on
the issue, issue of, uh, um, you
know, what
How, how MCOs and others might
react to um
Pulling out PBMs um from the
delivery of care. The argument
that MCOs that that managed care
entities of all type will always
make, and, and it's not in a
completely invalid argument is
that if you are managing health
proactively and, and
holistically, you need to be
managing inpatient care,
outpatient care, um, remote
care, um, pharmaceuticals in
combination and they will make
the argument that by having
part of the MCO they can more
effectively manage care. I will
also though, add that as
somebody who's worked in in this
space for a long time.
Care management is an extremely
difficult thing to accomplish.
Very few people want to engage
with it. It's uh, it, it's a
concept that sounds better than
it is for many people, um, so
it's a promise that's not fully
uh that that is not always fully
fulfilled.
Thank you. And just a reminder
on on Channel 7, well.
On page 7, it's the balance of
health care spending has shifted
from, from in, I mean, used to
be inpatient was the most
expensive. Now it's
pharmaceuticals and that's a
combination of using a lot of
pharmaceuticals and very, very
expensive pharmaceuticals that
has, has made that shift.
Soresentative Herndon.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and uh
thank you, Madam Presenter. One
of the items that you uh stated
when you first began your
presentation, which you talked
about some of the bills that we
passed and that maybe they
weren't doing the things that
they should be doing. So I wanna
go back specifically to the
transparency bill were you, is
that Bill, are you saying it's
not, we're not providing the
information that we should be
providing pursuant to that.
Uh, Representative Herndon,
Madam Chair, uh, no, I would not
say that at all. I, it's really
too soon to tell. It's, it's,
you know, it, it hasn't been
that long since that was
implemented and I was actually
quite impressed when I looked at
the progress that has has been
made on transparency. What I'm
saying though is that the trans
what the transparency won't do.
It will allow people
To have better information on
what they're purchasing and what
it's costing. Ideally, it will
also ensure that if there's a
less expensive drug available,
people know that they can get it
less expensive drug, that's one
of the other requirements, and I
have to go back and look at the
legislation and see if that was
included. That would be one of
the things that you could do to
affect affordability, but making
the information transparent by
itself won't reduce cost,
particularly when you have
inefficiencies and what I would
best
describe as kind of the business
practices of purchasing and
managing this particular cost
category.
Thank you very much. And then
just as a quick follow up in my
conversation with some insurance
companies, for example, and, and
utilizing pharmaceuticals and
other things that, uh, drugs
that particularly as uh uh
Representative Robert Caballero
mentioned with our senior
citizens that what they've done
is they said that they put a cap
on what uh people will be having
to pay as their co-payment, for
example, and uh that's one way
that they say that they're
keeping costs down. And I'm just
asking you, have
you've seen that and is it
effective.
Uh, Representative Herndon,
Madam Chair, um, sure, caps on
co-payments can be effective,
um, the, the, what, what has
happened over the last several
decades is there has been a
belief that um there has been a
transformation of, of um health
of health insurance in the US,
um, to shift more of the cost to
the individual with the belief
being that if you, if, if they
have to pay more, people will be
better.
about how they utilize care. The
reality is that almost all
academic research that has been
done, um, of the American health
care system is that utilization
is not our problem.
Um, that isn't what's driving
cost, so what if that won't
address, for example, is the
other point you made, which is
polypharmacy, right? I have some
uh uh on one of these slides,
there's some data on the number
of drugs people take and how
many people take multiple drugs.
The US has a real problem with
polypharmacy. Um, and that the,
the problem with polypharmacy is
twofold. It's, there's first the
cost associated with taking all
of those drugs, right?
But then there are all kinds of
adverse health effects and, and
all of your providers are
required to track.
The um adverse health uh health
events adverse events that
result from a medication error
for the elderly in particular,
um, medication error is one of
the primary reasons for
admission or, or, or um
Uh, and encounter in the ED in
the emergency room.
Um, because when you're on a lot
of medications, it's very easy
for them to have all kinds of
interactions, it's all kind, uh
it's easy for, you know,
something to occur that you
didn't anticipate can cause
falls and all kinds of things,
so, so it has multiple
downstream effects and if you're
looking at things from a health
technology assessment point of
view and total value, you would
want to reduce that, right? I
would just add one other thing
which I didn't, I don't think I
touched on here, but I touched
on in the report.
is that one of the reforms that
you can make with your
pharmacist is that you can more
actively engage pharmacists in
polypharmacy management and
medication therapy management.
Through a scope of practice, and
that has a benefit of reducing
overall system costs and also
reducing the risk of of um
injury. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you so much uh for your
presentation. I'm going to go
really quick. I wrote down my
questions, so I'm just going to
read it to you. So, uh, it's
multi-part, so on slide 11, uh,
you mentioned PBM alternatives,
uh, but in other states, those
PBM alternatives have just
turned in to be rebranded PBMs
and they're pretty much doing
the same thing. So I'm just
wondering what makes these any
different. And then another
question I have, I don't know if
you want to start writing these
down. Then on slide 18, the
presentation states that New
Mexico's reforms haven't lowered
costs, so
states like California, Vermont,
West Virginia, so it cost
increases, despite PBM reform,
and so they're, you know, really
PBMs are only being used in New
Mexico when they're serving
value. That's I'd really like to
make that a point. So another
thing, Madam Chair, um, we're
told
On one side to unbundle, such as
on page 20 then on page 21 on
the other option you give, it
says to bundle, and so I'm just
wondering which, which one we're
really looking to do when it
comes to options. And then
another point I would just like
to make in the last few months,
the president has been doing
executive orders to put tariffs
on other countries that that
import their drugs and then that
has actually lowered the cost of
drugs like Eliquis was lowered
by 40% and other.
drugs like that, according to
the Washington Post and Reuters.
So I'm just wondering how that
also plays into with a global
factor and a national factor on
New Mexico's reforms, and then
how can we channel those here
because I've seen in other
states like Washington,
California, they've made these
larger forms, but they're
increasing their, their costs by
about 11% or 12%, and that's
right on par with the national
average, which is about 11.4%.
So I'm just wondering, could you
expound on all of that, and I'm
so sorry, I only have 3 minutes,
so go for it.
Representative Block, Madam
Chair, I hope you're not asking
me to comment on tariffs. I am a
business person. No, I'm, I'm
asking what we can do on New
Mexico, so please go ahead.
Thank you.
Um, I'll try to
Diagnose the things you said.
Um, I, I, I haven't seen the
data that you're seeing, so I,
I, I, and, and I don't wanna
question the data that you're,
uh, that you're, uh.
Quoting that suggests that their
costs are actually going up as a
result of the reforms that
they've implemented. I can just
say that the research that
That we've done, um, and which
draws on the research of many
organizations, including
organizations, for example, like
the Cato Institute, the Cato
Institute, by the way, is a very
big believer in unbundling.
Um, and, uh, that, that they
actually showed that, that, that
it, that these, these costs
Have, have at a minimum reduced
the trend in spend. Remember the
rate of increase for specialty
drugs in particular is
significant. It's in many
instances over 30%.
Um, so I'm trying to think of
what the, the other point you
made was about bundling versus
unbundling.
Uh,
depending on what the
recommendation is, you may,
there are some things that you
may group together and some
things that you wouldn't, um,
as a business person and as
somebody who has advised
businesses as well as states
and, and, um, uh, and policy
makers for a long time, I can
tell you that to the extent that
you have more visibility and
costs and prices, um, you uh,
you will get more efficient
purchasing, I mean, in, in, in,
in my old days, I ran a
strategic sourcing, um,
consulting operation, um, as
part of a larger, um, uh,
consulting, uh, group. So, uh,
it, it, it is a common practice
to be able to break things into
discrete elements so that you
can actually see the price, and
again, I would say there are
many, many think tanks that um
On, on both the left and the
right that have recommended
unbundling as a, as a solution
to be able to get more
visibility into what you're
actually paying for. Did I touch
on all of your things or did I
miss you touched on so many of
them, and I just want to note
that that data was just compiled
from publicly available data
from those states by the
Peterson Institute of Health.
And so that's a nonpartisan,
very well respected group, and
so I'd be happy to email that to
everybody if they'd like. But I
would just, I was just looking
at
The trends, you know, these
states are making different
reforms, different kinds from
Oklahoma to New Jersey, and I
really just want to see what's
the, what's the trend that we're
looking at? Because I see that
drug costs keep on just going up
and skyrocketing despite these
reforms, and I, I understand,
Madam Chair. I've been very,
very judicious with my time
previously. So I just wanted to
make that note and I apologize,
I only have 3 minutes to talk
about this very complex issue,
but thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, and, and I will state that
there as far as I know, there is
no evidence.
No data and evidence that New
Mexico's PBMs only provide
value, I would say just the
opposite. I mean, they may
provide some value we have data
that shows that they take a huge
chunk for essentially.
Nothing.
So Representative uh Kate, uh
thank you very much, Madam
Chair, and thank you very much
for your presentation, um, just
a couple of recommendations. One
is I, when we get this panel, I
would like this rep this
presentation.
At least a recording of this
presentation to be sent to the
LFC.
Um, uh, I, I'm gonna say, as I
say, almost every single
committee. I don't know why the
LSC does not provide us stats
from the MCOs that lay out
exactly what the RFP
requirements are and how we are
tracking to make sure that
they're living up to their RFP.
Um, I am asking that the chair,
put this on the consideration of
possible legislation that we
move forward on for the next
session of removing the PBMs
from the MCO requirements, um,
and then I wanna out myself. I,
uh, helped fund this study as
well several years ago, and I
stopped funding it because I was
not receiving data. So now I've
received data.
Now Mary knows she has to hit me
up again for funding in the
future and I'm adding myself to
let you know that I do believe
in my chair that the LFC should
be funding this, um, and not
our, our uh grow money, but, um,
but you have lived up to your
end of the bargain and then so
with this data and so I wanna
let you know that you have
another funder here, um, and
then once again, um, I wanna
thank this committee and this
chair for at least
Access to the all payers claim,
I do, I do uh appreciate that
our New Mexicans can be able to
do comparison shopping.
Obviously, I'd like to have a
robust data program so that we
can lay it out ourselves and do
some comparisons as well,
besides being spoon-fed, but at
least it's taken a 7 years of
Lao and I really appreciate um
our chairs and our vice chair's
leadership on that matter. Thank
you.
Thank you, Representative, and,
and I will say that, that I had
a hospital transparency bill,
this session that didn't go very
far and basically it would pick,
I think, 100 different things
like a, a knee re like more like
um non-emergency surgeries and
those kind of things so that
hospitals would have to publish
their price, so when you're
shopping for a total knee, you
can see that, you know, Hospital
A, it's gonna be 200,000 in
hospital B, it might be 120.
or whatever. So, so just to plug
for a bill in the future.
Thank you. um Madam Vice Chair.
Uh thank you, Madam Chair, and I
appreciate this updated
information.
We've been working on this for
so.
It seems time immemorial.
Um, you know, Senator Feldman,
when she passed the bill, I mean
this was, uh
It seems so long ago, Madam
Chair, but I remember the
discussions that we've had, what
we, I mean, it just, it's time
immemorial for us to keep
moving.
So I look forward to the um
final data, final report that
you will bring forward to the
committee.
But just some thoughts, Madam
Chair, you know, as we have this
new Senate Bill 3.
Reorganizing the behavioral
healthcare system.
Uh, you know, and I was just
chatting with the chair, um,
What effect, right? Well it
Well, bringing those different
providers together, the system
and such, um, as we look at, um,
they're purchasing
opportunities, um, and you know,
it may bring others.
Out of the woodwork.
Um, that are sitting there that
maybe we can also begin to have
conversations with some of those
entities. Um, and as I said
earlier this morning, um, you
know, I've met with a, a small
group of providers who are not
on the radar at this point, but
they too have questions as to,
um, you know, the, the cost
availability in such a pharm
pharmacy when they need to
prescribe for those that they're
serving.
So I think, Madam Chair, that
there's so much still potential
um for us to look at, but for me
Senate Bill 3 and what
implications that may have as
the, the
Processes going forward. You did
mention with regards to FQHCs,
um, they're also part of the
mix, and some of them are
involved in the 340B program.
So, you know, how is the
inclusivity with regards to
them, right? Because they too
are looking for an opportunity
to be able to provide.
Um, less expensive, um.
pharmacy, um.
Pharmaceutical opportunities for
their patients too. So there's,
I still think there's um
The moving parts, but it's, I
think it's also, madam Chair, an
opportunity to bring
these entities together.
So, uh, there's still that, and
then, um, your recommendation to
enhance PBM oversight and
Dang, we've been having this
discussion for so long as to the
PBMs for that middle entity, um,
I think that's something that we
do need to do, um.
And, you know, it, it may put
the fear and.
The MCOs and other entities, but
that's what our job is, and I'll
leave it to that. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
So I don't have any questions. I
wanna thank you so much and we
look forward to hearing more
from you and personally, I think
you're doing a bang up job and
uh and please stay available to
us and um members, the uh the
pizza is provided by JD
Bullington and
So thank him and, and I will
just ask folks to please let the
legislators and staff get your
food and then if there's some
left, the public can and and
presenters if you're a
presenter, we'll feed you, uh,
so, uh, we will take a
Oh, we, I'm sorry, so we, we do
have um one public comment,
Mary.
Surprise.
No, no, go ahead. We people can
go, I mean, it's in the same
room if you wanna go get your
pizza, you can't go ahead, Mary.
We'll, we'll listen to you. And
just out of curiosity, there are
2 people on Zoom with public
comment if you 3, if you are on
Zoom and would like to make
public comment, please raise
your hand, and we will come back
to you after Mary, so go ahead,
Mary.
And Dorothy, if you're, we're,
we're through with you, so if
you are comfortable there, stay
there if you wanna go get some
pizza, go for it.
Just one real quick question.
Was that SB 3 that you were
mentioning?
Madam Chair, yes, it's, uh, if
you go back and review, it's,
it's
passed the administrative office
of the courts with
Um, a new design, uh, based on
the judicial districts in the
state of New Mexico for a new
behavioral healthcare system in
the state of New Mexico. It's
much more into it.
But I think, I think I did look
at that. I'll go back and take a
look at it. Um, the important
thing to remember is that um and
I apologize, um, Senator Lopez,
Madam Chair.
Uh, the important thing to
remember is that um most larger
providers have access to joint
purchasing organizations and
stuff like that, smaller
organizations don't, so I don't
think that any of your clinics
probably participate in a lot of
that. They do in fact.
Um, if they are, uh, if they're
a qualified provider, they can
participate in 340B. Now the
thing about 340B and you guys
implemented some changes.
Is that there's nothing in law
that requires them to pass those
discounts on to the patient.
Um, and I believe somewhere in
here I've recommended that you
do an analysis of what's
actually happening with the 340B
discounts.
Um, I, and I would add to that
is that you really ought to be
looking at
340B along with something like
an SPAC.
So the state, uh, and the state
pharmaceutical affordability um
program.
Which again doesn't get federal
matching dollars, but does have
it does allow you to negotiate
deeper discounts without it
affecting Medicaid. Um, it also
allows you to wrap around
Medicare, etc. So I would, I
would look at all three of those
things, all 3 of your discount
programs together, the SPAP, the
340B, and whatever drug discount
program you enter into, I happen
to believe just based on an
initial analysis that the array
RX discount program is a, a, a
good program.
that seems to have very good
uptake. A lot of, uh, several
states have, have adopted that,
so, um, I'll go back and take a
look at SB 3, for the last 10
years, I did a lot of behavioral
health work for uh a couple of
managed care plans.
Uh, and I specifically looked at
New Mexico and how it was
structured or not structured,
so, um.
Let me take a look at it and see
how that affects, and if I could
just make one other comment to
representative Block, if you
will make sure to send a copy of
either to Xander.
And he can forward it to me,
that of that Peterson Institute
study. I've, I've actually
pulled a lot of stuff from
Peterson. It's a very good
organization. It's based in
Houston.
Um, and, uh, I'd like to see
what they have to say. I would
add that one of the things that
continues to drive
pharmaceutical costs up as we
just utilize a lot of drugs in
this country.
So that is a place where
utilization is much higher than
it is in other countries.
Thank you so much. OK, uh,
public comment is 3 minutes, so.
Thank you Madam Chair, members
of the committee, I'm gonna try
and be, make 4 quick points
because I know you're hungry and
it's been a long and very
complicated issue. Um, it's not,
there's no one easy solution.
And the first thing I wanna, uh,
I, I actually read both your,
your appendix and your report.
And there was like a theme that
comes up and she's mentioned it
in her presentation.
Which is there are targeted
reforms, and then there's the
big systemic ones and let's keep
that in mind. And by system, I
would be even broader than the,
the production of drugs and the
sales and how they're procured
because maybe by chance,
prescriptions are being uh given
to patients because doctors are
working for private equity firms
that rush them through.
Um, through decision making. So
I mean, you have to look at the
whole system, really, and how it
works, but then that can be
overwhelming if we're looking at
this particular problem. And um,
so I, I would suggest that we
need and, and Madam Chair,
you've said this, a road map.
And I, you know, there are
myriad reforms going out, um,
that will help alleviate current
problems and people are
demanding that. They want to see
something happening with rising
healthcare costs and drug costs,
but the systemic solutions are
much more complicated and you
could see in the years, you talk
about how they, they, they,
they, they figured out, um, and,
uh, and essentially, there's
almost like two
Choices in my mind. One is, do
we join an existing consortium.
What does that mean? The
Minnesota one or the array,
would that be easy? They're
certainly dealing with some of
these issues, or do we then set
up our own board, drug
purchasing board, um, that, uh,
I would recommend has no rebates
and uses our president likes
reference pricing. He's talking
about European pricing, um, you
know, do we use reference
pricing?
And other techniques that are
used in countries as small as
Malta, 500,000 people.
Luxembourg has 2 million people.
Um, so there's a lot to learn.
So how do we proceed? Do you
want to set up a committee of
some experts like with the, the
pharmaceutical school, um, and
some legislators and sort of
hash out maybe with your
guidance. What, what is your
map?
There are other bills that will
be introduced regardless, but
what is the critical
situation that has to be dealt
with here and now and what path
do you want to take to deal with
the real systemic choices. I, I
want to read a quote from you
from the Commonwealth Fund,
which very quickly, Mary, your
time is up, but very quickly if
I could just read the quote,
Madam Chair, OK, reductions in
administrative burdens and drug
costs could substantial
reduce the difference between
the US and Pure nation health
spending.
So you cannot separate out the
administrative piece from the
drug piece. Thank you.
Thank you, Mary.
OK, so we will go to Zoom first
we have Barbara Casey.
Whenever you're very much um.
Go ahead, Barbara, you have 3
minutes.
Thank you very much, Madam Chair
and members of the committee.
Welcome to Las Vegas. I'm very
happy that you're here today.
Um, I had the honor of serving
with uh Senator Lopez and uh
Senator Stephanic when I was in
the legislature many years ago.
I served for 12 years out of
Roswell. I'm now in Las Vegas,
San Miguel County here.
I want to uh specifically focus
on um the cost of drugs, and
I'll give you an example. Las
Vegas has more veterans than any
other uh place in the state.
And, um, many served in Vietnam,
so they're older, and a lot of
their um physical issues and
mental issues, um, PTSD issues.
are dealt with with level one
drugs like heroin, Percocet,
fentanyl, uh, marijuana, uh, all
of those that are very um
potentially um, you know,
addictive, and so, uh, other
places, um,
That do big volumes of selling
drugs such as uh Express
Scripts.
I'll give you an example. One
veteran called me up. I'm also
on the city council and so a lot
of people call me up about
things.
Um
One person gets uh
Medication for his PTSD, he
orders it from Express Scripts
for for 3 months, he gets uh it
costs him $120.
Express Scripts no longer will
deliver those out of state.
And they're located in Missouri.
And so now he has to get his
prescription at Walgreens, which
is $174 for three months.
And so that's a big difference
for that person. He's paying $54
more for his prescription at
Walgreens and what he was
praying, saying that, uh, pain
that Express Scripts. So those
are some of the things that um I
would like to see addressed and
um perhaps I'm, I want to ask
that.
Your committee
Strongly consider requesting not
not just money for the committee
itself because I think you do
really important work and I
appreciate everything you're
doing, but also for continued
work on the cost drivers.
To do more research on those and
to come up with ideas for your
committee to propose to the
legislature at the next
legislative session.
So that we can start really
lowering drug costs and helping
people that really need it.
That's all I have to say. Thank
you so very much for being here
today. Great presentations and
wonderful questions from the
committee. I'm very happy that
you're here.
Thank you.
Thank you, Barbara.
And we are always looking for
ways to lower uh prescription
prices and
I feel like we are.
Not even David, or maybe we're
David without a slingshot, um,
but we keep, we keep kicking the
giant in the ankle and we'll
keep trying. So Keenan Ryan.
Can you hear me? uh, Speaker
Thompson? Yes, we can hear you.
You have 3 minutes. Go ahead.
Thank you very much. Uh.
But you, uh, Madam Chairwoman,
members of the committee. My
name's uh Tina Ryan. I'm the
director of pharmacy for uh the
Medicaid program here with the
state um HCA um I wanna just
thank you guys for holding this
hearing, um, it makes my little
pharmacist heart happy to hear
all this drug, pharmacy talk and
way to improve access for
patients, um, and I appreciate
the report from uh
The expert witness.
Um, a couple of things that
would just like to know. We
When I started here about a year
ago, we only had one full-time
employee in pharmacy, um, kind
of a theme of New Mexico
Medicaid is being doing a lot
with very little staff, so
there's now, now 2 of us, but
we've done a lot, I would say in
the past year. Um, as you
mentioned, we now have
value-based purchasing as a
possibility. I mean we have an
open RFP out for a PDL program.
I can't comment, uh, much more
on that since it's an open RFP,
um, but we are moving uh
forward. I can say when I
interviewed for this job, 75% of
my
Questions are about doing a PDL,
um, so clearly, uh, something
that the state is focusing on.
This is really a foundational
piece for anything we're gonna
move from here. Whether you're
looking at Massachusetts or
Oklahoma or, or any of these
other innovative practices that
were mentioned, all of them have
a PDL in place before they did
the carve out, before they
Kentucky went to a single PBM,
um, you really have to have a
PDL in place. So this is the
first big step and we can
evaluate other options that may
or may not be the right fit for
New Mexico from there.
Um, we're, we're happy to come
back and speak about this, uh,
anytime that the committee would
like to hear from us. We're,
we're always happy to talk about
pharmacy, um, and just one last
piece that I put for
Uh, for Miss Muller, um,
Happy to discuss about some of
the things we've had to do to
operationalize our uh
pharmacists as providers
legislation. I would say that
the, the previous iterations of
it had some limitations with how
they could access payment, um,
and we think with our most
recent iteration it's, it's much
better, but it's only been out
for about 6 months. So, um, more
to come on that front, um, but
I, I thank you all for your
time.
Keenan, I'm sorry, um, I, we
didn't catch who you're with.
Oh, I'm, I'm the director of
pharmacy for Medicaid, which,
uh, HIV OK, thank you so much,
Keenan, for weighing, for uh
providing that. And next we will
go to Davina Norris.
Davina
Go ahead
She's unmuted.
So Davina, you're unmuted. Can
you please go ahead.
And if you are, we can't hear
you.
Yeah.
Davina
I know you're a pharmacist, we'd
love to hear from you. There may
be some technical difficulties
on your end. It doesn't seem
that we are having them here. So
Davina, if you were on Zoom when
we reconvene, we will go back to
you and, and hopefully we can
hear from you then. So we are
going to take a, a
And a very luxurious 12 minute
lunch break.
