Thank you for the opportunity,
um, state Senator David Mals
from Eddie and Lee County, uh, I
missed the last meeting, so this
is my first meeting Legislative
council interested in doing as
much as we can for this capital
in this state. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chairman Pat
Woods, uh, drove in from Curry
County this morning, uh, Senate
District 7.
Thank you.
Madam Proin, Mr. Speaker, uh,
Bill Sher, state senator from
District one.
Uh, Madam President, Mr.
Speaker, Senator Michael Padilla
represent the Senate District
14, the southern portion of
Bernalillo County.
And present Peter Worth, Senate
District 25 in Santa Fe.
Thank you, let's go now over to
Patricia Caballero and Careful
of the mics are really hot,
don't pull them real close.
Thank you for the uh warning.
Oops, they are. Good afternoon,
madam uh Protem members of the
committee and those in the
audience and viewing. I'm
Patricia Royal Caballero. I
represent House District 13,
Southwest quadrant of
Albuquerque. Thank you.
Good afternoon, I'm Doreen Gaga,
District 52, uh, glad to see
everybody today. Um, good
afternoon, Madam President, Mr.
Speaker, Representative
Christine Chandler from Los
Alamos, House District 43. Happy
to be here this afternoon.
Good afternoon, Chairman,
members of the committee,
Rebecca Dow from District 38, a
little bit of Sequorro, little
tiny bit of Sierra in the
northern part of Donana.
Good afternoon, Madam prote, Mr.
Speaker, uh, members of the
committee, Gail Armstrong, State
Representative for District 49,
which is Katrin Socorro
Valencia, and Sierra.
Good afternoon, everyone. Madam
Prote, Mr. Speaker, Rena Sapansy
representing House District 47
in Santa Fe County. Good
afternoon, Madam Prote members
Javier Martinez, House District
11, Downtown Albuquerque, and
several neighborhoods in in the
near North Valley.
And I'm state senator Mimi
Stewart from District 17, the
International District, and East
Gateway area in Albuquerque, and
what a beautiful drive up with
that desert being brilliantly
green.
Let's go to our front table
members represents. Thank you,
uh, Madam Protem and Mr.
Speaker, I'm Representative Liz
Thompson, Health District.
Oh
Good afternoon, um, Madam Chair,
and um everyone in the audience
in our uh committee, um, I'm
Joanne Ferrari, um, House
District 37 in Las Cruces.
Right, thank you everyone for
being here. We have a long
agenda, but we think we can go
through it fairly, uh, at a good
pace, uh, we have all of our
interim committee's plans and
budgets, uh, to approve, um, I'm
proposing that we do the way we
did last year where we hear from
everyone and then at the end we
can ask questions or make our
approval, so, uh, Shawna, if you
will start us off.
Think you about a prote members
of the council, um, I will
introduce each committee and
their respective staff member
will come up to briefly present
the work plan. So our first
committee is the Legislative
Health and Human Services
Committee and Xander Dawson is
lead staff.
Wow, that is a hot, if you'll
just wait a minute, just get
yourself settled, and if I could
have an approval of the minutes.
Any objection to approval of the
minutes, seeing none, we've
proved the minutes, and now
we're ready for you soon. Thank
you, Madam President. Um, so,
uh, Shawna said, I'm Xander
Dawson. I'm the lead staff
attorney for the uh Legislative
Health and Human Services
Committee, um, the committee,
uh, as you look at this work
plan, uh, it's gonna be a really
interesting interim this year,
um, first, there's a lot of
legislation from the 2025, uh,
special 2025 session that passed
that uh the committee's
interested.
in overseeing the implementation
of, so, uh, things like Senate
bills 12, and 3, and Senate Bill
42 and House Bill 5, lots of big
key bills that uh the
implementation is going to be
key for.
So the committee's going to be
overseeing those, um, another
key issue that the committee
will be overseeing and, and
monitoring is federal actions
related to health and human
services, you know, specifically
the Medicaid uh funding, funding
for disability waivers and um
funding for uh nutrition
assistance programs. And then uh
the committee's gonna have, you
know, all of its normal stuff,
aging, disabilities, healthcare
workforce, uh, healthcare
consumer protections.
Uh, rural healthcare, all those,
uh, really big key topics, um,
and then I just wanna highlight
that the committee is going to
meet in Albuquerque in October,
which requires the council's
approval and uh we're all, or
the committee is also asking for
$10,000 for uh out of state
expert testimonies.
Thank you Sander.
Thank you, Madam Chair, the next
committee is Courts Corrections
and Justice Committee and Sean
Dolan will be presenting that
work for you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, uh, my
name is Sean Dolan. I'm one of
the staff members on CCJ, uh,
Nancy Martinez is lead staff.
She's uh out today, so I'll be
presenting, um, CCJ is going to
be doing a lot of its.
Uh, usual work of going over the
administrative office of the
courts, corrections, the um
public defenders, DAs.
Also digging into uh corrections
oversight, which hopefully is
going to include a few uh visits
to facilities. Um, we'll talk
about juvenile justice and gun
violence, as well as hopefully,
uh, a study of the redraft of
the criminal code by the New
Mexico Sentencing Commission,
um, and of course CYFD and uh
the corrections department.
Especially, um,
CCJ is proposing for 15 total
days, which will include uh a
two-day touring grants, uh, in
October, which would require
specific legislative council
approval.
Um, but, uh, no requested budget
for uh an expert or anything
like that.
Thank you.
Next for the Military and
Veterans Affairs Committee, we
have uh Domenica Nieto and Aaron
Bond.
Good afternoon committee. My
name is Domenica Nieto, and I am
staffing the military and
Veterans Affairs Committee.
Uh, this year we will be
focusing on the main topics, um,
per usual with military and
veterans affairs, uh, and we
will be traveling um in October
we are requesting a travel date
that would need your approval.
Uh, currently it's listed as
Silver City, however, the chair
is still reviewing, um, between
Silver City and Grants, so for
budget purposes we put Silver
City.
And I believe that's it. Thank
you so much. Thank you.
Next, uh, Aaron Bond for
Economic and Rural Development
and Policy.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the council. Uh, my
name is Aaron Bond. I'm lead
staff for the economic and Rural
Development and Policy
Committee.
Uh, this in terms the committee
plans to focus on issues
affecting rural economic
development and policies, other
years we've focused slightly
more on economic development.
Um, and so that will include
updates from government agencies
involved in economic
development.
Uh, reports on sector-based
economic drivers such as energy
and climate, uh.
Economies, agricultural and food
systems, outdoor tourism and
cultural economies, technology,
film, and innovation.
The Federal Military and Border
economies, um, and the committee
will also hear updates on
business development and capital
access challenges that face
rural New Mexico industries and
small businesses, um, and that's
kind of listed out there, uh, A
through F.
Um, we'll also hear reports on
workforce education and
livability infrastructure and
updates on tribal and rural
economic equity.
And I'm sure the committee plans
to meet 6 times this interim.
Uh, one of those meetings, the
October 1st and 2nd meeting, uh,
needs council approval. Um it
will meet.
Thank you, thank you.
So investments and pensions
oversight committee and lead
staff is Paul Esta.
council members,
um, my name is Paul Estock. I'm
gonna be talking to you about
the uh investments and pension
Oversight Committee and
radioactive and hazardous
materials.
Um
For
I
If you should look at the uh
list, we've got pretty much
what's statutorily required in
there.
In addition, the committees
decided they'd like to uh take a
deep dive in a a few things. One
is fundamentals of how the funds
work. There are enough new
committee members and committee
members who don't really
remember what the statutes and
rules say and how things
operate. So we're inviting
speakers to give a sort of
breakdown of that. In addition,
they want to receive testimony
on
Economic outlook nationally,
regionally, and within the
state.
Um
For that they requested a little
money for outside experts, um,
and one other thing is they'd
like to look at the idea of
solvency of all the funds and
make sure they're on solid
ground. So those are the real
sort of
Um
Unusual things or different
things that they want to look at
besides the stuff that's
statutorily required. Um, as far
as meetings go, the only meeting
outside of Santa Fe is October
8, 9, they're requesting.
Meeting in Taos, a two-day
meeting, um, so.
That's for IPO.
As far as radioactive and
hazardous materials goes.
There, the statue outlines a
whole lot of stuff that the
committee needs to review, um,
if you look at the list, it's
T2.5 pages long. Um, there are a
few things that are new.
Um, obviously, because
radioactivists have this
materials heels, there's a lot
of interaction between the
federal government and the state
government. There are a lot of
issues that need to be looked at
with what's happening.
Bely, um.
So they want to take a dive into
that. They also have uh for that
purpose requested budget for
Um, outside experts.
But
Nothing
horribly exorbitant, I don't
think, uh, so, most of the
topics are statutorily required,
like I said, um, as far as
meeting sites go, they always
aim to sort of spread the
meetings out.
Uh, around the state in places
that they're that are pertinent
geranium mining, mill site
cleanup we're meeting in grants
for that one.
You know, lots, Los Alamos
stuff, the federal stuff we're
meeting in Santa Fe. Hopefully
get that taken care of. Um,
That covers radioactive and
hazardous materials. Thank you.
Thank you.
Next, for the mortgage finance
Authority Act Oversight
Committee, Christina Vasquez.
Uh
Madame Perte, members of the
committee. My name is Christina
Vasquez, and I'm lead staff of
the mortgage Finance Authority
Act Oversight Committee and the
revenue stabilization and Tax
Policy Committee. Um, I'm gonna
start with MFA first. Um, this
interim, the MFA proposes to
monitor the distribution of
funding, monitor mortgage
commitments, received reports on
the the enforcement of the
provisions of the MFA Act, uh,
oversee issuance of bonds,
review and approve rules
promulgated by the MFA in
conjunction with the MFA board.
Um, we also
And I'm sorry, the committee
also plans to review the
following regional and statewide
housing programs, MFA funding
sources and programs
administered by the MFA recently
passed legislation, MFA budget,
reports on bonds issued and
financing strategies and the
proposed legislation for the
2026 session. Um, it is also
important to note that the MFA
oversight committee would like
to meet in Socorro on July 21st
with the approval of counsel,
um, MFA oversight committee has
historically held their meetings
at the MFA office in
Albuquerque.
this change in meeting location
will cause a slight increase in
the budget.
Um, from last year. It is also
worth noting that the MFA
oversight committee's work plan
includes a proposed meeting
location outside of the state
Capitol on October 3rd, which
will be held at the MFA office
in Albuquerque with the approval
of council.
Um, and moving on to the revenue
stabilization and tax Policy
Committee, um, this interim, the
committee proposes to receive an
overview of the state's primary
taxes and state properties tax
structure.
Hear from national experts on
the impact of potential cuts to
federal funds, review risks
associated with the state's
reliance on volatile revenue
sources and discuss how the
state can rely on more stable
revenue sources to ensure
long-term revenue stabilization.
Um, the committee also plans to
examine the effectiveness and
value of tax expenditures and
other economic development
incentives, um, review the
taxation and other costs of
healthcare practitioners in the
state and discuss the
development of a bipartisan tax
package for possible
introduction during the 26th.
Legislative session. And in this
committee, we're also going to
ask for 10K for experts, um, and
another thing to note is that
RESTEP committee work plan
includes a proposed meeting
location outside of the state
Capitol on September 2nd and
3rd, which will be held in Las
Cruces with the approval of the
council, um, rest up again
typically meets in Santa Fe and
this change in location will
cause a slight increase to the
budget from last year. Um, and
additionally, the committee
would like the council's
approval to meet on December
15th and 16th of the state
capitol in.
Santa Fe.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you.
for water and Natural Resources
Committee, Sarah Wiedmeyer.
Uh, good afternoon, ma'am,
pretend, Mr. Speaker, members of
the committee, uh, my name is
Sarah Weedmeyer, lead staff for
Water and Natural Resources
again this year.
Um, and as usual, we are um uh
breaking things into major
topics, areas being water,
energy.
Um, natural resources
conservation and climate is the
3rd and then the last one being
agriculture, land management,
and animals. Um
A pretty hefty amount on the
water and energy, um, areas, a
lot of required reports from
legislation that passed this
previous session.
Um
As well as under that third
category, a lot of wildfire and
forest management issues.
Um, we do have one,
meeting or the meeting that will
be outside of Santa Fe in
October. We did decide on
Artesia, um, to get down to oil
and gas country, one of the
meetings, and that will be
October 29th and and 30th. Um, I
believe that's it. Thank you.
You.
Land grant Committee, Ian
Keller.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Ian Keller. I'm a
relatively new staff attorney to
the council service and I'm the
lead staff for the land grant
Committee. So real quick, I'll
just go into the topics proposed
on the work plan. Oh, and excuse
me. So we actually have an
update on this, and this should
be on the purple handout that I
believe was handed to you all in
my many thanks to the staffers
of this committee for providing
that.
So, the topics for this work
plan include infrastructure,
disaster relief, and management
issues.
Governance of land grant
Mercedes and Eseas and water
rights.
Reports from individual land
grant mercedes, the Oseia
Commission, and other related
entities. Review of issues
involving the Bureau of Land
Management and land grant heirs.
Discussion of key historic
factors and events concerning
common lands and an invitation
of the New Mexico congressional
delegation to discuss relevant
issues to land grants and
assekis.
Regarding meetings, we have 3
out of town that are between
Santa Fe, but none of these are
after September 30th, so I do
not believe these need any
further approval.
Thank you all.
Thank you.
Science, technology and
telecommunications Committee,
Mark Edwards.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the council. My name
is Mark Edwards. I'm the lead
staff, Science and Technology
Committee, uh.
This committee tends to have a
growing list of oversight
functions as
The legislature adds a new
Programs for telecommunications,
broadband, and IT projects, and
it can, so it is proposing to
continue those oversight
functions. It also
will continue its it's proposing
to continue its examination of
artificial intelligence, the
impacts it's have that
technology is having
cybersecurity for both the
public and the private sector.
Uh, methods for uh meeting the
growing public demand for data
privacy and developments in
energy production and
transmission.
As well as uh potential impacts
of the federal budget on our
research institutions and on the
VLA which was
Reported last year, uh, it was
scheduled for a major
replacement of all of those
radio telescopes, which was
According to the VLA or the
National Radio Astronomy.
Observatory down there was they
were trying to recruit a
manufacturer to manufacture
those radio telescopes here in
New Mexico. So the committee is
very concerned that may be
impacted with the federal
budget.
There is one proposed meeting
outside the state capitol in
October, that would be at NMSU.
That we need a council approval,
and this year,
particularly because I was not
able to find some experts in New
Mexico or some of the items that
the committee had requested last
year. They are requesting a
small budget for.
To possibly 3 different experts.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mark.
public school capital outlay
oversight task force Simon
Suzuki.
Good afternoon, Madam Protem,
members of the council, so I'm
Simon Suzuki. I will be staffing
the public school capital LA
oversight task force as we call
it the Scuiff um for the 2nd
year in a row.
And um the task force is a
statutorily created oversight
task force within the public
school capital Outlay Act and um
pursuant to that act, it has
several statutory um oversight
obligations and it's primarily
monitoring the state's progress
towards the legislature's goal
of ensuring all public school
buildings meet the statewide
adequacy standards, um,
overseeing the, um, the work of
the public school capital La
Council.
The public school facilities
Authority, um, as they
administer the
capitality Act as well as the
public school Capital
Improvements Act.
Um, in addition, the statute
does give the task force some
discretion to look into other
issues. Um, and for the past
several years, um,
The task force has, you know,
kept an eye on developments in
the Zuni lawsuit, uh, which was
It recently dismissed um by
order of the Supreme Court. Uh,
so we'll be looking in the, the
ram into the ramifications of
that dismissal.
Um
Uh, additionally, uh, the task
force will look at um the impact
of inflation and increased
construction costs on um
You know, getting these public
school capital LA projects off
the ground, um,
And uh at the organizational
meeting, we uh discussed, um,
A particular focus on the
funding formula as a whole, uh,
last year, the task force did
spend a lot of time looking at
the funding formula as it
pertained to.
Specific small school districts
with low um property tax bases.
This year we'll look at it as a
whole and um LFC and LESC are,
are going to assist the task
force with that, um,
And I will turn now to the
proposed meeting dates, so the
the statute actually limits the
task force to only more
substantive meetings each year
and historically those are held
here at the state Capitol and
we're not changing that. Um,
this year, the council did not
appoint advisory members so that
it's going to reduce the budget
slightly, um, and other than
that, we'll, I'll stick around
if you have any questions, I'll
be happy to answer. Thank you.
Thank you, son.
Indian Affairs Committee, Nicole
Wagusbach.
Good afternoon, Protem.
Uh, the Indian Affairs Committee
has a variety of issues we're
going to be covering, uh,
dividing them into 4 main topics
we're primarily going to be
focusing on state and tribal
relations, uh, economic
development in tribal lands, uh,
of variety of education issues
and also some annual reports
from executive agencies.
Uh, we only have one meeting
that falls after that September
date, that's October 22nd
through 24th, uh, the committee
would like to meet in Tohajala
in Albuquerque.
And that's all I have for you.
Thank you very much.
Transportation infrastructure
revenue Subcommittee, Martin
Fisher.
Good afternoon, Madam President,
members of the committee, uh
Martin Fisher, I'll be lead
staff for the transportation
infrastructure revenue
Subcommittee.
This interim, the subcommittee
plans to review and discuss uh
revenue outlook and funding
mechanisms, DOT projects, rising
costs, safety, and future issues
in transportation.
The subcommittee is seeking your
approval, you travel October 6th
and November 3rd outside of the
Capitol, and then $5000 for
expert testimony.
That's it. Thank you. Thank you.
New Mexico Finance Authority
Oversight Committee, Sabina
Gaynor.
Good afternoon, Madam Preta, Mr.
Speaker. My name is Sabina
Gaynor. I'm the lead staff
attorney on the New Mexico
Finance Authority Oversight
Committee.
During the 2025 interim, the
committee will receive reports
on the various entities under
its purview that are not the New
Mexico Finance Authority. It
does include.
At the border authority, the
colonius Infrastructure Board,
the Spaceport Authority, among
others.
The committee will receive
reports from the New Mexico
Finance Authority as required
pursuant to statute. Some of
those include the public project
revolving Fund, the Economic
Development revolving Fund, a
full list of those is provided
under item B of the work plan.
The committee will also consider
rules proposed by the NMFA.
The committee will receive
testimony from the New Mexico
Finance Authority on the status
of the childcare facility
revolving loan fund, which was
amended during the 2025
legislative session with Senate
Bill 175.
Additionally, the committee will
hear a variety of topics
requested by the chair,
including testimony on the newly
created federal national defense
area on the state's border with
Mexico.
Thank you.
cute.
Tobacco settlement revenue
Oversight Committee, Sean Dolan.
Good afternoon again, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
um, I'm the lead staff of the
tobacco settlement revenue
Oversight Committee, the
committee will, uh, in addition
to the statutory duties, be
looking at uh various
legislation regarding both
taxing and vaping. The committee
is also going to be looking
through the uh new PAC program
through the Department of
Health.
Uh, counterfeit vape smoking
deterrents, especially um
nicotine use in schools, which
includes packaging and flavors
of vapes, um, also settlement
funds from the state's both
jewel settlement and the uh more
global tobacco settlement that's
been going on for a while. Uh,
the committee has 4 dates total,
uh, 2 of them in Albuquerque.
The first one up here in Santa
Fe and the last one of us.
The newly created federal
funding stabilization
subcommittee, Clinton Turner.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Clint
Turner, your staff for the new
federal funding stabilization
subcommittee that you created to
take a close examination of all
the federal funds flowing into
the state and pro any
recommendations on the changes
that they may see the committee
will be meeting in July twice,
August once and then to
highlight one,
Out of state meeting after
September 30th in Las Cruces,
October 20th.
Uh, 21 and 22. Then one last
November 6th.
The the committee hopes to
closely follow the federal.
Um, action as it the bills for
the future budget move through
um the reconciliation process
and the signing process
ultimately, and also any um
actions on executive orders or
changes in the administration of
those funds as they flow
through. I thank you committee.
Thank you.
The legislative interim
committee working group, Jarrett
Fleetwood.
Uh, Madam President, members and
finals MVP.
Um
So that council put the interim
committee working group together
at the last council meeting to
address a handful of concerns
that there are too many
committees.
To many members on too many
committees.
Communities are having a
difficult time achieving a
quorum and that the interim is
perhaps not as effective as it
could be.
I should note that this is the
4th such effort that the
legislature has made to reform
the interim process
the working group plans to make
recommendations. It will be up
to this council to implement
those.
Well, maybe you'll see something
different this time.
One never knows. Thank you.
Thank you, Jerry.
And Madame Protem, I have to uh
really kind of just budget, um.
Uh, placeholders, uh, for
approval, um, the first is for
the interim legislative ethics
Committee, uh, the interim
legislative ethics Committee and
any subcommittee of the
committee will meet only as
necessary to consider requests
for advisory opinions or
reconsider complaints filed
against legislators, the cost of
a 22 one-day meetings in Santa
Fe for the committee is a little
over $20,000. So we'd like to
budget for that at this time.
The 2nd subcommittee that I like
to present on is the capital
security subcommittee, the
council created the subcommittee
um on April 28th, 2025, and the
subcommittee will meet as needed
to review capital security
measures and if appropriate to
enhance and recommend
enhancements to those measures.
The cost of two one-day meetings
in Santa Fe for the subcommittee
is um $7000 a little bit over
$7000.
And lastly, Madam Chair, members
of the council, I do have a
couple of miscellaneous interim
business that I would propose a
council roll into the same
motion as improving the work
plans, but pleases, Madam Chair.
OK.
So the first, there's been a
request for authorization for
the council service to expend up
to $15,000 to contract with a
facilitator for the Senate
Memorial to wild wildfire Study
Group. Um, staff of the Energy,
Minerals and Natural Resources
Department, and in particular
the forestry division, they are
taking lead on scheduling
meetings, coordinating
stakeholders, and planning the
work of the study group.
However, to allow staff of the
forestry division and Enner
generally to be an active
participant, and they have
requested a third party
facilitator.
The first meeting of the study
group is scheduled for July 8th
at the state Capitol. Um, the
request is up to $15,000 so I do
not anticipate that full amount
to be expended, but just to be
cautious, uh, that is what the
request is at this moment.
The second request is pursuant
to House Memorial 2, which was
passed in this 2025 session. The
legislative Education Study
Committee has convened an
education data governance and
artificial intelligence working
group to study and recommend a
structure for improved statewide
education data governance and
policies to address artificial
intelligence. 4 legislators have
been appointed to the study
group, and there's been a
request to authorize the council
service to pay mileage and per
diem for the
appointed legislators to attend
in-person meetings of the study
group, because these are not um
technically a normal meetings of
the LESC, uh, that is why this
request, um, has been put forth
to you. And both of these
expenses would be paid out um by
LCS out of the interim expenses
appropriation that was contained
in House Bill 1.
And uh with that, Madam Chair, I
stand for questions.
Alright, well, thanks to all of
our great staff people that help
us run these committees in the
interim.
Not an easy task.
So, uh, thank you for all of
that. We're open for questions
and comments, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, madam for time. I
echo, uh, the gratitude toward
the staff and Miss Caby for all
the hard work.
Um, two things that I wanted to
raise, uh, first of all on.
Sports and corrections. Um, I'd
like just for the record, to
ensure that section K.
An update on the behavioral
health reform and Investment Act
of 2025.
That that includes a discussion
and I've, I've talked to
Madame co-chair Chandler about
this as well, to ensure there's
a discussion around this concept
of harm to self and others, uh,
that is something that came up
during the previous legislative
session, and I want to make sure
that we get, uh, the facts
straight that we give that
particular issue.
Within the context of the
historic investments we made in
behavioral health.
Um, a, a really good, um.
Analysis and and vetting. So I'd
like to to add that maybe as a
subsection. I'm not sure what
the appropriate way of doing
that would be, but I want to
make sure that that that that is
discussed this interim.
The second issue would be
In, uh, revenue stabilization,
um,
I actually asked um
the chair and um I think Ms.
Vasquez at their request at some
point.
Um, before this plan was put
together, uh, that a discussion
around thisation based sourcing
is had, and I think that that
fits neatly probably into any
one of these, most of these
here.
Um, I mean, honestly, I think it
really fits within a, probably,
uh, but I want to make sure that
that discussion is had because
every single year since 2019,
the issue of destination-based
sourcing comes up, um, rightly
or wrongly, that's not for me to
decide, but it comes up every
single year and I want to make
sure that that committee gives
that issue the airtime that it
deserves, uh, particularly as we
potentially face federal funding
cuts that are going to hit local
communities, perhaps a little
harder than the state. I want to
make sure that those
conversations are.
So, uh, if, um, I don't know
that I need to make a motion. I
think it seems that it fits. I
just didn't see it written out
in either of these work plans.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Other comments
uh first in Padilla and then
Center woods. Thank you, Madam
Chair and thank you, uh, Shawna,
on the
Work, uh, I'm sorry, the work
plan for investments and
pensions Oversight Committee on
page 2.
On item I.
You know, I think it's covered
here also as the speaker said
on, on some of his comments
there, but I just want to make
sure that on item I, the various
um retiree groups, retired
public employees of New Mexico,
the various para retiree groups,
the various ERB retiree, there's
a lot of retired. I really hope
that they are brought in to
testify on that item
specifically because uh a lot of
our public employee retirees
right now are really having a
very difficult time. Some of
the, some of the uh cost of
living adjustments have been,
and I've, I've literally seen
they they've.
demonstrated it for me
specifically, you know, $5
increases from one year to the
next, $17. I mean, that's not
getting you out of the parking
lot to buy a dozen eggs. And,
and I'm just very worried about
these employee, very worried
about their ability to just
maintain their, you know, some
semblance of a lifestyle there
that they that they need after
all of these hard years of work.
So, ma'am, I just want to make
sure that we
We get the retiree groups
actually they're they're they're
representatives or somebody like
that to come and testify to this
committee. Thank you.
you. I see everyone furiously
taking notes on our comments.
Uh, Senator Woods. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Um
On the transportation
infrastructure.
Revenue Subcommittee.
It seems to me it would be a
good idea to discuss
Exactly
What happens?
Because we did not fund the
highway department through a
bill this year and House Bill 2.
It seems to me you, you should
have in your work plan something
about
What local funds will be cut.
What, uh
Highway
Um, construction would be
limited.
Um
That, that kind of situation.
That actually, all that money
was put into one bill.
And it was, it was not passed.
And we didn't put anything in
House Bill 2 to fund highway
department, and it looks like
it'd be a good idea to find out
exactly how that would affect
them on, on the Indian Affairs
Subcommittee, when you start
talking about uh transportation
of uranium between various
chapter houses is that uh
I would wonder if that was an
illegal act or legal actor, is
it against the law to do that or
not.
But I'm assuming that's what
they have in mind with that.
Which when they talk about.
Transportation of uranium
between chapter houses.
Madam Chair, Senator, we can
certainly look into what the
legal basis of that is, um, it's
my understanding that that is
happening currently under what
authority? I, I don't know
offhand, but we can certainly
take a look at that. OK. And on,
on the
The mortgage Finance Authority,
and on, on the second page, the
top of the page you talk about
required the authority to
document the need for
To the oversight committee
regarding the issuance of any
bonds. So in that exactly what
they do now.
I mean
Madam Protem, I'm not sure I
understand the question I'm
saying is.
Uh
What is the purpose of oversight
committee if it's not to
To, uh
Talk about the issue of some
bonds and, and what those bonds
are going to be used for.
I mean
Madam Chair, Senator, exactly,
I, I believe that is what the
committee is looking at. Yeah
exactly that issue, yeah, but,
but I would think.
We
OK.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Woods.
Senator share.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, a couple of things here.
One,
On, on the contentious issues,
you go through these, most of
these are not contentious
issues, or informational, but
occasionally there's one like
setbacks, that's gonna be
contentious.
Uh, I would, I would ask that
That both sides of the story be
told in, in those cases, uh,
that we go out of our way to
make sure that we're getting
telling both sides of the story,
and I don't think that that's
emotion, just.
Heads up and uh and that the
minority members even being uh
Encouraged or allowed to say,
hey, will you bring in X-person
or whatever company to
To present the other side of FYI
kind of thing.
And I don't know if this is the
right time or not to talk about.
Committee members.
Because I failed last time.
Well, and I did teach centers
here, but let's wait till we're
done and then we'll
we'll do, we'll, there'll be a
place for you and I to correct
ourselves.
Right, in uh Representative
Doll.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, and
also on the transportation
committee, um, I know that we
were asked to send
recommendations and the cost of
vehicle insurance and the
uninsured motorist issue was
definitely in my
recommendations. I don't see
anything regarding that. Um, but
I, I wanna thank uh Senator
Woods for bringing up the issue
of the state transportation fund
for this year and the bonding
issue versus a permanent fund
and um had hoped that that would
also be present.
pretty important.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Anyone else?
Right, so the motion I'm looking
for is to approve the work
plans, we've, we've added to
them. We, we've uh we've brought
up the issues, and that will
that motion will include the um
Senate Memorial to funding for
their uh mediator or their other
person and House Memorial to to
pay for the extra meeting on AI.
So moved.
All right, so any other
comments? Any opposition to the
approval, uh, ingnan we've
approved.
Those work plans and committees,
including the extra meetings,
uh, seems like we're asking for
a lot of funding for experts. I
don't think we've ever had this
many requests, so maybe at the
end of the interim we can have a
little report on um what got
spent and what was necessary and
what wasn't.
All right, so, uh,
Shawna, I believe your next
door, no, maybe I am. We have uh
3 superintendent appointments
that we need to make for for the
scooter public school play
oversight task force, um, the
speaker and I have come up with
the required 2 superintendents
from Impactate districts, uh, so
that would be um
Uh, Rihanna Chavez from Cuba.
And Steve Carlson from Central
Consolidated.
And then finally, uh, Ignacio
Ruiz from Las Cruces. Las Cruces
has not been on that committee
in a long time.
Um, so those are the three
superintendents that we, uh,
worked out and um if I could
have a motion to approve.
All right, in the opposition to
those three superintendents on
Pascua, seeing none, we have
done that.
All right, now it's your turn.
Thank you, Madam Proam, members
of the council. So the next item
on the agenda today is
legislative district offices.
Um, the district office working
group meets on a regular basis
to discuss and assess whether
revisions to legislative council
policy number 27, Legislative
district offices are desirable
to clarify aspects of the
program at as it is rolled out.
I want to know before I go into
this particular policy revision
that on an almost daily basis,
um, legislators or staff are
bringing issues to our
attention, to the group's
attention, to review, um, and to
come up with a policy direction
to bring back to the council.
The revision that's before you
today does not touch on a lot of
those policy revisions that have
been brought to my attention.
Um, but please note that they
are important, they are on our
radar, they will be discussed in
good time. The revision that is
before you today was, um,
what the group was able to agree
upon and felt was feasible and
recommended uh to counsel in
this moment. So the, uh, and
again, all of the um draft
revisions and track changes
format are in your folders. They
are also posted online for folks
uh at home to follow along.
So this proposed policy revision
before you is to effectuate the
concept of discretionary budgets
for additional expenses of the
Legislative district offices and
district legislative staff.
Previously the group had
discussed establishing a travel
budget for each district based
on the geographic area of the
legislative district. And in
fact, policy 27 was revised to
include this language. However,
after receiving feedback of the
council at the last meeting, the
group is proposing a more
flexible approach for your
consideration. And this would be
to provide each district with a
discretionary budget allocation
that could be used for paying
mileage and per diem for
district legislative aides to
travel in.
state and or for additional
district office supplies and
equipment, and I do apologize
for the construction that's
going on outside. Uh, I know it
is a little distracting. I will
be addressing this in my staff
reports, um, but I appreciate
your patience, um, with the
project as it goes on. But as to
uh the district legislative
aides and district offices. Um,
when a district legislative aid
is hired, they are immediately
provided with a laptop, a
monitor.
A headset, a wireless keyboard
and mouse, a voice over internet
protocol phone number, a printer
scanner, a my Fi to access the
internet. The additional basic
kind of office supplies that are
also provided, and that would
include things such as paper,
stapler, tape, pens, pencils,
paper clips, legal pads,
highlighters, scissors, mouse
pad, correction tape, uh, drawer
organizer.
Each of the district offices is
also, um, their rent, uh,
utilities, signage is paid for,
uh, and, and worked out by
council service. Um, also
necessary furniture for those
offices is also provided, uh,
desks, chairs, cabinetry, etc.
So what this discretionary
office budget uh would be for
then are for those expenses that
are kind of over and above these
basic expenses. And at the
moment, the district office
working group would propose that
the council start with 2.
$500 per district. And so this
would be a budget that, um, you
know, the legislator in
coordination with the district
legislative aid, um, would be
able to uh essentially choose
how that budget is spent. Now,
for legal reasons, the
administration of the budget
does remain with the council
service. And, uh, because the
council service is the entity to
which that money was
appropriated. Um, but, um, there
would be some flexibility as to
how they want to spend that
budget.
Now the district office working
group recognizes that something
we don't have right now is data.
We do not know, um, entirely
what all of the officers need to
really perform their functions.
And it could be that there are
some things that we're thinking
of is very discretionary budget
items at this time. If there is
broad requests for them, you
know, maybe that item in the
future becomes kind of a basic
office request, uh, that would
just be provided off the top and
not be part of this
discretionary budget. Uh, we
also recognize
that the offices are just being
established right now, so
there's going to be more upfront
costs this first year of the
offices working, uh, then
there's going to be in the 2nd
tier. So what I would propose to
the council is that um if a
discretionary budget number is
agreed upon by this council and
approved that the council
service and the district office
working group would continue to
monitor the usage. We would
collect that data, we would take
a look at it in a couple of
months, you know, on a periodic
basis.
To see how it's being used, what
is being purchased, and then
perhaps to come back to you to
counsel to revise that number.
Uh, we do want to stay flexible,
but we also need to start
somewhere. And so the
recommendation of the group in
this time is to have a
discretionary budget, again,
that would cover mileage per
diem.
That's pretty bad. My apologies.
Um, my apologies, Madam protem.
Uh, so the, the request on this
uh policy at this moment is kind
of twofold. One is approving the
language that revises the
district legislative office
policy to allow for this concept
of discretionary budgets, and
then the second request is to
request uh the number, what
specifically council would like
to establish as that initial
discretionary budget. And with
that Ma prote, I stand up for
questions.
All right, thank you so much,
on Questions.
Represent Thompson.
You, Madam Chair, I'm just
wondering if there's any um talk
about out of state, you know,
let's say there's an NCSL Health
and Human Services chair meeting
that I can't get to. Um, is that
going to be a possibility to
send my assistant or how, is
there any discussion? Thank you,
Madam Chair, Representative. So
yes, any conferences, any travel
at this time, you know, would
come out of this discretionary
budget. Um, there was
disagreement in the working
group as to whether travel for
district legislative aid should
be
limited to in-state or if it
should be opened up to out of
state.
The policy before you uh
continues to limit it to
in-state. That is certainly a
question for council to discuss
and determine and provide
direction on if you would
prefer, prefer otherwise. Um,
realistically, $2500 is probably
not.
Enough money to send somebody to
say NCSL summit. Ordinarily an
out of state trip, you know,
more or less could be about
$3000. Um, so this is just a
kind of an initial getting it
started discretionary budget,
and again, there is not a full
consensus in the group on
whether in-state out, you know,
if it should be limited to
in-state or out of state.
uh rips down.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for the presentation and I'm
glad that there is a um.
A discretionary amount and that
can be used for mileage. Uh,
I'm, I recently took the DLA.
I'm just now hiring a DLA, so I
just took the training and I
don't know if it's um fresh on
people's mind on this committee
or not, but from very first day,
day one, the folks in the rural
part of the state who have a lot
of miles to cover, talked about
mileage, and I got a car towards
the end of session, and it
already has 9000 miles on it. I
don't need an office. I need my
DLA to be at multiple.
school district meetings,
multiple chambers, multiple
commissions, multiple soil and
water districts, electric co ops
in it, and I just have 3
counties, um, but within that
county are lots of villages, um,
and political subdivisions that
we have to represent, and so I
was hoping that it would be a
little bit more discretionary
and um I hope that in when
you're studying this, you're
seeing how many people choose to
have an office space because I
would take more discretionary
for mileage. I basically,
My DLA will consider his car
will be his office probably.
And, and it would be
That there would be an office
that was empty. If he's actually
going to attend commission
meetings or community meetings,
his office, the office will be
empty. There'll be no one there
and that wouldn't be a good use
of taxpayer funds, but I
definitely need more
discretionary funds than that to
be able to get across my
district, and I would imagine
most folks with rural areas
would feel the same way.
Um, that's 2 cents. Thank you.
So it goes.
Thank you chair and thank you
also for presentation. I've been
having a lot of conversation,
because I do have an office in
Hobbs, uh, one of the things
we're talking about, and you
talked about signage is the
state seal. I talked to
corrections because they can do
that.
Uh, while they do it for the
capital, but for me to purchase.
Not that size, smaller size is
extremely costly.
If I'm gonna put it in my
legislative office. I'm not sure
why that would be a personal
cost to me, and I was just
wondering and chair, if you guys
can look into that, if it's
provided for the capital.
Why they are not provided for.
The district offices.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
uh representative Real Kabila.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
So, um.
Shana the funds are
discretionary.
So assuming that um
They are discretionary.
Are there any um
Absolute.
Nose in terms of the
expenditures and um I'm asking
because there's a couple of
things that I wanted to clarify.
One would, could the funds um be
used.
Or, um, district legislative
aides to come and go to the
legislative session.
Um
30, 60 days. That's one question
also, um,
With the discretionary funds,
what will be the purchasing
constraints, for example, do we
have to go through a central or
our central purchasing and um
Or our accounts going to be set
up for things such as um
Supplies,
office supplies or any other
kind of uh related supplies to
the office.
And then, um, also,
And these or will there be any
restrictions on, uh, Madam
Chair, the use of funds for
particular subscriptions, for
example, if we are to subscribe
to a design online service to
help with newsletters, mailers,
whatever, uh, such as canva, are
there any um
Restrictions on those kinds of
things sort of general, I know
there's a lot of particulars
that you mentioned earlier that.
We'll have to address as we roll
out, but these are things that
have already come to our
attention, and then it reminds
me that we have things more
accessible to us in the urban
areas than those communities in
the rural areas, so it probably
would have a, a, a good impact
on day as well. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair, members of the
council. So the question about
uh district legislative aides
working the legislative session
or uh being in the capital,
working in the capital. This is
an ongoing discussion, um,
amongst the district office
working group and has not been
100% settled. But with that
being said, if a district
legislative aide were to travel
to the capital for official
work, then yes, mileage and per
diem could be paid out of that
discretionary budget, as that is
part of the purpose, um, of the
discretionary budget. Um, as to
purchasing
restraints, uh, state law does
put forward some fairly strict
purchasing restraints, you know,
the procurement code were all
subject to the procurement code,
the district offices are subject
to the procurement code and
because legislative council
service is the administrator of
those funds, procurement has to
be, um, be with the council
service. So, uh, the processes
are essentially would be the
same for requesting any um kind
of extra supplies under the
policy currently and that is a
request to the district office
liaison or through the council
service.
Um, myself or our procurement
officer, um, specifically. Um,
we were contemplating uh whether
it would be uh appropriate or
available to establish accounts
in some way with, uh, you know,
maybe a, a big box kind of
retailer that can ship to
different locations. So that is
a little bit of an uh
outstanding issue at this
moment, but the Department of
Finance Administration, um, it
does have a white paper on what
is appropriate to be purchased
with state funds, um, in
general, and this isn't super
helpful, I acknowledge, um, but
the direction is, is the
procurement necessary for the
functioning of state government.
Uh, but we will certainly, we've
circulated this white paper to
the district, uh, district
legislative aides and district
office liaisons, and we can
certainly get that to you as
well, um, to kind of help, uh,
understand the contours of that
procurement.
Um, now, in terms of
restrictions on subscriptions,
um, I think that's a really
great question, and it really
hasn't come to our attention yet
as to, uh, if or how the
district offices, um, could or
should have a, you know,
newsletter mailing service
something like IndieGov or
something of that nature, um,
definitely open to exploring
that. Um, I think at this
moment, um, unless it's kind of
determined that that's something
that we, uh, the council wants
to generally provide to every
legislator from state funds that
would come out of a
discretionary budget at this
moment.
Thank you. Thank you.
Ah thank you, Representative
next, we'll hear from Rep of
Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
I'm, I've cried about it the
whole time about the size of
our, of my district
specifically, um, I chose to
have an office in Los Lunas
because it's
The county with the largest
amount of people that I
represent.
But I hired my legislative aide.
Or yeah.
The legislative aid district
legislative aid out of
Tier C.
Because that's kind of in the
middle and she can.
go any direction.
But from what I'm understanding,
if I want her to go into that
office.
We one day a week.
That that's part of her regular
duty, and it cannot be, per diem
cannot be provided. Is that
correct?
Madam Chair, Representative,
that is correct.
Uh,
per mileage is provided for um
irregular and occasional travel
for staffers. Uh, if a
legislative staffer has to be
somewhere on a regular basis,
um.
Mileage and perdium is not
appropriate for that purpose,
uh, because, for instance, uh,
a, a lot of staffers who work
here in the capital live in
Albuquerque, and they commute
every day and they are not paid
uh mileage uh for that commute.
So under kind of general basic
um accounting principles, uh, if
you have to be somewhere
regularly, that is a part of
your regular job duties, but if
it's kind of the one-off
situation, uh, the conference
here, we're going to a meeting
there on an earring.
basis, that would be um eligible
for mileage and perdue. So thank
you for that. So, uh, Madam
Chair, so
Is is regular and irregular
defined in this.
that we're approving today or
where is regular and irregular
defined.
Madam Chair representative, it
is not defined. Uh, but if you
have to be somewhere regularly,
so on a consistent basis, same
day, you know, for instance,
working in the capital, the
expectation is, is, you know,
myself, expectations that I'm
here Monday through Friday. So
that's regular. That's my
regular schedule. But if there
was some deviation from that,
say you having to take a trip to
Taos for some meeting that would
not be part of my regular, uh,
day to day work schedule. Um, I
do believe there could, there
could be a possibility of um
Yeah, uh, no, it is not defined.
OK, thank you for that. That's,
that was my question. And so,
um, is it?
Is in your opinion, is it
feasible?
Or if you, uh, you probably
don't know the vision of my
district, but I go from Los
Lunas.
To hatch
From mountain air to Arizona.
Can I hire more than one.
District legislative aid.
Madam Chair Representative,
under the current policy, no,
that was, that was not
contemplated, um, nor was more
than one district legislative
aide, um, budgeted for in the,
in the latest budget request.
And I can't, um, Madam Chair
and, and Shaw, I can't pay her
per diem if I want her regularly
in some place at a certain time,
but if I wanted her at a
commission meeting in Los Lunas,
not on a regular basis, but if
there was something happening in
Los Lunas, and then there was
another one
that night in
Reserve New Mexico, she could
get paid per diem for all of
that.
And mileage.
Madam Chair, uh, Leader
Armstrong, that is correct. And,
and I'd like to add that the,
uh, you know, the the original
change to the policy was
contemplating kind of a budget
based on geographic area because
there's a recognition and
understanding that the, the
legislative districts in New
Mexico.
Very greatly in size, um, as
you've, you know, described
here, um, it became a little
unwieldy once we started kind of
running numbers to um to make a
formula uh to account for
geographic area. Um, so in the
district office working group
discussions about this $2500
initial uh discretionary budget.
We not only are we committed to
looking at it, getting the data,
seeing the usage that would be,
you know, your particular
district legislative aids usage
of that budget and
reassessing and adjusting and
coming back to council to
provide for, uh, maybe an
additional, maybe there's a um a
differential for larger
districts that would help to
kind of offset or or would uh
reflect the large geography of
your district. Um, so we know,
you know, there's a little bit
of a one size all approach here,
uh, just to get it started, um,
but there is a recognition that
maybe over time, this needs to
be revised once we really
understand um what the needs are
of the DLA's to travel.
and what are also the needs of
the offices. Thank you for that.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Shawna, so my next question
would be how do they it says um
for approved travel, is there
already um something in place
where they would be, um, we
would know how to approve it. Do
I approve it? Do you approve it?
Who's who's, who approves it and
where does, where does all that
go through?
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. Uh, yes, the
district legislative aid can
travel on your approval.
Um, really all that is needed is
an email, and I would recommend,
I know we haven't written down
formally what this process is,
but an email to the district
office liaison, uh, that that
travel was approved, and that's
sufficient for council services,
uh, purposes in processing that
reimbursement.
OK, thank you for that.
I'm, I just have to say I'm, I'm
just disappointed.
That everyone's gonna get the
same and some people are going
to be using it for subscriptions
and things like that. I can
guarantee you all of mine is
gonna go to per diem and travel,
and I think that it's it's
unbalanced.
Because of that, uh, I do, I
mean, I just got a new car. My
last car, 2021, had 130,000
miles on it.
And um I try to be everywhere as
much as possible as I'm sure a
lot of people in here do, but I
think it's really uh unfair for
People that have one square
block.
To get the same per diem or
Discretionary funds.
That are actually taxpayer
dollars.
Uh, to be used for
Enhancing their office or, or
being able and what do I do,
Madam Chair, if we run, if I run
out of that 2500, when do you
expect to, to, to re look at
this.
Madam Chair, members of the
council, um, I'm committed to
looking at it, you know, on a
periodic basis, um, if this
budget were to be approved by
council, it would be available
beginning July 1st, uh, we will,
you know, uh, undoubtedly start
getting requests at that point,
there'll be travel requests
coming in, we'll be able to kind
of keep, keep an eye on what is
going on. Uh council most
likely, though there is not a
date set for its next meeting,
but I would suspect uh council
may meet again later on in the
summer, uh, maybe in
in the August or early September
period. Uh, so we could
certainly, you know, take a look
at usage even up until that
point. And if a revision seems
appropriate, bring that back to
council at that time. OK, thank
you. Thank you, Madam Chair. um,
thank you, Shawna, for all your
hard work, I know this has been
um a a heavy, heavy lift for
your
Your whole team. And I
appreciate all the hard work of
everyone who's been working on
it. I, I, uh, once again, will
say this is what happens when we
put the cart before the horse.
Thank you, ma'am. Thank you,
Representative. Next, we'll hear
from Senator Woods.
Thank you, madam chair.
All right. When are we gonna
start paying for?
Madam Chair, Senator, per the
current, uh, language of the
policy, travel is authorized
after July 1st.
After July 1st.
OK.
And the travel that I've already
had my aid done. I, I just pay
for it.
Through my campaign funds.
Madam Cha question.
Let me, let me ask you another
question. Um,
Is there anything in the policy?
To keep uh uh a lobbyist or a
special interest group.
From
Doing gifts to my age.
To provide lodging or.
To
Take them with them to, to a
meeting or is there anything
that sticks that.
Or is there any restriction?
Uh, uh, say I've got a community
meeting.
And uh
The north end of my district.
Which is about 150 miles from
where I live.
And
Um
Someone
Agrees to.
Provide sandwiches for that
meeting.
Do I need to declare that as a
gift or
Is that allowable for my aid to
ask someone to do that?
Where, where are we at on that
deal, Madam, madam.
Here
in China.
Madam Chair, Senator, so a
couple of things come to mind,
uh, there is a gift act in state
law that prohibits, um, the
acceptance of gifts by public
employees and, and public
officers. So that would
certainly come into play. Um, I
don't know the specifics off the
top of my head on that. Um,
there is also a provision in the
governmental Conduct Act that
prohibits a state employee from
accepting honoraria, uh, for
the, um, performance of duties
that are part and parcel.
of the employee's job. Um,
however, that honoraria, um,
prohibition does carve out
payment for travel. Uh, so that,
that is a possibility there as
to requesting gifts from
lobbyists. Um, I think that
raises a number of ethical
issues, uh, that I would need to
look into a little bit further
to provide better guidance to
you.
So, but what if they were just
voluntarily giving.
Well, never mind.
Get too sticky here. Get too
many opinions.
But I guess my main deal is uh
July 1st is when we'll start
with and, and to get just to
further
Uh, cleared my mind.
All I have to do is, is give
direction to my aid to travel.
To an email.
And that will be enough to get
him reimbursement.
Madam Chair, Senator, the
district legislative aides are
subject to the same, um,
paperwork requirements, uh
filing of um a trouble form and
the itemized statement of travel
expenses form, signing that.
This is the same as all um state
employees, legislative
employees, and, and actually is,
is very similar to the uh forms
that legislators also fill out
to request per diem and mileage.
Uh, we do have a guidebook for
all
Legislative staff on that issue.
Um, and if it has not already
been distributed to the district
legislative aides, it certainly
will, uh, and we will also
ensure that legislators are
aware of what those additional
procedures are, but in order to
authorize the travel that would
um make a district legislative
aide eligible for per diem and
mileage, you're correct, uh,
that only necessitates your
approval in an email form. And
then uh one last question, Madam
Chair.
The last question is,
Will those forms be on.
Where we can download them or
where they can download them so
that
They can fill them out and, and
scan them and send them back in
or or even even fill them out.
Uh, on the page and
Yes.
Yes, Madam Chair, Senator, those
forms are electronically
available and we will ensure
everybody has uh copies of those
forms. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Woods,
Senator Charlie.
Thank you, ma'am. Holy.
Um, and thank you Shana. I'm
wondering, was there folks from
rural communities on that
working group?
So Madam Chair, Senator, the
working group was established by
the council and it consists of
the six chiefs of staff of the
leadership offices, uh, the two
chief clerks and the director of
the council service. Uh, we
additionally do seek input from
district office liaisons, um,
and, uh, the accounting staff of
council Service Human Resources,
Assistant Director for
Legislative affairs, um, but no
one specifically from a rural
community, um, so I, I, I don't
quite know the, the background
of everybody on the group, but,
uh, those are the people who are
appointed.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair and
Shawna, um, because I represent
5 counties and we're extremely
rural, um, and I would love the
opportunity to forego an office
and use that funding for travel.
Um, it's 150 miles from end to
end in my district and takes
over 3 hours to get from one
town to the edge of um the state
and I think that would be a
solution that would work. Um,
and I, it just goes to show if
we.
don't have adequate
representation when we're making
decisions about people who would
be impacted, um, we end up with
a situation like this. So I
appreciate the consideration,
Madam Taranana.
Any other comments?
your brand.
I know it was brought up, but I
would like to actually ask that
we remove from #2 on the second
to the last page, the
After travel in the state.
I do think that they're.
We should allow our
step to be able to go to things
like NCSL or CSG and I, I
realized that some of the rural
districts that they, they may
have other priorities.
Um
But uh I think that.
That should be left up to the
legislators.
How they use their stuff.
So that's a motion? Yes, ma'am.
Uh, discussion of the motion.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, Madam
President, well, I
would agree with the concept, I
think that.
This particular.
Policy and and the program that
we're building together.
I think we're still learning.
And trying to work all the kinks
out. I mean, I think the points
made by the leader or valid is
the largest district in the
state. I think Senator Gallegos
asking about the seal valid
point.
Um, I have an office that is
nondescript. You can't even tell
what's in there because I have
nothing that would identify.
The office is being my office.
Uh, having said that, I think we
probably need to take this
slowly.
Um, I'm concerned that all of a
sudden a bunch of us would want
to send our staff to NCSL and
that's an expensive trip. It's
Boston. I understand hotels are
booked up, so now people are
having to get Airbnbs and those
are really expensive, uh, per
diem, etc. I think we need to
continue to work out the kinks
over the next few months, and
honestly, I'm not even sure
we've got.
The budget to be able to
accommodate possibly everything
that everybody wants to do with
their DLAs, uh, and so if folks
are comfortable in the next
session, we can build up those
budgets. I mean, we'll see where
we are with federal funding cuts
and what we need to do here. Um,
you know, DLAs might be the
least of our problems, uh, but I
would really, um,
Ask
This council to move slowly and
and not.
Uh, opened the door, um, to some
pretty
Difficult unintended
consequences. Thank you.
Other comments on the proposed
OK, so, uh,
Saying none, I guess we'll just
take a roll call, Ja.
Thank you. I think that was very
reasonable explanation by.
Speaker, so I'll withdraw the
motion, um, I do think that we
need to maybe slow down and and
think about this, but, you know,
for, for some of us who have
smaller districts, and I
understand the, the difference,
um, I guess it's the difference
between equal and equitable. Um,
you know, but, uh, you know,
some of us.
I would have to look for ways to
spend some of this money.
Whereas I could send my DLA to
get some training, so she could
do a better job for my
constituents.
Um
And that's, that's, that's the
reason that I think we ought to
think about it, but
You know, if we all get the
same, we're all being treated
the same.
Thank you.
All right, so we're back on the
uh proposal as offered, uh, any
other comments or suggestions.
Um, I'll accept the motion to
approve it.
So a motion for approval, any
opposition to that.
Uh, seeing no with adopted yet
another of these, which we will
be doing for years.
All right, so another change,
Shana.
this snow is different.
Go right ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the council. So the next item
on the agenda is the legislative
staff code of conduct, um, this
revision is also in a track
changes form in your folders and
post it online. And uh before I
get to the instant motion, I
just wanted to provide some uh
context. At this council's
meeting in January, a revision
to the code of conduct was
proposed and adopted relating to
prohibitions on legis
of staff holding or running for
elected office, and it required
resignation of a legislative
staffer upon filing or accepting
the nomination. Until the
revision in January, the code of
conduct did not directly address
running for office and at least
one employee, um, had run for
elected office, um, sorry, ran
for elected office, um, and
maintain their job, uh, you
leave to campaign and when
elected, that employee resigned
their legislative staff
position.
Policy revision adopted by
council in January, however,
provided for a blanket
prohibition for legislative
staffers on running for or
serving in elected office.
This code of conduct revision
was not a consensus of the
district office working group.
The majority of the group
thought that running for holding
elected office, while serving as
a legislative staffer, raised
real and perceived conflicts of
interest in which the staffer
would be in a position to
improperly influence legislative
process to the benefit of the
person's elected position,
regardless of whether that
position was partisan or
nonpartisan. The proposal that
was adopted aired on the side of
no appearance of impropriety,
eliminating this ethical concern
entirely.
However, some members of the
working group think that the
code of conduct does not need
these provisions specific to a
legislative staffer running for
office because the code of
conduct and governmental Conduct
Act already prohibit employees
from engaging in political
activity with state time or
resources, and there's concern
that the types of office to
which the prohibition applies
could be narrower, as there is a
thought that legislative
employees should be encouraged,
not discouraged, to serve their
communities in such positions.
Some members think the
prohibition to be more in line
with the restrictions on
executive employees, which
limits the holding of office,
uh, prohibition to partisan
offices, and also allows for
leave of absence to campaign.
As a primary matter, a
legislative employee cannot
pursue private interests on
duty, including campaigning
while on duty, nor can they use
their work time or state
resources to advance a personal
political campaign. These
activities are prohibited in the
code of conduct, even in the
previous iteration and the
governor, governmental Conduct
Act.
So all these uh long standing
prohibitions and the
distinctions between political
office and legislative work.
Uh, that are already in the code
of conduct. Some members of the
working group continue to feel
that additional requirements for
resignation unnecessarily
prohibits or places limits on
the outside work activities of
legislative employees. I say all
this just to uh assert to you
that there is not a full
consensus within the group on
all of these matters and has
been subject to robust
discussion. Nonetheless, in
January, the council adopted
revisions to the code of
conduct, instituting this
blanket prohibition and
requiring a legislative
employee.
To resign their position if they
accepted a nomination.
During the council's discussion
of this provision, council
members raised concern with how
the prohibition affected
legislative staff serving in
tribal elected positions or
small political subdivision
elected positions, and after the
res were adopted and session was
underway, it was discovered that
the application to session staff
had not really been fully
considered, and several return
session staffers were uh
employed by various of the
legislative agencies. We're also
serving in elected positions,
which was now prohibited by the
newly adopted language of the
code of.
that
So in light of these concerns
about the new policy, the
working group has revisited this
issue and considered if or how
the code of conduct language
should be further revised on
this topic.
However, the working group still
has not come to a full consensus
on code of conduct changes
regarding legislative employees
running for or serving in
elected office and the very
viewpoints, um, continue to
persist. Some prefer the blanket
prohibition to ensure no real or
perceived impropriety exists,
others prefer more relaxed
approach, relying on other
ethical principles to address
improprieties if they arise.
Accordingly, given the
disagreement among the working
group members, this proposed
revision before the council
today is a compromise proposal.
And only addresses two of the
major concerns that were raised
by the revisions in January.
First, it provides a bright line
on the holding and running for
political office prohibitions on
legislative staff by specifying
that the prohibition applies to
elected offices with the state
and political subdivisions of
the state. This necessarily
excludes tribal elected office,
but would still include a broad
range of elected offices,
including localized or
specialized offices like Asseki
officers, land grant trustees,
soil and water conservation
district supervisors, as these
entities are political
subdivisions of the state.
Second, the revision excludes
temporary legislative staff from
that prohibition. And with that,
Madam Chair, I stand for
questions.
Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Madam
President, Ms. Case be first of
all, thank you to the working
group, you all have been doing
incredible work over the last
1214 months or so. Um, I'm not
sure we're there yet, um, and
some of us did raise the issue
of, of tribal office, um, and it
is my understanding that some of
those
Officeholders are actually
put forth by their communities,
right? You can't really turn it
down. Um, I do think that land
grants in aseas are very
similar.
Um, and I think that
In trying to create a some
robust.
Um
Gates here to keep.
Any funny business from
happening. Um, I think we are
unduly earning historic Hispanic
communities, particularly up
north, where you might be the
only game in town when it comes
to being the Mayor Lomo here
like yeah.
You might be the only game in
town when it comes to
representing your land grant.
Um, so I would um ask that we
continue to work through these,
um, I'm not exactly sure.
Any more of the problem we're
trying to solve.
Uh, if I walk myself through a
fact pattern, right? So let's
say my DA.
Um, wants to run for city
council.
In Albuquerque, that's a
nonpartisan race. Um, it would
be tough because it is more than
a part-time job there, um, but
it is nonpartisan, right? Um,
I'm an irrigator, um, in fact,
for a minute, I was the
treasurer of my Asea.
Um, I resigned that position
because I didn't want the
responsibility of being the
treasurer of the SA yeah, for
many reasons, uh.
But, you know, for for some of
my colleagues, I know that is a
calling, that is something that
really, um, you know, you have
to do.
Um
And I also think of rural
communities. I mean, you know,
you, you might be the only game
in town to be the town
commissioner.
You know, if it's a nonpartisan
election, I, I, I, I, I think it
really is between the
The principal
And the DLA.
And as a principal, I wouldn't
want my DLA to be running for
anything.
And if they want to run for
something, then I would make the
choice to maybe hire a different
dealer because I want my DLA
100% focused on what we are
doing on behalf of District 11.
Um, I would assume most folks, I
guess, I would think.
would fall in the same place.
Um, I just think that
By trying to keep
A state employee that is working
on the behalf of a legislator.
From engaging in
Quote unquote political
activity.
Electioneering.
It seems to me that partisan may
be the brightest line.
Even though I'm still not fully
there because.
You might be the only person in
town to be on your county
commission, and that's a
partisan, right? Um.
I just think we're looking for a
problem to solve here. I don't
see one yet, and I think that um
as as it happened before session
when some of us brought up the
issue of, of
Tribal
Communities
Now that you explained this
revision, I'm like, well,
The same applies to land grants
and I said yes, and I would hate
to cut those folks off, uh, you
know, for those who might think
that a DLA is going to game the
system and get more capital out
there for their, like, yeah,
look, if that aseia is in my
district, it's fair game, right?
I mean, if the universities in
my districts for a game.
Right, if the school or school
districts in my district seems
to be fair game. Um, now, it's
up to me as a representative not
to
Prioritize the needs of the Asea
simply because my DLA is an
office holder with the like,
yeah.
And leave the rest of my
district out to dry. I guess I
could do that, but that has
electoral consequences for me,
right? So I, I, I'm not there
yet, Madam President, and Miss
Casebeer. I do think we are.
Um, cutting out.
Folks who otherwise would be
incredible DLAs and or
incredible officeholders for the
sake care of their land grant.
But thank you for your work. I
mean, I think this is gonna just
have to continue and these
conversations will continue to
uh keep happening with the
working group. Thank you, Madam
President. Representative
Caviero.
Thank you, Madam Chair. And um
light of that same
conversation, it's, it's um
I bring up another side of that.
And that is that when we had the
discussions, um, and I was part
of the council as I am now, we
had discussions about
incorporating all of this
originally and so I empathetic
to the point that
We didn't anticipate so many
different uh questions that come
up and I'm glad to have been one
of the first ones to have
stepped up and hired a um
district legislative aid so that
we've been able to flush out
some things. So thank you for
the clarityun on the things that
you've been able to iron out for
us. Um,
There's also the fine line, um,
we talked about when we first
set up this these structures,
um, about
Being nonpartisan, that was
really we engaged in a great
deal of of discussion about
making sure that we know and the
district legislative, um, aids
that are assistants that are
assisting us understand that
once we are elected, we
represent everyone in the
district. So therefore, we were
very explicit about prohibiting
um partisanship, and I think
that was real clear. However,
um, there's been some
Tension about
Infringing also on a person when
our, our assistants, uh, time
away from their position, and
how much they can participate or
should we in any way restrict
what they can participate in.
For example, can they
participate and represent uh as
precinct chairs, ward chairs.
This is on their time. Can they
participate in their
prospective.
You know, partisan parties,
their parties, um, that's on
their time, not in, not in terms
of partisan work within the
office or in any way infringing
on their um official work emails
or any of those types of things,
but on their own time, that's
one. The other is
How about they um being asked
since most of us have hired, I
would assume I've met a lot of
our assistants that have been
very active in their
communities. And the reason we
hired them is because of their
activity and their activism and
their, their work in their
communities, they're well known,
they're well established, and
they can really assist us, uh,
in, in our work. So,
Can they also be involved in
endorsing candidates if
candidates for school boards for
city council, for county
commissioners, um, ask that they
be endorsers of their
perspective elect uh
candidacies. So I bring that up
because I think that that's
another one of those areas that
we didn't look into the
specificity of, but it also met
him chair. I don't want us to
ever be in the position of
restricting um and obviously it
would be unconstitutional to do
that, um, both.
US Constitution or state
constitution, I don't think we
can restrict that, but there
needs to be clarity because
there isn't um that degree of
clarity, and the final question
or point I want to make is we
also work on multiple levels
with our prospective, um,
different organizations. Um,
they are not necessarily
partisan organizations, but
their community-based
organizations that have a
Um,
could be construed as um
A partisan nature to them
because they encourage
individuals to run for office,
for example, um, they may not be
democratic, they may not be
Republican, they may be just in
general, get out the boat, just
encourage you to be involved in
your community.
Um, how about those
organizations being and and
those that are partisan being
intentional about
Making sure that certain
individuals
are hired as DLAs.
With the intent.
Of perhaps later using it
against that particular
legislator weaponizing it for
lack of better word. So there's
things that we didn't consider.
That could also influence what
we try to prohibit.
In speaking, uh, in referring to
the speaker's comment, we were
trying to prohibit certain
things, Madam Chair, and Shawna,
but we didn't anticipate how
that would play out. So that's
my commentary question. Thank
you.
Any other comments of Armstrong.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
I, I personally still think they
should not be elected.
Or anything.
Uh, I don't like the, the carve
out, I just.
I just think we're, we're
playing with fire. Do we carve
this out or that or that now
does it grow? If they're just
not elected to anything.
I think it's a much cleaner way
to do it. I see and I understand
and, and respect uh aaa, school
boards, everything else.
There's a lot of people that
could use this kind of job.
And I think every one of us can
find someone that's not elected
to something or is they're
willing to step down from their
elected position to fill.
The, the disposition. So I think
it's uh in my opinion, there's,
there's a lot of people out
there looking for jobs that
would be great DLAs that are
not.
Elected to anything. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you. Anyone else?
All right, seeing that no one
else, let, let me, I wanna make
a couple of comments.
Chandler, I didn't see you.
Very briefly, um, Madam
President and members, um, it's
a little bit of a I guess a
response to what the leader was
mentioning.
We have a lot of small
organizations that have elected
positions on the speaker was
referring to them, the Eos, um,
and mutual domestics, all, and
it is very hard to recruit
people to some of those
positions. I'm sure many of you
see that in the rural
communities and certainly the
speaker spoke to that in terms
of there's one person who does
about 10 jobs in a small town
and or a small community, and I
think then to say those people
who are stepping up.
For jobs that are very
difficult.
Um, and time consuming and the
like are then not eligible for a
job with the state of New
Mexico. I think it's really the
wrong way to be thinking about
this. So, um, I won't be able to
support this policy as is and we
need the issue if there is
indeed an issue. Uh, thank you,
Madam Proton.
Thank you. Just, just one thing
I want to be clear though, these
exceptions would all apply to
your staff, correct?
If we put those in here,
legislative employees are all
your employees, correct?
Madam Chair, members of the
council, that's correct. And
this is all legislative staff
code of conduct. So it applies
to all legislative employees,
including legislative Finance
Committee, legislative Education
Study Committee, uh, the chief
clerk's offices, leadership
offices, district legislative
aides, council service, all
legislative employees.
I just think that's an important
point, uh, again, to remember
this isn't just about the DLAs.
This is about this whole
institution.
And we've not had exceptions
like this ever before for the
rest of this institution, so
just wanted to make it clear
we're not just talking about
DLAs.
And let me also make the point I
was gonna make, and that is that
our previous
I'll see impacted legislative
employees, temporary legislative
employees, uh, many of whom are
in all of these roles, so we
really needed to uh take that
small little legislative
employee out of this mix, so it
does that also.
Uh, so, Mr. Speaker, did you
have a comment? Yeah, I just, I
thank you, Madam President, um,
I think
You know, back in December, we
voted on that policy and then we
came back and said, gosh darn
it, there was a temp employee
who happened to be like the
governor of Pueblo. Um,
And I am concerned, I mean, if
this, this, you're right,
Senator Worth is a bless to
everybody.
I bet you there's somebody in on
staff who's there a board
member, a land grant person, and
that you're gonna make them
choose between service to their
community and their job. For no
reason whatsoever.
There has not been an issue that
has come up, and I would be very
surprised if in the.
80, 90, 100 plus years of this
legislature, there has not been
an employee who at the same time
served as an assegama alone.
Uh, we're gonna end up with egg
on our face if in 3 months we
come back.
And, you know, Senator Padilla
and I, Valley, we have tons of
us I guess.
And I wonder how many of those
folks woke up, work up here. I
don't even know.
I'm sure there's at least one.
I think we need to identify the
problem first.
I think we're shooting.
That's a horrible metaphor. I
think we're squirting the water
gun everywhere.
Trying to hit the target and
just capturing everything and
everybody. Um, and I would hate
to be the legislature that
literally told us like yeah and
land grants.
Sorry, you have to pick between
feeding your babies and serving
your community.
All right, other comments.
The.
Thank you, Madam President. I, I
agree with all the comments that
were said here. One thing I'll
add also it's just the wealth of
experience and knowledge that
we're gonna really just throw
out the door, and boy, that is
really unfortunate. I, I'm aware
of uh multiple employees that
serve as executives in higher
education by our institution,
any number of others that serve
our education committees here,
and we need that kind of
knowledge in those roles. I
mean, we're, we're a, a very
large family here in New Mexico,
and we have a lot of people that
have a lot of wonderful
experience they bring to the.
the roundhouse. I really don't
want to lose that. So, thank
you.
Representative Armstrong. Thank
you, Madam Pro. My, my apologies
for going a second time, but I
wondered also if there was any
way we could divide this out.
To where, I mean, we would be
voting on C and D, can we vote
on them separately.
Instead of as a whole.
Shaw, I'll leave that question
to you. They seem related to me,
but
Um, Madam Chair, leader
Armstrong, um, I believe they do
need to go together, um.
We'll see is really about the
holding of office and D is about
the running for office.
So they're they're a little bit
of
You know, opposite sides of the
same coin. Um, I, I, I, it would
be my recommendation for um them
to be addressed together. Thank
you. Thank you.
Right, Shawna, do you have any
comments after hearing all of
the comments from up here.
Uh, Madam Chair, I do not. OK.
All right, so we are on uh,
we're not on an ocean. I don't
have a motion yet, but,
I move that.
The council
Send back this draft of the code
of conduct.
To the working group for the
purposes of identifying another
option for
Regulating the behavioral
behavior of legislative staff
and elected office.
Second
All right. Well,
I think we're all in favor of
that. So anyone opposed to that?
All right, so we want you to go
back to the drawing board. Uh, I
know it's been very hard to get
where you've gotten, um.
But it seems like there's enough
people who um want this massaged
a little bit more, so, um, thank
you for all of you that worked
on it.
Senor Brant
Thank you, Madam Chair, and if I
could just make a comment as
we're looking at this, um, you
know, it's affecting people now.
And, and I wonder if as a
counsel, we shouldn't look at
suspending C and D until this is
fixed.
Well sooner C and D is not in
place now. No, it is in its
current form.
Well, in its current form, um,
No.
Which is much more restrictive.
It seems like as we go forward,
we need to look at making this
partisan.
On any political or, you know,
political office because every
office is political. But
partisan on that one and on the
next line where it's talking
about organization, uh, seems to
make sense.
Um
But this is affecting
DLAs today.
It's, it's not an affecting
staff up here today.
Um
And I, I just think this needs a
lot more work.
Having an effect now.
Well, and unless we change it,
it's going to impact our
temporary legislative session
employees. I prefer to just let
them take it and massage it and
come back.
Yeah, but I'm trying, I would be
concerned that if you take the
language out, you could have a
whole bunch of hires that are
partisan political folks in the
little window that we've got
until we fix it. It just feels
better to just leave the status
quo and work on it, come back,
try and tweak it. I just could
see.
unintended.
Events that happened, and I get
what you're saying, certainly.
There's unintended events the
other way.
But again, just eliminating.
The restrictions.
could create its own set of.
Remember this is for everyone.
We don't wanna undo policy for
everyone.
Mr. Speaker, yeah, that's a
great point, Madam President and
Mr. Leader, um, and also Senator
Brent. I think you bring a good
point. I do think that, um,
maybe just by way of and I it's
not emotion, but just by way of
of.
Maybe some general guidance.
It seems like we've let's play
this out, right? If you have, if
you have a, a staff at council,
you know, one of your um
tremendous build drafters. And
they decide to run for.
Um
The legislature.
Um,
I don't know why they would want
to do that, but if they decided
to do that, or if they, if they
want to run for for
You know, Berlio County
Commission, partisan office.
You've got to draw the line
somewhere, and I would assume
that you've got something in
place right now where you would
Um
As an employee have to take
maybe some.
ETO
If you approve it to run.
Or whatever, um, and then if you
were to win, I would assume we
would want to have some sort of
policy. But what I don't want us
to do is to cast such a wide
net.
And because New Mexico is
unique.
We've got 23 tribal communities.
Um, and we've got
I say yes and land grants, to
name a few, there's a bunch of
others. Um, that would be
impacted by any type of
prohibition and Senator
Padilla's point, we are.
We are limiting.
Unilaterally, the amount of
expertise and knowledge that
comes into work for us.
Having said all that, we still
have to have some lines, right?
And I think that maybe
partisanship, partisan racism
might be a line that hopefully
most of us can agree with.
That's not going to capture
these smaller communities with
small scale elected positions
that do incredibly important
work.
Um, it's not going to limit the
ability of tribal members to.
To, to take on responsibilities,
um, dictated by their community.
Um
Having said that, even within
the partisan structure, I think
there are, you know, if my DLA
wants to run for office,
partisan office, do they have to
resign as soon as they announce?
Is it while they're thinking
about it, is it when, when
they're elected, if they're
elected, um, but I think those
are the bright lines that the
working group can maybe use as
guidance. Um, I just think that
We need to be really careful.
Not to limit the ability of
people.
to represent their community,
Um, and also using common sense,
um,
I wouldn't want anyone on my
staff.
During work hours.
To go to a political fundraiser.
What they do after work hours is
their business. It's not me,
it's not my job to dictate. If I
look at congressional
Members of Congress, um,
staffers after hours host
fundraisers all the time.
And attend partisan political
events after hours, not during
work hours. And I think that's
the difference here.
Um, maybe look at what Congress
does.
Um, I think congressional
staffers are allowed to
actually, I know for a fact they
are allowed to serve their local
ase association, I think I'm
pretty sure they're allowed,
though, I don't think or at
least they're not prohibited
from doing so.
Why are we, and not that
Congress is a shining example of
anything,
but why are we restricting the
pool of people that we have so,
uh, maybe that's the guidance.
Look at partisan, maybe look at
best practices, um, and maybe we
can come back next month and.
Finish this off.
Right, so we're going to move
away from this code of conduct
and go to our next agenda item
classification plan and salary
ranges,
Shaw, tell us about this.
Thank you, Madam Protem. So last
interim council adopted policy
number 20 year-round legislative
staff classification and
compensation plan.
Uh, that policy provides that
the fiscal and policy research
analyst at the Legislative
council Service and the chief
economist of the Legislative
Finance Committee are provided
to the plan committee, which is
composed of the 6 chiefs of
staff, 2 chief clerks, and the
directors of the council
Service, Legislative Finance
Committee, and Legislative
Education Study Committee, a
recommendation on increases to
the compensation ranges based on
inflation, cost of living, cost
of labor, and any across the
board increases to ensure that
the plan remains competitive for
recruitment.
and retention subject to
approval by the council. In your
folders is uh the proposed
revision to the uh pay bands,
the pay ranges under that plan.
And uh would would ultimately
reflect, uh, the request, uh,
that is before you.
The LCS's fiscal analyst, uh,
Clinton Turner, who was with
here, is with me here today, and
LFC's chief economists have
reviewed and recommended to the
plan committee that the
compensation ranges be increased
by 4%. This is because economic
data indicates that a 4 that the
4% increase passed in the most
recent budget is consistent with
the inflation, cost of living,
and cost of labor conditions for
the US as a whole and in our
region.
A handful of the most relevant
indicators were slightly above
or slightly below 4% in the
recent fiscal year or calendar
year, year over year growth.
This included averaged hourly
earnings, inflation as measured
by the consumer price index,
home prices, um, as measured by
the all transactions, house
price index for the Santa Fe,
um, region, labor costs as
measured by the employment cost
index, uh, that is published by
the US Bureau of Labor
Statistics. Also considered
where the United States, New
Mexico, and Santa Fe County,
unemployment rates and the
number of United States and
Western region job openings.
While the year over year growth
in levels of these indicators
does not directly translate to
the compensation increases or
the pay band increases, I should
say. They do shed further light
on the condition of the labor
market in the United States and
regionally, and indicate that
the proposed 4% is an
appropriate increase to the
bands at this time.
I know that the proposed
revision to the pay bands does
not change the current salary of
any employee.
All current employees will
receive a 4% increase. This is
what the legislature
appropriated in House Bill 2
this year was a 4% increase
statewide to all state
employees, so all current
legislative employees will
receive that 4% increase, that
first full pay period in July,
and are additionally eligible to
up to a 3% raise in any year of
employment. What this proposal
does is
Adjust the pay bands for
inflation so that the pay bands,
uh, which do dictate hiring
salaries, promotion salaries,
etc. for legislative employees,
stays competitive and ahead of
inflation. And with that, Madam
Chair, I stand for questions.
Thank you, Shaw. Questions or
comments, Representative
Chandler.
Um, thank you, Madam President.
I have a few questions. The this
this pay band, there's a
midpoint um stated in all pay
bands, how does one ever get to
midpoint.
Madam Chair Representative, uh,
so under the the current class
in compensation policy, new
hires, the maximum salary they
can be hired at is 75% of the
maximum. Um, so that kind of
dictates where somebody starts.
Um, it did, you know, depending
on that person's performance,
their experience, education,
etc. that really dictates the
starting salary, um, within that
pay band. So the maximum is 75%,
but somebody could be hired
lower.
Depending on their
qualifications and what seems to
be most appropriate, given where
the salaries of other employees
within those pay bands mainly.
Um, thank you for that answer
about the 75%. The question here
is, how does one get to
midpoint? It, it strikes me that
since we have a policy that
starts somebody no higher than
75%. No one has the option to
making it to min point, and then
what's the value of a bitcoin?
Right, it sets the maximum at
75%, which
For the
At higher, right.
And then we can provide small
raises.
So with this raise, I did, you
know, I'm sorry we're talking
about DLAs, but that's my
universe. I don't deal with
secretaries. I don't mean I so I
have no idea how their salaries
work and what they're paid at
and what they're brought in at,
and so on and so forth. So I
apologize, but the highest we
could hire that person was close
to 78,000. It was 57,700 and
something. OK, that's 75%. If we
gave that person the maximum
that we're proposing here, they
will still not ever make it to
midpoint.
And next year we'll have a 3%
raise or a 2% raise and how long
will it take for someone to get
to midpoint? What's the value of
midpoint? Why are we even
talking about midpoint. Why is
it in, in the end?
You see where I'm going? Yes.
Why can't we hire at midpoint,
you know, I've held, uh, you
know, institutional jobs. Mostly
you bring in people at midpoint.
And I understand we're talking
about a different policy, that's
the 75, the famous 75% policy.
It it just seems illogical to me
that we have such a policy and
let's be real, we do have
trouble recruiting people, I
bet, um you do and legislative
council. Have we looked at these
salary bands holistically, are
they in line with market? Are
they appropriate for the jobs
instead of simply just looking
at what's the inflationary, they
may be at a wrong place now.
For other reasons besides
inflation.
I think this, this has been a
very narrow evaluation of this,
the pay band issue here. So just
want to bring that up.
Because I think what we're doing
here is inadequate in terms of
trying to adjust salary for all
of our employees. I just know
about one because I only
supervise one, but um, so that's
one point. The other point is,
and, and again, sorry, it's,
it's something that I'm dealing
with. The district you look at
all the position titles. We have
levels for so many positions
here, which make a lot of sense
to have levels, of course,
because you're bringing in
people with different qual
locations, different
experiences, the job requires
different things, and this is
not a criticism of what we've
done so far on the district aid
thing because I agree it's a,
it's a project in process and
progress, I hope.
But we have a whole array of
people who have been hired that
do are doing um different
things.
Um, that are all within the very
broad job description that we
created for a legislative
district aid, but some are doing
the full scope of what was
listed in the district aid, um,
job description and some, I
imagine, are doing some portion
of that and that's totally
within the um discretion of the
legislator as it should be, but
I would suggest that we need to
have a um a, a district aid
level 2 and that we
Well, you know, a job
description that's specific to
that, that entity that will give
that our district aides the
ability to progress.
And actually get real job, real
salary increases, because I
don't, this, this whole
structure doesn't make sense to
me. When we're required to bring
people in 75%.
In other places I've worked, we
need, if someone was qualified,
you try to bring him in at
midpoint, at, at a minimum.
So, you know,
I think this needs work. I'm not
gonna vote against the, the um
The percentage request, but I
think we should be looking at
the pay bands.
Holistically, that's one. And 2,
I think we need to be creating a
second tier of legislative
aides.
That, you know, so for example,
my legislative aid does
everything that's listed in that
job description. Research,
drafting, interactions with
constituents, interactions with
subject matter experts, um,
really, uh, operates at a very
high level, well beyond, you
know, administrative level.
So I think we need opportunities
where we can advance people
based on what they're um
Multiple degrees, you know,
based on experience, multiple
degrees and the like. So when
it's appropriate, I'd like to
make a motion, um, Madam Pro 10
that will address the tier issue
and it may be premature for
that, but you could come back to
me when it's appropriate. Thank
you, Madam President.
So Shawna, do you wanna respond?
I, I, I, I, I heard some issues
that weren't exactly correct in
looking at this, the 75%.
Madam Chair, members of the
council. Uh, so the 75%, uh,
maximum for district legislative
aides that, that hiring max is
in the legislative district
office's policy that was
adopted, uh, last year by the
council. Um, that certainly
could be subject to revision at
the will of the council. Um, I
think there was just a sense of
trying to start somewhere to get
this program started, um, and
the point that has been raised
about having tears of district
legislative aides, um, that
issue has been raised with the
working group, and it will be uh
the subject of further.
discussion. Um, one issue that I
think needs to be kind of
fleshed out, um, before that can
be effectuated is really what
are the educational
requirements? What are the um
experience requirements. What
are the job duties of somebody
who might be in a tier 2, tier
3, you know, tier 4 senior
district legislative aid
position. So these are really um
just kind of foundational
considerations, but certainly on
the radar of the district
legislative aide or district
office working group, um, and
will be subject to many more.
Russians, no doubt. Um, you
also, or the point was also
raised about doing a holistic
review, um, of the jobs and
where they are within these um
salary bands and um there has
been a um sense of the class and
compensation plan committee,
that absolutely an audit needs
to be taken place, uh, for that
to happen, we do need to have
job descriptions for each of
these positions and have a a
better foundational
understanding of what the roles
are doing.
Um, I would say the council
service has job descriptions for
all of our positions. Uh, not
all positions have job
descriptions, um, so that is
something that's kind of an
ongoing project to get to a
place where an audit firm could
be contracted with to do this
holistic review and make sure
that our job duties are lining
up with appropriate, um, pay
levels. Um, so that is, that is
absolutely noted, um, and is a
project that will be worked on.
Madam Proton, just point of
clarification. Does that 75%
rule only apply to DLAs?
Madam Chair, no, um, all new
hires, um, are limited to 75% of
the max of the pay band, unless
an exception is met. Um, those
exceptions, uh, which I do not
have directly in front of me at
the moment, um, are exceptional
legislative experience,
exceptional experience uh above
and beyond other individuals who
may be in that pay band. That
does not, however, apply to
district legislative aides at
this moment because the district
legislative aid policy itself
limits uh the initial salary.
Higher in that position at 75%
of max. So, as is a standard
rule of, of construction in, in
statutes, um, the specific
trumps the general. So the um
class and compensation policy is
a general policy that applies to
all legislative staffers. The
district legislative aid policy
legislative district offices,
policy number 27 is specific to
district legislative aides, uh,
and again, I believe the impetus
for that was really just to get
the program started, to keep
everybody on.
Even footing until it is, you
know, figured out, uh, what is
the scope of work that everybody
is doing in these positions, uh,
and then to revise it from
there.
Uh, representative uh Shaansky.
Thank you, Madam President. um,
in Miss Casebeer.
I support this 4%. I think
that's great. I just hope that
uh when you all do the
assessment, which I the audit,
which I hope will be complete
before the end of the year that
you look at the building
superintendent, um, as well as
Maybe even the assistant
building superintendent, um, and
just looking at the
classifications of these
positions.
The Building superintendent
manages many, many staff, uh,
manages teams, manages
contractors, uh, it takes lots
and lots of random requests from
all of us and from the staff,
uh, and it seems to me that that
position is in the wrong pay
band, um, and potentially
You know, some of, some of that
person's direct reports, um, and
I would hope that you all would
consider bumping that up at
least to an L, um.
Yeah, at least to an ally. I
just think that it's a
phenomenal responsibility, um,
on that individual and their
team. Thank, thank you, Madam
President.
Thank you, Prissypia.
OK, thank you, uh, Madam
President. Thank you, Shawna. So
just, just some real quick
observations that I had also, so
if, um, on the question about
can you ever get to midpoint?
Let me just kind of talk to you
about my back of the envelope
math here real quick. So if
you're, if you look at position
or level A on page 1, if you are
brought in at, at um 75% of the
maximum, that's about 38,000. In
3 years, feasibly if there's a
4% increase.
Every year for 3 years, maybe
it's 3% 1 year, maybe it's 5%
the next year. I know we've done
other things, and that actually
puts you within 3 years at the
midpoint. I just want to make
sure that we, that that's clear.
So you can get to the midpoint,
you know, with that, and then
maybe you were moved into a
custodian too position, which
also increases your pay there.
Then if you go down to to uh
level E where the district
legislative aid is, if you're
brought in at midpoint, I'm
sorry, 75% of the maximum in two
years actually in actually in 2
years, you're right under the
midpoint. In 3 years, you're
about 2000 over the midpoint. So
I just, I, I think this is
actually it's not, it's not bad
what you put together here. I, I
think there's probably a good
plan here. The other, unless I
just didn't see it, but is there
a level 12, and 3 for district
legislative aid.
So I think we probably need to
think about that because
everybody else has got some
steps they can take. It is
feasible that a district
legislative aid could go from,
like, let's say I leave, you
know, decide to go do something
else or don't want to run it and
somebody else comes in. I mean,
it would be really smart if the
person following me probably to
take
keep that person on. So I want
there to be some motivation for
them to just keep climbing, you
know, in terms of their pay
grade and all that stuff. They
shouldn't be stopped and capped
at um 80,000 as an example, if
they go on and, and maybe they
serve the district beyond my, my
leader, my time that I'm in
office or whatever. So why
aren't there, why isn't there a
level 12, and 3 for at the LA
maybe you already said that, but
I didn't hear it. I don't know.
Madam Chair, members of the
council, um,
The district legislative program
is about what, 9 months old
right now. Um, this policy was
adopted, um, approximately a
year ago by council, so a lot of
these details are um being
flushed out, um, different
approaches concerns, uh,
requests are, are coming to the
district office working group's
attention and we're working
through them and, and if it, if
it seems appropriate to bring
that to council to revise the
policy, that certainly will
happen.
Um, having a tier 1 and 2,
that sounds like the future of
the district legislative program
and the district office working
group will be taking a look at
that and what the requirements
would be for each, um, because,
of course, there are experience
there, there must be differences
in experience and maybe
education, maybe different, um,
tasks or job duties of the
individual's performing in order
to progress up uh into a 2
position or a 3 position, but
that absolutely is going to be
looked at.
Um, it is, um, yes, it, it's an
issue of consideration that the
district office working group
will be taking a look at.
Wonderful. Thank you, Madam
President. I think that's
terrific. I think we should
absolutely do that so we can
create some, some real
institutional knowledge here in
some of these roles. And I just,
you know, again, want to just on
the midpoint question, um, I
think it was an excellent point
you could comment in question,
but I couldn't find a position
here that that wasn't within 3
to 5 years where you were at, at
the midpoint. If you got, if
there was a raise available to,
you know, every year. But if
there wasn't,
Then it would be make it very
difficult for you to get to that
midpoint. Thank you, Madam
President.
Thank you, Senator
Representative Doll.
Thank you, Madam President, and
thank you so much for the
presentation. I, I wanted to
know a little bit more about
this exception. Um,
So has that been utilized? like
where it was this body aware of
that? I, I know that I'll let
you answer that first.
Madam Chair, members of the
council, I was looking for that
policy. I do not seem to have it
right in front of me. Um, so the
district office policy
specifically states that a
district legislative aid cannot
be hired at more than 75% of the
max. And actually, some
legislators have hired their
DLAs at lower than that. Um, and
it was my understanding that
that choice was made because
they wanted to see how the
person fit into the role and
what tasks, um, would be
performed by that person as the
program is rolled out. So that's
what that current
he says. The class in
compensation policy, however,
which does broadly or generally
apply to all legislative
staffers. It also limits new
hire salaries to 75% of max,
unless certain exceptions are
met, and the appropriate
approvals are received. So if an
individual um if it's determined
by a hiring manager that the
individual should be hired at
higher than 75% of max, uh, due
to exceptional educational
attainment.
Uh, exceptional experience, uh,
legislative experience, uh, in
New Mexico or elsewhere, so this
person kind of stands out above
the regular pool of candidates
for the position, and, uh,
merits a higher salary, uh, that
can be provided if approvals are
received. So in my case, if I
want to hire somebody above 75%
of max, I need to receive the
pro tem and speaker's approval
to do so. Um, and those
requirements are put into the
policy. Um, so that there are
additional
levels of approval required to
hire above that 75% of max.
Thank you, Madam President, and
thank you for that and where
those exceptions made for any
DLAs.
Uh, Madam Chair, no.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and uh
our secretary, um,
Madam President, sorry, if, if
OK.
So once someone is hired, like I
know some pretty phenomenal DLAs
that have been, including former
rets. That would be considered
extensive knowledge.
Analysts.
People who've worked a lot of
years in the capital, um, and
some of those folks I could not
hire because the pay wasn't high
enough.
Um, so how do we correct that if
this policy was not known of,
and someone would meet those
qualifications.
Madam Chair, members of the
council, the district office,
uh, policy would need to be
revised by this body.
Um
Madam President, unless they
haven't hired their DLA yet.
Um, Madam Chair, the, the
current policy on district
legislative offices, which
includes the policies for
district, uh, legislative aids,
uh, limits hiring at 75% of max.
So in order to um you know,
eliminate that specific
requirement on district
legislative aides, uh, and it
could be formulated just to
remove that uh language from the
policy, then the policy that
would apply to district
legislative aides entirely would
be the class in compensation
plan, which still
limits to 75% of max, but also
provides for exceptions. Thanks.
Thank you, Madam President, and
thank you for that. So the
exception does not apply to DLAs
that at this time.
Madam, um, Madam Chair, that is
correct, at this time. Thank
you. OK, thank you.
Uh, rips and caballero.
Thank you, um, Madam Pain.
So I um wanted to ask.
A couple of questions. One, how
does?
This classification plan and
salary ranges align with the
state personnel offices or are
they, or is it the same
alignment?
Um, because I'm, and the reason
I'm asking that question is
because the state personnel
office just because it's part of
their function, uh, conducts
comparable studies of every
position.
So, every position
It's assumed must meet uh their
Comparable
position within a region, say,
for example, because the
assumption, Madam Chair, is that
we're recruiting.
4 positions regionally and
nationally, so we have to be
competitive. It's just a
standard human resource function
or state personnel office
function in this case. Um, my
assumption is that
The non-seasonal legislative
staff that you're referring to
would be the same, similar basis
if we want to recruit, retain,
then we recruit retain from it.
From a reasonable area.
Which means that we have to do
and have in place comfortable
studies, um, or comparative
studies, whatever, however we
referred to um for these
positions, because we're looking
at local communities as
recruitment area, um, and so
forth. So that's my one question
and then I'll proceed to the
other.
Thank you.
I have several questions I I'd
like her to answer that question
and then I actually only have
one other, Madam Chan. And I
should tell you that we did a
full.
Case study 2 years ago, we had
Clinton Turner, we had numerous
other people, so what you have
here is so much better than what
we used to have, and the only
proposal today is to add 4%.
And I wanted to, to, I'm glad
you brought that up because I
was privy to that, but there may
be members that weren't, so
that's why I'm asking that
question, but if it's answered,
if that, if that's your answer,
but we did, I know we did that.
Madam Chair, members of the
council, uh, to what extent the
plan aligns with the uh state
personnel office, uh, pay bands,
I'm not entirely sure, though I
do understand with the changes,
uh, the increases that happened
last year. Um, that was largely
intent of it to uh maintain the
legislative salaries
competitive, uh, within, within
the state, and that would
include executive and, and
judicial um offices. I do know
that the state personnel office
um is at least for
compositions moving away from
tears and just looking at a very
large pay band. Um, so I think
that's something that's
interesting and, and maybe
worthy of exploration. Thank
you, Madam Chair. I mean, thank
you and thank you, Madam Chair,
and thank you for bringing that
up because that was of major
concern to us. The next question
I have is um
What happens to sin since the
district legislative aides are
hired by the legislators. What
happens to the DLAs should a
member, um,
That hired them, um, leave their
position for whatever reason.
What happens to
So Madam Chair, members of the
council. So in the uh
legislative district offices
policy, um, in subsection M, it
does state that the Office of
the Legislature, legislature
becomes vacant for any reason,
the respective leadership office
shall be responsible for
supervising and directing the
work of the affected DLA until
the vacancy is filled, the new
legislator may decide whether to
retain the district legislative
aid or request a new aid, in
which case the previous aid may
be terminated.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair,
thank you for that
clarification, and I would hope
that you would make that
clarification clear with the
whomever the DLAs meet with on a
regular basis because they're
understanding was that their
position would not be retained,
uh, either temporarily or
otherwise. And so it seems to be
a a major concern right now.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Any other comments,
say a word that we adopt the
proposed 4% increase to the
classification plant and salary
ranges.
a second.
Is there any further discussion?
Is there any opposition to
adopting 4% increaseing none, we
have done that.
At this point in time, um,
Know where he is.
Uh, I will accept a motion from
anyone on going into executive
session to only discuss uh
security issues for legislators.
So Madam President.
All right, so Jarrett, if you
will call the roll on a motion
to move into executive session.
To discuss only safety of
legislators.
Representative Armstrong.
Representative Armstrong is yes.
Senator Campos, yes, Senator
Campos, yes.
Representative Chandler.
Representative Chandler is yes.
Representative
Representative Doo is yes.
Senator Doig,
Senator do is yes.
Senator David Gallegos
David Dale says yes.
Representative Doringalegos.
which is, yes, uh,
Representatives Hockman B. Hill
and Martinez are absent,
Senatorparillo.
Yes,
yes. Senator Sheriff.
Senator Sher, yes,
Representative Sapansky. Yes.
Senator Worth, yes,
Senator, yes, Senator Woods.
Woods is yes.
Mr. Speaker is not in the room
at the moment, Madam Prote. Yes.
Motion carriage.
All right, so, um, we will go
into executive session of our
staff will undo us from.
The Internet and everyone except
her staff.
