but also our presentation after
lunch on the public school
insurance and increasing
employee share. We appreciate
you being here with the LESC if,
uh, people would like to do, to
participate in public comment,
please come up to one of the
microphones, have a seat, uh,
push the red button, then you
have up to 2 minutes. Anybody in
public comment get sign in
sheet, OK, we're getting the
sign-in sheet then, but please,
if you'd like to start while
they're doing that, that would
be great. Thank you.
Hi, I'm Bethany Jarrell. I'm a
high school CTE teacher in
Alamogordo, and I'm the
president-elect of NEA New
Mexico as a union of educators,
our students' future and success
is at the heart of everything we
do. That said, the well-being of
our educators and education
support professionals is
essential to that success. To
maintain high quality
instruction and support for
students. We must retain our
professionals in the field.
This is critical to addressing
the ongoing education, educator
shortage in New Mexico.
One of the most significant
challenges our members face is
the rising cost of healthcare
premiums. NEA New Mexico is
advocating for state to cover
80% of healthcare premiums for
educators.
In the last legislative session,
all public employees with the
exception of educators, received
an 80/20 contribution structure.
An effort that we supported and
testified in favor of because we
believe that all workers, union
or non-union, public or private
deserve access to affordable
health care.
Several of our members are here
today to share how the high cost
of insurance premiums is
impacting their lives.
We look forward to the LESC
report on this issue and hope
that the legislature will work
with NEA New Mexico to pass
legislation that provides
meaningful relief to K-12 and
higher ed professionals. Thank
you for your time and attention.
Thank you.
John, I, I see you're up there.
Uh, we also
Others want to line up, stand
rounds, Kelly.
Valeria or valerie.
Go ahead, John. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee.
My name is John Durch. I'm with
the American Federation of
Teachers in New Mexico here to
speak specifically to item
number 9, the next item on your
agenda regarding increased
healthcare uh coverage and sort
of contemplating uh parity with
other state workers. Um, the
bill that, uh, President Gerald
referenced Senvie 376. We also
supported that effort for many
of the same reasons. And a
couple of years ago, um, when
the LESC really pushed for a
higher
share of uh coverage for our
lowest paid workers in our
schools are classified workers.
That was really life changing
thing for many of our bus
drivers, or EAs, that was money
back into their pocket with a
fairer and more equitable, um,
healthcare share covered by
their employer. We're here also
to advocate um for many of those
things for the folks who are
maybe more advanced in their
career or some of our uh
certified teachers in K-12
settings. The other thing that
what your
contemplating would have a
benefit for some of our higher
ed instructors as well, because
when you consider NIMSA, we're
talking about Northern College.
We're talking about highlands,
we're talking about some of
those other institutions that
serve educators in that stage of
the public continuum. So we want
to mostly say thank you for
putting this on your interim
work plan. Thank you for kind of
keeping that conversation around
parity alive, and we hope to
work with all of you to pursue
this legislation in the coming
session. One thing I want to add
before I
uh stop my comments is a couple
of years ago when that split was
changed to 80/20 for classified
educators. You also remove the
cap that prevented districts and
institutions from going above
that 80/20 split. As you know in
the uh report that you're about
to hear, a lot of districts have
pursued that and making that
local choice to pay a higher
percentage, so the need is out
there, the one is out there. So
just keep your foot on the gas
and keep moving forward on this
issue. Thank you.
Thank you, John. Others.
You know, that are either on the
list, you know, I can call off
the list, but if people just
want to come up, that, that'll
work too. You have up to 2
minutes. Thank you.
Can y'all hear me OK?
Ah, how to folks. My name is
Bruno and I'm a proud instructor
from Ruidoso High School. The
10th Amendment guarantees all
rights, not enumerated within
the Constitution belong to the
states. This includes the rights
to education. It is not the job
of the federal government to see
to the education of New Mexico
citizens, it is yours.
And as we consistently rank 50th
in education, we are not doing a
very good job.
Yet you can change this.
Education begins at home, and it
is formalized in the classroom,
but without retaining good
teachers and qualified staff,
the lessons won't be learned. In
Ruidoso, we learned that 80/20
leads to incredible teacher
attention and student
achievement. Provide your
teachers an incentive to stick
around and we'll storm our way
out of 50th. We ask for a
pittance, a mere pittance to
invest in your teachers to
entice qualified.
individuals and to ensure the
strength of our democracy. An
educated population needs
teachers who can afford peace of
mind and basic necessities.
Hence AT20. Politics aside, I
ask that when you vote, you vote
with the wisdom of the future
and the insight of the past in
mind. The only investment that
pays for itself is education,
education, education.
Thanks and have a good day.
Thank you. Yes, sir. Brett,
please come up.
Yes
I, I love the energy.
All righty. Uh, hello, my name
is Brent Clay. I am a school
social worker, clinical social
worker. I've been in social
work, uh, 26 years of those 26
years, 22 have been in schools.
I am in the discipline of
education. I work with teachers,
I work for parents, and I hear
the stories. I, I, I know what
it, what it takes to continue to
put food on the table and to get
some relief uh with the 80/20
that helps to provide that
relief to.
our teachers, to our educators
across the board so that they
are better equipped to, to face
the challenges of life. Uh, I'm,
as any of you that may be
parents, you know that you're
most precious resource is your
family, and I'll use the example
of a bus driver. I give bus
drivers so much, uh, credit and
honor because they transport our
most precious resource around,
but in doing so, uh, they too
have a story. I, as a social
worker, I am paid well and I'm
grateful for that.
But I also care about people. I
have a twin brother and when I
was a little boy, my aunt told
me that I would always take my
bottle and give it to my brother
and then go back and get mine.
Always, you, you don't teach
that it's just how it is and
I've always had that heart and
I'm here today because I have a
heart for people. I am in the
caring profession of social
work, but I am among those who
care what your teachers, and we
would like, you know, the 80/20
because it allows for uh
competition. It allows for.
attention and it provides some
relief, OK, some relief is what
we're after, and I would like to
say thank you for your time and
I appreciate it.
Thank you, Brent.
Someone else, anyone else
interested in speaking? Yes,
ma'am, please come up.
Denise Dawson, Roswell Education
Association. I'm a librarian at
Sierra Middle School, so I'm a
very brave individual. I teach
middle school.
I want to talk to you about
retirement.
Because that's what I did in
2014. I retired.
Because I could. I'd put my time
in. I was 60 years old. I
decided to retire.
And I lived on retirement.
And I came back to work in 3
years because I couldn't live on
retirement.
I couldn't own my own home.
couldn't pay for a decent car. I
couldn't do anything on
retirement.
Because I retired.
After receiving a $1 a year
raised for probably about 8, 10
years, $1 a year every year.
Thanks, guys. I really
appreciate that one.
And so I had to come back to
work. I came back to work at
twice.
What I went
Away at
Twice
So that I could survive.
I've been working 8 years. I'm
tired. I'm 71 years old almost.
When are you guys going to
Let us have enough money to
survive. That's all we're
asking. And I'm still paying
retirement, even though I will
never see that money.
I'm still paying retirement
cause I'm working full time.
And I've done it for 8 years,
and I'm exhausted.
Thank you. Anyone else?
Stan, I know you were on the
list.
You
Well, good afternoon, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee stand around school
superintendents Association,
coalition of Educational
Leaders, great to have you in
Roswell. They have to drive
quite as far as I usually do to
Santa Fe. So it's great to have
you down here, uh, Mr. Chairman,
you asked a question yesterday,
uh, as a committee, and the
question was, why do you have
the turnover you have in
superintendents?
OK, and you got an answer from
three of my superintendents
which were on, but let me
suggest a little additional
information you might need to
have. In the last 42 months, we
replaced 76 of the 89
superintendents in New Mexico.
That kind of now that turnover
rate is very high. It's been
very high for a number of years.
It's slowing down, I'll tell
you, Mr. Chairman, but here's,
here are a couple of things I'd
like to share with the committee
in the in the limited time we
have.
When a board interrupts a
superintendent's contract by
terminating the contract early.
Which is what's happening in
many of those cases.
We have a problem.
I suggest we need to amend the
statute.
To put an intervener into those
kinds of disputes that occur. We
do it in teaching.
I think we might need to do it
for superintendent. We have a
group of people who, Mr.
Chairman, you're one of those is
a certified master school board
member.
And I would suggest, Mr.
Chairman, that that might be
part of the body along with
perhaps some some retired
superintendents that could do
the dutiful job of intervening
in that matter and seeing if we
can first solve the problem that
is there before you go to the
termination because what we need
to do is not have the
interruption in leadership that
that creates. Mr. Chairman, how
much longer do I have? OK, final
point then, Mr. Chairman, is
this, um, I would recommend that
we also
Provide the Secretary of
Education, the ability to remove
individual board members for
cause rather than have to remove
an entire war. Thank you.
Thank you.
Anyone else in public comment
who would like, please come up.
We have some other people that
had put their name on here that
haven't come up, so you don't
have to, but if you would like,
you have up to 2 minutes. OK.
to address. Thank you.
OK,
is that better?
I guess I'm the clean up batter.
All right. Good afternoon, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee. Thank you for letting
us speak to you for just a
minute. My name is Diy Maker and
I'm here representing the
Lovington Board of Education and
I'm joined today by our
superintendent Pam Quonnis.
Today we want to have a brief
minute to talk to you about time
in regards to education.
When you look at legislation and
directives from the public
education department in all
areas, instructional learning,
professional development,
certification, renewals, the
time is measured in hours. The
one exception to that is the
K-12 plus initiative, which is
measured in days. And so what
we're here to ask about today is
the possibility of looking at
aligning it with systems not
only in education but across our
state, um.
in other, uh, industries, any
kind of uh accountability or
funding is measured through
hours and we have prepared a
handout that will share um for
the committee, but
By moving and and those of you
that are familiar with uh K-12
Plus, the tier one and tier 2
simply changing that to ours
would provide some flexibility
for districts to structure their
school day as well as their
calendar to best meet the needs
of their community and um having
briefly spoken with some other
board members in both 5 day and
4 day districts they are
interested in this.
We've had legislators already
offered to draft legislation,
um, I, I personally am not a fan
of surprises, OK, and so we
wanted to be sure and keep you
guys in the loop on this, but we
would ask for your support
because strengthening that
through that flexibility we
believe will impact our kids in
a positive way. So thank you
very much
for yourintendent, you can have
2 minutes too if you'd like.
Yeah
You know stuff, yeah.
So, um, you know, just coming
together with, um, the board
president. Um, I'm very
fortunate. I am one of those
fortunate superintendents that
has a wonderful board and we're
not afraid about working harder.
And longer, but it's just a
little confusing when the law
states the hours and K12+
districts are being, um, held to
the days and uh we will begin
school on July twenty-ninth.
First day of school for
students.
We're about to turn the calendar
page to July.
And um,
We just want a little bit more
flexibility of what we do. We
need this funding that the K-12
plus um grant provides and, uh,
without that, we're looking at
the tune of $3.8 million if we
don't do this, that affects
kids, the bottom line. It
affects our kids and it affects
our staff members, um, so just
asking you guys to just take a
little consideration to
re-looking at what K-12 plus
funding is. We're a tier 2
district, so, um, we
appreciate your time. We do have
a handout that we would love for
you guys to, um, have, and uh we
are available for questions if
you want to call us or email us,
we will be more than happy to
have a conversation with you. So
thank you for the time.
Thank you and thank you for, for
being here and speaking with us.
Anyone else? last chance, anyone
else wanna address us for up to
2 minutes.
Going once, going twice.
OK.
Mr. Director, we are back to the
regular agenda, um, and I know
many of you are here for this
topic, uh, the public school
insurance and increasing the
employer's share and uh Daniel
Estupian, uh fiscal analyst is
doing the presentation for this.
So Daniel Connor, whenever you
all are ready.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee. My name is Daniel and
I cover public school finance
for the LESC joined by Connor
Hicks, who's gonna be moving to
the slides, um, we're also
joined by Patrick Sandoval from
NEMCA.
Uh, we are now on item 9 of your
binder with a brief titled
Public School Health Insurance,
making sure everyone's on item
9.
Uh, last year in Silver City,
you heard a presentation on
health insurance from me, where
we talked about the increases in
premiums for public school
employees over the last few
years, uh, some of the reasons
that have caused those increases
in premiums and the impact
they've had on public school
employees.
In the last few years, uh, you
all have focused on building the
educator workforce by providing
strong increases in
compensation, and those
investments have gone a long way
toward making a career in public
schools, uh, a financially
viable option for a lot more
people.
So as another step in your
long-term vision around building
the educator workforce, uh, the
LESC work plan includes a
discussion on an 80/20 premium
cost share model for all public
school employees.
Uh, 80/20 has been a uh
recurring topic for you all for
a while now, uh, but we haven't
had as a committee, a standalone
presentation on 80/20 as a
concept and how it would impact
individual employees or what it
would cost.
So our goal for today is to
really flesh out the problem
that we're seeing with premiums
and how they're impacting uh
school employees on an
individual level.
Uh, how you all and NIMSA and
APS have responded to those
challenges and then discuss how
80/20 could alleviate the burden
of premiums on public school
employees.
So we're gonna start uh with
context for our new members, uh,
starting with page one of the
brief.
Uh, public employees in New
Mexico have access to insurance
through 3 separate entities
including the Healthcare
Authority for state employees.
APS for APS employees and NEMCA
for all other public school
employees. Uh, each entity is
independence and they design
their own plans for their own
employees and set their own
premiums.
In table one, we have a
comparison of the employee
portion of premiums for those
three entities.
And this table uses premiums for
a family plan.
Uh, since many of our public
employees have spouses or kids.
Uh, so you'll see in the table
that an FY 26, there will be
some pretty significant
disparities in the employee
share of premiums between state
employees and public school
employees.
And we'll talk more about that
in the brief, uh, but this gives
you an idea of the scale of the
premiums that are paid uh by
employees.
Below the table is a section on
how you all fund public school
insurance, uh, every few years
and MCI and APS review their
their health plans to ensure
they're responsive to employee
needs.
And every year they prepare
projections of their claim
expenses and based on those
projections, they set premiums
for the following year.
And every year, uh, your staff
here at LESC recommends that you
all make an appropriation to the
SCG.
To cover the employer portion of
those premium increases.
And for FY 26, just for context,
you all appropriate an
additional $38.2 million to the
SCG to pay for the employer
portion of premium increases at
NIMSA and APS.
On page 2,
Uh, we have a graph showing the
annual increases in NIMSA and
APS premium since 2016.
And you'll see that premium
increases those annual premium
increases have accelerated
pretty significantly in recent
years, with a 10% increase for
NEMSA and almost 14% for APS in
FY 26.
In the next section, we have
context on how you all have
responded to those increases in
premiums, primarily by
offsetting the increases through
increases to compensation.
Uh, since FY20, you all have
invested around $730 million in
additional recurring funding for
public school, uh, personnel
compensation.
And 2 on page 2 has the annual
percentage increases in
compensation, you all have
enacted in the last few years.
Uh, but this graph doesn't
include the increases in minimum
salaries that you all have
passed most recently with the
$5000 increase to those minimums
in FY 26.
On this page,
You can pretty easily see how
premium increases are pretty
significantly exceeding your
increases to compensation, with
a 4% increase to compensation in
FY 26 compared to between 10 and
14% increases in premiums, uh,
in APS and MCI.
Uh, some of the reasons that are
driving those premium increases
have a lot to do with national
trends around chronic diseases
like cancer and COPD, uh, more
people using specific
prescription drugs, and the
large cost that NIMSA incurred
during the pandemic.
And with all those costs
happening at once, uh, NEMCS
specifically has been enacting
larger premium increases to
rebuild their fund balance to a
more sustainable level.
Uh, we talked about the NIMSI
fundal issue last year in Silver
City, and how the premium
increases needed to rebuild that
fund. We're going to place a
pretty big burden on employees.
So last October, LESC
recommended to you all that you
make an appropriation to rebuild
that fund.
So you could stabilize the fund
and bring those future premium
increases down.
And you all did that during this
year's session with a $65
million appropriation to NEMCA's
fund balance and House Bill 2.
And you'll see the impact of
that in figure 3 on page 3.
Uh, the blue line.
Is the annual premium increases
the NIMSA had projected before
the session.
The red line is the new
projection after you all
appropriate that $65 million to
their fund balance. So as you
can see in the graph, overall,
your appropriation to that fund
balance brought the FY 26
projected premium increase down
from almost 20% to below 10%.
But obviously, uh, premium
increases of between 7 and 8% in
those future years is still not
where we want to be, but the
investments that you all have
already made are softening those
premium increases in the short
term.
And laying the foundation for
more sustainable increases in
the long term.
So
While you all have been
increasing compensation and
stabilizing NIMSA's fund
balance. NISA has been focused
on reducing future premiums by
reducing their costs.
Uh, this year they revised their
plan designs and you'll see
those changes in table 2, with
changes to deductibles, copays,
and co-insurance rates. NIMSia
has also made substantial
changes to their low option plan
and dropped another plan
entirely.
And those changes are expected
to save NIMSA $5.6 million in FY
26 and $12.8 million in FY 27.
On page 4, APS is also reducing
their health costs by
eliminating their PPO plans and
only offering to EPO plans and
the consequence, the negative
consequence there is that those
EPO plans limit APS employees to
coverage in their network,
unlike a PPO plan where you can
access out of network providers.
But overall, uh there's been a
pretty comprehensive effort
statewide to reduce premium. Can
I interrupt? What's an EPO, uh,
Mr. Chairman I don't know that
acronym right off.
Go back. I believe it's an uh
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, it's an exclusive
provider organizational plan. So
an EPO plan just for context
limits you to providers that are
in your network, a PPO plan has
broader access to providers
outside of your network.
Thank you.
So, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, overall, there's been
a pretty comprehensive effort
statewide to reduce premium
increases for public school
employees. And we think here at
the LESC that those efforts have
been effective in stabilizing
premium increases over the next
few years.
But unfortunately, despite all
those comprehensive efforts,
we're still at a point where
premiums are burdening many of
our public school employees, and
you saw that on page one, where
a level one teacher with the
family making $55,000 pays $7000
for their health insurance every
year.
Uh
In your collective goal in the
LESC roadmap around building the
educator workforce, especially
in our rural communities and
towns like Roswell, um,
expecting our new teachers to
pay $7000 for their insurance is
probably not how we're going to
get to our goal of building the
educator workforce.
And this last session, you all
recognize that same problem with
uh state employees.
Uh, when you pass Senate Bill
376.
That bill did a lot of different
things, but it's two main goals
were to 1 stabilize the state
employee health fund so that it
would no longer require
appropriations from the general
fund.
And 2, increasing the
affordability of health
insurance for state employees.
To achieve the second goal
around affordability, uh, Senate
Bill 376 abolished the salary
tiers for premium contributions,
uh, we're beginning in FY 26
state all state employees will
pay a maximum of 20% of their
premiums, regardless of their
income.
The bill did not, however, as
you heard during public comment,
include public school employees.
And so public school employees
will continue to pay premiums
based on their salaries.
And we have those tiers, those
salary tiers and table 3, where
public school employees earning
below $50,000 each year, pay a
maximum of 20% of their health
premium. Those earning between
$5000 and $60,000 pay up to 30%,
and those earning $60,000 or
more, pay up to 40% of their
premium.
And again, starting in FY 26,
all state employees will pay up
to 20% of their premium, and
that is reflected in the 2nd
column in the table.
And I think it's important to
say that these are just
maximums, a district or a
charter school can choose to use
their operational funding to pay
for more of their employees'
premiums and 30 already do.
With 21 district, one charter
school, paying 100% of their
employees' premiums and 14
already having an 80/20 cost
share model in place.
And that is important to know
because as you heard during
public comment, it tells us as
staff, you as members, that
districts and charter schools
are finding that premiums are so
important to the recruitment and
retention.
That their school boards and
their charter school governing
bodies are choosing to make
trade-offs in their budgets to
be able to pay more of their
employees' premiums.
I'm going to pause there for a
brief moment.
Because when you all passed
Senate Bill 376, this last
session, you were clear to us as
staff that you wanted a
two-pronged approach to stay
employee health benefits.
You wanted the insurance
programs to be more sustainable.
And you also want the benefits
to be affordable to stay
employees, and you achieved both
of those goals in Senate Bill
376.
When it comes to K-12, we as
staff believe those two goals
still apply.
And we believe you all have made
Uh, you all have achieved goal
one around sustainability.
And you all have done that by
stabilizing NEMCS fund balance
and bringing down those future
premium increases as well as
with the cost containment
measures that were passed by
both NEMSA and APS.
There's going to be a lot more
to do around cost containment.
But we're in a much more
sustainable place right now than
we were even a year ago when it
came to insurance premiums.
So based on the progress that
we're seeing around
sustainability in public school
insurance, uh, we as staff are
moving on to goal too, around
affordability.
And you all as members have been
very clear with us that 80/20 is
your collective goal, collective
long term goal, and so that's
the framework that's guiding our
affordability conversation,
starting on page 5.
If you look at table 4, we have
the cost estimate for an 80/20
cost share model for all public
school employees.
Uh, there are 2 cost estimates
here, and I'm going to walk
through each of them and
hopefully the explanation is
clear because it's a little
confusing.
Um
I mentioned before that some
districts in charter schools
already do an 80/20 cost share
model or they pay some portion
of their employees' premiums
above what statute requires.
And they've made trade-offs in
their budgets to make that
happen.
That $51.1 million in column 2.
Is the cost to bring all
districts and charters from
their current cost share models
to 80/20.
So here we're saying the cost of
8020 to a district or a charter
school that already has 80/20.
is $0 because they're already
there.
In column 3.
We included a second cost
estimate, and this number
assumes that no district and no
charter school is paying for
more of their employees'
premiums and is required in
statute.
In that scenario, it would cost
$74 million to get to 80/20,
about 22 $23 million higher than
the prior cost estimate.
The table also includes the cost
estimates for higher education
and some other entities.
Obviously, LESE is focused on
K-12, we're only talking about
K-12.
So I hope the difference between
the two numbers makes sense, but
it's basically two different
philosophies around how we
define cost in the 80/20
conversation. And if you all
decide to pursue 80/20 in the
upcoming session. We can talk
more about the nuances between
the two, cost estimates.
But for now
Uh, we often talk about 80/20 in
some pretty broad strokes, and
we usually don't talk about it
and how it would impact
individual people.
And so if you move down on page
5, we have a section on the
impact of 8020 to public school
to individual public school
employees.
Each table in the rest of the
brief uses family health plan
premiums to estimate savings and
the numbers will vary for people
who don't have family plans.
But in table 5,
Uh, we have an estimate of what
a NIMsia covered employee would
save in premiums if 80/20 were
enacted.
With $2358 in savings for those
earning between 50 and $60,000.
And those earning above $60,000
would say $4,007016.
If you turn the page,
We have the impact of 80/20 to
APS covered employees.
With savings of $2,324 for those
earning between $500 and $60,000
and savings of $4,648 for those
earning above $60,000.
Uh, in both tables you'll see
that those earning below $50,000
would not be impacted because
they already have an 80/20 cost
share model in statute.
In table 7, I did some savings
estimates for teachers based on
the minimum salaries of their
licensure level.
A level one teacher with a NIMSA
family plan would save about
$2,0358 in premiums a year.
Or about 4% of their minimum
salary.
And a level 2 and 3 teacher
would save $4,0717 or between 6
and 7% of their minimum
salaries.
So those are obviously some
pretty big savings for our
public school employees with
8020, especially those with
families, uh, but these tables
also got me thinking about the
unintended impacts of how we
structure premium cost shares
and the most obvious as I'm
looking at at page 5 is the jolt
in premiums between level one
and level 2 teachers in table 7,
where we're going to be bringing
our new teachers at $55,000 in
FY 26, and if we don't lose them
in those first few years, and
they moved to level 2, they
receive a higher minimum salary,
but they also get an extra $2000
a year in premiums.
Or say I'm a level one teacher
earning $55,000 in a school that
does not do K-12 plus, and the
next school year, my school says
they want to do K-12 plus and
I'll get more money for those
extra days. If those extra days
push me above $60,000 K12 Plus
might have just cost me a lot
more in premiums.
Uh, but that K12 plus thing only
impacts level one. It doesn't
impact level 2 and 3.
So
The more you reflect on it, the
more you realize that the
current structure of insurance
premiums that we have in statue
may actually be working against
us in terms of retention
specifically.
And people react pretty strongly
to changes in the amount of
premiums they pay because the
last time you all adjusted the
percentage of premiums that are
paid by public school employees
in 2023. 837 additional people
signed up for insurance through
NIMSA.
So there were people in our
schools coming to work every day
to teach kids. And the whole
time they couldn't afford
insurance.
And because of an investment
that you all made in the SCG to
lower those premium shares, 837
additional people got health
insurance.
And that is a pretty powerful
example of why we're talking
about 80/20 for public school
employees. We're not trying to
just achieve parity which they
employees for the sake of
equity, uh, we're trying to
build the high quality educator
workforce we need to realize the
outcomes that you all want to
see in our schools.
In our current approach to
health premiums is likely not
helping us get there as a state.
So for that reason, we have one
policy and budget consideration
in the brief that reads the
legislature could assess the
feasibility of an 80/20 health
premium cost share model for
public school employees. Um,
there are a few things in flux
at the federal level, which I'll
talk more about after this
presentation that may impact uh
the revenue that comes into the
state, uh, or that might require
some changes in what you all
support with General Fund
dollars. So that's why we're not
making a firm recommendation.
on 80/20 before the revenue
estimates in August, but if we
get directions from you all that
you want us to bring 80/20 as a
formal budget and policy
recommendation for FY 27.
Uh, we'll bring that back to you
all when we start the budget
process later in the interim.
That should do it for me. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. Oh, and we
also have uh NICS staff, uh,
here to help answer any
questions that you may all may
have.
Thank you, Daniel. As always, a
very good in-depth, uh, analysis
of things, uh, we're open for
questions, uh, representative
Mirabal Moya.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you, Daniel, so much. Um, this
is a huge
Um, I'm, I'm so very thankful
that you, that you did this, uh,
brief because, um, I for one,
when, um, and I can't, uh,
remember the, the actual, uh,
number of the, what was it, HP
what?
The
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Moya, I believe it was House
Bill 533 533. Um, when, when
that came and, and I saw that it
was state employees, um, I
immediately asked, um,
That, um.
You know, is it all? And when I
was told that it was everyone
except for educators, I was
really irritated, um, because,
um, because I've I've only been
here a few years and and the
amount of time that I've been
here, um, most of the feedback
that I get from the people that
don't want to do it is, well,
it's not fair for all of the
state employees if we pay for
educator's insurance, it's not,
it's not fair that we don't pay
for um other state employees,
uh, premiums and, um, and, and I
used to argue that, um.
I wish that educators would get
the same amount of premiums as
other state employees, that
would be great. Um, that would
be enough right there. Um, so
I'm, I'm really hoping and what
I got on the answer last year
was like, oh, educators are next
year.
Um, we'll, we're gonna do the
state employees this year, but
educators are next year. And,
but, uh, but unfortunately, I've
heard that several times
already, so, um, so I'm, I
really think it's time, um, I
was, uh, when I, you're looking
at level 2 and level 3,
the, the amount to go from a
level 1 to a level 2 premium,
um.
If this would go to 80 and
80/20, I did the math, uh,
that's $181 a paycheck that they
would get back.
That's huge, especially for
these, for these, um.
Um, teachers, which again, many
of them have a family.
Um, so, and, and, and.
I agree with you. I, I, I 100%
agree with your assessment of
this is a barrier to our
retention, because I have spoken
to several of my, um,
Colleagues that are on the verge
of do I retire, do I not? And if
they got help with insurance,
they probably wouldn't, and
these are excellent teachers and
administrators that, that, um,
That very well could, um, um,
uh, get out of it, but we don't
want them to because they're
very good at their job, and we
don't need, and we don't need
that vacancy, right? Um, so if
this is something that can keep
them here and working and
educating our, our, our students
because it helps them, um,
Uh, make ends meet, then that
would be like I, I don't
understand why we keep pushing
it and kicking the can down the
road. Uh, so it's very timely.
Thank you. I hopefully we can
get it done this session. Thank
you.
Thank you. Other questions
committee.
But he's just looking at each
other. I'll make a couple of
questions and and comments, uh.
Oh yeah, I ask, um, our
director, what are the current
cash balances that we have as a
state, um, people hear me say
all the time, we are a wealthy
state. We have lots of money,
cash balances this year, 32% on
a $3.5 billion budget.
What that means is each 1% of
cash balance is worth about $100
million. We could easily go from
32% cash balances to 31% cash
balances and pay the total cost.
was on here on one of these,
these ones of the, you know,
$80.1 million and would just
lower the cash balances we have
as a state from 32 to 31.25%
would hardly be noticed.
I think we really need to be
pushing to do this, um, the one
thing that worries me, and I
guess, you know, I, I'm curious
from NEA AFT is, I can already
hear that it's almost like,
well, do you want a salary
increase or do you want the
premium increase.
My personal feeling, yes, we
want both, it ought to be both.
But I'm, but we're likely to
hear from the finance committee.
It's like, well, you.
One, you know, the effective uh
increase of, you know, 6+%.
On the premium, you know, by
having uh, your healthcare at
80/20, or do you want the salary
increase.
My personal thing, I want to
fight for both, uh, cause I
think we ought to be doing both,
but be aware of that's gonna be
one of the arguments against
Doing this is not giving both
because that would be an
effective increase of 10%, which
we ought to be giving you 12%
increase over effective, but
that's
We don't hear that from
everybody else, um.
I, I guess the one question I
have is more is for the NIMsia.
We're all worried about the
increased healthcare costs is
NIMSA doing anything as far as
wellness programs to reduce the
payouts by encouraging people to
exercise more, to lose weight,
to not smoke, to, you know, all
of those kinds of positive
things to, to increase wellness
and thus reduce costs. What
sorts of things are we doing on
that side?
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee. Yes, we are
doing um numerous wellness
initiatives. One initiative that
we're looking into and we hope
to implement here in the very
near future, probably in the
next couple of months,
hopefully.
Is a musculoskeletal solution
that can be done via device to
where members that have chronic
back pain or knee pain can do
physical therapy from their home
and be monitored and still be
able to communicate with the
physical therapist. And we also
are looking for a single
platform for wellness program
access. So what that would do is
it would take all our wellness
programs into a single platform,
hopefully one application
regardless of carrier and
and open to all our members,
whether that's Blue Cross Blue
Shield, whether that's
Presbyterian, and then any other
initiatives that we have like
the Transformed diabetes care
and hypertension program.
That's when we have through CVS.
So what that program does is it
connects your device and it
monitors sugar levels, and
monitors hypertension levels. It
connects you with the clinician
and as soon as your levels get
out of range, they communicate
with the member and they see why
they're out of range and they
try and get them back into the
normal balance. Those are just
some that we're doing. We also
have several mental health
programs available. Thank you.
And that's sort of an aside to
the 80/20. We ought to have the
8020, but just in general.
You know, doing more promoting
wellness rather than just
dealing with chronic problems
and disease and, and things of
that sort, um, again, I guess
I'm asking members, other
members have questions,
comments?
Representative, please go ahead.
Thanks, Mr. Chair.
There's been a huge rise in
weight loss drugs, which I
understand are very expensive
versus my pink salt freebie,
which doesn't seem to be
working. Um.
Are there things like that that
can
What's the impact of some of
those specific very expensive
drugs. They're covered, aren't
they?
No, they're not covered.
Representative Garrett, NEMsey
has been doing some work on
those weight loss prescription
drugs and I'll let Patrick speak
to it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative So Nimsia does
cover GLP ones.
Which for weight loss and for
diabetes. Right now, we are
covering those drugs and because
of the passage of Senate Bill
51, I believe, last legislative
session or the session before
those drugs for the most part
depending on condition or
freedom members. So those drugs
do come with a cost of an
average of about 11,000 to $1200
to $1200 per drug. However, on
the flip side of that, we are
seeing a rebate of about 500 to
$600 per drug.
So the net of those drugs is
about $600. So one thing we're
looking at right now for those
drugs is those drugs.
are not bad drugs. They're good
drugs for our members. They help
lower weight loss. They help
control diabetes and hopefully
they help solve problems that
can occur down the road, but
what's missing right now is a
mental health component for
those drugs.
We need to be able to allow,
allow our members to learn how
to use the drug, how to interact
with the drug, how to change
their habits, especially when it
comes to diet, to exercise, and
how to eventually one day be
able to balance the weight loss
and keep up the positive
behaviors.
Thank you.
And I just, I mean, there's some
chronic diseases that
We have to cover.
But I, I'm just wondering how
different companies deal with
it. Thank you.
Numbers other questions.
We hear regularly about access
to healthcare. Is that driven up
the costs and prices of things
or is that just an aside, that's
not affecting insurance rates,
do we know?
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, NIMSA has HMO
plans, so our plans are open
access plans. We don't really
limit the network. We did have
an EPO plan, but we only had
like 300 members, so we decided
to remove the plan, but with an
HMO plan, we incur more cost
than a PPO or an EPO plan, but
the reason why we have them is
because we have scattered access
all around the state and it's
more convenient for members.
But they do cost a little bit
more.
Thank you, and I, I know access,
you know, it's one thing to have
insurance coverage, but if
there's nobody to go to that
doesn't do anyone much good, um.
It sounds like and I almost wish
because I've heard the same
things, it's like next year, I
wish I'd written down the names
of the people that told me that,
so that I can kind of hold it up
in front of them when they're
like, well, you know, maybe next
year, you know, it's like, well,
we've heard that for a couple of
years, um, and that I hope, um,
you know, and as we get closer
that this committee will look at
drafting legislation for an
80/20 split as coming out of
this committee as endorsed
legislation, uh, that's.
My wish, it's up to the
committee as to whether we
actually do that, but I see you
nodding, I, I may task you with
if you'll work with council
service about, you know, getting
that started or what that might
look like, uh, representative
for us to, is it usually our
November and December meetings
when we look at endorsed
legislation out of this
committee.
Other questions, comments?
If not, Daniel, as always, a
wonderful presentation with lots
of depth and and also policy
recommendations at the end. I
appreciate it.
We are way ahead of schedule.
So yeah, yes, senator. Oh yeah.
Please go ahead.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This is
totally not.
In regard to that, but it's in
regard to teachers out there
that do make a difference.
Mr. Chairman, it doesn't matter
if there's a family that is in
poverty.
Their child still has the
ability to make more of their
life than ever before in today's
society.
And this is about.
Couple that I know that have 3
daughters.
Uh, the mother, the dad works at
a local nursing home here is
elder care provider. The mother
works at one of the school
cafeterias says she also cleans
houses for a living.
Ah, Their eldest daughter was
salutatorian of her class.
Um, she is now a doctor. She
received a full scholarship and
she is now a doctor.
The second daughter, I think
finished 4th in her class.
And she is now a stockbroker in
Denver, Colorado.
And the youngest child is still
in school.
And this friend of mine, the
mother.
Tell me that her daughter was
being bullied because she was
smarter than the rest of the
kids in her class.
And that
Just went all over me.
I went to a local teacher that I
know that taught at the same
school where this young lady
went to school.
And I said I might need some
help with something.
And Mr. Chairman, this is where
Whenever I brag on teachers, I
do it for a reason, and that
teacher happens to be in the
room today, and I would like for
Miss Laura Ridge to please stand
up.
And she is the lady.
She is the lady that
This young lady was on the verge
of not wanting to go back to
school because of the bullying
that was going on.
And through the.
Delicate nature of what Miss
Ridge did, this young lady.
Made it through there and she is
at the top of her class right
now as we speak, so.
To all you teachers out there.
You do make a difference in a
child's life, and I want to
commend each and every one of
you for doing that. Thank you
very much, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Senator. We should
regularly be recognizing the,
the heroes that teachers are
every single day, uh, in our
society that they, they truly
are. I think some countries and
we ought to start talking about
their nation builders that, you
know, they are the, the
framework of, of our country.
Um, Daniel, you're up for our
last presentation of the day,
Federal funding update.
Hello again, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, Daniel
Public school finance.
We are now on item 10 of your
binder with the PowerPoint
titled Update on federal funding
for public education. I'll let
you all turn to the PowerPoints.
So we've been asked to provide
you all with a monthly update on
what we're seeing at the federal
level. So we drafted a really
quick overview of updates since
you all last met in May.
If you turn a slide 2, we have
an overview of federal formula
funding that flows to the state
under ESA, and that includes
funding for low-income students,
rural education, professional
learning, and a lot of other
programs, uh, PED has received
preliminary awards for Title IA,
the funding we get for
low-income students, Title IVA
for student academic achievement
and title 5B for rural education
and everything else is still
pending from the federal
government.
man
Uh, PED has not reported any
significant fluctuations in
those awards, and we haven't
been notified as a stage of any
planned federal changes in
funding.
Uh, but we have heard the
administration is planning to
allocate the remaining funding
it hasn't issued preliminary
awards for, uh, in ways that
align with the priorities of the
administration.
So overall, we're not seeing any
immediate changes in federal
funding for K-12. Uh, but we are
seeing some delays in
communication, some delays in
preliminary awards that aren't
allowing for as much planning
time at the local level and
deciding uh how schools want to
use that funding.
On slide 3.
Uh, we now have a more detailed
proposal from the administration
for the next fiscal year. Uh,
overall, they are proposing a
$12 billion reduction to the
Department of Education, or 15%.
Uh, a lot of that reduction is
the FTE terminations at the at
the administration wants to
codify a DOE as well as some of
the programs and funding that
they want to terminate.
Uh, the administration has,
however, recommended flat
funding for a few of the larger
funding programs like Title IA,
special education, impact aid,
and CTE.
If you turn slide 4,
you may remember at our last
meeting in Santa Fe, that I
mentioned the administration is
focused on consolidating grants
and reducing the rules and
regulations that are attached to
that funding, and I mentioned
they were calling this concept
the K-12 simplified funding
formula.
We didn't know last month which
programs they want to
consolidate, but they released
that list earlier this month and
we've included them here on this
slide.
Overall, the administration's
recommending that 18 grants be
consolidated into one flexible
and discretionary funding stream
that would flow out to states.
They're recommending this new
formula push out $2 billion in
funding, but that is a $3.8
billion reduction in what those
programs are pushing out right
now.
So this concept around the K-12
uh simplified funding formula
would be a 67% cut to the
funding that these programs are
distributing out to states right
now.
Uh, we're not gonna go through
each of the funding streams, but
I do want to highlight that some
of these funds are pretty
substantial in what they pushed
in New Mexico.
Uh, one of the biggest ones is
item 4 on the list, and that's
labeled supporting effective
instruction. Uh, that's Title
2A.
Uh, which would get about $15
million a year for and that
districts and charter schools
use for professional learning
for educators.
Uh, we told you last month that
Title IIA is one funding stream
that people across the country
are generally worried about and
the fact that the administration
included Title IIA in this
proposal is sort of reinforcing
people's fears across the
country.
Uh, but this is just a proposal
right now, and it would take,
uh, it would require
congressional action, uh, to
codify the change.
On slide 5.
Uh, we have a few other notable
updates on the administration's
proposals, uh, special education
has been recommended a flat
appropriation, but the
administration has proposed
eliminating a few of the smaller
funding streams that flow
through idea and instead they
want to push that money uh out
to states through the primary
state grants program that we,
that we receive our idea be
special education funding
through.
Uh, we don't know too much about
the proposal or the impact it
would have on our state, uh, but
we'll dig more into it if the
idea or the concept gains
traction in Congress.
Uh, the Institute of Education
Sciences is the nonpartisan body
at DUE that does a lot of the
federal research and evaluation
on public education and the
administration has recommended
cutting its budget by 67%.
Uh, I told you all last month
that's going to be really
important that we focus as a
state on building our capacity
to collect and leverage our own
data and this federal
recommendation is sort of
reinforcing the urgency of
building that state capacity.
Uh, you all heard about this
item last month, but the
administration has now formally
recommended to Congress that it
terminate funding for TRIO, uh,
English learners under Title II.
Adult education and migrant
student education.
And last, Congress is still
deliberating on changes to SNAP
and Medicaid, and we're tracking
that for any potential impacts
to public schools.
And to close on a very brief
update on federal action, uh,
we're gonna get, we're we're
we're going to continue tracking
the various things happening at
the federal level, and we'll be
bringing you updates on what's
happening through our weekly
activity reports.
Here at LAC intro meetings and
we'll be updating the federal
funding stabilization
subcommittee, uh, as they
requested.
Thank you.
Thank you, Daniel. Questions
from the committee, uh,
Representative Garrett. Thanks,
Mr. Chair.
Daniel
How closely do we work? Does ESC
work or PED work with our
federal delegation. I know our
federal delegation also has
education specialists, but.
Are we conveying our concerns
and priorities to them.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Garre, uh, the staff.
The staff that staffs the
congressional delegation, do
reach out from time to time to
LESC to LSC to PED and they
request various forms of data.
We provide them with data. We,
we provide them with input. So
we do collaborate to some extent
with uh the congressional
delegation.
Mr. Chair and Representative, I,
I would, I would also just offer
if there's something specific
that the committee would like to
convey to the delegation that
you would, we would take your
direction on that.
Right, cause Mr. Chair and
Daniel, it's like I don't wanna
wait for them to reach out, they
so much is going on every place
with everybody that I just feel
the more we initiate, um, it's
just like an exclamation point
like we really, really, really
need to address this. And then
my other question is, did we get
any specific feedback from the
secretary the federal Secretary
of Education when she was at the
Western Governor's conference in
Santa Fe on Monday and Tuesday.
Did she say anything.
Specific about all of this, Mr.
Chairman Representative Garrett,
I don't think anyone from LASC
attended the conference where
the education secretary spoke,
and I didn't hear anything uh
related to K-12 that she
specifically spoke on at the
conference.
OK, thank you, and, and, um, Mr.
Charon
director Sea, I do think we
should put some stuff together
just so we as state legislators,
we go on record.
Other questions, comments, oh
yeah, Representative Rometo, I
had you written down.
Just went up.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um.
On slide 5, you have TRO. What's
TRIO, Daniel?
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Romero, I'm not too familiar
with the TRO program. I know
that's intended to help some
underserved students,
specifically in secondary
schools, uh.
Improve their outcomes.
Mr. Chair Representative, I'll
just add a trio. I think it's
both uh sort of college prep for
low income students as well as
support in higher education for
those same students once they
actually enter higher ed.
And, and thank you all, Mr.
Chairman, for that clarification
because I mean I like others
have expressed to find it
incredibly frustrating that
these are the priorities, um, of
the current Federal
administrations cut programs
that we in New Mexico have been
trying to bolster um be and make
these investments in our
students particularly low income
students, um, all the Martinez
Yazi plaintiffs that are that
are captured in some of these
cuts and in the
Federal government is, is
actively undermining those
efforts, um, in their budgetary
priorities and it's something
that I think we, we as a state
need to continue to look after
um in case some of these cuts do
go through. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Other questions, comments, you
know, is one of the, the chairs
of the new federal funding
stabilization.
Interim Committee, uh, these,
you know, these matter a lot to
me, I.
As I look at it, there's both
some good news in here and that
sounds like they're, uh,
recommending flat funding for
the Title IA special education
impact aid Indian Education
initiatives, career technical,
those are big funding issues for
us as far as the, what do we get
about 15% of budget from the
feds.
And I would guess that's the
majority of that 15% of the
budget are within those things.
So it's encouraging that we're
talking about what may be a few
percent of our overall budget
out of the feds getting cut.
Uh
Though there are concerns on the
other ones, as you indicated on
page 4, number 4 supporting
effective instruction that
You know, it's like just some
quick math, we may be losing
somewhere around $7 million of
the 15 million there.
You know, by just the
percentages that they had, uh, I
was looking at 7 in the
education for homeless children
and use the McKinney Bento
monies and some of those kinds
of things which are federal
funding, look like they're at
risk, uh, some of the other
pieces through there are, are
concerning that we don't have
those, uh.
On page 5, Daniel where that
same section of the
administration recommends
eliminating funding for TRIO
English language acquisition
adult education, migrant
students, how much of our budget
is that? What are, do you have
actual numbers for what that
would be if that is totally
eliminated from the federal
funding. How much of a
Of a hit to to the end budget is
that.
Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator, Mr.
Chairman.
Um, English language
acquisition, Title 3 is about $5
million a year that we get from
the federal government, migrant
student education is a lot
lower, maybe like around $1
million a year from the federal
government, not too sure about
TRO and adult education, we can
get you those numbers, but
they're not significant numbers
like Title I or IDa B.
Thank you, because, you know, as
I'm looking with that committee
on recommendations, and again,
we're a wealthy state. We're
very fortunate due to oil and
gas, important in this area that
we've got lots of money, we've
got money sitting in the bank
that if we choose as a
legislature.
$6 million to backfill these
things that are up for
eliminating because we as New
Mexicans think it's important
are things that we could easily
cover, um, similar to the
comment, you know, you will use
the other 10% of or $10 million
of the, the money we're gonna
save when we do the 8020 out of
taking 1% from that, we could
cover those kinds of things, um,
on the SNAP and Medicaid.
Is that talking about school
meals and how much is that part
of the budget, would that be as
far as the education costs, not
the whole society costs.
But just the education portion.
Do we know, Mr. Chairman, uh,
the chairman, uh, the snap and
Medicaid proposals that are
currently being deliberated in
Congress, wouldn't impact the
school meals program. It would
not it would not impact the
school meals and that's a
separate funding stream that
flows to New Mexico. It's pretty
substantial funding, but it's
not currently being deliberated
in the reconciliation bill
currently pending in Congress.
OK, thank you, and, you know,
and those are are important
because they protect our kids
and our families that make for
good education, but as far as
direct education budget, my
understanding then they are not,
would not be affecting the
direct education funding that we
get. Mr. Chairman, it would not
affect the school meals program.
Some uh school, some public
schools do receive Medicaid
reimbursement, so it would
impact public schools in that
way, but as of right now,
Uh, separate funding streams for
school meals versus snap. And
again, that one is, you know,
kind of what level they're gonna
cut, what parts of programs and
things and so that's very much a
we'll wait and see.
Type of things. OK.
Again, any other questions, it's
for any other comments or
questions from people, if not,
again, thank you, Daniel, it's
nice always having you keeping
watch on these things and giving
us updates, uh, because it
affects our communities, our
schools, our kids.
Very much appreciate it. I think
that does it for today, and
last.
Questions or comments, we do
have reception this evening at
5:30. It's not far from here.
It's only about 1 mile or two, I
think, at Antigua Cosina,
Mexicana, 306 North Main at 5:30
for
Members
Staff, etc. so we'll see
everyone there and then we start
tomorrow morning at 9 o'clock,
uh, with New Mexico Military
Institute presentation PE rule
reviews and the director's
report. And with that, we will
