to get too far behind schedule.
So we'll go ahead and get
started with the first panel
this morning being
The New Mexico Alliance of
Health councils and uh Valeria
Alarcon.
is here and she's brought some
other members with her.
So if you could introduce
yourselves and welcome and thank
you for coming and bringing us
up to date.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, Senator
or Ti Pino, and members of
committee. Thank you so much for
this opportunity to present
legislative Health and Human
Services Committee, uh, on
behalf of New Mexico's county
and tribal health councils. My
name is Valeria Larcon. I'm the
executive director at the New
Mexico Alliance of Health
Councils here with my team
members, Heather Maxie, Health
council and public health
specialists in Ger and Antonio
tribal liaison. Um, I want to
begin.
Um, by thanking Representative
Thompson, of course, and
Representative Allison, as well
as our partner DOH, our
legislative body, our executive
branch, uh, for this year's one
time allocation in support of
this critical function of public
health, health councils. Um, I
want to begin by as, as you see
on the first slide, paving the
way for a healthy and thriving
New Mexico. It is clear that we
have a lot of dedication, a lot
of commitment.
a lot of um expertise, lived
experience in our public health
sector, particularly in health
council sector, and I think
we're we're faced with the
challenge once again, as you may
have, um, uh, learn about the,
the health ranking study New
Mexico forty-seventh in
education, 50th.
In health and safety, um, once
again, any EKC study, New Mexico
50th, um, in as the worst state
to be a child, um, and I think
we have such a, a pivotal
opportunity and an effective
strategy, uh, when it comes to a
solution to address these
elements, um, and that is health
councils who are literally
addressing public um public
health priorities at both the
local and systems level and one
of
the strengths of health councils
um in the course of this 30
years, they were established
originally in 1990. My
colleagues can talk about that
in a minute. Um, is that they
are the trusted local health
hubs and the work that they
drive at the local systems level
is deeply aligned with that of
the governor of our legislative
body of NMDOH's North Star,
right? New Mexico as the
healthiest state in the nation
by 2040. Um, and also with our
partners.
At the healthcare Authority. Um,
this is in terms of paving the
way towards a healthy New
Mexico, um, investing in health
councils is both a short term
and a long-term strategy. Um,
they are the local trusted
community-based health hubs.
They are the representation and
embodiment of our local
communities, they are health
equity in action, um, and
they're working together across
sectors through key
collaborations in improving the
health and well-being of New
Mexico.
And one of the things that I, I
think it's true here, um, around
the table is that we can all
agree that health is
the most important thing. Um, if
we turn over to the next page,
um, I wanted to, uh, also once
again acknowledge Representative
Allison, Representative
Thompson, who reaffirmed the
original uh state statute from
1990, uh, the maternal and
childcare Act child Health Care
Act and in 2020, uh, 2019, it
was reaffirmed as the county and
tribal Health councils, HB 137
for your reference.
Um, we currently have health
councils in all 30, well, we've
had health councils in all 33
counties for 30 years and
currently 10 tribal health
councils, and these include the
pueblo of Acoma, Pueblo of
Cochiti Pueblo of Nambe, Pueblo
of Piuris, Pueblo of San I
Alfonso Pueblo of Santa Ana,
Pueblo of Santa Clara, Pueblo of
Santo Domingo.
Pueblo of Tesuki, Canoncioban of
Navajo Nation and also uh our
dear dear colleague and strong
leader in our tribal uh
liaisoning world, uh, continues
to enlist new partnerships in
SUNY, Puebloa Pueblo, Pawaki and
others, um, NMHC also has foster
as a result of Gerrylynn's work
has fostered strong
relationships with the all
Pueblo Council of Governors and
tribal leadership in Navajo
Nation.
um, and also working on uh
Apache nation as well. As you
can imagine, we're talking about
10 tribal health councils at
this time, of course, enlisting
new partnerships, as I noted in
the remaining, um, you know, 7
to 9 pueblos and of course our
nations. Um, I also wanna in
reference to the uh state of New
Mexico infographic to the right,
just note that New Mexico is um
one of the 6 or 7.
states in the country with a
centralized public health
system. In health councils in
essence and function are the
extension of DOH's regional
offices that you see here, these
four regions, um, and so as you
can imagine, we're a critical
partner, um, in concert with an
MDOH in addressing public health
at the local level.
If we turn over to the next
slide, this is, um, a quick, uh,
it's a high level depiction of
how deeply aligned health
councils are not only with NMDOH
is unifying North Star that were
so deeply aligned with, um, and
just noting that this is as, as
we can imagine, 2040, that's a
15 year turnaround time. We need
all hands on deck, um, and such
an ambitious goal requires a
very bold and pivotal
investment.
In this case, in health
councils. Here we have outlined
NMDOH's mission, its goals, its
key components, and on the right
side of the infographic here,
um, you see health council
center in this specific
overlapping areas because they
do play a critical role in
addressing, obviously the public
health priorities bridging gaps
in services, and they do this by
collaborating with key partners,
care management organizations,
and so forth, uh, to connect
local communities to key
services.
Um, they're also, uh,
instrumental in in form in our
key to the DOH Fab accreditation
process, um, the state health
improvement plan is informed by
the cha process that is led by
health councils and NMDOH which
generally will go into more
detail here in a minute. And on
the bottom right hand left hand
side corner, you'll see, um, uh,
highlights of how health
councils are not only aligned in
this case with Governor
Grisham's prior.
Um,
around behavioral health, aging
care and services, firearm
safety, housing, uh, addressing
housing, um, accessibility,
vaccination. We heard from DOH
yesterday speak to um the
vaccination efforts across
public health sector, health
councils, um, during COVID
particularly were a key partner
in emergency response
coordination, including helping
community members register for
their vaccine.
register um for their to go get
tested, um making home
deliveries with, you know, masks
and food and water and test kits
to make sure our communities
were safe and I think having
that already established, um,
emergency response coordination
can be duplicated and applied in
many other areas including
vaccination, climate responses
we've seen this year with fires,
floods, so on and so forth, um,
on the
Healthcare Authority. We see a
great deal of alignment with our
partners there around achieving
health equity by addressing
poverty discrimination, um, and
lack of resources and health
councils because of how they're
structure both in our tribal
and, and Geraldine will touch on
this in a minute, but the, um,
community health workers, right?
Um, they are key and are part of
our health council system, um,
and essentially they can, they
can be an extension to the field
offices.
from the healthcare authority
Connecting community members to
Medicaid Services, Medicare
services, services and
behavioral health, and so much
more on the systems
collaboration were also close
working closely um in health
councils are key to the closed
loop referral system. This is a
specific system geared towards
um Medicaid recipients, um, but
also we bring um uh uh critical
resources statewide called Share
New Mexico.
Where we have curated over
15,000 resources uh accessible
to local communities, health
councils, and key partners are
part of making sure those
statewide resources are up to
date and imagining things, you
know, things, all things
perfect. Health councils fully
resourced. We could even have
navigators locally to connect
people and walk people through
some of these cumbersome
processes, you know, not just in
our counties but also
particularly in our tribal
communities and when we think of
folks who English may not be.
first language in our tribal
communities we think of, you
know, connecting with our elder
population through there, um,
their native language is really
important to make sure people
have access to the resources
they need. NMHC has also as a
way to bring uh key partners
across the public health sector,
launched the community
collaborative forum last year in
collaboration with uh NMPHA
behavioral health division,
early childhood education.
Care department and also working
closely with DOH's regional uh
public health managers, um, and
we bring various uh partners to
the table to really learn about
the local coalitions in these
three state, uh, areas, public
health, ECE behavioral health,
see where the synergies are with
their body of work, see where
collaborations have been taking
place in what we've learned from
those collaborations in
services.
community so that we can be more
effective and also as an
opportunity to see new
collaborations. This can be very
helpful in increasing the
capacity at the local level and
getting resources to our
communities, uh, uh, more
effectively.
If we turn um to the next page
this infographic here gives us a
high level overview of the types
of collaborations health
councils are either involved in
or leading.
So imagining when health
councils are resource, right, in
a way that leverages them for
success in service of
communities. What can be
possible across all these
various types of collaborations.
And if I can point out, uh, for
example, our dear friend Nancy
from New Mexico Alliance School
Based healthcare centers was
here yesterday, um, imagine if
health councils were resourced
at a at a more optimal level,
the kind of collaborations that
can take place there, uh, same.
with our friends on Monday, um,
are 100% New Mexico initiative.
Health councils have been
instrumental in their success in
such a short time by seeing
those collaborations locally in
those 18 counties. One of the
ways that this collaboration has
rendered success is through
increasing capacity within the
health councils or the local
communities through these, uh,
action teams where they're able
to come together and list
community participation as um
Our friend Diego from Rio Riva
Health Council noted on Monday,
right, delivering food directly
to community members. Um, and
that's the level of commitment
and dedication that we have in
New Mexico across these key um
collaborations, um, highlighted,
of course, our state agencies.
Um, we can go in so much detail
about the types of
collaborations that are
happening um across state
agencies, um, care, uh,
management organizations,
service care providers.
Um, of course, with tribal
leadership, public safety,
school districts, um, one of the
things that I want to highlight,
I think it was Hidalgo County or
Guadalupe County during COVID,
as you know, 60% of most of New
Mexico lives in rural
communities. Um, they typically
obviously our communities don't
have the kind of transportation
access in order to get to
medical resources or services,
it averages about a 2 hour drive
to get any kind
of primary care, and I know the
state has invested a lot of uh
um of our tax dollars into
addressing this brick and
mortar, but of course we know
that takes a bit of time. Health
council in this particular
county worked with their, with
the EMS licensing board to to
create a a nurse license that
allowed the nurses to function
at a higher level in their
ambulances in their communities.
Therefore, creating mobile
units, um, so these are the
kinds of in the moment right
now, action driven solutions,
innovative solutions that health
councils drive. I know DOH has
their mobile clinics that
they've introduced, I think this
year, and we're so excited to be
working with them, coordinating
those services alongside Blue
Cross Blue Shield, and I think
there's another um insurance
that also provides mobile,
mobile clinics.
Um, if we turn to the next page
I'm gonna uh pass it over to my
colleague Heather Maxie.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee. I am going to
talk a little bit about the
history of the funding for
health councils, um, and first
I'd like to thank Governor
Grisham and the legislature for
passing legislation allocating
one-time funding of $3 million
to health councils, um, that
funding does end in July of
2025. So we're advocating for
recurring optimal funding for
health councils, um, in 2010
health councils were defunded,
um, their funding that they
initially had 2.8 million.
was um taken away, um, and
throughout the following years,
they were funded um for a small
amount each year until 2021,
when they received funding from
CDC and Kellogg funding at
$50,000 per health council, that
funding ended in May of this
year, um, but with that funding
health councils were able to
provide a lot of outreach. They
were able to reach over 350,000
people throughout the state,
which is 17% of the state, so
With more funding, imagine, you
know, that percentage could be
50%, 100%. Um, so in 2024, like
I mentioned, health councils
were able to secure that one
time appropriation of $3 million
from the legislature, but, um,
that funding is not enough to
make sure that health counselors
are able to reach the entire
population, um, the DOH's goal
of the North Star to make New
Mexico the healthiest state in
the country by 20.
um, is like we've mentioned a
really ambitious goal. So it
requires a lot of ambitious
funding, um, one state, for
example, um, in New Hampshire,
which is one of the healthiest
states in the nation, um, their
annual budget for 2024 was $8
billion and they allocated 47%
of that state budget to fund
public health initiatives, so
things like healthcare, COVID
outreach, um, so they allocated
a large percentage um to make
sure that their state was able
to
to become one of the healthiest,
um, in the nation.
So moving on to the next slide a
little bit about health council
staffing and community
membership, um, throughout the
state, there are 109 paid staff,
um, so in for counties there are
96 or 96 paid staff reported and
for tribal health councils, and
there were 15 paid staff. So the
membership, um, of the health
councils depends on the health
council's governance structure,
and we have a
a little chart there showing the
different types of governance
structure, but each, each health
council um operates according to
their bylaws that are specific
to that governance structure and
the membership of health
councils represents their
diverse local communities, um,
and as I mentioned, health
councils are critical extensions
of DOH since there are not local
health departments, um, health
councils fill in those gaps to
help connect people to critical
resources and to help make sure
that those populations still
have access to the public health
resources that they need.
Um, so county and tribal health
councils are the trusted
community partners, um, so they
are really the perfect way to
invest in communities and
leverage all of the different
multi-sector public health
resources, essential services,
prevention, intervention, um, in
service of the state. And so the
current funding that health
councils have is providing
capacity for those 109 statewide
paid staff, but providing
optimal recurring funding.
will expand this capacity and
allow health councils to provide
even more services and reach
even more people.
And so on the next slide, just a
little bit about the health
council leadership role, so
health council coordinators, um,
are really the leaders of their
health council in their
community. They have high levels
of knowledge, high levels of
experience, um, they do so much
more than hosting meetings they
provide collaboration in their
communities. They provide
community outreach to help build
the membership of the Health
council to help expand its
reach.
throughout the community, they
increase community awareness of
the health councils and the
resources that they provide. Uh
they lead health education,
prevention, intervention
initiatives, all of these are
critical services, um, to make
sure that people have access to
healthcare and public health
education, um, health councils
truly are the voice of community
members, um, who can inform
policies to ensure equity and
improved systems of care for New
Mexicans throughout the.
date
And so on the next slide, um,
just an overview of the
functions of health councils,
um, as outlined in House Bill
137, the 2019 County and Tribal
Health Councils Act. So health
councils are mandated to provide
these services to identify
community priorities and needs,
um, identify and help coordinate
access to those critical
resources that are going to help
people be as healthy as
possible, um, health councils
are really the representation of
their.
local communities and are such a
strong voice for health equity.
And so as you can see all of
these different services are
multidisciplinary, they're
cross-sectional um health
councils work with partners, uh,
throughout the state to make
sure that this mandate is being
met.
So now I am going to turn it
over to Jerilyn, who's going to
talk a little bit about the
community health improvement
plan.
Thank you, Heather. Mr. Chair,
Madam Vice Chair, my name's
Gerrilyn. I'm Yatabenne from the
Navajo Nation, but I'm also, uh,
the tribal liaison for the
alliance and a fun fact, I'm the
first reaison ever for our
organization and so as you can
tell, there's probably been a
lot of foundational building,
um, connecting, rebuilding
trust, but also a lot more
outreach.
And so on slide 10, I am just
gonna hit on some high level um
Uh, points about the community
health improvement plan, um, and
so each individual county and
tribal health council through
the CDC and Kellogg funding for
the past 3 years. Um, this
funding made possible, uh, made
it possible for each county and
tribal health council to do
assessments, data collection
through focus groups and
interviews. It also gave them
the opportunity to do planning,
so each tribal and county health
council have a community health
improvement plan.
And so, um, what's great about
the CDC funding ending and the
DOH this year is that the DOH
funding for FY 25 is going to
fund the implementation of the
chips and going to fund the
evaluation of the chips. And so
that's what's great about the
partnership that we have with
DOH, um, moving forward, you
know.
So, so
that's the money you're going to
be asking for in 2025, or is
that money you received in 2024,
which is called state fiscal
year 25. Which of the two is it?
Do you already have the money or
are you gonna be asking for the
money to do this. Mr. Chair,
they have the money and it's for
this fiscal year, yes.
Thank you.
Yes, and so with, um, so CDC
funding did end in May, um, and
so now we're working with DOH
to, uh, report out on metrics
for this fiscal year, um, and I
just want to note what the
community health improvement
plans, um, they're instrumental
to the DOH um state Health
Improvement plan. Each of them
will have inform DOH's
priorities around behavior
health and access to primary
health care.
Um, the second one is DOH is
also going through a statewide
community health needs
assessment. And so that also
each individual county and
tribal health councilI
information is also informing
this process. So, um,
They have been instrumental in
both of these um ship and CHNA
process, and I think it's just
important to note that DOH um
relies on the information that
health councils are getting from
communities, um, utilizing that
as community engagement and
feedback.
On slide 11.
Um, this here, um, is some
information I think we have
shared in the past. However, I
just wanna touch on some high
points. These are some of the
priorities identified through
the assessment and planning
process that health councils
have been going through, uh, for
the past 2 to 3 years, um.
And so as of this year, um, no
brainer, we're seeing behavioral
health as a priority, um,
statewide from all health
councils, uh, about 60% of
health councils identifying a
priority uh with behavior health
um and ongoing mental health and
substance use disorders. We're
also seeing um some priorities
with housing and economic
instability, um, elder and aging
care, chronic disease
prevention, access to quality
healthcare services, access to
healthy and nutritious food.
foods and violence prevention,
um, which is the firearm related
injuries, reducing that.
And so this is just a statewide
overview combined of all health
councils, um, in the state.
And I think it's just important.
I think Val touched on it really
well. There is so much alignment
with DOH and the healthcare
authority here around behavioral
health, addressing social
determinants of health, um, and
addressing access to primary
health care.
Mr. Chair, could, uh, on, on
your page 10 in the orange
circle. It says from September
2025 to July 2025.
Is it September 2024?
Where's that? So, oh.
traditional funding if like
2025, which is what we're in
right now, right? It started,
no.
2024, sorry, so that may be a
type on our end. Apologies.
Thank you. Thank you for
pointing that out.
Yes, thank you.
Um, OK, slide 12, so we have our
um tribal health council ship
priorities listed only, so this
is of our tan. Um, again, we are
seeing 44% of our tribal health
councils focusing on behavioral
health. Um, second to that is
disease prevention and a very
specific focus on diabetes, um,
as you know, it's prevalent in
our tribal communities, but
health councils taking on the
role to also do a lot of
prevention and education with
that.
Um, coming in also third to that
is elder and aging care. Um,
there's been a lot of focus on
dementia caregiver burnout, um,
helping our elders get, you
know, signed up for Medicare,
Medicaid, open enrollments now,
so, um, being able to provide
that navigation support, um, and
also working closely with CHRs
for this work as well.
And then last to that quality,
um, access to quality health
care services, and I think most
of this is, is mostly
contributed to the fact that one
of our health councils in their
community, um, ACMA Peblo
specifically had one of their
IHS hospitals, um, closed
services down, so it's no longer
a hospital, it's just a clinic
open 9 to 4, so that pose a lot
of challenges for the community,
um, and the health council
working in collaboration with
the local tribal health board on
how they can.
fill gaps, um, for some of that,
those services.
On slide 13, um, is the
Community Health Improvement
plan, um, CHIP priorities by
region.
So I think this would be
helpful, you know, depending on
the district and the counties
that you serve, um, we have all
of the health councils listed
here by the five regions and um,
What by region, what are the,
what is the most prevalent um
priority. But as you can go
through slides 13 and 14, um,
tribal health councils, I think
I noted 44% focusing on behavior
health in the metro region, um,
again, 62% focusing on
behavioral health.
On the next slide here on the
north north uh region of our
state again, Northwest, um.
There's there's a bit of a shift
here in Northwest, uh, focusing
on access to quality health care
services, um, but on the
northeast side again, behavioral
health and so, um,
Again, I think most of this is
contributed to um getting
resources to our tribal
communities and also, um, San
Juan County is also focusing on
some, some of the access to
quality healthcare services and
the outreach around resources,
um, and connecting with uh local
behavior health providers.
On the next slide here, again,
uh, South and Southwest,
Southeast region, both focusing
on behavioral health.
And so if you would like
additional context uh or
additional information about
your specific health council,
we're also happy to answer
questions about that, um, at the
end of this year.
And slide 16 is just a breakdown
of all of the chip strategies,
um, by versus county versus
tribes, um, and so you can see
on the county side, it's more,
um, there's been more strategies
specific to increasing access to
care and services, uh,
information and education
campaigns and also doing um more
community engagement and
partnerships, uh, increasing
partnerships and also addressing
workforce development.
On our tribal side here, we're
also seeing um more efforts
around information and education
campaigns, data collection and
analysis just because they've
seen a lack of, they haven't had
enough data to really inform
some of the work, so a lot of
our tribal health councils had
to do comprehensive community
health assessments, um, policy
work just because so much of
this work is tied in with tribal
leadership, informing them,
getting approval to do a lot of
this work as well.
So I will just pass back to
Heather to hit on some of the
impacts from the CDC funding.
Thank you, Glyn and Mr. Chair,
Madam Vice Chair and members of
the committee, um, as Sherilyn
Mitch, I'm going to just go over
a few of the impacts of the
county and tribal Health
CouncilI priorities.
So all of this data was
collected during the course of
the CDC grant, um, and right now
DOH is implementing a strategy
to continue collecting data
moving forward, um, and all of
this data is from those ship
monthly reports in this data was
collected over a 10 month
period. So I'm just gonna go
over a few of the highlights um
of the impacts that were uh
Possible due to that CDC
funding. So there were over 4600
Narcan kits distributed, there
were over 1800 community members
and partners who were trained to
administer Narcan. Um, there
were over 1100 community members
and partners who were trained on
mental health first aid, um,
which that training was hosted
by health councils.
Um, and there were over 1200
behavioral health resource
guides that were distributed to
households and we're also um
uploaded to the Share New Mexico
uh website for people to access
throughout the state. Um, so
health councils, as you can see,
have had a really large impact,
um, with limited funding from
the state, so they each had
$50,000 from the CDC, which, as
mentioned before, ended in May
of this year, and this work um
was above and beyond the
just 2 deliverables, um, in the
Department of Health scope of
work. Um, so as Val mentioned
before during COVID, uh, health
councils provided outreach, and
they provided PPE testing, food,
um, education and outreach to
rural communities and so with
all of this work that was done
just unlimited funding, just
imagine what could be possible
with that optimal recurring
funding, so the state could
really save a lot of money by
working to prevent disease and
educate people on how to stay
healthy instead of um treating
disease. So this is how we get
to be the healthiest state by
prevention.
And so a few more um highlights
from those chip parties data,
um, on the next slide, I'm in
Los Alamos. They were able to
provide almost, um, over $26,000
of in-kind gift cards um for
people who are experiencing
homelessness or were at risk of
experiencing homelessness, so
that those gift cards could be
used for things like food, gas,
other necessities, um, and also
almost 6000 community members.
who were living in tent cities,
um, received support with social
service related needs.
Um, and also, um, for access to
healthy and nutritious foods,
uh, there were almost 250,000
pounds of food distributed um by
health councils to members of
the community, and there were
over 24,000 food boxes that were
distributed to households, um,
so providing that service for
people who may not have
transportation to get to
somewhere to access that food.
They were able to still have the
healthy food that they needed
thanks to the work of health
councils.
Uh, and just a few more impacts,
um, so for, um, I just wanted to
point out for the impacts of
elder and aging care, um, there
were 16 elder assessments, um,
and study risk interviews, not
416, we apologize for that, um,
but, um, as you can see, there
were just a lot of impacts.
There were almost 5000 gun locks
distributed, um, there were
almost 400 tribal community
members educated about diabetes
prevention about um
Preventing other chronic
illnesses. So there's just a lot
of really important work being
done by health councils, um, and
so on my end, I have worked in
health departments, um, at the
local and state level in both
North Carolina and Virginia, and
I've seen the impact that
sufficient funding has on those
communities and the work that
health councils do, um, so I
know that sufficient public
health funding really has an
impact on health outcomes and
New Mexico really is poised. We
have the resources, we have the
money available to improve
health outcomes if that
increased funding is provided to
health councils. So, I'm going
to hand it back over to Val.
Thank you, Heather, um, Mr.
Chair, um, Senator Ortiip Pino,
members of the committee, as
noted earlier, an ambitious goal
of New Mexico as a healthy state
in the nation.
Right? Um, I think calls for a
very bold investment and so
we're um our advocacy efforts
are really, really geared
towards reinstating recurring
optimal funding. And I wanna
just um make a comment here
around the ask because when we
look at really leveraging health
councils for success in service
of community members as you've
learned about all the various
priorities that they're their
efforts are driving and meeting.
and all of the local and systems
level collaboration. This level
of funding can really leverage
health council staffing
capacity, operations,
administration, coordination,
collaboration and programmatic
costs, right? And that will take
for them to meet the needs of
local communities and also, of
course, in concert with an MDOH
and many other key partners
together improve the health and
well-being of New Mexicans.
Um, and so I wanted to also, uh,
note that as Heather mentioned
DOH is is implementing a
reporting system which will
really, really excited about,
and I think by the legislative
session, we'll be able to learn
more about those impact data
points, um, our organization at
the Mexico Alliance of Health
Councils is also working with
our higher ed partner UNM to um
uh work on a return on
investment, study much like they
did in 2011, 2015, 2014, I
believe, so that we can.
report back to the executive
branch to all of you, our
legislative body to say, here's
the return on investment from um
the the robust funding in health
councils. Um, and I'd like to
close with a quote that speaks
to this moment, um, in our
shared commitment here, um, from
the American Progress.
Investments in public health,
not only improve the health of
society, but also advanced
equity and foster economic, um,
and resiliency. So on behalf of
county and tribal health
councils, we thank you for this
opportunity to present to all of
you today and with that, uh, Mr.
Chair, Senator or TC Pino, and
members were open for questions.
Thank you. Thank you very much,
Valeria, and so we'll go now to
the committee and I think each
A committee member would have 4
minutes to ask questions.
Yeah, OK, 44. Don't push it.
Don't, don't go crazy. It's just
4 minutes and 4. If you need it.
If you don't need it to. Yeah.
You don't have to use it, but
there's no giving it to someone
else, so.
So we'll start with you, Senator
Ceda Lopez.
Mr. Chair.
Um, she said that she has food
in her mouth, so if I could
start.
All right,
Representatives what she told
me.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, the
food in your mouth came from
Brian Colon. He, he provided the
breakfast burritos this morning
for the committee and so, um,
you know,
Uh, just as an act of total
generosity on his part, I'm
sure.
No expected in return.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So, um,
the question that I have is
there's a whole lot of work.
That's reflected in this um in
the handout and the presentation
that you made.
And you have 109 staff
throughout the state. Is that,
is that right? Yes, uh,
collectively health council,
county and tribal, and we're
currently with NMDOH in
partnership, uh, conducting
surveys to make sure we have the
most up to-date information.
And so my question is, there
must be a whole lot of
collaborating and um referral
going on to resources in the
community, um, so how, so I
guess my question is, is that
how you're accomplishing, or is
that one of the ways that you're
accomplishing, um, all of the
great work that you've talked
about today.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. um
Representative Chavez, um, a big
component of the work and the
successes thus far with Health
councils, especially given the
the funding that leverage them
for the first time during COVID
is through those strong
collaborations that they have
built over the last 30 years by
being the trusted, you know,
community-based, uh, health hub,
essentially, and they continue
to build on that. And I would
just like to know that I think
the reason it's evident to us,
our team here, the reason why
health councils are continuing
to stand after 30 years and 13.
essentially 10 years of deeply
being deeply underfunded, is
there dedication and commitment
to community. Um, I hope that
helped answer your question and
then the other question that I
have is that I know that the
health councils are also um
representative of the
communities where they're
located, so, um, do all of the
health councils have, um.
Functioning community councils
in the areas that you that
you're working.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. um
Representative Chavez, yes, each
health council is active. And so
if you can imagine in in one of
their health council leadership,
many responsibilities is
community engagement and
outreach and enlistment to build
that health council membership.
So the more that there's that
representation of local
community, the more diverse
voices we have, the more diverse
perspectives that get to inform,
right, those assessments or
strategies, action-driven.
solutions. So it is, you know, a
representation of local
community, um, and I think that
is an area that uh when resource
at a more optimal level, they
can do that uh piece of the work
even more effectively. Geraldine
Heather, did I miss anything to
answer? OK.
Thank you Mr. Chair.
Of Senator of the Olympus, we'll
go back to you then. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Um, I think that one of the most
important things I'm so excited
by this presentation and all
this work is the whole health
equity issue, um, because it
bothers me. I've been reading a
lot of data recently regarding
how um.
Higher income white individuals
actually drink more, um, than,
um,
Native and.
and Hispanic groups total.
But their health equity outcomes
are just so much better, um,
that, that there's such a
disparity in what happens, um,
with individuals, um.
I mean, just the, the the
disparity. And my question is,
is being on the ground, what do
you see would be the best thing
to do to address these
disparities, these health
outcome disparities because you
see it everywhere. You see it
health outcome disparities, um,
when with regard to to
environmental justice you see it
with regard to, you know,
reactions to alcohol misuse,
reactions to drug
misuse
What can be done?
Thank you, Mr. Chair Tipino,
Senator Lopez, um, I would be,
and I'll turn to my colleagues
here because both Gerrilyn and
Heather work very closely with
health councils, um, but I think
what we have is such a pivotal
opportunity because health
councils by nature, right, are
the representation of local
communities. Hence, equitable
representation, um, health
councils have intimate knowledge
of their community members who
are struggling with who. The
reason why they can go knock on
the door and deliver a box of
food.
Water test kit register someone
for um for vaccination is
because they know their
communities. And so the fact
that they have, they're the
trusted partner with local
county commission,
uh uh service care providers,
care management organizations,
if they had the level of
capacity and operations to
really scale up those
collaborations, then they can
have navigators on site to
really to go and make those at
home visits and
help register that tribal elder
or that family member to those
Medicaid, Medicare and other
resources, um, so I think they
are the connective tissue of
public health, uh, the
connective tissue at our local
communities who knows their
local community very well in the
barriers. Transportation, of
course, continues to be the
recurring theme across our, our
rural communities, right? Uh, on
the average it's a 2-hour drive
to the nearest.
in the blank of medical service.
I noted an example of a solution
that a health council worked on
to bring sort of a medical
mobile uh clinic through EMS,
um, but there's lots of other
ways that we can cross-sector
collaborate with, with hospital
satellites, telemed, um, so many
other opportunities, uh, if, if,
if and when health councils are
resourced and I'll turn over to
to Heather and Geraldine for
additional context. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, Senator.
Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair and
senator. Thank you for that
question, um, you know, we've
had numerous conversations with
tribal health councils and to
your point about disparities.
One thing that we do see
obviously county versus tribe is
the, uh, lack of infrastructure.
Um, we've had tribal health
councils say it would be great
to have data or an evaluator or
someone who, um, a legal person
to help us with some of our
work, but the truth is that some
of our tribal communities just
don't have those positions, um,
even in epidemiologists, they
would love their own
epidemiologists, but they don't
have the funding or the capacity
to hire someone that to fill
that role. So, um,
That's something they mention is
that we are truly um under
resourced in our community
versus a county they could drive
20 minutes to a local store
where we have, you know, we have
someone named Santo Domingo has
to drive to Albuquerque for, for
food, I mean, even on the Navajo
Nation, we work with Tohajali.
They've got to drive an hour and
a half into Albuquerque. So
thinking about that, um, you
know, the lack of infrastructure
around food, housing, um, even
the nearest gas station, uh, it
poses a
of challenges, um, so I think I
just, I just wanted to, to
provide that note there. But
another thing that, um, tribal
health councils have been saying
and even county health councils
is how can we improve this
system work systems work around
DOH and the healthcare authority
um when the health care
authority was introduced, health
councils asked, Where do health
councils fit in the healthcare
authority, um, and we still ask
this question today, but I think
that poses a challenge um when
our state agencies in that
collaboration.
is happening, but community
members aren't aware of that
work or that collaboration, um,
it poses challenges at the
community level, like where do
we fit in? Where can we fill the
gaps, um, and most importantly
how can health councils support,
um, you know, some of these
priorities that our state
agencies have um strategized and
prioritized so I just wanted to
end on that. I just wonder if
$44 million is enough.
Given the enormity of the, I
mean, if we're truly going to
address health disparities, I
don't know that this is enough.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, uh, Senator
Representative, uh, Ferrari.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you so much for all of your
great efforts, um, uh, following
along the same line of, you
know, uh, you being an integral
part of uh the health and, uh.
Department of Health and HCA and
reaching people at grassroots
level, I think is very important
and besides the 44 million that
you're asking for, I think we
should be able, if we can get
the um alcohol excise tax in the
Aha fund alcohol harms
alleviation.
Which
I think you all support very
strongly and um having this um
funding, um, especially for the
tribal groups and making sure
that you can do the culturally
appropriate, um, programs and
because Department of Health and
HCA can't do this as an agency.
They need your groups to be able
to implement the programs and so
we need to get that funding.
To you and um I see that as if
we're raising $200 million to
$250 million with this, um.
proposal, um, that you would be
able to implement very
expeditiously, I believe, and so
is that something that
You agree with
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam Vice
Chair, uh, Representative
Ferrari, absolutely will and we
are in alignment.
We're in alignment with you.
Thank you and um this was such a
great presentation and uh makes
it easy for everyone to
understand exactly what is
needed and how you're working
and so or well organized, so
thank you.
Uh, Representative Cates will go
to you next.
Thank you, uh, Chair, and thank
you for your presentation. Thank
you for this tremendous hard
work, um.
Uh
I'm, I'm assuming you're pulling
a lot of your data because you
have to prepare it anyways for
like the Kellogg Foundation.
This is very impressive and for
those who are fearful of taking
on large foundation dollars. I,
I hope that they look to you to
figure out how to make the most
out of the intensive labor of
data collection.
Um, I just have a clarification
on, um, your slides on community
health improvement plan, the
CHIP.
And you have them by region,
tribal, metro, Northwest. What
is the
Explain what this uh.
diagram is telling us.
And the disparity in the
percentage of our investments in
behavioral health.
So some regions need a 70%.
And some are 20%, so can you
explain what this is telling me.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Gates, yes, I'm happy to, um,
touch on this, so we broke down
each region by priorities
regional priorities, and so
that's just saying, um, for
example, if you're on the metro
region, uh,
62% of our health councils in
the metro region have
prioritized behavioral health.
And so forth, so.
So thank you so much. So these
are survey results, um, uh,
based on the region, correct?
Yes, uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, yes, each health
council went through a data
collection process, um, some
went through, um, community
health assessments, including
focus groups, interviews, um, in
different forms of data
collection, whether that would
be interviews going door to
door, phone interviews, um, so
this was all collected by health
councils informed by community
members.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Uh, Senator Lopez, did you have
any, I know you got here just
the tail end, but you might have
some questions about health
councils and county and tribal
health councils.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair, and my
apologies for being late this
morning. I just wanted to make a
comment, Mr. Chair, in that.
Our, our health councils.
Um
Have an important role in each
of our communities.
And I want to say thank you to
To those who are here with us,
that all those who are part of
the team across the state of New
Mexico.
I know in working with um our
health council in Bernardo
County.
With Enrique, um, and others,
it's uh.
I believe as Senator Seria Lopez
has mentioned, we need more
money.
Um
To be able just to sustain the
movement that's ongoing.
But Mr. Chair, I believe that
our health councils are also
part of that system that needs
to be recognized and supported.
Um, when we talk about the
issues of mental health.
When we talk about the issues
of, uh, I mean, everything
seemed to set to center around
mental health and our abilities
to deal with stressors in our
life, but it's also working with
just general physical health uh
for our families and um.
Would I continue to learn, um,
in talking to Enrique is the
value that our health councils
bring and we're not really
utilizing.
The strengths that you bring to
the table and, um, Mr. Chair, I
think um our communities know a
lot about what they need more
than those who are further up
the chain of command, and I
think we really need to figure
out how we honor and work with,
with our health councils, or
school-based health centers, and
others who have the feet on the
ground because I think they can
guide us as we talk about
systems change.
And it's, it's not, it's not the
top down approach, but it needs
to be community going up. So
just some comments, Mr. Chair,
but thank you. And again, thank
you for the work that you
continue to do.
Thank, thank you, Senator
Representative Thompson.
Thank you. The senator stole a
lot of my talking point.
But
really, I want to thank you all,
um.
And, and I know that 109
employees to cover the state of
New Mexico. The majority of the
work is being done for free,
essentially, and, and that
doesn't go unnoticed by.
By us here, I don't think, um,
so I wanna thank you and I
especially want to thank all the
people who are putting in
countless hours, um, to help the
health of New Mexicans. It's,
it's uh much appreciated. And
then I have to say, Valeria is a
bulldog, and I mean that in the
kindest, most reverent way, I
mean, she, she is on top of
everything. Rip Thompson, are we
gonna do this? Rip Thompson, Rip
Thompson. It's like, OK, she's
not gonna let me forget this.
she's not, and I appreciate it.
I need it. So, and then just
because I didn't get a chance
yesterday. Nancy Rodriguez is a,
is a gem to New Mexico
healthcare as well, and I really
want to thank her for that. Um,
I don't have any questions
because Valeria keeps me up to
the minute with them, um, but I,
I want to encourage the folks
here, which probably most of
them already do to support this
funding. It's a real deal. I
mean, it's a, it's a bargain for
what we're getting and there's
As the senator said, there's
nowhere else we're going to get
it, you know, we're not gonna
get it from Department of Health
or healthcare authority because
they're up here, not.
On in the in the grassroots, so
I want to thank you all for all
the work that you do and please
take my thanks to all of your
members, all of your volunteers,
worker bees, whatever you want
to call them. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Representative and I
had a few questions of my own,
um, you mentioned
And I missed exactly how it was
going to happen, uh, kind of an
assessment or evaluation by UNM.
Is that something that you,
you're doing now or you'd like
to do in the future if you get
the money.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Madam
Vice Chair, um, so you and M,
uh, in 202011, 2014
ran ROI studies which have been
very helpful to us to understand
the the return investment,
right? Um, and so we are
currently in conversation with
UNM to see if we can um run
another ROI in, in the goal, my
goal, our goal is to have it at
least biannual.
if not annually to really report
back to executive branch and our
legislative body, um, you know,
and into community. Here's where
we're, we're making strides and
here's the return on investment
in from your tax dollars.
So it,
so it's something you're talking
about. Do you have the money to
do it or would they do it for
just as a community service.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, that's
part of the conversation, uh,
what I know historically, it's
been a service to communities,
NMHC is a 501c3 backbone
organization, the county and
tribal health councils, um, and
we're, you know, we're looking
for to build our own
sustainability so that we can
ensure pieces like this ROI to
continue or our own in
collaboration with DOH our own
collection of data and
extrapolation alongside them.
In reporting back to
legislation. Does that answer
your question, Senator.
This could be something that,
that we would ask the LFC staff
to also take uh in the future,
an interest in giving a, a, uh,
an appraisal of an assessment,
one of those studies that are
done about different programs
because if you're gonna be
asking for 44 million, it would
be good to have some kind of
Now you wouldn't have it, you
won't have that, that study that
shows just what a great deal
spending 44 million would be
this year because there's no,
not enough time and they've
already have their priorities,
but possibly for next year, we
could get that on the list of
studies that the LFC staff would
do for, uh,
The effectiveness of this
program, uh, because 11 of the
thing, yeah, uh,
Ruben, um, just to evaluation of
the. Exactly. OK, very good.
I'll, I'll shoot you a note.
Yeah
Um, that's a little different
from a return on investment, a
little deeper and gives us a
little broader thing. I'm
concerned, uh, have you found
any resistance to from the
executive departments to your
inputs, or have they've been
eagerly accepted and can you see
some evidence that they're
actually incorporating your
recommendations into their
policies and planning and and
programming.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, when
we're speaking about uh planning
and we're talking about uh DOH.
Yeah,
or CFD, uh, aging and long-term
services and the healthcare
authority, all four of them
absolutely. So on the DOH front,
um, health councils working
concert and so the, we're right
now in that chip implementation
process, so it's a constant
ongoing, you know, partnership
collaboration, day to day work.
Um, we've also have been engaged
in conversations with uh aging
and long-term services, uh, to
resource health councils to
connect.
Essentially kind of like a
navigator connect to elderly
population, um, to, to, to
Medicare and Medi medical um
resources available to them, um,
healthcare authority, um, we're
in the works of having a
follow-up conversation as well,
um, and the list goes on,
Jerilyn and, and Heather, I know
we have work that we're doing
with the New Mexico
Environmental division as well
on the climate front, um,
there's, there's lots of
collaborative.
op port un ities We also do, we
have a 12 page overview.
Report on the types of
collaboration goes into a little
bit more in-depth detail that
we're happy to share with, with
you and members of LHHS
connected to that is, is the,
the, the, the issue of the
behavioral health collaboratives
around the state. I mean, it was
like we had two parallel systems
for a while there. We'd have the
Burnley County Behavioral Health
Collaborative and the Burling
County Health planning council,
and that was the case in in
others they were
don't,
it just seems to me to make
great sense to, to pull them
together. Is that happening or,
or what's, what's the status of
that? Thank you, Mr. Chair. um,
and members of the committee,
um, the reference that I made
earlier around the community
collaborative forum the NMHC
launched, um, was to bring these
3 coalitions together health
councils, behavioral health
collaborative early childhood
education so that they can learn
in more detail about the
respective roles.
functions, priority strategies,
goals, and so forth and see
where the synergies are because
there's a great deal of
synergies where collaborations
can happen so that they can be
more effective in serving
communities. And we've also
showcased the collaborations
that are happening across all
three or across the two health
council behavioral health
collaborative as you mentioned,
um, so that we can learn from
them what works well, what
doesn't learn lessons so that it
seeds and inspires others.
to see those collaborations as
well, so we're literally
continuing to create those
convenings to to bring these
three coalitions together and
also it's not open to the
public. We'd love to invite you
all as well.
Um.
On Sunday night, I saw one of
your health planning councils in
action on television, uh, the
Chavez County, with the flooding
in Roseville, the Health
planning council was highlighted
on the, on the coverage of the
response to that emergency
situation, uh, I thought that
was you got pretty good press
out of that, uh,
congratulations. And they seem
to be doing a really good job of
pulling things together that I
thought it was uh something you
might wanna.
Uh, highlight when you ask for
some more money, that just the
role that the health planning
council played in serving the
people of Chavez County during
those floods.
Absolutely, thank you, Mr.
Chair, and to that point, um,
whether it's these, uh, you
know, the, the impacts, the
unfortunate impacts of fires and
floods and climate changes you
just noted, um, we already have
essentially the blueprint from
COVID in our emergency response
efforts, how integral health
councils were in coordinating
with state agencies, services,
uh, you know, uh public health
education intervention,
prevention, and all of that. And
so we can
literally duplicate what's
worked so well in these other
areas that were faced with
around climate change and around
um, you know, fires and floods,
um, and so on and so forth. So I
think we have a great partner in
health councils in a multitude
of ways.
Well, I, I wanna thank you for
the presentation, but also for
the work you're doing on the
ground. It's very good, uh, you
know, it's gratifying to see the
kind of
Quantum steps that have been
taken once you got a little bit
of money, it's amazing. Uh, this
could be a lesson for us all,
uh.
No, then step you're asking for
is a giant one from 3 million to
44 million, but hey, if you
don't ask for it, you won't get
it. And so maybe if you ask for
44 you'll get something.
Near what you need to get the
job done. Thank you. Thanks for
your presentation today. Thank
you, uh, all, all of you, Gerry
Lynn and Heather as well and
Valetti, thank you.
Mr. Chairman, may I just if I
may just add something, and I
know you may have mentioned this
previous, um,
But I know with the behavioral
health collaborative.
It's been non-existent for a
while.
But I know that there are some
proposals coming from LFC that
I'm, I, I believe is going to be
coming to make some changes
within the behavioral health
collaborative.
Um, it's there, there needs to
be, I think a revamp look again
as to what our intent was all
those years back.
I remember when we had the
discussion and passed it, and I
think the intent was good, but
it fell apart under Governor
Martinez, and it's just been
kind of a non-existent to revamp
it and move it because they
haven't met for a period of
time. And so I, I do know that
there will be a proposal I
believe coming this coming
legislative session to revamp
it, and I think
We need to be careful and seeing
what it's doing to engage with
um all these different parts of
the mosaic in this health
council's um school-based health
centers and others too, because
that's also part, I believe the
structure of what we talk about
um behavioral healthcare system.
So I just wanted to mention
that, Mr. Chair, that I've I've
heard. Thank you.
Very good. Thank you, Senator,
and thank you all. So we'll move
then to the next item on the
agenda, which is a report from
the Donana County Keveness pilot
program, and we've got Rosenda
Chavez Lara.
Family law attorney and a former
guardian ad lite, we have Brian
Kavanagh.
Uh, CEO of the FYI Plus and
Jennifer Race. Brian didn't,
didn't come?
No, Mr. Chairman, good morning,
um,
the person. Yeah.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
committee members. I apologize,
Brian Kavanaugh was not able to
make it this morning.
Well thank you, thank you for
coming and, and, uh, you have
something to pass on, yeah.
You haven't memorized it?
Yes
Good morning, Senate um good
morning, um, Chairman, Mr.
Chairman and committee members.
My name is Rosinda Chavez Lara.
I'm a former guardian at Lite
Youth Attorney, and eligible
adult attorney that worked the
contract with CYFD representing
children in custody from 2017.
Through um the end of 2023.
I was also invited to be a part
of the um pilot program that the
Kevinist settlement, um, had.
Developed and proposed to happen
in Donana County and I believe
the other was in Farmington.
I attended every single one of
the meetings.
That the Kevenous pilot program
had.
And that's the reason that I'm
here today to let you know what
I experienced in every single
meeting. This is a uh snippet of
everything that happened.
The collaborative, the, I'm
sorry, the pilot program was
brought about to
um, reach these goals, and
that's the first slide or the
second slide after my um fancy
little pencil with with a little
pulse.
The initial
purpose of the um pilot program
was to bring all of the
community together, healthcare
professionals, guardian ad
lites, um, workers within CYFD,
um, insurance, um, the
Presbyterian portion of the um.
The community, those that help
with with health insurance, so
we had a huge turnout at the
very first meeting. We had about
65 member um from the members
from the community show up to
our very first meeting.
And the purpose of that, um,
pilot program was to implement
some form of change, reasonable
changes and creative solutions
to what CYFD was um experiencing
the pilot team was to provide
concrete and community specific
recommendations to keep the
children first of all within New
Mexico and also to provide them
age supportive trauma and.
traumaresponsive care while in
CYMD custody.
This included also any
recommendation that would fill
the gap on, um, behavioral or
mental health services.
On the 3rd slide over are the
proposed recommendations and the
proposed recommendations from
the pilot program were to meet
these 3 bullets.
The, the sole responsibility and
the authority to agree to any of
the recommendations that the
pilot team came up with lied
with sub C of the cabinet
secretary, the director of
Protective Services and the HSD
cabinet secretary.
From there, the recommend any
recommendation that was deemed
to be unreasonable or impossible
was to then be brought to the
attention from the state.
To the facilitator that was
facilitating this pilot program
and so that we could discuss it
as a whole pilot program team so
that we would be able to discuss
any barriers or challenges or
the reason that this
recommendation was being
rejected or not accommodated to
by the three individuals that
had the authority and the
responsibility to move that
recommendation forward or to
implement that recommendation.
And then it it the 3rd bullet
does mention that the state was
to make every reasonable effort
to move the recommendation
forward, um, if it was not
within the state's ability or
within CYD's ability, then it
was we were to look for
solutions and look for anyone
else within nonprofits or
providers to help the state
reach that particular
recommendation.
And you turn to the next slide.
This is probably the most
informative of my slides, this
particular slide walks you
through what CYD visions.
What the pilot program was asked
to do.
The recommendations that the
pilot program brought forward.
And the response from CYFD.
The first one is the least
restrictive and most appropriate
placements that was what CYD
envisioned the pilot program
asked that we keep children and
youth in family-based settings
within the local community. Too
many of our children, as you all
know, were being sent out of
state and the first goal was to
keep them within the state of
New Mexico but also keep them
within a family setting if
possible.
The pilot program made
recommendations to increase the
number of foster homes to
provide foster parents support
and training, and we even
proposed a child crisis center.
The response from CYFD was
pretty blatant.
At the final meeting, the
response was, you come out and
find a placement on a Friday for
a child in a foster home.
The next CYD vision was a highly
skilled and supported workforce.
And the pilot program was asked
to build and maintain a strong
workforce that meets the needs
of children and youth.
The pilot recommended one that
we not have a hiring freeze that
we ensure that front line staff
support that the front line
staff was supported and retained
and that we certify social
workers.
The response from CYOD is that
they would train their staff for
appropriate trauma responsive
capabilities, but CYFD did not
have the, does not, did not have
and does not have the funding to
secure the appropriate staff to
provide that.
The third vision from CYD was an
accessible.
Accessible trauma responsive
system of care.
The ask from the pilot program
was to build and strengthen or
expand access to timely and I
really would like to emphasize
timely.
Timely and appropriate trauma
responsive behavioral and
medical services in Donana
County.
A pilot program recommended
number one, a high fidelity
wraparound services.
And access to all resources of
mental and behavioral health.
The response that we received
from CYFD was that there are
limited behavioral mental and
behavioral healthcare in Donana
County and it's out of CYFD's
control.
Something I personally do not
agree with and that particular
response and my final slide is
where are we now?
Well
All of our recommendations were
rejected, not one recommendation
that I remember of all the
meetings that I attended from
2023 through May of 2024, not
one of their recommendations was
ever implemented in Donana
County. Not one of them was
deemed unreasonable or
unfeasible or impossible that
they that the state followed the
three bullet points that I went
over that they were supposed to
take it to the facility.
li t ator the facilitator was
then to have um in a future
meeting, um.
collaboration to find out how we
could solve the issue or what we
could do about the barrier for
that impossible or that
unreasonable recommendation.
We never followed those
procedures.
At the final meeting in May of
2024, the Children's Court
judge, who was an active member
and participant of our pilot
program and our meetings, I
believe she may have missed
maybe 3 or 4 of our meetings,
but she was very active and very
present at every single one, the
majority of our meetings, she
asked a really important
question that I thought was, um,
Interesting.
When during her opening
statements and giving her
remarks, um, at the final
meeting she asked or she
mentioned that CYD in 2024 had
fewer abuse and neglect cases
coming forward in her court.
And she asked, does that mean
that abuse and neglect has been
resolved?
And she asked a question but
received no response.
That's a concern for us in
Donana County.
At the final meeting in May of
2024, 3 legislators were
present.
And promised to work with our
pilot team to help fix our
system.
And here today we thank you the
legislative Health and Human
Services Committee present here
today for your time and for your
dedication to hearing our
concerns.
With our system.
I think we all have a duty.
As adults, we all have a duty to
preserve the rights.
Of our children and see what
custody.
I get emotional because I did it
for 7 years.
And I got nowhere.
I'm committed though.
To see this through.
I'm committed to see a new
system that protects my clients.
Because my hands are tied as a
guardian ad litem as a youth
attorney and as a eligible adult
attorney, it feels as though I'm
I was consistently running up
against a wall.
In the courtroom.
And at CYMD team meetings.
So I, I leave it in your hands,
legislators here today and with
you.
Committee members, Mr. Chairman.
Our children have constitutional
rights.
And I'd like to make sure that
they are not violated anymore.
Thank you. I apologize, but this
is near and dear to my heart.
I am now going to pass my um
presentation over to a wonderful
colleague of mine we met.
Because one of my clients who's
had cerebral palsy and was in a
wheelchair, is in a wheelchair
for the rest of her life, had
issues getting any form of
medical care.
Even an appropriate sized
wheelchair.
And had no ramp available to get
her up to her trailer within her
foster home, so the foster dad
and foster mom had to pull up
the wheelchair and placed it up
on top of the trailer so that
she would be able to get into
the home.
And this is how I met, um, Miss
Jennifer Race, who is a
wonderful and
Licensed social worker, and I'm
going to pass my baton on over
to Miss Race. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee, thank you for the
opportunity to be here.
I am nervous, so I wrote it all
out just so you know. Um, so I
wouldn't leave anything
important out.
I do want to say I am a licensed
clinical social worker, and I
have been for 25 years in this
state. I am going to tell um.
A story in an attempt to impress
upon you, maybe in a different
way than you've ever heard
before. The importance, in my
opinion, of a highly qualified
workforce specifically inside
CYFD.
So, on the first slide, you'll
see my friend Eric, and you see
my job title, but you also see
my most important job title
professionally, and that's that
I am Eric's social worker.
To this day.
Thank you for allowing me the
time to discuss my experience
with the Kevins pilot and the
Department of Children, Youth
and Families, specifically the
Protective Services Division. I
have many stories to tell, as
you can imagine. Some about
being on the pilot and about
working in the field, um, but
this story is the most important
in my opinion. Please note, this
is also the only story I feel
safe telling because CYFD staff,
foster families.
Community providers and kiddos
have shared their fear of
retaliation from CYFD if their
story is accurately shared.
So, I've spent more than 25
years practicing social work in
southern New Mexico. And I've
always worked directly with
children and families. I've
never wanted to be involved at
the policy level. I have
rescinded a thing for this. Um,
I didn't think it was my
calling, and then I met Eric.
Um, now the primary focus of my
advocacy efforts is on improving
the quality of the workforce at
CYFD. This is the only reason I
served on the pilot, and it's
the primary reason why I'm here
today. I'm going to illustrate
this concern by telling you the
story of this young man who
changed my professional life for
the better, and that was a mere
4 years ago, so I had already
been practicing for a good chunk
of time. And before anyone asks,
this child has been adopted, and
I have permission from his
parents to share his name, his
and his story.
In fact, Irma and Jesus, who are
Eric's parents, have begged me
to get his story in front of
people who care and who may
actually have the authority to
do something to prevent stories
like this from ever happening
again.
To be clear, Eric was not in any
way a party in the Keviness
lawsuit, but he's a real boy, a
real person, and his story is
tragic.
You see, we can sit around and
talk about the issues all day
long.
But until we embrace the fact
that these are actual kids
suffering.
Then we failed to grasp the
emergent situation we've
allowed.
Slide 2 is Eric playing with
Sporky at one of our many
sessions together.
Um, I began working with him in
the fall of 2019. At this point,
he had been removed from Jesus
and Irma's home and bounced
around, but that's not the point
of this particular part of his
story. The school nurse had
concerns about his health
because he was beginning to lose
his balance, fall frequently,
and fatigue more easily than his
same age peers.
She, the school nurse, made a
common request.
For permission to obtain medical
records and speak with
physicians, um, from his
guardian who was CYFD at the
time.
They initially granted consent
and then rescinded it on 1113,
19.
I sat in many very large
meetings where CYFD staff and
the foster parent at the time
claimed that he was falling for
behavioral reasons.
And experiencing bowel accidents
for attention.
He could no longer even climb
the steps of the school bus, and
this was explained to us as a
behavioral issue as well.
I attempted to explain our
concerns for a possible
diagnosis of some sort of
muscular dystrophy.
I attempted to explain this to
the assigned worker and her
supervisor.
On 9419, I emailed the entire
team at Donanata County CYFD all
the way to the county office
manager.
I attached delivery receipts and
read receipts to those emails.
On 96, 2 days later, I received
email notification that my email
to the county office manager had
been deleted without being read.
Every single time I communicated
with the worker and or
supervisor, they were defensive,
dismissive, and bordered on
hostile. I really did genuinely
want to collaborate with them to
get a medical evaluation for
Eric.
The next slide is Eric and his
mom on their way to carry
Tingley up here in Albuquerque.
Fast forward a few months to a
meeting with CYFD higher ups and
our associate superintendent for
Special Education. As it turns
out, that county office manager
knew our associate
superintendent personally. They
signed consent to share medical
information on the spot.
Why should it take a personal
contact to do the right thing.
Fast forward again, and COVID
has hit.
Under mounting pressure, CYFD
finally moved Eric out of that
home where the foster parents
and the caseworker continued to
believe he was faking symptoms
of a medical diagnosis. At this
point, Eric is now back with
Irma and Jesus, who would always
expressed a desire to adopt him.
Interestingly, according to
CYFD, he had now also been
diagnosed with Duchenne muscular
dystrophy. Just, just one quick
Irma and Jesus had been a foster
parent. They had been a foster
parent, then Eric was moved from
their home and gone through a
few, and now he's back with a
different foster parent that was
resistant to having him get
medical. Yes, sir.
So at this point, he's back with
Erman Jesus, who had always
expressed a desire to adopt him
and been diagnosed with Duchenne
muscular dystrophy and in a
wheelchair most of the time.
As is the process with the
diagnosis like this, he needed
to be seen at Kerry Tingley here
in Albuquerque as quickly as
possible. In speaking with Irma,
I learned the following as
documented in my clinical notes.
Doctor Blank, I'm not
comfortable sharing her name,
herself.
Had attempted to contact.
The CYFD worker whose name was
in my notes, but I'm also not
comfortable sharing on 131618
and 19 to move the appointment
forward because they have the
results of the test.
The doctor has not received any
callback or communication from
CYFD at all, end quote.
Slide 4.
Remember, the time period I'm
talking about is 2020, and I
want you to see the date on that
medical note on that slide. It's
September 8th, 2016.
The note was provided to his
guardian CYFD and his foster
family at the time, who happened
to be Jesus and Irma.
He should have been evaluated,
diagnosed, and received
treatment for almost 4 years
prior to the time CYFD even
acknowledged his condition.
The next slide
Over the summer of 2020.
I promised to play nice with
CYFD and they allowed me the
true honor and privilege of
providing counseling and therapy
services for Eric via telehealth
and an IEP.
We talked about his diagnosis,
his prognosis, and his make a
wish.
These are things that CYFD
workers were not qualified or
skilled to do. They just simply
do not have the training or
knowledge base.
After all, one of the primary
rules in social work assessment
is to rule out all possible
medical causes before addressing
behaviors as the problem.
This is basic practice, and they
did not know how to do it.
Even so, the road to adoption
was full of struggle with
bickering over the equipment
Eric would need, a lift for the
van, for example, and who should
pay for it, even while Eric was
still in state custody.
The next slide.
is Eric's adoption photo and a
Make A Wish photo once he was
adopted in the summer of 2021.
He was granted his wish.
Eric wanted to be able to go
camping, and they granted him an
accessible RV to be able to do
that.
Make no mistake though, the
smile and joy you see in the
photo is the result of the love
and compassion shown to Eric by
foster parents who never gave
up.
Despite every single roadblock
created by CYFD.
In fact, Erman Jesus believed
that there was retaliation by
CYFD when they advocated for
Eric and his brother.
But they never quit fighting for
him.
The next slide is a current
family photo. This is Eric now.
He is in a wheelchair full time.
And he seems to understand the
progressive nature of his
disease. I think he understands
that it will in all likelihood
eventually cost him his life.
Could that be different or
delayed if CYFD had taken care
of his medical needs in 2016.
After 25 years, it is my
professional opinion that the
lack of care provided by CYFD
and his as his guardian cost him
years of his life, and I know
there are physicians who have
treated Eric who would agree.
Next slide
So what's the point?
The point is this, #1, I
acknowledge the shortage of
mental health providers
nationally and in this state,
however.
I do not believe a shortage of
providers is the primary issue.
Number 2, Eric's first social
worker was a bachelor's level.
I'm sorry, her first, his first
caseworker was a bachelor's
level social worker. As we got
to know each other, she cried to
me on the phone.
About the level of
responsibility she bore.
And the lack of training and
support.
I learned about a work culture
where the agency seems to eat
their young.
I personally observed a culture
of defensiveness and hostility
towards outside providers and
professionals who sincerely
desire to partner with CYFD.
I saw many times, remember the
email. An apparent attempt to
ignore problems and concerns,
hoping they would go away.
I learned of a workplace where
workers can never seem to admit
to mistakes. Be vulnerable or
open to ideas and suggestions
from clinicians outside the
department. The problem is not
only a lack of providers. It's
the culture and climate at the
agency.
Number 3.
Most social workers, most of us,
truly go into the profession
hoping to save the world.
At a minimum, we'd like to save
the children.
We want to work in child
welfare. I would love to work in
child welfare, but not here and
not with this agency.
Number 4
Lowering the standard
qualifications for these
positions down all the way to a
high school diploma.
We'll never fix the real problem
of culture and climate. It will,
in fact, make it worse, because
these new hires will need even
more support than licensed
degreed social workers. Number
5. In the meantime, kids like
Eric and his brother are paying
an extraordinarily high price
for unqualified workers trying
to operate in a hostile
workplace doing the most
difficult and important work in
our state.
Next slide, my, my suggestions.
And what I tried to push during
my time in the pilot.
Take all clinical training of
new hires and foster parents.
Out of the hands of CYFD, our
local uh behavioral health
collaborative LC3 or private
contractors can provide the
highest quality training to CYFD
workers and foster parents on
things such as the impact of
culture on behavior. Behavior
intervention, crisis
intervention, trauma informed
intervention. Autism
interventions. The effects of
medical
diagnoses on behavior and
working with schools and medical
providers, etc.
Number 2, offer support groups
for CYFD workers and foster
parents at least once per month,
facilitated by a highly
qualified clinician outside of
the agency, provide paid time
off and our respite to attend
these groups for those who
choose to take advantage of it.
Number 3, Work with the Center
for Excellence in Social Work
and the social work Workforce
Consortium.
To increase the number of
degreed licensed social workers
at CYFD. Perhaps a pipeline
could be modeled after the Yazi
Martinez teacher pipeline.
During my time on the Kevinness
pilot, I asked many times.
To be able to send an anonymous
confidential survey to all CYFD
workers in Donana County to
determine their real concerns
without fear of reprisal. This
request was repeatedly ignored
or denied.
This is part of the problem with
climate and culture. It feels on
the ground.
Like supervisors are trying to
protect themselves and frontline
workers are stuck between doing
what they think is best and
going against the inconsistent
guidance of higher ups.
My last slide.
Change the culture and climate
immediately.
I promised Eric and his family.
That I would tell you his story
with the same zeal that I've had
in working with him.
Now I can't see. Um.
It's tempting to believe.
That this is an isolated case.
But that's simply not true.
Remember, I've witnessed many
stories.
But Ermine he sees no longer
have fear of reprisal.
From CD. So this is the story I
share with you.
My true suggestion, and this is
the way I talk to my social work
friends. Well,
Usually and more colorful with
my social work friends, but
It's to dismantle absolutely
everything about CYFD and start
all over again.
Make everyone reapply for their
positions. Make it known that
things are going to be
different.
Create a commission to oversee
CYFD.
And hold them accountable,
similar to the commission on
Higher Education.
Implement the recommendations
from the co-neutrals and the
pilots immediately.
Supposedly we're all on the same
team.
And we should all at a minimum
be on Eric's.
I also apologize, Mister Chair.
I am a micro-practice person and
I'm a micro-practice person in a
macro-practice environment. So
thank you for your time and we
are happy to answer questions.
Well, I want to thank both of
you for
Not just the passion you
demonstrate for the issue, but
for being willing to come up and
share hard facts, hard, hard.
a hard story.
Uh, before we go to the
committee, just a quick
question. Has the pilot
disbanded then?
Um, thank you, Chairman, uh, Mr.
Chairman, uh, my understanding
is that yes, we were given a
certain amount of time to meet
um and to come up with
recommendations, implement the
recommendations and then if the
recommendations were successful
in Donana County, then we would
implement them throughout the
state, but we have reached our
time limit. And do you have any
idea about whether the San Juan
pilot is also disbanded.
My understanding was that the
pilot program was only going to
run a certain amount of time.
In both areas, yes. So
basically, your understanding is
that it went on, you had 65
people there willing to help.
And at the end of the time,
nothing was accepted, nothing
was adopted and none of the
recommendations.
Mr. Chair, um,
I think you're still meeting
informally, is that correct?
In informally, I'm sorry, Mr.
Chairman, committee members, um,
representative Ferrari, my
understanding is they may be
meeting informally in Donana
County, um,
I, I just cannot verify that. I
don't know.
Mr. Chairman, may I, uh,
representative Ferrari, there
are a few of us that I think you
may be talking about who were
frustrated with the progress of
the pilot and agreed on our own
to meet separately just as
members of the community with
stories to tell, and that is
the.
That group
It it's still in existence, but
it's 4 of us.
Um
Yeah.
Well, let's go to the committee
for questions. Uh, what are we
giving them, 3 minutes each? 3
minutes each. We'll start with
you, Representative Martinez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I will attempt to be brief.
I am not an emotional guy.
I have been an advocate for
veterans and their families, the
majority of my adult life, and I
have never seen tragedy.
Like this
And I've met with
frontline social workers.
And I've also met with
leadership at the top, the very
top.
And the stories that I get are
very different.
Those frontline social workers.
Feel crushed.
And the top level of this
agency.
As a very rosy picture of the
future.
The first interview I gave as a
legislator was after the first
60-day session two years ago.
And I made one comment, and I
have saved that comment.
That we have failed the
children.
Of the state.
And I apologize. I know that
this face will, they'll take
pictures and send mailers out.
But my heart is.
Breaking because I know some of
these families I've talked to
some of these families, and
they've asked me why.
Why hasn't the legislature done
something about it?
And all I can tell them.
So we're trying.
But when we introduced bills
that are
Not given a fair hearing.
Or shot down in committee right
away?
Makes me angry.
It really does cause even though
we, we.
Work in a political climate, the
ones that I introduce are not
politically motivated cause I
have to come home and look at
those people in the eye.
And tell them I'm sorry.
We tried
I want to thank both of you for
the courage.
And the commitment to these
kids.
And rest assured that there are
people.
Who
Want to do what's best.
And I hope that.
We all find the courage.
To do it sooner than later.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Celia Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and don't
apologize for crying. Shows your
passion, and it also helps you
avoid ulcers. If you let it out.
It really does, um, I'm a crier
and I know it helps me, um.
Who organized the pilots. I, I,
if you said it, I didn't catch
it. Who, what was, was it the
CYFD or what or how did these
pilots come to be?
Um, thank you, Mr. Chairman,
committee members, I believe
that the um pilot program was um
Developed by the um.
neutrals and the um, OK, the
groups the group.
So yes, I should have figured
that out because it's part of
the Kevinness settlement.
Correct.
Which isn't, doesn't seem to be
going anywhere. I, I really, uh,
just want to commend you on the
recommendations, um, as a
legislator saying this over
time, it's gotten a bigger and
bigger, you know, first, OK,
it's a new administration and
you want to give them a little
time. OK, it's a new director,
you want to give her a little
time and and it's just come to
be such, well, you've come to
realize that it's
It's a culture.
Like a really toxic culture.
And I know I I used to work at
the clinical law program and we
dealt with some of these abuse
neglect cases, and I'll never
forget the one where, um,
A young woman was just
Heavy.
And they took her out of her
home, um, and it turned out she
had an ill, uh, a pituitary
illness.
But they had her, it, you know,
bouncing around in foster homes,
while her family just missed her
and she missed her family and
Same kind of thing they didn't,
they didn't get the medical
diagnosis needed. I, uh, I
really appreciate your, your
recommendations and I
I'm just wondering how we can.
has a legislature.
Get these things implemented,
you know, because there's this
whole balance between policy and
micromanagement, um.
And, and, and I think the best
we can do is structural change.
Cause these are real specific
things. It makes me feel like
you should be running this
agency, um.
I don't know, it's.
Mr. Chair, I'm just at a loss,
um, and that doesn't usually
happen, but I
I really, uh, commend you and
thank you for, for coming
forward. Um, it was courageous.
I mean, I also know that people
have told me things about CYFD.
One of the issues, and I guess
I'll ask this question, one of
the issues people have come to
me about is this issue of
unqualified staff, um, in two
contexts. One, the lawsuits
against the state because they
put these people who made these
horrible decisions on the stand
and just show how unqualified
they are.
So I've seen it in that context,
but also resentment by the
qualified individuals who
actually have the degrees and
the training necessary being
paid at the same level as people
who don't have the training in
disease and, and um degrees
necessary, but these individuals
don't want to be public.
Because they're afraid of
reprisal.
And so it makes it very
difficult to
To get at it. Uh, we did get a
commitment of a salary study. I
haven't seen the outcome of that
salary study, and I'll get to my
question, have you?
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, I have not seen the
outcomes of that salary study.
However, I would like to tell
this committee the same thing I
said at one of our first pilot
meetings, uh, I, while I am not
here representing my employer at
all. I am a school social
worker.
And it boggles my mind that a
school social worker should be
on a higher pay scale than CYFD
frontline workers that boggles
my mind because I know the level
of responsibility I have in my
job versus the level of
responsibility they have in
their positions. Um, not that I
want to pay cut, but they should
certainly be paid what they're
valued, um, I listened to uh
Professor Emeritus Alvinal.
present to the Senate Memorial
Committee recently on behalf of
the Social Work Workforce
Consortium where he shared that
7% of the CYFD staff are
licensed to greet social
workers, 7%. Exactly, and, and
what got me was they're getting
at the same pay scale.
As people with a high school
diploma who've been case
managers for a while.
It's, it's just very disturbing.
It's, I, I know, and I
apologize, it's such a tiny
piece, but it's symptomatic, I
think, of the overall.
Culture problem within this
agency.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, I absolutely agree it
is my thought, my belief that
with adequate pay, social
workers want to change systems.
This is what we do. We love to
shake the cages. We love to make
things better for people. If we
could bring in degreed licensed
social workers pay them what
they're worth, especially if
they bring with them 1015, 2030
years of experience to guide
that change and change the
culture and climate.
Not only do you improve
recruitment and retention. You
also increase recruitment and
retention of foster parents
because they're better
supported. Right now if a foster
parent calls their worker at
midnight, what do I do with this
kiddo with autism who's having a
full blown meltdown.
They don't know, and it's not
their fault, they don't know.
That's not their degree. That's
not their license.
But of course foster parents
quit, and of course foster
children are bounced around. I
absolutely agree with the
premise. We need a well
structured pay salary schedule
that recognizes and rewards
relevant degrees, the highest
possible licensure and years of
experience so that we can
generate system change. Thank
you. And Mr. Chair, I just don't
understand why that's not the
case at this agency. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. I think my time is
up. Yeah.
I'm sorry, you just used a
Representative Chavez's time
too.
Representative Chavez, go ahead.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, um, so.
I mean, the issues continue to
be the same, right? um.
I'm on the SM 5 task force, so
the task forces has heard a lot
of presentations and, and I've
been in meetings with the
secretary and raised the issues
about foster parent recruitment,
training of the workers,
recruitment, the whole thing and
we sort of
While we're doing it, right?
That's the answer that we get.
And so I think that at this
moment in time, we have to stop
trying to fix CYFD because it
can't be fixed.
Um, one year recommendations in
here in terms of creating a
commission is something that
Senator TC Pino introduced um
earlier um this year.
Um, and that legislation will be
introduced again.
Um, hopefully this time it will
be passed. We're gonna need
everybody's support to do that.
Um, because I don't think that.
Continuing to have a new
secretary every 2 years or every
time there's a governor we have
secretaries who come in and have
their own idea of what child
welfare should look like, um,
and they don't have the
experience or background
necessary to understand what
child welfare is and should be.
Um, so I'm asking for that in
terms of supporting that
legislation when it comes up.
Um, and the other piece too is
that.
Back in the day, um, I'm not
gonna date myself, um, but um
it's been a while. Um, I worked
at CYFD before it was actually
CYFD it used to be under the
Human Services department. Um,
and I believe the senator was
there also, um, at that period
of time and we were under a
federal court consent decree,
um, and the department did start
hiring licensed social workers.
I was one of those.
Um, things were improving.
And then the consent decree
ended and it went to hell, and I
don't know why because I, I
stayed almost 10 years.
Um, and
I look at it now and.
I have no words in terms of what
it looks like now or in terms
of, you know, what those kids
are going through. I know that
there are still kids languishing
in foster care that should have
had a permanency plan years ago,
and they don't. Um, one little
boy in particular.
Um, has been with his foster
parents since the age of 2.
He's now almost 4 1/2.
Those foster parents are his
parents in his mind.
And to try to send him back to
his birth family is just going
to be one more tragedy.
Um, and I really feel for the
workers also because they have a
huge responsibility and the
department.
Hasn't done a good job in terms
of changing the um work
environment and again, I don't
think that they're going to,
they don't have the ability um
to be able to do that. So we
need to get some consistency at
the top of that department so
that we can have consistency
throughout the department. So um
thank you for your work.
Um, and again, I hope I see you
during the legislative session
and testifying in support of the
bill.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, if I may, um,
The, the reason I would support
the commission so strongly as
during Eric's case, when I
finally had evidence of medical
neglect in every other aspect of
my professional life, I would
pick up that phone and make a
report, right? I have evidence
of suspected abuse and neglect.
Well, guess who that report goes
to?
So I did. I called Sky, the
statewide centralized intake,
and I said, I want to make a
report of of medical neglect,
and they said, OK, who's the
guardian?
And I said CYFD and the poor
worker had no, she was like, I
don't know what to do with this,
so I felt for her, but I wanted
it documented, so I made an
allegation of neglect against
CYFD, but I had to report it to
CYFD. And in my opinion, that is
the importance of a commission.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Chavez. Representative Ferrari,
are you one of the three that
was at the meeting, the
legislators who was at that
meeting and
I know, I'm sorry, I was out of
state at the time, but I have
met with Rosina and Jennifer and
um just before we started
hearing um.
From in our committee from CYFD
and the co-neutrals and so it
did help me understand what they
were presenting as changes, and
I really appreciate that and all
the efforts that you have
persisted in, you know, bringing
to light a lot of these issues
and um critical issues for
saving our kids.
And
I will support
Um, your recommendations that so
many of our community have
worked so hard.
Um, to make and um.
For those adoptions in the
efforts of my colleagues that
have been so important. So thank
you again.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you both, um.
Never ever be ashamed of crying.
It means that you're a human
being and you care, and we need
100,000% more of that from other
folks. I'm a crier too, and so
I, I think back to the young man
you're talking about and you
know, as, as you started your
story, I'm thinking muscular
dystrophy. He can't go up the
steps, muscular. I'm a pediatric
physical therapist, so, um, and
then I start thinking about.
If the foster parents were
saying it was behavior, they
were probably punishing him for
what was happening to his body
out of his control, and um I
can't imagine what that would
feel like, not being able to
control it but being punished. I
also am the mom of a a man with
autism and getting, you know, at
midnight when he's tantruming
for his 6th hour when I'm his
natural mother and I wish I
could have.
That somebody should call and,
and I raised him. I knew him
from from before he was born,
um, so.
I really am concerned about who
we keep naming to CYFD
secretaries under the previous
administration, she brought her
tourism secretary who I always
called a cheerleader cause she
was very much, you know, New
Mexico, New Mexico, but she
didn't know anything about child
welfare. It's, it's, it's, yes.
Yeah, um, so we, we keep making
the same mistake over. We need
someone from within the system
and not necessarily to see why.
IFD system, but the child
welfare system who understands
it, and I always say I
frequently say, you know, let's
nuke it and start over, and
that's kind of what you're
suggesting and I'm, I'm all for
it, um, you know, I mean, we
have to.
We just need to have a box of
tissues up here.
Um, I'm all for that. I mean,
knowing that we need to keep
something going and we can't
just flatten it. Oh that's what
I wanted to do a special
education is just flatten it and
start over, but um.
I, I actually have a, a cousin's
wife who lives in Minnesota and
she's a social worker and I was
trying to convince her to come
here and I stopped.
I stopped and it's she's young
social worker. She's full of
them and passion and I just, I
just didn't feel like I could do
that to her, um.
And then, um.
Yeah, just
As, as a pediatric PT, I worked
with lots of foster kids and
their foster families and saw a
lot of the horrors going on on
both sides, Natural families and
foster families and including,
um, I remember working with this
baby who had multiple. She was
alcohol addicted and substance
use and she had cleft lip and
palate. She had liver concerns,
kidney concerns. She wasn't
doing anything in any of her
developmental steps. She was
with her mom and while I was
working with her, she got taken
out to a foster family.
And the foster family after a
couple weeks, I mean, this girl
needed OTPT speech nutrition,
whatever there is she needed and
mom foster mom just said it's
too much trouble for our family
to have all these people coming
in and out, so this little girl.
I mean, I, I, she needed
everything that she got and it
breaks my heart that a foster
family could just say sorry,
it's too much trouble for me,
um, you know, forget about what
the kid needs. So thank you so
much for your passion. You have
a cheerleader here, but not a
tourism secretary.
Um, Senator Lopez will go to
you.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
We don't have enough time to sit
here and discuss.
To be honest, um.
To take on what representative
um
Thompson was saying
You can keep going back on all
the other secretaries that have
been appointed to the department
over the years, and there's only
been, I think, one.
Two, maybe who've been truly
qualified to sit in that spot.
Under Governor Martinez, we had
the tourism secretary, then we
had a couple other persons who
had no idea.
To be honest, as to what their
job was.
And it's evident for what was
taking place based as to what
you're you're presented here in
2016 that was under
uh Governor Martinez, and we all
have stories. I have a story of
a young girl who was raped by
her father.
Um, substantiation by the
department that was then
reversed under the tourism
secretary.
I went to go petition and do
everything that could, but the
young girl was returned to her
father.
I mean, there's, there's so many
incidences of what's happened
over the years, not just under
this governor, but under many
administrations and I've been
around a while, as some of us
have to.
So first of all, thank you for
your presentation. Thank you for
your heart and for caring.
There are many proposals that
are in front of us, the
commission, um, Representative
Chasey, there was a proposal for
us yesterday on, you know, where
they're doing um a potential
task force next year, but
they've been doing some surveys,
you know, getting some intake,
um, writing down the information
about, uh, you know, what's
happening currently, the
different levels and such. We
have Senate Memorial 5 Task
Force of which Representative
Chavez and several persons,
including the secretary, she's
been
Attending with us at each one of
them, so I'm, I'm at least
pleased on that level.
Um, we listened to your
recommendations and Kevin S is
also we have a member from
Kevins, who sits with us on the
task force, and we've heard all
these wonderful potentials for
what can happen.
But
and I mentioned this at an LFC
meeting where we were meeting at
UNM and I did mention as the the
subcommittee was finishing is
that I hope that the governor
would listen.
And be willing to entertain some
changes within the department.
Because no matter what work we
do and how much passion we have,
if it doesn't get signed by the
governor, it ain't going
nowhere. And we've been around
long enough that that happens.
It's the game.
It's a culture, yes, even for my
own daughter that I have now, I
have stories and I told
Secretary Casados about middle
management.
Even if we have a commission, it
still ain't changing what's
happening inside that
department.
And I'm being very incorrect on
my English, but it's not going
to change what's currently
happening, the lack of
investment, the lack of
appreciation for those who are
there. And yes, there are those
who are making bad decisions,
but they don't have any support
and you look at our education
system, it's the same thing. We
have teachers who are doing
good. We have some bad ones,
yes, but there's a lack of
support that we don't give. I
mean, none of us are going to go
work if all you hear is the bad
stuff, right? Bad, bad, bad.
It's an HR.
It's an issue of when you want
to recruit, it's not a bed of
roses, while the roses have
thorns, but it's not a, you
know, this beautiful,
Place because it's hard.
But Mr. Chair, when I look at is
how do we make those changes in
what you've proposed here from
Kevin S is important,
but how do you work within a
system that is tainted, that is
hurting that has some ugliness
in it.
And that to me is a big change
that people are not wanting to
make and that's because
sometimes staff
Sit out the next secretary,
Staff sit out the next turnover
of legislators, staff sits out,
right? Because they're there.
OK, so they're there. How do we
make the changes internally? To
me, that's an HR focus and we as
legislators, we can't do that.
That's the function of the
executive.
We have a new governor coming in
in 2 years, 18 months, give or
take, by the time we get through
session. So what are we going to
do to talk about with that new
governor coming in.
Either he or she. That's where
we need to work with the news
media entities such as um the
plaintiffs, right, for Kevinness
and all the others. I know that
Kevin S is going back to court.
Now in November, I think we did
that. I'm hoping that they're
going to push some things where
we actually get the feds engaged
on this because that's the only
thing that helps to change.
Our local politics has problems.
And I'm just being quite, quite
frank about it, and we all know
it, the legislators, we try and
do our best and we do, but it's
still prevalent on whatever line
item happens on the budget and
whatever is vetoed or
You know, that little veto
pocket pocket item, whatever.
It, it just, there's some
Endeavors, I believed in what
Kevin S has done for us, and
we're gonna be discussing this
on Friday at our task force.
It's just a day for discussion.
I don't want to have any votes,
but I think each task force
member needs to share what we're
sharing even here. Um,
But
How we change a system that has
been like this for years.
It's entrenched.
I don't have an answer, but I
believe it's piecemeal and if
there's an actual what was done
back when Senator Ortiz Pino was
there as well as Representative
Chavez. I'm hoping that we could
level it up with the feds
actually do something.
Because the state cannot do it
unless there's a federal
involvement which costs money.
We'll see what happens.
I'm, I'm hopeful that from when
you all to Kevin asked, in fact,
we have a report out coming, Mr.
Chair, too, from the, the call
neutrals. I remember the call
neutrals also work at CYFD. So
we'll see what else comes out
from that report, but I'm
anticipating what will happen
when they have their court
hearing.
So I just say a TPD, but thank
you for what your passion is for
what you do, and we'll be paying
attention to this at Friday's
meeting too.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Lopez.
Senator Representative Cates.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you so
much for your presentation. I,
I, I know everyone here is
really thank you. I, I, I
understand the risk that you
took.
In telling your story and so I
very much appreciate it.
If uh Senator Lopez and
Representative Chavez don't have
a clear and perfect path for us
to follow. I don't know what we
can do because we really look to
them, um, as being on the task
force.
Um, I, I will support any bill
that takes that director
position and no longer is
appointed by a governor. I will
support any bill that will
increase licensed, educated,
experienced social workers in
their numbers. I know that I ran
programs that hired social
workers, 15 years ago, and I
hired many of them from CWFT and
I didn't have better benefits.
I couldn't pay them more. They
came to me because they could
accomplish what their mission
is, which is to improve the
lives of the families we serve,
and that's why you become a
social worker. And so I, I
understand that workforce. I, I
do think and I've been talking
about this.
Even to the lieutenant governor
back in 2018 to see where FT is
too big. It needs to be split
up.
Um, I, um, am interested to hear
more about Senator Lopez's
federal involvement.
I find that many things do not
culturally shift here without a
lawsuit involved or a federal
intervention, and I'm sad to say
that.
I guess I have no questions and
I have no magical answer. I will
just say that.
Why we may understand that
addiction is a disease and I
very much understand that.
Um
What we're teaching generations
of children is that they don't
matter.
The people when you're under the
age of 18, you can do virtually
anything to that child as long
as they're not hospitalized or
killed. They get along, they get
away with it, and that is the
lesson that this generation of
children.
are learning
And we will continue to suffer
the consequences of it.
Thank you again for your
bravery. I will be asking some
questions to CYFD on some basic
protocols such as why any
individual who needs medical
hard equipment. What is the
process of accessing that? How
do we make sure? Why is it
always up to the foster family,
it should be following the
child.
Um, and so, uh, I, I will go
into the weeds and some of that,
but I am so sorry that I do not
have a magic wand.
Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, may I? Yes.
Representative Cates, thank you.
Um, I just want to, as you're
going into the weeds, remind you
that Eric is just one story.
Um, and the one that my
colleague Rosenda referred to at
the beginning, uh, it's an
ongoing case where we still do
not have a ramp.
That
has been 2 years, 3 years.
Um, so I, I too no longer have a
magic. Well, I never had a magic
wand, um.
I, I do have some ideas,
however, and perhaps this isn't
the time or the place, but we
are available for questions and
I appreciate the support from
the entire committee. Thank you.
Yes, thank you, I would love to
give you some ideas about some
disability attorneys in our
state, and I will be glad to
share that with you. Thank you.
I'm waving at the uh disability
attorney.
Uh,
thank you, thank you both, not
just for coming here and
sharing.
Your views on, on what's going
on and, and bringing us up to
date on
Which seems like a uh an
ill-fated effort at, at a, at a
pilot program and Donat County.
I, I don't know what's going on
in San Juan County, but I
wouldn't be surprised if a
similar result hadn't occurred
there.
Um, my experience has been the
department gets very defensive
as soon as any group makes
recommendations, the department
says, though, you don't
understand us, our problems are
multiple, far beyond your poor
abilities to understand and just
leave us alone, and we'll keep
trying the same thing over and
over and over again.
And that pretty much fits the
definition of insanity. When
something doesn't work and you
keep trying it over and over
again. It doesn't work to hire
people with bachelor's degrees,
so you start hiring less
qualified people, and that
doesn't work, so you go to high
school. And then, and then you
just, you're training people to
do paperwork. And, and you're
not really getting any kind of
clinical or professional
expertise into the department
and it's just a.
downward spiral.
I had had great hopes that the
announcement of a family
services division was going to
make some sort of difference.
I, I don't know how that's
going. Uh, uh, when you pointed
out that the.
A number of cases coming before
the judge had dropped.
I thought, well, maybe that's
evidence that they have a strong
family services unit down there
in Donana County, and there
Not taking families into, uh,
they're not taking kids into
custody because they're serving
the families and keeping the
families united in, in providing
them supports. That sounds like
that may not actually be what's
going on, but that was my first
thought. Well, maybe it's this
is evident that we're trying
something that is actually
working.
Um, and the same thing about
recruiting more foster families.
I noticed one of your
recommendations was for a crisis
center for kids.
If you cannot recruit foster
families.
Go to something like a crisis
center. We had one in
Albuquerque. They disbanded it
because it wasn't as good as the
perfect thing, which is family
setting, of course not. It's not
as good as a family setting, but
I face did a lot better than
having people having kids
staying in the offices.
And, and, and I just don't
understand the thinking that
says we reject the, the good
because the excellent is so much
better when you can't even
attain the good.
I, I,
it, it, it just seems like over
and over again the same mistakes
keep getting made, which is why,
I mean, the big problem, as you
both have pointed out, is the
staff is inadequate to the
demands of the job.
And if that's the case.
You don't solve it by lowering.
The
Expectations for the staff.
You either find a new way to
attract more, more skilled
staff.
Or you rethink the demands of
the job, but you're not going to
get there by just doing the same
thing over and over again.
Every time a worker gets hired
and then leaves within 6 months.
That's disastrous.
Cuz that's kids that have gone
without care, having to go
another 6 months without care
because it'll take that long for
the new worker to come up to
speed.
Uh, I, I
That's why I recommended the
crea and you mentioned it, I, I,
you didn't write it down. It's
not in the written, your written
comments, but you recommended,
one of your recommendations was
to go to a, to a some kind of a
commission.
To me, the, the, there are two
advantages to go to the
commission.
Well, 3, really takes it out of
the political arena, so you're
not hiring somebody because you
know them because they've been
your chief of staff for the last
2 years, or because they did a
great job at tourism, and so you
think they'll do a great job
here too. No, it doesn't
necessarily translate that way.
But beyond that,
It's how you begin,
I think, to restore the public's
confidence because until you
make some change.
The public just has the
perception that this is a
continuation of the same
disastrous.
Malays that we've suffered over
for the past 20 years.
And, and it's, and it'll be
true. You've got to do something
to shake up the public's
perception so that those skilled
clinical social workers will
come to work for CYFD instead of
the public schools or become
care coordinators at an HMO
which uh a lot of them did
because they got paid $70,000
and then they didn't do a damn
thing, and they realized they
weren't doing a damn thing, but
once you're making 70,000, how
do you go back to a $50,000 a
year job or a $45,000 you don't.
So
I, I think that the advantage of
creating a commission.
Would be that you would restore
public confidence, you take it
out of the.
Out of the political arena, but
the third thing is you would
have open public meetings to run
the department.
They would, it would not be done
behind closed doors. It wouldn't
be done in a cabinet meeting in
the governor's office where who
knows what went on.
And then when the press asks
what went on, well, I'm sorry,
we, we're just not at liberty to
talk about this because there's
litigation. We can't say
anything.
We're just going to keep doing
everything under the, under the,
the mushroom growing uh
structure that we've created
here and they keep feeding stuff
to us to, to make sure we don't
know what's really going on.
Those public hearings that a
commission would have to have
the press would be present.
There would be webcast. The
decisions would be made out in
the open.
Why are we stopping the pilot
program. Why are we rejecting
the recommendations, and the
commission would be made up of
professionals, people with
expertise.
I, I really think that until we
make some kind of drastic change
like that, um.
We're, we're just not going to
see it it's just impossible for,
no matter how hard the
department, oh, the 3rd, there's
another advantage to go into the
commission. You would be able to
get out from underneath state
personnel office, I think we'd
have to structure it
differently.
So that they could do their own
hiring, they could set their own
salaries. They could try to
attract the clinicians that are
desperately needed in those
supervisory positions so that
the new workers coming in would
have a chance to get
professional supervision and
could get their license after
3000 hours or whatever.
They can't even give, they can't
even provide professional
supervision now to, to, to get
new graduates, to hire new
graduates and get them MSW's
licensed as a certified social
workers.
Uh
I don't know how you're going to
change the public's perception
until you create the image that
you're doing something
drastically different, but just
to keep the same thing over and
over and over again. It, we're
not getting anywhere.
And, and the department's
working hard. Nobody's saying
they're not working hard. I
mean, the, the secretaries
racing around the state and
having meetings and she's
probably working 70 hour weeks,
but that's not gonna cut it.
It's just not gonna, how are you
going to recruit new foster
families to a department that
that has such a bad reputation.
You, you, you, you know, it, and
it's, how do you change the
reputation?
It it's a chicken and egg
situation.
We're going to hear the,
tomorrow morning, we're going to
hear the department's budget
request, the LFC staff is going
to give us a report on several
departments, one of which is
CYFD. We'll hear their budget
request. I'm hoping they're
asking for some massive
infusions of cash. If they're
not, we know they're not
serious.
If they're not, how are they
ever going to attract the social
work staff that they need to
make this work.
So we'll find out tomorrow
morning whether they're serious
or not. And if they're not, how
are they going to increase the
reimbursement to foster
families. How are they going to
add the family Services division
with the resources it needs to
really help families stay
together.
We've got money. There's no
reason for them not to ask for
it. Now, then it becomes
It's our job. Are we gonna give
them the money that they need to
do the job. But
So thank you for bringing this
to our attention. I wish your
report had been more glowing,
that you had said, you know, we
made these 8 recommendations and
they only did 6 of them.
But you made 9 recommendations,
and they didn't do any of them.
So
Thanks for coming and bringing
us up to date.
Thank you for having the courage
and thank you for shedding some
tears too, as an indication just
how crucial this is.
Appreciate it. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
committee members, may I? Thank
you.
Thank you all for your attention
today and um getting through the
emotional part for for both of
us. I'm, I am open. I don't know
about my colleague here because
I haven't asked her, but if you
all need support at the
legislative session. I'm willing
to drive down. I'm willing to
take the day off of work and do
what I, I need to do because I'm
not gonna let this go.
And we do want to also thank
Representative Ferrari. She was
not one of the three.
But I tried my best to keep
My reputation as best I can
intact without naming the three
representatives that showed up,
but we have not heard from them
since.
But Representative Ferrari did
approach us and lent an ear and
we're here today because of
Representative Ferrari and we're
hoping that we can make a
difference in Donana County in
some form or fashion, and of
course statewide.
I don't know if our contact
page, um, printed.
Uh, OK. It's on the back of, of,
of Jennifer slides, um, please
feel free to reach out to any of
us. We have, we are a separate
group from the Kevinist pilot
program, we
Saw early on that this was not
going to go anywhere.
And 4 of us, um, decided to band
together and move forward and
we're willing to do that to see
that to the end, so you have our
contact information and I do
want to, um, I think we've all
been on the page of, as Senator
Lopez mentioned getting federals
involved if we need to go up
higher, we, we will, I'm happy
to figure out the legal way to
do that, um, if we need to go
up.
A little bit higher and
Take that funding from the
federal requirement that CYFD
has to meet in court for every
permanency review hearing. I
know about that, and if we need
to to fight that legally we
will.
Um, thank you very much. I don't
know if Ms. Grace has any last
comments. Thank you
of all your recommendations that
were responded to by CYFU, the
one that I, I just can't get out
of my craw is limited mental and
behavioral health care in Donana
County. That's out of CYFD's
control. No, it's not out of
CYT's control, there's something
called the behavioral health
collaborative that's supposed to
bring all the resources of state
government to
on, on a need identified by any
one department of state
government. So if Donana County
needs more.
Mental and behavioral health
care.
CYFD ought to be banging the
cymbol and, and, and, and, and,
and, and raising Cain and, and,
and making sure that somebody
begins providing that care. It's
not out of there, I mean, that's
what they're supposed to be
doing is finding resources for
the kids in their care. I, I
just don't understand that. Oh,
I'm sorry, we, you know, we
can't do a damn thing about it.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to
speak directly to that, um, with
a different case, we were told
that the parents, the, the
family of origin could not
begin.
Mental health services because
there was a waitlist everywhere.
Well, I've gotten to the point,
maybe I'm jaded after 25 years
where I just don't believe
anything anybody says. So I took
an afternoon and called.
A dozen
Providers of behavioral health
services in our community and
asked.
Can you get a set of parents in?
6? 6 dozen had a waitlist of 2
weeks or less. I put it all in
an email to CYFD. So in some
sense, this is a very typical
experience with CYFD where they
will tell you there's a lack of
something, but you don't have
social workers used to going out
and finding the resources. Tell
me what you need. I will go out
and find it. I may have to
create it, but I will go out and
find it because that's what they
trained me to do, um, so that,
that is sort of the epitome of
what it's like to work.
with CYFD and Donana County.
Ruby just reminded me also that
we, we appropriated.
$20 million
for expanding children's
behavioral health services, uh,
2 years ago, it didn't get
spent, so we had to reallocate
it.
Yes, it was not beyond their
control. It could have something
could have been done.
Thank you very much.
Members, we go now to public
comment and we have uh two
people here in the audience and
how many online? 33 online. So
you have 3 minutes, we have
Robert Edgar from uh Together in
New Mexico, which used to be
called Albuquerque Interfaith
and Charles Guttmacher from Do
Good Inc.
So Mister Edgar, go ahead.
You're watching
Mr. Chair,
committee members, um, thank you
this morning. My name is Bob
Edgar. I'm with, uh, Together
New Mexico, which is formerly
being doing, doing business as
Albuquerque interfaith.
Um
Senator Pope
Ask a question yesterday about,
um,
Hearing that there was a delay
in funding last year from
Department of Health to health
providers.
And um Kristenkovich answered it
accurately. She indicated that
definitely there was, but they
hope that it doesn't happen this
year. Albuquerque interfaith
members.
Voice that concern, the health
providers, and what came out of
that was an a a working and
getting some conversations with
Secretary Allen and with the uh
upper management of Department
of Health.
And I have to say that they
have.
Embrace that we've had some
regular two-way
conversations to attempt to work
on better transparency and
better communication.
We heard from the school-based
health centers last year that
last year there were 53 this
year there's 116 that the money
that wasn't provided held up
expansion that communication is
important to continue in order
to be able to make the plans.
Go into place. So I would ask
that you, when you have
conversations with Department of
Health Secretary and Upper
management that you reinforce
this two-way
conversation.
The other, the other issue that
I have, uh, uh, comments on has
to do with the New Mexico tele
uh Health Act, the New Mexico
Telehealth Act prohibits new
social workers from
participating and conducting
telehealth.
It asks for license independent
social workers. This is not true
of the psychologists. This is
not true of clinicians other
than social workers and we're
asking that you change the
language of that act from
licensed independent social
workers take out that
independent and then add
language to make sure that
whoever is the social worker is
licensed, but they are properly
supervised, so this language now
prevents new social workers from
getting reimbursed for Medicaid.
It, it is a roadblock for
getting new social workers into
New Mexico. We saw the map
yesterday from the social work,
I'm sorry, from the school-based
health centers that many of the
rural health benefits come
through telehealth.
Help us bring people into New
Mexico that can make that
happen. Um, Kenneth Winfrey has
done a lot of language about how
to change that, and I'd be happy
to share that and pass that on
through your websites, I mean
through your uh email sites.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you. Yeah,
he, he made public comment the
other day too, so he said he
would be providing us with the
actual language that we need,
I'm already working on the on
the um.
Telehealth Act to deal with some
other issues in it, and so I'd
be happy to include that if you
send it to me in the bill that
I'm working on. I'd be happy to.
Thank you. Very good. Thank you.
Uh, next is, uh, Charles
Guttmacher, and then we have two
other people that signed up, uh,
Robert Cagle and Gary Josepien.
So, uh, Charles, you're next.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam
Chair, may I hand a hand out to
the committee. Thank you.
Thank you very much. um.
So I'm Charles Goodmacher with
Do Good LLC, but I'm speaking to
you today on behalf of Goldfinch
Health, um.
Statistically speaking today, at
least 10 people in Albuquerque.
Which
About the same numbers in this
room, uh, have become addicted.
To opiates.
through
their legal prescriptions,
um.
A bill, well, hundreds of
millions of dollars are
available in the state now for
opioid, uh, and other addiction
prevention, uh, and treatment
and recovery services.
None has yet been spent for
prevention programs. Almost all
of it that has been spent so far
is on treatment and recovery.
Um, a bill will be introduced
this session that will include
some language in the budget so
that a portion of the state's
spending from the opioid
settlements would go to a
statewide prevention program.
The program I handed you out
about is uh from my client
Goldfinch Health, which, uh,
focuses on surgeries and the,
the behavior of the medical
Providers around surgeries and
pain management specifically.
So, um, there is an alternative
means, um, you know, every,
every, uh, um, patient if
Goldfinch were to get the
contract, uh every patient going
undergoing a surgery would get
a, a nurse specifically to talk
to them about how to deal with
pain management, uh, that there
will be some pain to expect some
pain, uh, but here are some very
viable alternatives to using
opioids.
There's some cases when opioids
are required, we don't, not
saying they're never required.
Um, but there's, uh, they also
would get prepared for surgery
tool kit so that they, um,
Get out of the hospital at least
a day earlier than normal, uh,
through these alternative
procedures, um, as you'll see on
the handout, the number of
callbacks to surgeons and, you
know, for more prescriptions,
renewal prescriptions,
drastically reduced when this
program is in place, um.
Saves the state an enormous
amount of money, public funds,
treating people is so much more
expensive, but the horror of
people having to go through
addiction and their families,
the what everybody experiences
it's needless we can prevent so
much of it. 7 or 8 of those 10
people who are getting addicted
today would not be getting
addicted.
If, if this program was adopted
by the state. So I thank you
very much. Uh, it's called the
Billion Pill pledge, and I'm
available after your session for
more conversation if you'd like
it. Love to show you the
contents of the.
Toolkit.
Thank you, Charles. it sounds
very interesting.
Um, Robert Cagle.
And then Gary, you'll be next.
There he represented.
He represented quality of life
in the recent federal lawsuit
where they ended up spending,
paying what was 1.1 million plus
another 400,000 attorneys' fees
using the model the state has
recommended for providing
service in the DD waiver.
As you may recall when we did
the House Bill 395, I requested
we identify subcontractors.
Uh, I, we've got the
information. I've gone through
it. I've absolutely identified
over 1000.
In supported living agencies
that are definitely
subcontractors.
Uh, in supported living, uh,
custom in home supports and a
community programs, um, I
believe that they are all um
have to be under the law, they
have to be um
Employees instead of
contractors, so I'd like Mr.
Stanford to address the, the
various legal aspects of how
many laws are broken by using
them as subcontractors.
It's always nice when the
presentation that precedes is I
get to be super cynical and
scare everyone in the room with
the legal prospects. Um, I do a
lot of labor and employment law.
I have the issue of independent
contractor employee come up.
This appears to be an arena for
whatever reasons and years ago,
a model was structured whereby
DSPs, those providing services
would be categorized as
independent contractors. Lo and
behold, in my litigation world
that has come to
fruition because plaintiffs'
attorneys are now not only suing
my client, but I think it's safe
to say that they're going to be
suing almost every organization
that currently has uh
individuals in that are in an
independent contractor capacity.
To Robert's point, the concerns
of misclassification are
monetarily substantial. You owe
wage an hour if you were
providing overtime. You owe
treble damages, so 10,000
becomes 30,000 if I.
over time. 30 becomes 90, 90
becomes 270. Magnify that to 50
employees or 100 employees or
300 employees.
Add to that the healthy
Workplaces Act, a wonderful
statute that was passed several
years ago, but you can assume if
someone thought that they were
categorized as independent
contractors, they weren't
funneling money into their sick
leave balance. And then you can
add, of course, from wage and
hour laws and with federal laws
as well, payroll taxes, Social
Security Administration, uh, New
Mexico unemployment
compensation. And so you can see
on the legal side, it is almost
unsustainable, if not beyond
risk.
To continue to categorize
workers as independent
contractors. And, and so in the
legal analysis, while I haven't
done it for every organization.
My guess is probably the
analysis is gonna be the same,
or they're gonna be making the
kind of risk benefit,
cost-benefit analysis in a class
action lawsuit in federal court
all throughout New Mexico and so
that's just simply the situation
that we find ourselves in
legally. And so then we have to
look at it economically. What
are the costs associated when I
almost
legally have to make that move
over from independent contractor
status to employee status.
What's the cost going to be? And
are we getting the money? And
that really becomes a
substantial risk that that I
think this organizational arena
is facing and it's going to be
continuing to face it for
several years. So at this point,
you represent one of the
agencies that's been sued. Yes,
we have you're kind of, but
you're, you're saying, look,
this is going on in a lot of
of other agencies there's going
to be a lot of other suits on
the same grounds. What, what
earthly reason would the state
have for not responding
immediately to the first suit
and saying let's put a stop to
this.
I is there, I mean, are we just
putting our head in the sand, is
that, is that what, and hoping
that it goes away, a bad dream
dissipates that's, that's an
excellent question Mr. Chairman.
I, I, I think there's an easy
sort of duck and cover is, look,
that's your problem, not ours.
Um, we sort of give some
parameters. We use some language
in the DD waiver program, but
ultimately, we're not going to
come in and run any kind of
legal interference in a court
case onto whether or not you
an independent contractor versus
an employee, that's not our
problem, it's yours. But, but by
the way, you, you better do it
right, number 1, and then #2,
you're gonna have to deal with
the funding that we're not going
to give you. So it's a double
whammy because we all know, I
mean, you can get out your basic
Excel spreadsheet and do some
arithmetic, it costs
considerably more to classify
individuals as employees as it
does independent contractor, I
mean, that's just basic math.
Well, thank you for bringing us
such good news, Robert. You're
always just a beacon of joy and
happiness in our lives and
there's more.
Thank you. Also, thank you very
much for coming in letting it
out.
Uh, I had, I had a couple more
things that, uh, but you've used
up all your time. No, he used my
time. Oh.
Uh, I wanted to hit the
contractor issue, which we did.
Robert, we're, we're behind
schedule. So, I'll give you 2
minutes. All right. OK,
regarding the A&E investigations
and that. I, uh, sorted through
the thing. There was 2 MOUs, not
MOUs, interagency agreements. So
historically under the Martinez
administration when they were
cutting rates, they were afraid
that that you'd have all the
A&E, which there was. So under
the interagency agreement, they
moved the investigation to a new
Definition at DOH.
The criminal law was never
mentioned in the MOU. So Terry
Cotter and them over there never
saw it, don't know it, don't
know it exists, and they've
never done anything with it.
They're not operating under the
uh reality that some of those
are crimes.
And that's it. Now, uh, Senator
Saa Lopez had offered to, uh,
work out and sit down with Mr.
Linari and have a, a discussion
and I looked up their state
organizational chart, and
they've had a an opening for an
attorney for DHI for 2 years
now, and I just couldn't see the
point of wasting her time, my
time, Linari's time of having
this discussion without an
attorney present.
So I have the documents I'll
leave them with uh.
Senator delous.
Uh, on the, uh, DDC you're
hearing them later today. This
marks the 30th year that they
haven't provided the
appropriate uh report to the
council. It's the 30th year that
the agencies that are required
by law to provide information to
them haven't done so.
I copied you guys with an IPA,
uh, while back, uh, asking for
that, the latest was that Joe
Turk at uh DDC asked uh sent
letters in 21 to the agencies to
provide the required documents
under the statute. They refused.
That's where we're at. So I
don't know what the fix is, but
I'm getting tired of my son's
rights being abused under this
law and you guys being deprived
of the, the stuff you need to
make honest decisions.
Well, you've given us, you've
given us a topic to ask a
question about this afternoon.
And then finally, the Attorney
general request which 2/3 of the
legislature signed as apparently
not been responded to.
Um
And the Attorney general should
be over there at DDC trying to
do that. And then finally, uh,
capacity in the DD waiver that
first came out in the previous
administration with Don Hunter,
who and Harry Garcia said, I
don't understand what that
means. I thought about that, and
then while I was in Almogordo
this weekend, I went to Walmart,
Home Depot and a bunch of
things, talk to the managers
about how they dealt with the
provider capacity issue, and
they all said the same thing. We
gave higher wages. Thank you,
Robert.
OK
Thanks a lot Robert uh we'll go
then to Gary.
Ocean from
The
Good afternoon, Gary Al Sapien,
CEO of Disability Rights New
Mexico. Uh, first of all, I want
to thank, uh, Rosenda and
Jennifer for their testimony and
their participation. I've got to
know them.
To my numerous visits to Las
Cruces with the pilot program.
Now I just wanna clarify a
couple things real quick. First
of all, we, we did have
A court settlement, the court
settlement was with both CYFD
and HSD, which goes to the point
you're making, Senator HSD
having that responsibility with
behavioral health services,
built making sure network is
built.
Then once we had the settlement.
We entered into a corrective
action plan with the state,
right? The correction action
plan was to address some really
urgent issues that everybody
agreed upon need to have some
focus on and do something about
it. Part of that corrective
action plan was a pilot program
in Donna Anna and Saan Juan.
Donna Anna was selected because
of their strength and their
collaborative relationships in
that community and the strength
of a community and if you having
trouble getting reform.
Over a settlement, well, let's
try to do something locally and
get some footing there and lever
those resources, which you saw
representative today and so
You also saw with the pilot,
which was quoted by Rosenda
strong language in there. It
just just wasn't an advisory
committee, like some of the
other things that you've seen,
and then just simply thank you
for your opinions. Let's move
on. It said, you need to do
something with these
recommendations if you're gonna
reject them.
That pilot has ended.
But one of the recommendations
was for the pilot not to end.
People like Brian Kavanaugh and
other individuals say we'll have
this within LC 3, and we're not
done with this. We're willing to
work with you with these
recommendations and implement.
But that was rejected.
So that is done in Donna Anna in
San Juan, I believe there is
some quarterly checking in with
that pilot.
But I just wanted to emphasize
that that's, that's pretty much
done, uh, we're sending and
Jennifer and others are still
trying to work with this and,
you know, see if some reform can
happen. I thank them for, for
recognizing people like Eric.
Uh, that puts a face on this. We
have timelines, we have reforms
and everything, but these, these
failures have consequences. And
you guys heard me before talk
about the fierce urgency of now
time doesn't stand still. You
saw what happened with Eric with
just some physical disabilities
of not being responded to.
And so in closing, I would just
say, as we know this, this is
not a red issue, it's not a blue
issue, it's a human issue.
And it's the things that keep
Like represent Martinez and
others.
Awake at night, right? It's what
keeps us awake at night, so I, I
just, uh, thank you for your
support on this and
attentiveness with this, and I
continue to look forward to it,
but I wanted to clarify exactly
sort of this, the status on some
things. Thank you.
Thank you very much,
Gary.
Oh, Gary, could you turn your
mic off there? Thanks, yeah,
thank you. So then we have 3
online, and we'll start with
Peter Kubra to be followed by
Marilyn Beck, and then Kenneth
Winfrey, Winfrey.
And just a reminder, it's 3
minutes.
Thank you.
I got that a little longer
because he had a big tissue to
bring.
Uh, this is Peter. Can you hear
me OK?
Yeah.
OK. So, um, I discussed with you
a couple of times including back
in uh Las Vegas August of last
year, the idea of establishing a
waiver for people with
behavioral health needs, similar
to the DD waiver.
I want to just let you know that
uh Senator Tipino and I have had
3 meetings with the healthcare
authority where we haven't
gotten a clear answer about
whether or not they support the
idea, but I've also met with uh
members of the court's
Corrections and Justice
Committee and the LFC.
And I would urge all of you to
do two things. First is to
promote this idea as best you
can, uh,
Uh, representative, uh, Dixon
now has a rough draft of a bill.
It would lay out how to roll
this out over time to submit an
application by developing one
here and then uh beginning the
process of establishing a waiver
for people with serious mental
illness, behavioral health
needs, including brain injury
and substance use disorder.
That would provide comparable
services to people in the DD
waiver, so I'm urging each of
you to support that notion,
there is the question of finance
and in the meetings I've had
with our consultants and with
other people in the government,
as well as uh some legislative
staff.
It appears that for $1 million
we could get a application
developed and ready to go by
adding some staff to do this to
the healthcare authority, and
also consulting um dollars to
retain consultants.
I've talked to people at
Georgetown University and two
other organizations that do this
kind of work developing uh
Medicaid waivers. And so I'm
asking that you also work with
LFC staff and others who are
involved in the budget process.
To ensure that there's enough
money for 3 FTE to be assigned
to the healthcare authority, and
then that would leave around
$700,000 to have uh a consultant
who is specialized in doing
these waivers, um, online and
starting as soon as possible to
get this waiver submitted.
To the federal government. The
draft of the bill encompasses
people who have these 3
categories of behavioral health
need SMI substance use disorder
and brain injury. And it also
talks about the fact that we
would prioritize in the rollout,
those people who are spending
the most state and local money.
Going through emergency rooms,
hospitals, drug detox, jails and
prison, and also consuming a lot
of resources through the court
system. And so I rushed that in
order to respect the fact that
you're running behind, but if
anybody wants to either ask a
question or um make a comment
that's terrific, and senator or
TZPo, is there anything else
you'd like to clarify?
Um, the, the million dollars
that would be.
matched with federal money,
right? Isn't it? Medicaid, uh,
administrative money? Can't we
match that fifty-fifty?
Yes, they, they, um, Medicaid
program for administrative money
matches 50/50 for the
substantive program they would
cover 74%.
OK, well, thank you.
This is not the end of our
hearing about this. I'm sure
that this will be an issue that
we, that we return to before the
session. Thanks, Peter.
Thank you.
Next is Marilyn Beck.
Hi, can you hear me? Babe. My
name is Marilyn Beck. I am the
founder and executive director
of New Mexico Child First, a
nonprofit organization dedicated
to improving the lives of
children in foster care and
empowering those who serve them.
Um, that is Rufus. He's very
excited to be here as well. I am
also a member of the SM5 task
force, and I am an Aspen
Institute Civil Society member.
I just wanted to address some of
the things that were said
earlier today, um, as Mr. Haseen
just said briefly, the Kevin S
settlement, the co-neutrals are
not local, and they're not paid
by CYFD, um, I'm not part of
Kevinness, but I follow it
closely. For anyone wondering
about the updates of the Kevin a
settlement, there is actually a
website www.kevinsettlement.com,
and it's just were saying that
the co-neutrals are not paid by
CYFD, um, I, I heard quite a lot
of testimony in both a lot about
resources, um, as a new foster
parent, when I was a foster
parent, I received
a young 18 month old who we
didn't know if she was Spanish
speaking, English speaking, or
simply nonverbal. I asked my
caseworker for SLP OT PT, um, at
the time PB and J was doing
reunification therapies, um, and
reunification preschool with the
bio parents, um, this child at
the time was number
8, the 1st 6 had come into
custody and been placed with
family placements. The family
actually asked that the next
children not be placed with them
because their safety was at
risk. So I asked for PB and J
reunification therapy, to which
my caseworker told me, if you,
and she used her private cell
phone to tell me if we keep if
you keep asking for resources,
Marilyn, my upper management
will think you don't support
reunification or the parents'
ability to parent the child, and
they will move the child.
And I replied to her cause I've
sat for hundreds of hours on
these calls. If we're not
getting fit or SLP or OT or just
even diagnosis for these kids,
um, and, and for all the money
the legislature is
appropriating. If we're not
getting them to the kids in care
who we can't decide if they're
English speaking, Spanish
speaking, or nonverbal, who are
we getting them to? And then
just to kind of reiterate what
has been said previously in all
of this, um,
I, I have another foster parent
friend who received two girls
who had been sexually abused by
both parents and grandparents
received her as a level one
foster parent. She asked her
caseworker for um therapies,
what was available?
For children who we had known
had been extensive sexually
abused by relatives. The
caseworker replied, I googled
and couldn't find any. So, um,
the Kevins settlement as Mr.
Howeian is sitting there,
they're going back to
arbitration, um, we, we keep
waiting for a panacea of a fix.
Is it an ombudsman? Is it a
commission? Is it the feds
coming in to take over, um,
tomorrow, the LFC is presenting
the CYFD budget, but this is a
department that continues to
leave money on the table.
including the 20 million for
behavioral healthcare that has
not been spent. So I will say
once again, money is not going
to fix this issue. Start asking
where that money is. Hold this
agency accountable, please,
please, please hold this agency
accountable. Our children are
not OK, and if you read my
newsletter, just another lawsuit
was filed just this week about
Bernna Leo Academy and Brian
Blaylock, knowing full well he
is named in the lawsuit for
knowing the harm that this.
agency has done to children.
Thank you.
Maryland, um, and then finally
we have uh Kenneth Winfrey.
Thank you all again and good
afternoon to the members of the
committee. I'm Kenneth Winfrey.
I'm the CEO of Ummoji Behavioral
Health. Thank you for the
opportunity to speak again
today. I'm gonna try to keep it
brief, um, I appreciate the
previous speaker mentioning the
draft language and the
committee's uh recognition of
the need to revise the act and
include supervision for elements
of using telehealth services. I
just want to emphasize today the
profound impact that regulatory
clarity will have on individuals
we serve.
Um, I also appreciate the
comment from my friend Bob from
Albuquerque Interfaith and the
notice um that we've been
provided by the Social Work
Board, that we can currently
operate without prohibitions
until this matter is further
resolved. And then I want to
share a little bit about Sarah,
um, who, of course, is not her
name for real, um, but she's a
single mom in a rural community
facing some real challenges with
accessing mental health
services, and it kind of aligns
with what I've been hearing.
today, especially
Work with regard to CYFD and
telehealth, um, have become
available during the pandemic,
she found some relief, but then,
um she like um a veteran that I
shared about late, uh, earlier,
lost their care because um they
believed that their their
telehealth was provided
illegally by an LMSW. So this
just exemplifies this broader
issue, um, we clearly need
clarity and um we, we clearly
need extra help in, in reducing
the.
on our, on our system. And then
we have this opportunity to uh
optimize funding within our
mental health system, you know,
indicating, you know, in some
comments that there's some
unspent funds by various
agencies, knowing that um we
have underemployed LMSW force is
troublesome, um, and so, yeah,
if there is someone um on the
committee working on the
language for this fact. I invite
them to reach out to me, um, I
also wanted.
make sure that my briefed and
draft have been received. Does
this sounds like maybe some of
you have not, and if needed, I
can send those documents to your
individual email addresses, um,
and just to wrap up, um, I
encourage and am encouraged uh
by the efforts to um establish
some guidelines allowing LMSWs
to provide telehealth services
with appropriate supervision.
And appropriate legislation. So
let's keep the stories like
Sarah.
Uh, at the forefront of our
discussions.
And thank you again. I urge you
to prioritize the definitions
and guidelines for LMSWs and
telehealth ensuring all New
Mexicans can access the mental
health care they receive.
Um
Did you send that email to to
Xander, you did. Xander has it
and he'll make sure we all have
it.
So yeah, thank you. So,
You wanted to make a public
comment also
Got it.
OK.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
um, I wanted to follow up on a
um comment that was made by a
previous uh.
public comment um regarding a
waiver for residents with SUDs,
which I I'm, I apologize. My
name is Vicente Vargas. I'm with
the New Mexico Health Care
Association New Mexico Center
for Assisted Living. We
represent, we're a trade
association for long term
licensed long term care
facilities in New Mexico, um.
We absolutely would support such
a waiver, um, we definitely see
the need in long-term care for
support to provide quality
adequate care for residents in
long-term care facilities. Um,
as we presented to this
committee previously, long term
care facilities and, and the
care that they provide is no
longer focused on what we would
think of traditional nursing
home residents. It is more and
more, uh, residents that are
young.
40, 40 years old, um, many of
those folks are with, uh, come
in with a behavioral health
condition or uh an SUD, um.
So that is definitely needed
that support. Please note that
the um New Mexico Health Care
Association, New Mexico Center
for Assisted Living has
presented to you last year and
we'll and is pushing a proposal,
um, that would allow for the
support of uh funding to support
the care of 175 individuals in
nursing facilities, behavioral
health conditions or SUDs on a
daily basis for, you know.
for an entire year. Um,
We have one of our priorities is
a $1.5 million request to HCA
that would be matched with um
federal dollars that would ramp
up such a program, um, we
estimate that once that program
is ramped up, it would cost
about $2.6 million annually to
provide um that the care that we
just talked about 175 residents
across the state a day, um, keep
in mind that that.
That 2.6 would be matched with
federal dollars. We have made
that proposal both to the
legislative Finance Committee
staff as well as the healthcare
Authority, um.
Uh,
it hasn't.
It's a budget thing, let's put
it that way, that we get pushed
back on, um, especially for the
sustainability of a $2.6 million
dollar investment over however
many years.
That's up to the legislature to
determine whether that's a wise
investment or not for the long
term, but we cannot in long term
care provide to Mr. Cooper's
point. We can't provide
behavioral health care to and uh
substance use disorder care to
residents in long-term
facilities without some type of
added financial support. It is
truly needed. Thank you.
Thank you, Vicente. Yeah, that
was, that was a proposal that
was made last year that
reintroducing it this year and,
um, thank you. I think it has
great promise
Mr. Chair, may I ask, uh, and we
can ask HCA when they come here
tomorrow, but do you know if
it's in the budget, the $2.6
million to make it in the budget
because they've already
submitted
uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
representative, good question.
Um, it did not make it in the
budget.
Thank you very much Mr. Chair, I
want to remind the members as
soon as my timer went off, he
said, thank you, I'm done. So
just, he's a model.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
You can, you can go ahead and
take an extra donut.
Um,
upset for any other questions?
If not, thank you so much. Good.
And I do want to give uh Kerry
an opportunity to come up and
tell us about the event tonight
that she has helped organize
at
alo alos, which is the Spanish
word for giving birth.
Mm
And here we have an example of
the product.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman. um,
unexpected but very much
appreciated. Uh, my name is
Kerrie Robin Bruder. I do pro
bono work for Darra Lou's Birth
and Health Center. Shiloh was
born there, um, in December, we
received all of our care there
for my firstborn Owen 9 years
ago. Um, it is 100% midwifery
led care as an alternative to
home or hospital birth in New
Mexico. It is the only
nationally accredited state.
Licensed birth center in the
state. It's just right off of
4th Street and the freeway, so
we would love to give you all a
tour this evening. We'll have
some food for you, some drinks
for you will be very efficient
with your time because you know
that you all are very hard at
work, um, with 2 or 3 weeks left
in a campaign, but if you could
stop by as soon as you're done
here, we would really appreciate
it. It's a very warm place and
we would love to show you where
Shiloh was born, so thank you
very much Mr. Chairman.
And when you say off the
freeway, you mean off of. That's
right. 7708, I think 4th Street,
so you'll just take the 2nd
street exit off of Pao, do a
little bit of a U-turn and, and
we're, we're right there, so.
Yup, so we're we're very close,
um, and I know Representative
Kate, you've, you've been there
recently, so hopefully you can
tell your colleagues that it's
well worth, um, the hour of your
time this evening, um,
so birthing centers in rural
areas.
We really hope to show the model
so that we can help be part of
the solution.
Thank you Carrie thank you very
much thank you so much. Now
members, we don't have anybody
who's provided lunch today. So
you have the choice, you can eat
another burrito or more donuts,
or you can go out, we will
resume at 1:30.
And with that, we'll stand in
recess until 1:30. Our, our
afternoon, uh, agenda is not as
tight as yesterday, so we think
we can
