if the members could could
gather I think we're ready to
get started
with the announced time for
starting was nine fifteen where
a few minutes late we wanted to
see if a few other members would
join us today I think they'll be
they'll be driving up so they'll
probably not get here till about
mid morning at earlier but let's
get started because we have a
lot of stuff to cover
and we we would like to welcome
uh uh people to the
monthly meeting of the
legislative health and human
services committee uh
will be meeting next month in
real
not correlate no we actually got
we have a place in rearantial we
found a meeting spot in rent
show next month for four days
and then we'll wrap up our
interim work with four more days
in santa fe in november so it's
been it'll have been twenty five
I think twenty five or twenty
six days total that we meet
these three days of following
meetings in sacora and uh
albert key portalous in towns so
it's been in a tour of the state
for us this summer
we're eager to find out what's
going on in silver city but we
want to introduce the members of
the committee in our staff first
so representative vincent why
don't we start with you will go
around and introduce ourselves
thank you mister chair harlan
vincent I proudly serve district
fifty six which is linking an
old terrible counties.
Up there where you you're
probably seeing all the floods
in fires and stuff like that in
just to report to you mr chair
we're doing pretty good we're
starting to pull everything
together and get a lot of stuff
cleaned up and
in the other reason that I sit
over here on this side is I want
to be able to look at everybody
and I would set right there next
to you I know it looks like
we're over here in the back
forty but I like this in seat
cause I get this stretch my legs
a little bit so thank you.
Thank you representative
representative block good to see
you again good to see mister
chairman thank you so much for
having us today i'm state
representative john blackhouse
district fifty one in alamo
gordo the beautiful city valum
according which i'm blessed and
honor to represent and it was a
great drive up here yesterday
and I always love being in
silver city it's a beautiful
climate beautiful hills and one
of my favorite things here to do
mister chairman it's goes to our
lady of gotta loop a monastery
up on the top of the hill which
is one of my favorite things to
do and i'll probably do that
after today so thank you so much
and if you look in your gift
bucks get back john you'll find
a bag of coffee from the
monastery only goodness the it's
the abbey roast isn't it mister
chairman I love it
so
and representative russia's not
a member officially the
committee but always welcome to
attend thank you mister chairman
members of the committee thank
you those of your attending
I want to welcome everybody to
silver city it's my hometown
this is where I went this is
where I graduated when one of
the universe is I graduated from
get my accounting degree here
campus is as really transformed
over the last decade to what you
see today thanks to capital
outlet and the support from the
legislature
we see some of our friends here
from healer regional our friends
from uh h m air south was born
and joined silver health care
these are just some of the this
is not all facilities but some
of the facilities here that
support or health care in in
silver city uh we have
prospectors in the are here on
that I see and of course at the
staff and the faculty of staff
from western mexico university
beautiful campus beautiful place
there's like john said the
monisters are very beautiful
place to go see it's amazing
what those guys have have the
the guys a count guys because of
my friends I said the brothers
have
have a developed up there I I
took the first load of block as
my dad on the the true value
here in town.
And I took the the truck and
showed them how to get to to the
monastery when they first
started uh in was a load of of
center block and we up in the
top and if you see it today it
is hidden in the mountains up
there past the wall at back up
and they're talked in it's a
beautiful facilities they have
the brothers the nons and of
course about the abbey coffee so
nice places to eat a lot of
beautiful places to visit
whether it's cliffed wallings
overlook you know we can
overlook the uh uh the mine the
mind look out
there's places to uh hunt in
fish so I just start wanted to
welcome everybody and thank you
mister chairman.
Thank you representative and
when this legislative thing is
you could get a job it sounds
like with the tourism department
representative charge this good
thank you mr chair my name is
ellen archais I represent house
district twenty sixth which sits
on the west side of albert
and we're talking a little while
ago how beautiful the drive was
up through the healer my hat and
bent to silver city for many
many years
but coming up I also remembered
sell to the earth
which I hope that everyone has
seen with a great documentary in
terms of what the workers the
struggle of the workers and
mines faced and and the women as
well so thank you and sober
cities beautifully love it
thank you mister chair i'm
ferrari a state report house
district thirty seven the kind
of northeast side of lost
crucials and i'm glad you
mentioned salt the earth my
brother in law
passed away last week who used
to be at adjunct professor at
stanford and he always tight and
showed the film of salt of the
earth and he was a big fan of
whenever he came out to visit us
we would come up to silver city
and visit though great
union building that has a
wonderful depiction of the
artwork and what happened to
your back then so anyway thank
you for hosting us glad to be
here.
Good morning and representative
liz thompson house district
twenty four which is the
northeast types of albuquerque I
have win rock mall and uptown
are in my district and I too
drove through the healer and
it's lovely but they'll coming
out with the sun going down this
dirty windshield
but it's great thank you for
hosting us we'd love coming to
silver city
can I mention mr chair um it was
his name was peter carol just
like the coach only
historian thank you
and center bullet you introduce
the staff because I don't think
they have microphones sure thank
you mister chair i'm zanderason
lead staff for this committee
and I just want to say thank you
to everyone from silver city and
western for really accommodating
us fantastically today
for the other staff we have
grace ball there almost over
there she is a proof reader with
the LCS and she's going to be
helping with like everything
today so we think her a lot then
we have leoguns all is over
there he does all of the audio
visual stuff for us making sure
people can cs from all across
the state and then our colleague
from LFC doctor legal hernandez
will be here all three days and
she's also going to be making
the first presentation so it's
busy for her
thank you and I too want to
thank the
the uh university for the for
the incredible hospitality that
they are showing us the the
facilities with the or some of
the best in the state we go
around have meetings at a lot of
different places and this is one
of the ones that always has
great connectivity great food
great opportunities to socialise
but also usually has a lot of
students in fact they and
community people would come and
share their.
Feelings about what's going on
in their suggestions for how the
legislature might respond more
effectively to what to the needs
of the state i'm the chair of
the committee for this year the
way this works the senate is
chair for two years and then the
house chairs for two years so
for the next two years the
assuming she gets past the
election
representative thompson will be
the chair next the for the next
two years i'm in the twilight
two years two months of my
uh well here comes to the
senator carrier him to come on
and sign up i'm in the twilight
months of my senate career uh
i'll be retiring at the end of
december after twenty years and
this committee has been uh far
in a way the most consuming uh
effort uh of my time in the
legislature we we split put most
of my energies into the bills
that come out of this committee
I represent senate district
twelve in albuquerque a district
that now has been moved starting
january one it won't be made up
of a half rear and show her
tailorance in half incentive or
county happen berlier county and
it's now probably the most
competitive district in the
state in terms of
past performance about it just
about a fifty fifty district and
there are too many of them left
we'll have to take care of that
in the next districting
so
that in the meantime my old
district which is downtown
albuquerque
and the part of the university
campus and about a dozen
presidents west of the river
that district now has been
chapped into six pieces divided
up among six other senate
districts so it no longer exists
as it has for the last fifty
years so we're getting let you
introduce yourself now.
Thank you mister chair i'm
senator cycry have from our city
represents and it just started
twenty eight which is great
county catering county and most
of secure counties seem to be
great county luna and hit i'll
go good to be here and great to
see everyone this morning it's
great to have you with this I
hope you can spend a little bit
of time with us today
and with that lio where we we've
got we've got people online and
uh
doctor none of us should list it
started.
Yeah.
First item this morning is uh
we had a hospital finance report
that was given to us in was it
house
in towers and
I think it raised some
so my browse around the state
and
so now we have an update on that
hospital
report from doctor nondashand
will give everybody a chance to
ask questions afterwards I think
you have a hand out on it
members it's a just one of
public finding of new mexico
hospitals
okay
good morning mister chair
members of the committee my name
is doctor illigrade non this and
I am a health in human services
analyst today I will be
discussing a follow up to my
previous report focused on
hospital costs and profitability
if you turn to the post page you
will see the four key points to
take away with today
the first is that hospital net
income declined between twenty
twenty two and twenty twenty
three however examination of
cost reports indicates that non
cash adjustments increase
greatly during this period this
includes changes to bad debt
corporate over head allocations
and depreciation meaning that
one that income may have
declined hospitals are still
making a significant amount of
money in rapport now the second
key point is that the state
legislature committed
substantial investments into
hospitals and rural providers
for start up costs amounting to
twenty one billion dollars last
legislative session although
much of the allocated funds are
not expended and rfp was just
issued for forty six million
dollars
the third point is that the
health care quality delivery in
access act performance measures
do not include ematrics
measuring healthcare outcomes
and access which is included in
the name of the act over the
next five years and the final
point.
Is that the increase in private
equity owned hospitals raises
concerns in new mexico
nationally data has shown
patient outcomes in financial
viability are worse in these
hospitals and osign others are
considering adopting market over
sight legislation which may help
reduce these concerns and so if
you'll turn to the next slide
please
you will see a chart depicting
the first point.
The.
Are there more copies of this
for the public do you have any
extra copies that could be
available if anybody wants
copies you can get them from
grace over here on the side so
you can follow the discussion in
particular the new mexico
and it's also possible and it's
online that these are all posted
online under the
uh
or weapons the the legislative
council were page go ahead i'm
sorry like
sell as you can see if we start
with the red light in the graph
total revenue has increased
exponentially since twenty
nineteen from when we have the
beginning of the hospital cost
reports you will also see that
total operating expenses which
is the gray line they they have
increased although they remain
relatively flat meaning that
hospitals are not that
hospital's costs are not
increasing precipitors
and then if you look at the next
two lines you will see that
medical malpractice rates are
remaining relatively flat and
that net income odd has declined
some as I highlighted previously
the hospital cost reports
indicate that non cash
investments increase greatly
during this period this means
that hospitals are creating
changes to bad debt corporate
over had allocations and
appreciation and this explains
the gap between increasing
revenue and declining that
income.
What did you call those non cash
and nine cash i'm sorry
non cash adjustments
okay what will have to come back
to this because it's crucial I
think absolutely
if you turn to the next two
slides you will see that they've
the first side focuses on that
income costs are nat incomes for
hospitals across the state with
each row serving as an example
of one hospital who meets the
criteria in the left column
generally speaking you can see
that there is wide variation in
that income across hospitals
with most hospitals being
profitable by a few still having
negative profitability if you
turn to the next slide you will
see that with the exception of
the don urban investor owned
hospital medical malpractice has
increased slightly over the past
five years but remains
relatively flat compared to
expectations
i'm the next slide you will see
that in FY twenty five the
legislature invested a hundred
and twenty one million of non
recurring appropriations and
hospitals yet hospitals were not
dispersed any funds as of
september
forty six million was allocated
to the health care authority to
defray operation losses for roll
reached our hospitals health
clinics and providers the
department did recently issue an
rfp for this allocation an
additional fifty million was
appropriate to find the cute
care subsidies act which
targeted eleven roll acute care
hospitals that were financially
struggling to some degree
on the date of this hearing the
money was budgetary to however
none of the funds were
encumbered or expended
the health care authority had
two additional appropriations
for a specific hospitals excuse
me one for rehealt with mckinley
and one for dancie tread both
appropriations were moved to the
department of finance and
administration.
The funds for the hospital and
to come carry have a pre
incumbents and the funds for
rehobits mcheadly were budgeted
but either encompared nor
expended
the next slide discusses the
healthcare quality delivery in
access act.
Which still has uneven impact
towards hospitals and does not
guarantee and across the board
improvement and accesses or
services for new mexicans
the health care quality delivery
in access act initiated by the
new mexico hospital association
takes advantage of the multipire
factor but almost seventy five
percent federal medicaid match
with the assessment on hop
spidles providing the state's
twenty five percent share sixty
percent of dollars return to the
hospitals is based on medicaid
service volume while the other
forty percent is based on
performance on average despite
most non urban hospitals
becoming profitable following
the disbursement of the health
care quality and delivery access
act which should helpfully be
march of next year there margins
are much smaller and raised
concerns about long term
viability
since the percentage of dollars
disperse to every hospitals
based on medicaid service value
hospitals with lower income will
receive less funds meaning that
larger urban hospitals will see
the most benefit from the
slegislation however the
assessment charged on non urban
hospitals is less than urban
hospitals you can see on the
side the variance in awarded
amounts that hospitals will
receive.
The next slide
focuses on the forty percent of
funds based on performance which
do not guarantee that access for
patients will increase in a
meaningful way.
Importantly the forty percent
that is allocated based on
performance has two caveats
worth noting first a care
facilities will receive the
allocated forty percent of the
health care quality in delivery
access act regardless of their
performance for the first year
simply by submitting their
mattress of where they currently
set for post acute care facility
as that is the case for two
years
even more strikingly the
measures below do not guarantee
that patience access will
improve and a meaningful way
if you turn to the next slide we
will now focus on private equity
owned hospitals
private equity firms that are
increasingly purchasing
hospitals both nationally in a
new mexico raising concerns
about hospital liability new
accident has the highest
proportion of hospitals owned by
private equity in the country
with thirty eight percent or
seventeen out of forty three
hospitals owned by private
equity firms.
National peer reviewed research
demonstrates that quality of
care and number patients treated
decline when hospitals are owned
by private equity firms patients
who visit a private equity owned
hospital are more likely to
experience hospital quiet
adverse events additionally
private equity owned hospitals
are less likely to discharge
medicaid patience financially
when compared to hospitals who
are not owned by private equity
firms to those that are private
equity owned hospitals these
hospitals are likely to charge
more per impatient day
experience higher costs to
charge ratios for emergency
departments and total costs to
charge ratios this drives up
costs for patience the federal
government and the state
the passage of the health care
consolidation oversight act
creates transparency but does
not fully address the potential
threat of private equity owned
hospitals and large mergers more
broadly during the twenty twenty
four legislative session the
legislature enacted the health
care consolidation over sight
act or senate bill fifteen which
gives our side tools to provide
oversight of certain hospital
transactions that result in a
change of control the act is
intended to ensure that such
transactions are in the public
interest and will not
excessively increase health care
costs reduce access to
healthcare services or diminish
the quality of count
the health care consolidation
oversight act gives over sight
of gives osi excuse me over
sight of certain transactions
involving hospitals through june
twenty twenty five osa is
currently reviewing drafts later
legislation based on the organ
health care authorities health
care market oversight statutes
through its health care market
oversight program the organ
health care authorities reviews
proposed reviews proposed
business deals to make sure they
will help and not hurt organs
shared goals of help equity.
Lower consumer costs increased
access and better car the
program applies to mergers
acquisitions and other business
deals that involve health care
entities and meet certain
criteria in addition to
considering organs program
outside the new mexico
legislature should consider
adopting portions of the
national academy for state
health parts sees model
oversight legislation
if you turn to the final side
now
returning to the floor key
points you will see that while
hospital on that income did
decline
generally speaking non cash to
jack non cash adjustments
increased greatly during this
period asded revenues
more over you all the
legislature committed
substantial investments to
hospitals to date none of the
allocated funds are budgeted and
cumbered or expected.
Next the health care quality
delivery and access act
performance measures do not
include metrics measuring health
care outcomes and access over
the next five years
and finally the increase in
private equity owned hospitals
raises concerns of long term
viability for hospitals in new
mexico as national data has
shown patient outcomes are worse
in these hospitals and osi and
others are considering adopting
market oversight i'd legislation
that may help alleviate some of
these concerns thank you
thank you before we go to the
committee I just want to get a
couple of things clear and give
the committee chance to
consolidate they're thinking on
some of the questions they might
want to ask a little uh
dr nondashis this the same
report that you do give this
report to the left seed last
week I had no sir you are the
first committee to hear this
report because they heard some
report last week didn't they was
it from some other staff person
they heard several reports
related to the health care
authority in hospitals came up
during those reports but they
were not focused on hospitals
very good persists this this is
this is really important
information that you're sharing
with this thank you so I I
wanted to mention to the
committee that we have scheduled
osa for our reerencial meeting
to give us an update on what
they're going to be proposing to
the to the upcoming session and
and hopefully we'll will have a
chance to use this data in our
questioning of the
superintendent of insurance when
she comes before us next month
the other question I wanted to
get clarified
with pages around sorry I forgot
to investigate but it's the one
on the.
It's the one on state government
subsidies of hospitals and so
years I think your fifth the
last speech
the top two paragraphs say just
wanted to make sure we're
talking about two different
pieces of legislation there
between FY twenty four and
twenty five the legislature
invested a hundred and twenty
one million
non recurring and hundred and
forty nine million recurring
into hospitals and that's
different isn't it from the
health care quality delivery in
access so the hundred and twenty
one is discussed below the
hundred and forty nine point one
which i'm happy to discuss
further is increases to him by
the kid rates are which
hospitals will see in january
and that's recurring
and in the health care quality
and delivery access act will I
is I think about one hundred
point something billion I want
to say three but i'm not a
hundred percent okay yeah
that's.
Quantum leap above what we've
already been able to put in yes
and that but that doesn't start
was that the way the legislation
was drafted that it can't be
spent until march
sell twenty four so right now
cms's reviewing the draft
proposal and so it depends on
how quickly the review is the
proposal is processed
in
right now they're hoping for
march twenty twenty five but it
depends on what happens in the
federal election as well as how
quickly see a mass is able to
process these but the earliest
any of those moneys could go out
well be much on the other hand
the the existing one twenty one
one forty nine what is that one
fifty.
Two seventy two hundred and
seventy five million is is
available now and has been
specific it has been spent in
none of it has been sat spent
and rfp was issued for the forty
six million which goes to free
operating hot costs for
operating glasses for rope
providers and for start up
services but we didn't that
didn't go out I thought that
rural money went out already.
Well okay so none of that has
been spent in no so they the
health care authority did issue
an RFP I want to be clear about
that and so they're in the
process of reviewing grant
proposals are they will be soon
but for the rest of the money a
has not been spent now the the
ten million to dancy trig is
that the same as that eastern
plains behavioral health
hospital no it is not it's a
separate ten million so is that
ten million out there too for
behavioral health I am not
familiar with that ten million.
Yeah the that was a capital I
think it's capital
okay well let's go to the
communities give everybody in
the committee once as a question
chances question we don't have
that many committee members so
we'll will keep our time keeper
from being too ruthless
but don't take advantage of
friends
five minutes to we'll start with
your representative vincent
which is correct around the
table.
Thank you miss your chair and
you you actually answered a lot
of my questions that I had it
was on that but why.
So despite large financial
investments in hospital most
allocated funds are not budgeted
in cumber nor expanded why why
is that uh limit let me just say
one one other thing I was in LFC
last week.
And the most frustrating thing
is as many problems as we have
around the state and as much
money as the legislative body
gives all these different
agencies why can they not spend
the money mister chair.
So that's a question for the
health care authority
I will say that they did set
spent send the allocations for
rahobit and dancie tread to dfa
but dfa is currently sitting on
the money
by hospitals that were
purportedly struggling last year
have still not received these
funds and they are still
operating
and so I think that raises a
broader point of
these hospitals and their
financial viability and then as
well with the executives are
movement on these funds
thank you mister chairman in
this can be a question for the
committee as well is there so
much red tape involved in
accessing money but that's why
we're having such a hard time
expending the money for example
the money that my community
received in july.
The hundred million they went
back to rebuild our community
they were just able to access
that last week.
And there was no pro says it was
very difficult to access the
money and and the community
members were very frustrated
they have figured out a way to
access it and i'm just wondering
why
a lot of our agencies mental
health the h a c um cyfd all
this money they could go to
benefit and help our children
around the state is not getting
getting.
Expended his frustrating very
frustrating.
Opera we just say that the money
we appropriate in the special
session if it's going out the
door now that's pretty good
that's sixty days
if we could get everything out
the during sixty days I would be
terrific will just my background
when you say emergency that
means like right now to me yeah
and sixty days if you call mine
one one I don't want to see in
sixty days i'd like to see your
right now today if I could thank
you mister chair
represented block.
Thing to mister chairman i'm
just gonna get my time already
causing how I like to do that
thank you okay
good okay i'm down to three now
so thank you mister chairman
thinking madam vice chair for
the time keeping and thank you
doctor nondashso a couple quick
questions i'm gonna try to just
be brief and just throw mets you
and I and you sound like you can
answer quickly so I number one
could you just give me a high
level definition of non cash
adjustments yes are so non cash
adjustments are were hospitals
are sending money back to
their parent company they are
invasing in capital outlay there
they're basically cutting money
somewhere else that allows them
to write off the money is the
basic definition of that okay
thank you mister chairman thank
you for that doctor and under so
it's essentially a tax write off
essentially like certain certain
services are tax deductible or
certain improvements that
they've made can be deducted so
it's not a tax write off as much
as it's a way so the hospital
cost reports are sent to cms and
then that's how medicaid
reimbursement is determined for
hospitals and so what it allows
hospitals to do is demonstrate
that there are profitability of
slower than it did that their
net income is lower than it
actually is okay thank you
mister chairman thank you for
that cause I saw that graphic
look kind of confusing with
little yellow line going below
the blue line which means
they're losing money and so that
makes sense okay so next thing
is ah mister chairman I don't
know what numbers I numbered my
slides but we don't know it's
okay how do you define private
equity firm who is included in
the
private equity firms are firms
in which
the.
Eight its large investment
backers who are coming in and
are buying these hospitals and
then are then selling off assets
within the hospitals
I store the stored case in
massachusetts which made the
national headlines earlier this
year is a good example of that
where they're selling off land
they're selling off as many of
that hospitals assets and then
they're charging the hospitals
for rent other things like that
and they are then declaring
bankruptcy of these hospitals
okay thank you mister chairman
thank you for that doctor and it
so are any of these hospitals
non profit entities so private
equity owned hospitals are not
nonprofit okay thank you mister
chairman that's a good
clarification have next on this
page I believe I I numbered at
nine is the second to last talks
about national pure reviewed
research I don't see any any
links or any kind of sources on
this would you be able to
provide me with this okay thank
you so much and then lastly on
this page
you said seventeen out of forty
three hospitals in the state in
the mexico owned by the private
equity is that what I understand
okay and how many of these are
failing or being tossed to the
wind so to speak as you
described so I have not done the
analysis dividing private equity
owned hospitals versus on
private equity owned hospitals
and profitability i'm happy to
do that
but generally what we know more
broadly based on national
research is that private equity
owned hospitals do worse off.
Okay thinking mister chairman
and then on the last last page
says helped her quality delivery
act measures performance
including metrics and healthcare
outcomes how many programs do we
have in the state legislative
programs actually require
outcomes because I know like
when it comes to education they
don't really care let us throw
money at it assume it works you
know how how many of these
problems regarding health care
do we actually track the
outcomes of the patience that
i'm not sure and I would have to
get back to you okay and I think
that's other questions I had
mister chairman I think I gave
you a minute in fourteen seconds
so you're good thank you mister
chair you will say that up in
addition to your time on the
next presentation
representative to us as you have
thank you mister chair I know I
don't sit on your committee
often but i've been listening
and ah.
I'm glad you brought that up a
representative vincent it's very
difficult we see a lot of
difficulty in a lot of hurdles
from appropriations down to
where the money is needed uh
gets clogging on the way for
whatever reasons and I think
that's something that legislates
you should probably revamp and
see how we can clean that up so
the you know what we we have all
these billions of dollars
sitting there and they're not
getting too worth the
legislature intends them to go
as far as this operating
expenses looking at your
hospital that income deal at
these are going to be questions
because
you can have more revenue.
Uhm and sometimes when you're
expenses are not.
Um increasing.
Could that be for the lack of
doctors and nurses that they're
able to hire cause I mean I will
be honest with you as it is an
accountant what are your largest
expenditures is payroll and so
if you're not able to get your
doctors nurses hired in they're
not there you're expenses going
to be down in that could
probably tie into some of the
problems that we're having when
it comes to patient outcomes can
you give me some inside on that
I still I can
give you my best guess
but what I believe is that
during covet during the covered
nineteen pm the cost of doctors
and nurses especially was
exponentially higher and so even
though costs are remaining flat
my gas would be without knowing
for a hundred percent certainty
I want to be clear about that is
that has is that doctors are
actually employing more people
are the same amount of people
because costs have gone down for
nurses and doctors compared to
the covered nineteen p if that
makes sense
mister mam thank you very much
for saying that but I think I
will use to sit on the health
committee and I think we're
fighting the the hold united
states is fighting for the same
doctors and nurses so we have
travel nurses and so forth so I
think the problem is uh
I would you know respectfully
possibly disagree with you that
they're not hiring as many
people they just don't have all
their positions filled
because they're they're trying
to fight for that same pool of
people throughout the united
states and these doctors the
nurses are making much you know
more money are in possibly
better schedules for them when
they're traveling is what what I
would I would attest that you
when you said something about
non cash adjustments that should
be capital investments that can
be
and that's a little bit
different than.
Just an expense because you are
actually putting money into
infrastructure possibly that
would that be
secure capital investments are
portion of it but a wide of it
is going back to parent
companies and sending money back
to parent companies yeah and i'm
not here trying to excuse all
that i'm trying to understand
this just so you know mister
chair is because if they're
funding some of the stuff if
they can't if they can expend it
look if you can expend it on on
payroll because you can't get
enough doctors and you have to
do something with it in your can
you you're not able to serve
your your patience the best to
the best of your ability because
you can't get the staff that you
need any have this yet you're
still you know you're still
having some that reviewed coming
them
you you
and then your possibly needing
capital investment in if you
own several hospitals they're
going to shift some of that
stuff to try and you know what
we need to we we we need to
expand this in necessary a new
emergency room or new operation
equipment or we need a new I
don't know ct was sheen I don't
I don't know you know i'm but
most of this when it's big
capital investment they're going
to they're going to put those
dollars there and then they're
not going to see it that's why
you're seeing the depreciation
later because that's how the
expense comes out because their
investing in it right there
transferring cash into bricks
and mortar equipment and then
you're seen later on the expense
come out for up a period of five
to twenty years is the way
because does that sound possibly
accurate so i'm from my analysis
a majority of the funds are not
going to capital outlay and in
state are going to parent
companies to bad dad and to
depreciation
i'm just trying to district
trying to figure that out
I do want to clarify that there
is a health care shortage in new
mexico
by the what I was trying to say
is that costs have remained
relatively flat despite the
shortage.
I would probably finish this
mister chair mem thank you for
again for your presentation in
in saying that I think this is a
lot more complicated than and I
got one word of quick little
thing but I think it's a lot is
that time
thanks I think there's a
it's probably a lot more
complicated and primes of more
robust conversation to really
get to it down to the bottom to
see why that's not for leading
properly uhm and then I guess
about times up so I won't ask my
last question
yeah let let you say tomorrow
afternoon to help the hospital
association is going to be here
okay you you know you'd have an
opportunity to to bound some of
these have they seen this but
they have seen okay so you'll
have a chance to more desk maybe
they can explain some of that
that mister chair representative
charges thank you mister chair
so
so the questions that I have I I
think one of the things that I
always like to know is a little
bit more detailed so on your on
the page that
is a title hospital net income
you have net income you have it
broken down sort of by category
do you also have it broke is can
we get really a list of every
single hospital that reported to
you absolutely for that out that
would be great I would love that
then one
the page state government
subsidies of hospitals so again
that question in terms of you
know you said that that the
fifty million I think it is
were targeted eleven rule
hospitals in the state could we
also get a breakdown of that one
so that we have an idea of which
hospital and the reason i'm
asking is that in our
in the presentation and towels
i'm remembering that holy crisis
a think one of those hospitals
and if I remember incorrectly
they had just.
Um past
nil levy to help that hospital
for I think it's five years or
maybe it's longer than that but
I I really want to get a sense
of sort of you know where these
real hospitals are and are they
really
are they in in the trouble that
was reported you know during the
legislative session and
therefore we passed all this
money to give to them so we
could get a breakdown of that
also I wouldn't really like that
near the other piece in terms of
the.
The
improvement in accessor services
are outcomes that's something
that concerns me as well
we had had a conversation
probably last week maybe I don't
remember now but anyway so there
were outcomes that were
mostly if I remember calling
correctly decided by the house
possible in terms of the money
that they're getting you know
patient care outcomes
and i'm wondering if
if we should really relook at
that and really have a uhm a
more stringent application of
outcome so that we know that
we're getting you know what
we're paying for in other words
so to be clear the health care
authority and the hospitals
combined created this list of
outcomes
it is absolutely within the
progress of the legislature to
require certain outcomes that
address issues that you feel are
important that would be great I
think access is one of the
issues
that that's of concern and then
the other piece
farther down on that
I wanted to basically point out
that will this medical center
who is scheduled to receive a
hundred and eighty million is a
private equity
and i've always had questions
about why we're giving money to
private equity hospitals because
it's my understanding that they
don't necessarily give us all of
the information and I could be
wrong or the financial
information they don't open up
their books to us to really go
in and and look at you know what
they're getting and and all of
that kind of stuff is that is
that do we really have access to
their financial situation or we
realize on their report so from
every hospital on the state we
are relying on the hospital cost
reports we are trying to work
with the hospital sociation
right now to get
the data from hospitals exactly
I will say are the california
has a law that I was informed of
last week that requires
hospitals to rep.
Port to their health care
authority they're fighting the
actuals separate from the cost
reports and so there are
hospitals do claim that there's
a discrepancy between the cost
reports and their real
financials and so that would be
one way for the largest leature
and the executive to get at
there.
Profitability and they're not
income and then the other
question mister chair that I
have is with regard to um press
material who scheduled to
receive a hundred and ninety six
million my understanding is that
presbyterian has lots of money
and I don't know I don't know
the exact amount of you know
billion maybe but my question is
these hospitals and i'll use
perspective as an example or
require to also expand a certain
amount of money on charity care
so
with that in mind are we asking
them to increase the amount and
do even know how much one do we
have and really know how much
they're spending on cherry care
and then to requiring them to
increase the amount of money
that they spend on charity care
and how is that documented to us
so in the cost report time able
to get it how much they're
spending on charity care I
haven't but i'm happy to get
those numbers to if they're of
interest
in terms of the health care
quality delivery in access act
there is nothing requiring these
hospitals to invest more into
charity care to invest more into
anything there is and troy from
the hospital association can
answer because i'm forgetting
the exact number but there is a
percentage of money a majority
of the funds must stay within
the state from the health care
quality and delivery access act
I think it's ninety percent i'm
not one hundred percent cite
don't call me on that
but show how the hospitals
choose to spend that money is up
to them and their discretion
and then the other question that
I have is your cherries um so
looking at how many use
presidential as an example again
there are a non profit
nonprofits don't have to pay
property taxes to the counties
have we do we have any kind of a
mount that were losing in county
property taxes that some of
these hospitals don't pay I do
not have that amount available.
What's going wrong with
hospitals and I was wondering if
you you know it looks like it's
you know pretty much averaged in
you know flat lining um
on your chart am I getting that
street so I am by no means an
expert in medical malpractice by
based on the data what I can say
is that costs for medical
malpractice over the past
five years have been relatively
flat
possible for hospitals
okay so those who are in
private.
Investor owned they've seen
quite a drastic increase so that
but the hospitals are the ones
who were having everyone
complained about it the most and
so we can go back to those
doctors and say.
This isn't really true which
we've been trying to say for a
long time and I don't have data
for private
practices in terms of medical
malpractice rates so I can only
speak to hospitals but in terms
of the data that i'm seeing
medical malpractices staying
relatively flat okay but but
your question about
practice what's happening to it
is a good one for osa when they
come in in
october in rearench
thank you and the rest of my
questions have all been
asked in answer thank you.
Thank you doctor leg
this is a a great let me start
my own timer
so
as I represent the vincent said
we were learned to believe in
the last session that the house
was on fire in many rural
hospitals that we needed to get
money to them and the fact that
it's going to be at least a year
from when we appropriate it to
win we get it.
Leeds one to believe that it
wasn't an emergency because no
hospitals have closed so that's
really concerning to me that
we're we're being brought data
that's obviously misleading and
i'm looking at the chart with
the colored lines and I mean
it makes no sense total revenue
is you know
twenty five million and.
Total net income is basic you
know is way down it seems just
like a shell game that the
companies are playing to put it
how can I I mean then I know
you're not a lawyer but it seems
like that should not be legal to
be able to in a right things off
like you know a new york for
your ceo as a as a cost that's
that this the state needs to
help pay for so i'm just really
frustrated with and I know
probably
that that this is not your deal
but I just want to get that out
there.
So what is a revenue adjustment
show a revenue adjustment is.
Yeah.
Where did I reference that i'm
necessary.
That's a good question
I think is the question.
I it was in your oh a non cash
adjustment
just
well maybe I think on that same
chart total revenue no I don't
know what I was thinking at the
time so just forget about it
and does your data come straight
to you from the hospitals or is
it filtered through the hospital
association sell we have not
received any data from the
hospital association or the
hospitals themselves and that we
are working to try to get back
data in the hospital association
has been working with us
they data that we receive is
from hospital cost reports which
we have to basically request an
epra from the health care
authority to get these cost
reports they send them two s
three weeks later and then we go
through them and come through
for the data that we need
by as I alluded to
there are
claims that there are just scrap
and sees between the cost
reports and actual hospital
financials and we just haven't
had the ability yet to determine
if that is correct so it feels
like if they would just report
to you that would be no
discrepancies and it's
ridiculous that the overseeing
body the legislature has to ipra
to get information then they're
asking us for hundreds of
millions of dollars and we can't
know who's doing what or where
the money is going and we have
to infer to get what little
wrong according to them you know
if they want us to have right
information provide it to
and after we pass the bill on
the rural hospitals last year it
came out that it wasn't going to
the hospitals we were told that
it wasn't going to hospitals
that were struggling and and we
were told that well the hospital
association didn't provide any
data.
I want to make a point right now
that anytime there were trying
to do something and we're not
getting the data from the people
who are asking for the money we
need to be told as a body that
that they were not they did not
provide information which I
would voted against that bill if
I would have known that
so just it it's just an and I I
mean it has nothing to do with
you you're just i'm just really
frustrated with the the whole
the whole shell game and that's
what it is and so I think it
would be worth our wild to um
maybe pass legislation that says
that it you know if you don't
provide us data financial data
that we need
we don't we don't give you any
more money so I have twenty
seven seconds left thank you so
much for this this is great in
i'm putting it out to the world
that
we're not letting go of this
bone we are going to choose it
and whatever tell we get to the
bottom of it because this is
ridiculous thank you mister
chair
if you're chewing on a bone
I don't know if you want to get
to the bottom if you want to get
into the middle of it
depends on how you're holding it
one thing the committee could do
and if I were going to be around
I I would be willing to help co
sponsor but i'm not is passed a
lot like california's with
requirement that they you know
and with the hospital so that's
a lot of extra work for us we
know I mean it it they that's
where they have these high
powered accounts that configure
out how to do non cash
adjustments to save them
millions they can figure out how
to pay for this uh the same kind
of love the california is asking
for actual costs according to
categories that we define not
according to categories that
they define so I would urge the
committee to consider that.
There's something to at least
propose and start of dialog with
the hospital association about
now when you came to tells
doctor nondashyou you gave a
report that had a lot of us up
in arms because it showed
that
while the the health what was it
covered we call the health care
quality delivery in excess and
access act
was going to help struggling
rural hospitals.
In fact it was helping the big
boys the the the big urban
hospitals far more and even some
of the little ones was to help
they were going to get from this
we're still going to be
struggling
but now you're telling us none
of that money went out anyhow
so that was based on projections
is that with that.
Just what are those project I
mean how do they know in july if
they're not going to be able to
spend the money till merch how
much each hospital got or gets a
will get
so my understanding which
again I would clarify with the
with the new account hospital
sociation is that they had to
turn in projections when they
submitted the cms on paperwork
and so that's what i'm working
off of I will say that except
for rehobits machinely every
hospital will after the health
care quality delivery in access
act be have at least some
profitability or net the
positive net income however the
margins are much slim for these
rural hospitals which are the
most at risk of closure
compared to these larger
hospitals.
No
where is the heart is
so senator.
A george monos got fifteen
million dollars for hope with
mckinley have you affected that
into their profitability I have
i'm sell even after that and
then even after the health care
whatever the c m s approval
they'll still be unprofit
according to the class reports
from last year rebeth mckinley
rehobits when kennelly's
negative nat income is a
negative fifty eight million
dollars
fifty million
according to the cost rewards
just sort of on that point I
mean that's a great example of a
hospital that got run into the
ground and money sucked out of
the state they're ceo is making
a million dollars a year so now
we're really
you know picking up all the
pieces of trying to
yeah I need it it we're acting
but we're acting long after the
the damage was done and and now
it's a question of how do you
how do you
patch up something that's in
total collapse.
Or start up from scratch or
takeover as a public house but I
don't know I don't know what the
answer is
what was the other question
I guess that's it
let me see
you already answered about the
metrics we could we could add
our own metrics absolutely these
ones the hospital said we'd like
to report in this so we should
sure could report in that might
not have any relevance to what
we need I will say that
the legislative legislature the
lfc has asked to attend to the
meetings and which the mattress
were decided and we were not
invited to the meetings so it
was that executive in the
hospital association and the
legislature was not.
Thank you
let me see if I have any other
questions
that's it
thank you so much anybody have
any lingering issues they want
to bring up thank you so much
doctor none this year it's very
helpful thank you so now we'll
go to uh
doctor jennifer phobian
economists with our sale here
you are good did you just drive
up this morning now you came in
yesterday too
over crossed the black range
so she will be reporting to us
on
how much money we will have to
to put into the bank and not get
spent next
year
good morning as your charity
members of the committee thank
you for inviting me here this
morning I love every excuse to
come to this pocket of new
mexico so I really appreciate
inviting me to this meeting
love the drive over came up last
night it was beautiful my name
is jennifer five and i'm an
economist for the legislative
finance committee
i'm part of a twelve member
group of economists across
executive and the legislature
that put together the revenue
estimates a couple times a year
it's really a around the year
process but we report out
august december rate before the
session and then we'll update
mid session if necessary if
things have shifted enough to
change the revenue outlook so
i'm gonna go over the short term
some of you have heard this
before
last week maybe last month the
bell sea but maybe a gleen a new
insight in a new question for me
so i'm off of this report hasn't
been passed out.
Okay so working off of the money
matters brief.
I'm gonna start on the first
page that table on the top is
really the kind of thirty
thousand for view so and fi
twenty four the fiscal year we
just closed revenues came in
just over thirteen billion
dollars for a friday twenty five
the fiscal year were currently
in revenues are expected to
decline from last year about
point two percent twenty million
dollars less than FY twenty four
and then in the budget year fy
twenty six revenues are expected
to be thirteen about thirteen
point four billion dollars a two
point eight percent increase
over the current fiscal year.
So really what we're looking at
and I want to point you into the
chart on the bottom corner of
the of the page we've been
seeing revenue growth in double
digits twenty percent applies to
the last couple of years twenty
two and twenty three in
particular fy twenty four still
really strong growth at twelve
point five percent but we're
really looking at moderating
revenue growth into the future
again hitting negative barely
negative basically flat in the
current fiscal year and then
really moderating to
um just under kind of our
prepandemic trends under five
percent growth that carries
through to the outer revenue
growth is between two and four
percent it through twenty fifty
we just presented the long term
week at the lfc so that kind of
moderate and growth carries
through the long term
that grave above that one so the
graph in the middle of the page
shows our new money figures
so traditional new money but
we've typically talked about was
your budget from last year how
much money you have over that
that figure is three point one
billion dollars so you
appropriated money twenty five f
way twenty six revenues are
three point one billion dollars
over that amount however given
the rise of non recording
spending and how large a share
of the budget that's become
it was over twenty five percent
of the budget last year was non
recurring could be a third of
each year's budget allocations
we really wanted to show you
what you had over that amount so
you can see in this graph the
red is your recurring
appropriations that's the base
budget for the operating
expenses the green is your non
recurring appropriations and
then the blue line above that is
our projected revenues.
So what we're kind of talking
about here is six hundred and
sixty million dollars over what
you spent last year is coming in
for the budget you're fight
twenty six.
Moving on to page two.
We can look at some reserve
figures so with these
projections of revenue and what
you spend enough by twenty five
reverse sorry reserve balances
are going to be what we asked me
three point over three point
five billion dollars thirty four
point eight percent that's
before you might appropriate
more in this coming session
often you're probably some in
the current fiscal year if
revenue is exceed expectations
or if you want to lower that
reserve target.
The graph on the top left of the
page is really showing you
what's driving this avoid twenty
five decrease over fy twenty
four.
So grocery states taxes are
coming in stronger than last
year.
Income taxes are lower by quite
a lot this is really what's
driving that that negative
twenty million dollars of FY
twenty four over five twenty
three this was expected and i'll
talk about why we can do this is
coming a lot of it is
legislative changes i'm cut a
lot of personal income taxes
last couple of years so.
That was expected it was
forecasted
in the fire so that was that was
a decision on the legislature's
part
interest earnings are going to
be we project higher than f I
twenty three.
Rent some royalties a little bit
lower other revenues trickling a
little bit higher basically
flight revenue growth for four
twenty four
so without a minute move into
the underlying economic
conditions that are driving this
forecast so the craig uses these
kind of national and local
forecasters moody's s and p
global beeber out of you and m
to kind of look at where they
think employments going where
they think consumer spendings
going inflation stuff like that
that really kind of under pins
are forecasts and drives what we
think the state will will garner
in revenues.
So i'm still on page two so
looking at US consumer prices
and that bottom left that's
inflation expecting that to
moderate cannot come down to the
target of like two and a half
percent by a four twenty six
twenty seven and kind of settle
there the federal funds
rate pads have already begun
will get to that little bit
later but expecting those to
come down really threat the next
year and come to about two point
six percent interest rates by
the end of the phone twenty six
early afly twenty seven.
Moving on to page three
weekend look at new mexico total
employment forecast.
Employment has
active stronger than we thought
last december which was the last
forecast that was published you
can see that graph is above the
downward line the data line is
where we were for the last four
cast it's out performed although
we are still seeing that
moderation that I have been
talking about that's going to be
kind of a theme throughout this
we had massive growth in twenty
one in twenty two after the
pandemic recovery and now we're
going to see a kind of taper off
to normal sea were really
returning to normal trend lines
for most of these underlying
indicators.
And we have recovered our jobs
are about three percent over
what they were prior to the
pinemick so we have recovered
all of our lost jobs and then
some.
You can see the employment
growth and below that again
coming from very high growth
rates tapering back down to
below um two percent
a prepanemic average was about
point seven percent so still a
little bit stronger through the
forecast period that are pretty
pinemic average but growth is
slowing down considerably.
Wages follows employment wage
growth is expected to continue
some of this is inflation driven
other wages have outpaste and
inflation so incomes have gone
up in new mexico faster than
inflation and the last couple of
periods expecting continued
growth there but again
moderating from where we had
seen them.
Moving on to oil and gas gas
production obviously under
penn's a lot of our revenue
I will just say or guess
production has grown immensely
in the last couple of years just
since twenty seventeen has grown
three hundred and eighty one
percent that's nearly
quintupling um just production
growth that's that's in barrels
per day you can see that in the
bottom of page four.
Three hundred eighty one percent
growth for new mexico far
outpacing national averages
north dakota and texas which are
the other two top producers in
the us.
And in fact
in the last year new mexico
production drove nearly fifty
percent of the oil production
growth in the united states so
the permian especially the new
mexico side of the premium is
really driving overall us
production growth.
However you can see on page five
production and prices are
expected to moderate in this
forecast we have a lot of
forecasting from raced ad
from other national oil gas
forecasters and they're all kind
of expecting this s shape to the
production so we were kind of
chugging along then we hit kind
of the fracking boom in the
permian you can see it skyrocket
there for oil and natural gas
and that we are expected to
start to play tell still some
grow through the forecast period
this is the first time.
In our short term forecast that
we've actually seen the plato
with in the short term I think
the very last quarter of the
production forecast was slightly
negative or basically flat so we
are seeing that in the next
couple of years really by by
twenty thirtieth and we're
expecting to kind of reach that
peak it will remain flat for a
while and we're not expecting it
to fall off a cliff but we are
going to start seeing oil and
gas become a drag on revenues in
the future.
Prices are also moderating you
can see in a table of the middle
table on the middle of page
five.
Oil prices kind of around
seventy dollars into the next
couple of years natural gas
prices about four twenty
so again moderating their
a little bit prices are very
volatile very hard to predict
there's a ton of factors that
can influence price production
is a little bit easier although
still difficult but as the base
in his maturing there's little
bit more consistency there
there's larger companies that
are buying up a lot of lands is
lot of consolidation I feel like
every couple months there's a
new merge and some company
buying on another and they're
really in it for the long run so
they're kind of smoothing their
production they might be
drilling less productively and
now wild prices are high moving
to easier rock um more
profitable rock when prices
might fall they're kind of china
stretch their life out while
smaller companies tend to drill
cheapest most profitable now and
reap us but if it's what they
can so we're looking at a
maturing of the basin a little
bit which is making this a
little bit more consistent
okay
so i'm gonna move on to how
these underlying kind of
indicators are actually
translating into revenue growth.
So i'm gonna start with grocery
seats taxes it's our largest
revenue into the general fund.
So gracious these taxes were app
six point four percent in f by
twenty four
this is a market slow down from
fy twenty two and twenty three
in twenty three we saw fourteen
point six percent growth in
twenty two we saw twenty one
point seven percent growth in
grocery seats taxes
i'm on page five still a lot of
this again is oil and gas you
can see over a third if you
count out of state and adding
the county as oil and gas driven
and now is a show in the
majority of those groceries he's
taxes are oil and gas driven
over a third is oil and gas
dependent so when we saw those
booms around the gas we also saw
booms there additionally as
we've just talked about
employment wages and salary
spending in inflation have all
been very high the last couple
of years so we are expecting
that to moderate and trays
leading to lower revenues and
grt.
Moving on to h six.
And if I twenty four grocery
seats tax revenue so so what I
was just talking about was
basically underlying spending
its for taxable value
the taxable spending that is
taxed by got it's a much more
reliable measure than the actual
revenue which can be influenced
by rate cuts deductions credits
then tgr is really measuring
what's being spent in the state
and it helps us predict across
time without trying to adjust
for all these different changes
we can see mtg are growth in the
top left of page six again
mining and it might enquiry and
kind of the oil gas industry
really driving up by twenty
three growth the bars and blue
the bars and orange is five
twenty four growth really
shifting into other industries
construction is driving up by
twenty four growth professional
services driving fy twenty four
hundred so I will shift out of
um oil and gas driving
guarantee.
Suggest you see its tax revenue
and for twenty four was two
point eight percent above fy
twenty three.
That slower than the overall
spending growth that I talked
about earlier and that's because
we phased in that last one
eighth percent rate cut but you
are past two years ago one
eighth went into effect in fy
twenty three the last five
twenty four
so seeing some of that trickle
through
had you knocked on that rate cut
got would have been two hundred
and two hundred and fifty
million dollars higher and fy
twenty four so that's kind of
clouding some of that that
growth and that you would have
seen
there have been other guitar
directions as well passed in the
last couple of years so without
legislative changes guarantee
would be significantly above the
ten year trend.
However it is slowing home again
and i've watched twenty five g o
t revenue was estimated to be
only one point two percent over
four twenty four am so not a lot
of growth there but it is
expected to settle out through
the forecast period at about
three point four percent growth.
So moving on to seven taxes and
federal royalties.
So oil and guys revenue
again is starting to slow a
little bit and if I twenty four
if we look at the two graphs on
page seven.
These are a two largest revenue
sources from oil and gas it's
the emergency school tax.
And the federal mineral leasing
payments you can see the total
amount of these taxes that we
are generating is the total of
those bars.
The blue is a general find the
orange is early child a trust
find and the green is the summer
tax permanent fund she can see
again some slow down in for
twenty four but then picking up
a little bit of growth still as
that production curve um is
approaching the peak but still
growing in both of these graphs
again a lot of this revenue
because it's so volatile wanted
to take it out of the general
fund ledges to pass the early
tell a trust fund measure that
takes the rolling five year
average of these oil and guys
revenues anything over that five
year average goes into early
child a trust fund you can see
that had a huge huge impact in
twenty two and twenty three
the rolling average was quite
small back then if you look at
twenty one it was around those
levels
then when twenty two and twenty
three were quite massive a ton
of money was diverted into the
early child a trust find you to
those orange bars and both
graphs are much much larger and
then what what's going to the
general fund in those years.
Really set the early challenge
has found up
well above expectations you can
see a balance of those an
attachment five early child a
trust fund forecast but it's
sitting at about eight billion
dollars at the end of five
twenty four.
So as we saw these large
revenues come in and twenty two
and twenty three the efficacy of
that five year average was
diminished so the five year
average got pulled up and then
as those revenues kind of
stabilized you can see their
kind of you know it's flat
you're not seeing those huge
swings anymore that five year
average started to diminish and
you can see those orange bars
are to get smaller and smaller
and smaller as revenues are not
expected to exceed the five year
average quite as much as they
used to.
The legislature saw this
intending to again show the
general fund from that
volatility and put away some
excess revenue started to divert
money into the permanent find
this is passed in senator twenty
six.
You could see in the green bar
is the difference between the fy
twenty four amount of money
going to the general fund drive
friends days flat from twenty
four.
Then the difference between that
five year average in that twenty
four rate goes to the permanent
fund.
The.
So an estimated three point two
one billion dollars of school
tax and four point eight billion
dollars of federal royalty
distributions is expected to
reach a severance tax permanent
friend throughout the forecast
period so from twenty five to
twenty nine that's what that
money is going
early tell the choice find just
to note in the forecast period
from twenty five to twenty nine
and additional one point eight
billion dollars a federal
royalties and additional one
point two five billion dollars
of severance taxes are estimated
to go to the really child a
trust.
So what is that investment doing
the next section i'll talk about
investment earnings
so i'm page eight.
The.
I want to draw attention to the
graph on the top left.
This is our percent change of
our crange and often revenue
year over year.
And what's really incredible is
that our investment earnings are
by far away are fastest growing
revenue source it grows an
average of twelve point one
percent a year that out pieces
everything by a bong shot almost
three times that we're expecting
growth and other sectors
sometimes four times
and it's actually expected to
outpace personal income tax and
become our second largest
revenue source by for.
So really those investments that
you put into the permanent
finder already spinning off
general fund money that is
becoming our second largest
revenue source
in the long run.
You all will be receiving more
revenue by doing this than had
united by FY twenty forty
so just a a point there within
the next fifteen years
you'll basically have been
you'll have reversed that
revenue decline that we would
have been seeing with that kind
of decrease oil production by
putting some this money away
spinning and offer future
revenue i'm really shoring up
that revenue stream it's not
dependent as much on underlying
economic conditions
it spends a very consistently
it's very very stable
it's our most stable actually
it's more stable than gt more
stable than personal income tax.
There's another small investment
earnings revenue from the state
treasurer's office they invest
general from revenue so many
that
comes into the general phone
hasn't been expended yet some of
this one gas money comes in and
sits for a little while before
it gets transferred to these
different parts of money they
invest that money it's it's
shorter term than what we see in
the permanent funds so generally
yields less.
I'm typically it follows the
feral funds rates but it can be
extremely extremely bad tile you
can see in the middle graph here
those revenues have dipped
negative and then the next year
been record breaking so it's a
very very volatile revenue
source i'm i'm gonna talk a
little bit more about
volatilities that put a pin in
that kind of image right there
for you
moving on to income taxes
income tax revenues decrease in
fy twenty four which is in line
with expectations i'm on page
nine now.
Down at about three percent
ninety million dollars can be
with that fight twenty three and
this decrease is really the
result of two things first and
up tick of tax credits
exemptions deductions another
tax changes have really deflated
those revenues by choice the
legislation to make this
decisions based on the amount of
remedy we had coming in in the
needs of the state.
And then second inflation has
eased wage pressures have
softened and corporate profits
have receipted as the total kind
of overall us economy has been
cooling so some is like
underlying economic some is
legislative changes
you can see the impact of tax
expenditures on income taxes on
the type of page nine
had unites.
Cast kind of a a large series
from twenty nineteen did really
last legislative session have
just been
a lot of investments in low
income tax credits a lot of
investments and working families
licter tax bracket changes we
haven't actually seen hit yet
but a lot of targeted tax cuts
through the personal income tax
had you not had those cuts just
for a frame of reference between
twenty nineteen and twenty
twenty four income tax revenues
would have been estimated almost
seven hundred and eighty million
dollars higher and therefore
twenty five eight hundred and
thirty four million dollars
higher than twenty six and year
of your growth would have been
about two point eight percent
higher
than what we're currently
forecasting which is like closer
to historical average growth
rates.
The.
Corporate income tax credits on
page nine you can see are being
eroded by the film tax credit
that comes directly out of
corporate income tax it's a
volatile revenue source as well
very hard to forecast corporate
profits.
And they are expected to remain
relatively flat in twenty six a
little bit of a depth before
increasing slightly you can see
the total of those bars and the
general find amount is being
eroded by corporate or by film
tax credits which is in the
orange bars.
The.
The.
Moving on to page ten.
Reversions are kind of the last.
Buckets have
revenues I want to talk about
today they were mentioned
earlier
they have been a lot larger the
last couple years and we are
used to seeing we used to
forecast kind of flatly around
fifty million dollars and
they've proposed two hundred
million dollars
so very hard to forecast very
hard to know we also don't know
these until the audit we don't
even have four twenty four
reversions yet trying to
estimate them based on what
agency agencies have expended
but given the amount of
budget increases and how fast as
much increase is have happened
agencies are struggling to get
money out the door and therefore
reverting quite a lot so that's
adding a little bit of
volatility into our forecasts um
it's not a huge amount of money
in terms of a thirteen billion
dollars any forecast a couple
hundred million but definitely
worth pointing out
i'm speaking of other forecasts
risk there's always things that
could disrupt this forecast
things we can't really account
for
one of those obviously the
biggest one is oil and gas you
can see on page ten what would
happen if prices went down a
dollar production went up
million barrels so one dollar
change in average new mexico
price of oil has about a fifty
million dollars impact on
general fund revenue so very
small change in in prices can
really really affect our
revenues.
Each additional million dollars
million barrels of oil generated
is about five million
dollars into all of her.
Our income streams this includes
those diversions into the early
children trust fund in the
seventh text permanent find.
So get only guys as the largest
risk but of course there are
other risks like recessions the
feds just cut read spa half a
percentage point set up a
quarter really trying to call
those fears of a recession
really trying to achieve that
soft landing um we'll see
you can see kind of the waste of
journals economic survey of
recession risk on the bottom of
page eleven has come down since
a couple months ago um we're
sitting at about a thirty
percent risk of recession based
on a pulling of of economists
so take that with a great
assault economists are um.
Like weather mandatoriously off
and I speak as one
of course inflation and federal
policies are just talk about
federal funds there's also risk
there is a large tax federal tax
cut the tax cuts and jobs acts
that was past a few years back
it is that to expire we
anticipate in all the underlying
forecasters anticipate all of
the personal income incorporate
income tax measures to be
extended regardless of who wins
the presidency in november
but that could change there
could be some compromise bill or
where some tax provisions get
extended and some don't and
because we pick you back off
federal personal and come taxes
we could also be affected were
initiating that now i'm trying
to figure out what may need to
happen legislative session for
you all showed tcga change
but that is also a risk.
And then last year's general
revenue volatility in the
forecast are chief economists
did a new revenue volatility
study this this interim which
had some pretty interesting
revolutions your diversions of
oil gas revenue out of the
general fund have reduced
relatively by thirty seven
percent in the last five years
so really incredible stabilizing
mechanisms there however while
small insists corporate income
tax and state treasurers office
they're very very volatile our
corporate income taxes are three
times more volatile than other
states corporate and come taxes
and this is again because it's
dependent on oil and gas
a lot of our corporating and
texts are coming from oil gas
production companies.
But those revenues they
considered about seven point
seven percent of our total
revenue but they can both go
zero or negative pretty much
overnight so while while small
if seven point seven percent of
your avenues drop out of um
the bottom of the back we would
be in trouble.
So really looking at that maybe
trying to figure out ways we can
smooth those revenues somehow
and let me know some of the
volatility but also just
something to note for you that
our revenues are more valuable
in most states.
And because of that the crag
does stress testing scenarios so
we take some of the underlying
forecasters put out scenario so
what if there was a general
economic
and over performance that's our
s one scenario that's our high
scenario if the economy performs
better than we expect
then we have a a short term
recession or near term recession
what would happen if the economy
just doesn't perform and what if
we hit a mild recession or a
moderate recession in the near
term and then we have our worst
case scenario which is an oil
price to client scenario if oil
prices drop below forty dollars
a barrel what would happen to
the state revenues.
And so starting on page twelve
and thirteen looking at this
stress tests.
And the sensitive analysis
basically shows that in that
worst case scenario and i'm on
page twelve here at the bottom
chart avoid twenty five we we
need about one point five
billion dollars to cover our
expenses to cover the budget
that was passed
in in front of twenty six we we
need two billion dollars if
budgets remain relatively flat
with a small amount of growth I
think three percent growth
we would be needing that much
more to cover what we already
spent.
The gray thing is your reserves
are sitting at three point one
billion dollars at and of a five
twenty four projected to be
three point six billion dollars
in a point twenty five
so you're pretty much right
there reserves between thirty
and thirty percent thirty and
thirty five percent basically
allows you to cover all your
expenses without hitting budgets
which is a great place to be the
states really set its off up
well for that you can see on
page thirteen what this really
looks like.
The red bar is our low oil price
scenario are sorry line the red
line the yellow line is the
short term recession.
And the green is the high side
the black is the best and you
can see in all scenarios there
are five twenty seven you're
really only hitting your non
recurring spending base budgets
are pretty protected mostly
because as revenues have
increased so much um you have a
lot of surplus that you have
been spending in non recreating
which is a really really great
strategy instead of building an
into the base while the base has
had a lot of growth having that
non recurring kind of be a
buffer is great as well as
reserve levels.
In the table below the graph you
can see kind of in dollar
amounts what we're talking about
here that first blue line online
seven of that table
this is the general fund
difference from baseline.
So in twenty twenty seven that
low price scenario would almost
be two billion dollars hitting
the general find.
What's interesting here is that
because of these other funds
that you're putting on the gas
money and they're getting hit
first so in that second blue
line that's online fourteen
you can see these transfer
accounts are getting hit much
harder over two billion dollars
which first hit the early child
attress fine first at the seven
sex permanent find and then the
general fund would take the one
point eight billion dollars
but we are seeing that ends
leading effect work here over
fifty percent of these downturn
revenues are gonna first hit
those accounts before I think
the general fund.
Moving under page fourteen.
Just a quick note.
That are ten year trend analysis
shows us returning to trends
these trends have kind of rated
it up a little bit come a little
bit steeper the last couple
years with these increased
revenues but we are kind of
returning to trend if not a
little bit below trends in the
outers but again just seeing
moderation in revenues in
general throughout throughout
the forecast period.
And then last night on page
fifteen just for reference the
forecast for reserve balances
between thirty and thirty five
percent in the next couple of
years
and where those kind of set also
seeing that growth in reserves
this is really in response to
the peak of oil and gas like I
should you earlier quintubbling
in the last five years becoming
more reliant on a very volatile
revenue source has a
necessitated higher reserve
levels and you can see those
reserve levels grow
throughout the last twenty years
or so.
So with that I will stand for
questions
there is a lot in the appendix
as well I encourage you to flip
through those there's a lot of
good incidents that can be
gleaned from there we wish we
could you know rate a fifty page
report in three days
we stick to thirty pages
but there's a lot in the
appendix that don't get a lot of
narrative but happy to answer
questions on those as well
thank you mister very good well
this time I think we'll start on
the right
if you're ready
okay we'll start with
representative chose we'll go
around this way this time
thank you mister chair so I have
a couple of questions one of
them is you talked about um
investments state investments
doing really well so my question
is would you be able to tell us
what is the state investing in.
What kinds of I don't know where
do we investigate
yeah mr chair representative we
have an investment report I have
a copy with me I can share with
you after i'm not as familiar
with their investment portfolio
right now
but it's a it's a mix of things
I think generally follows smp
but I can get that for you I can
get their make up they also have
great investment reports on
their website but it's it's a
fair amount of of private equity
I will not the sic specifically
the seven text permanent funds
does have an obligation for a
share of their portfolio to be
invested in basically economic
drivers for new mexico and new
mexico based businesses those
typically have a lower return
than if they were to just be
investing in stock market
like the rest of the report for
those which does bring down
their return lower than what we
cen they'll be in graph coming
to find lower than what we see
in para and erb.
So mr chair then in terms of
private equity you would be able
to tell us what kinds of private
equity firms we are investing in
as a state yeah i'll be able to
call that for you okay perfect
thank you so then the other
question that I have is on page
nine and I don't know if if my
question is comparing the same
thing but i'm page nine you have
the corporate income tax and
film tax credit forecast rate so
my question is
around the issue of oil and gas
um so oil and gas is bringing in
lots of revenue but do we have a
comparison in terms of the
amount of tax breaks that we
give to oil and gas to compare
that with the amount of revenue
that they are
bringing into the state
mr chair representative shop is
we haven't done in analysis
announces specifically on oil
and gas tax cuts and they do
receive deductions on
transportation costs for example
that can reach twelve percent or
more of some of their profits
that they could be paying in tax
design that comes out of their
severance tax revenue not their
corporate income tax corporate
income tax because there's so
few pairs in the state it's very
hard to get deader
tired he is very protected of it
for good reason a lot of it if
we were at to analyze that we'd
be able to tell exactly which
company it was
because there's just not a lot
of corporate income tax payers I
think that's a great analysis
that we could do.
Trying to figure out you know
what share of their total
liability is being deducted.
Thank you mister chair
thank you representative
representative ferrari thank you
mister chair and thank you for
this excellent support report
when on page fifteen the general
fund reserves and for the
tobacco permanent fund
my understanding is the tobacco
permanent fund is not
supposed to be able to
be tapped from the general find
and it being under this general
fund reserves it makes it look
like that's something that could
happen.
Mrperiod terrebson and ferrari
you are correct so an for twenty
four is that the last year that
the tobacco settlement permanent
fund will be counted as reserve
if you go to page nineteen
attachment to is our general
fund financial summary and it
shows all of the reserves you
can see the tobacco settlement
permanent fine fall off for for
twenty five and twenty six it
was really never intended to be
a reserve it's intense is very
different as you all know and so
the letters your past I believe
just last year it might have
been twenty twenty three
to remove that from the reserve
counts the reason it's in our
reserve analysis is because it
used to be a reserve it used to
be counted as a reserve and it
doesn't fall off until this
current fiscal year so we keep
it in there because that's how
we used to count it but it does
fall off you are correct.
Great um mister chair and thank
you
I was wondering if we had gotten
the increase for that
oil and gas severance tax.
To be equal to what texas is can
do you have that projection in
here
rep
mister chair we don't have it in
this report we basically only
forecast current law and law
that has been passed you know to
come into a fact we do have
fiscal impact analysis of a rate
change because it has been
proposed we have some fires I
could pull for you or re run
that analysis for you.
But that would be great thank
you in your right this isn't
part of what is in lie yet
and i'm sure we've talked about
it but I was just wondering how
that would go into the mix.
Yeah yeah and I would have to
check
you know which rate you would
want me to compare to our
current rate but it is shouldn't
be too difficult to figure out
ok thank you they thank you
mister chair that's all
representative campsite thank
you mister chair joy
i'm also the microwave
so thank you so much for your
it's it's dents and a lot of
information and I eight I too
noticed that tobacco like wait a
minute but thank you for the
explanation i'm not sure I have
questions right now
because I need time to look at
it and they but thank you so
much for their sender thank you.
The.
Process
thank you mister chair are we
still at five minutes since they
give up other non district
cause this is a lot of
information to to
you know to discuss in five
minutes quick question as well
some of my questions by the way
thank you for the presentations
really informative
um
I was looking here in appreciate
you being a honest when you said
that the their forecast is
massive manners cause I watch it
and I go my gosh so
the
ma'am I just wanted to ask you
do you see a lot of compression
for businesses in the in because
of the inflation because
inflation isn't in place it
isn't just um
doesn't just hit consumers a
hits everybody across the board
so before that reason are you
seen massive compression
basically for those people don't
know compressions where the
costs are going up but then a
business or whatever cannot
intern charge enough because the
ability of that um.
The community to a ford that
causes compression can you can
you tell me if that has anything
to do with us
all this house to do with us mr
chair representative while this
takes a macro approach that's
really looking at firm level
dynamics I can just tell you
from lfc perspective especially
looking at a non recreating or
capital investments we are
certainly seeing cost rise.
Whether it's it's more than
profits are also raising right
inflation kind of all but rises
all boats in a sense
but certainly in the in the wage
increase as well which increases
with inflation tend to squeeze
businesses a little bit we're
not seeing it necessarily hit
our corporate income tax revenue
or a personal income tax revenue
which is where a lot of
businesses pay their income
taxes is through the personal
income tax if they're not
technically a corporate entity
so we're not necessarily seeing
it squeeze revenues per say but
we have just heard from business
community and we're seeing it on
our side at the lfc and the
budget side also becoming a huge
factor well I think ma'am in
alcohol you I couldn't find my
sheet earlier that's why wasn't
calling people by their name
just jennifer it's fine jenny
first fine okay well thank you
can for I think what what i'm
seeing on just in the community
basically in the community of
people that I know as people are
struggling to make ends meet you
have a big portion of new mexico
there's on a fixed income and
when inflation they hit they get
hit the hardest when you go to
see cat gas parms that when
you're going to fuel up with
fuel and you see him it showing
ten dollars on the screen and
several the pumps doing that
gives a good indicator that
people are struggling to to make
ends meet
although and so there's a bunch
of a lot of things that we could
talk about here that are causing
some of the overall tax
you said right you're you're
sales tax gives exactly what's
going on the best indicator rate
but that also hurts because
you've got inflation which is
causing better revenue for the
state right because it all said
instead of your pain
I don't know it doesn't matter
for an item at a dollar now
you're paying a buck fifty
you're getting taxed on buck
fifty but then that also in
turn.
Are creates less
goods and services that are
being purchased rate so you're
losing your losing over us the
sales make look the same the
dollars might look the same but
the goods and services that are
being purchased or less because
they have less to afford would
that be accurate.
Yeah mr chair reps that's
certainly within their own
possibility it's also possible
that wages have also increased
enough so that you know the
basket of good someone might be
buying might be similar although
their price tag might be higher
we haven't done kind of a a
price versus volume analysis on
our gross receipts taxes
specifically but it's a very
interesting question
and and I think I think overall
that being said in this the
quick little conversation I I
think are mister chair jennifer
that would attribute to some of
the less profitability that
you're seen are on corporate
rates and stuff like that I mean
it's just trickles all the way
through the system everybody you
see it you can I I can kinda see
it through here when i've gone
through stuff i'm now a quick
question here's mister chair
jennifer how would you
how would you recommend to
soften the wall tell you that
we're seen if you had magic one
you say I want to change this
fall to the what would you do.
Mr chair representative that's a
great question we don't have to
have answers like that a top of
our head I do think are two
largest volatilities streams
right now is corporating them
tax and our state treasures
investments so some
possibilities would be to take
the voltel parts of that put
them in another fund even if
it's something like grow which
is appropriate by you all but
it's at least not hitting our
general friend revenues it's
hitting this other part i'm
should those fluctuate I think
volatility while not totally it
has not been totally addressed
it has been reduced
significantly
by really addressing the oil and
gas piece of that I will say in
the long run once oil and gas
kind of dips below that for
twenty four level that
installating effect of even the
permanent fund transfer goes
away so this is night a one
hundred year solution but it
does get us through the majority
of our long term outlook which
goes to twenty fifty
so you think you all have done a
really great job of addressing
volatility already we do have a
couple pieces left and we are at
the left sea racking arrange for
solutions you might see some we
don't know yet
but yeah I probably
skimming some of it out of the
general fund of running it into
a fund that is still appropriate
and and still to be spent an
alternative would just be may be
classifying it as non recurring
revenue so that it's not built
into based budgets but spent on
a non recurring uses
well we'll just have to do this
had that right fifteen minutes
but it's ok thank you mister
chair ma'am jim
if if we still have time after
his questions we can come back
to your represent normal problem
yet and represent have heard and
welcome a realize you probably
don't have any questions for
this
but I would note that your
presence now gives us an
official quarter of voting
members.
So we'll be able to take all
important action approving the
minutes of the last meeting
pretty soon but we will get to
that problem but welcome good to
see
how is your trip over the
mountains.
Okay
represented a block the go to
you for questions thank you so
much mister chairman thank you
miss
for this great presentation all
this information I I heard last
week I believe but I didn't ask
any questions because there was
like a trillion members on that
committee and I did not want to
take their time but I did want
to point out mister chairman I
thought it was super interesting
a pitch for it talking about new
mexico being a leader when it
comes to a production of energy
in the state I didn't know that
I really thought that was so
cool that were the second
largest in the whole country so
usually new mexico is like
fiftieth and everything except
for this and i'm happy to hear
that so that's one thing that
there is really positive mister
chairman and mistreatment so my
my next question is it was
brought up by representative
ferrari about the severance
taxes and I believe on the state
level it's about three and three
quarters percent for oil and gas
but I believe with advertirement
all the other local tax as it's
about twenty percent my might
getting that correct on average
mister chairman
mr chair representative block
the licenses I did on severance
taxes so not including a lorum
actually think it does include
overlap but maybe not including
the corporate side was around
eight hundred percent.
Okay thank you mister german and
does that include like school
bonds and things like that yeah
and that's across the
interesting correct yes it's an
average across the state that's
also after they deduct some of
their transportation costs any
of their deductions and credits
it's after all of that so it's
kind of their net tax rate
okay thank you mister chairman
thank you for that that's
helpful for me because we're
always trying to find different
legislation to increase revenues
in the state without going to
the little gather tax period to
get him so mister chairman i'm
just wondering then severance
wise I know that like renewables
they don't pay any severance
taxes right now which I believe
it should but they don't right
now so what would the net
benefit to them be with what we
give them in the tax write off
sent incentives how much are
they making more than the oil
and gas is eight percent if we
factor that and mister chairman
and I know it's a big question
so I apologize mr chair I don't
have the analysis in front of me
on the renewable industry it's
very small in your right there's
not a ton of taxes and post on
them at the moment I think
there's
you know the trade off of trying
to attract them get them to set
up shop versus taxing them at a
rate that would be comparable or
in any way replace oil and gus
I don't have that in front of me
i'll have to check and see the
last time lse did it analysis
like that and get back to you on
it thank you mister chairman
thank you for that I would just
be very interested to see how
that works because we do invest
a lot of money into renewables
but not as much into oil and gas
yet we're really relying on oil
and gas so i'll just continue in
your presentation just I just
want to clarify when thing about
however can I make my time later
mister s- mister
this won't this this won't
affect your time but that short
does not show us as number one
producer choses number two
printed
in growth it was number one but
in production.
If you look at the chart at the
top so we're number two yes
mister chairman number two we're
not i'll take number to over
number fifth our head
all right mister so on page
twelve we're talking about what
we need to run the government
for a year in the worst case
scenario and it's from what I am
seeing it's one and a half
billion in FY twenty five and
then about two and f o twenty
six and I know currently our
budget was about ten some ten
point three billion and FY
twenty four i'm wondering mr
chairman so how much of that ten
point three was going to
reserves
so the budget none of the budget
goes to reserves that's
completely going into agency
budgets
that was our recurring spends
now recreating spend was on top
of that
the reserve level is basically
what spent what's left over so
revenues last year where
you know thirteen billion
dollars budget was ten billion
dollars that left some for
recurring some for fund
transfers and some per reserves
got it thank you mister chairman
and that's kind of where I was
hitting the point at we are
spending about eight billion
dollars above what we just need
to to function
and because if if it's this
worst case scenario one and a
half i'm going to reclaim my
time again mister chairman it's
one and a half billion dollars
that we need to just run the
government and we're spending
ten billion dollars in one
fiscal year I would just say it
might be
the duty of the committee to
look at more prudent fiscal
policy two claw back some of
those extravagant expenses thank
you mister I I think you're
making a an enormous assumption
that's that is not born out what
is the I mean when when you say
we only need one and a half
billion dollars to operate
government in this state where
did you get that I would refer
to just page twelve where it
says it says funds needed to
meet stress test scenario with
flat budget.
That's over an above the budget
the budget isn't one point five
billion the budget is ten
billion
that's correct mister chairman
yeah we're we're increasing it
every year yeah it looks like
the needs are about half a
billion dollars more annually so
over ten
the budget need is ten and we
need to go up about a half of
billion a year that's right
exactly mister chairman so why
are you assuming that we could
operate government on one point
five billion or wouldn't that be
the day they're terminated or
when I when i'm trying to say
right now we're spending what we
have to spend to keep the
government open we need
additional money to do that and
so we need to find extra revenue
to ensure that we can do that
and that's why I think bringing
up a revenues such as severance
taxes on renewables and things
like that are a good
conversation to have because we
need to continue that investment
if we want to keep the
government spending at the same
level because we have made a lot
of one time investments is that
correct yeah mr chair I think
you're correct in that there has
been a lot of non recording
spending
spending at the traductory of
the we've seen last couple years
I presented last week on a long
term is not sustainable
around six percent growth every
year is is kind of a sweet spot
three percent is sustainable
forever six percent gives you
about ten years without other
prioritising
however I will point out that on
page twelve and thirteen these
are in stress scenarios and so
should revenue decline given
these forecasters you know this
is mostly moody's forecasting
some rice died low price
scenarios what we would need to
cover what we've already
basically appropriate with
appropriate at five point twenty
five um how much we would need
to cover so in in a bad case
scenario we would be in a
shortfall
thank you mister chairman if you
need a few more minutes go ahead
because I interrupted you
thank you I know I think that's
pretty much it I think uh.
I covered it I tried to be quick
mister german but very
interesting presentation and I I
have so many questions but I
will just leave him to my mind
thank you mister chairman
represent a vincent
thank you mister chairman and
thank you jennifer for your
presentation if you would refer
to page t
and I hate to stay hung up on
reversions but in physical year
twenty two it shows that we
reverted a hundred and sixty
five million are we on track to
do that again this fiscal year
mister chairman yeah mr chair
representative incentive don't
have final numbers yet
reversions through march arab at
about a hundred and seventeen
so I think
we could be on track
thank you mister.
Said it represented vincent
that's a certainly makes your
earlier point clear we're having
trouble spending but we're
eligible appropriating
I just want to ask a couple of
questions one severance text the
currency up to severance tax.
Isn't the concept that this is
something that we're taking out
of the ground.
And once we burn it up it's not
going to be there anymore
or oil or we take a lived in
them or gold or cole out of the
ground send it off to fort
knocks or whatever you send goal
to it's not going to be there
anymore so this is something
that we're losing
that's why we tax it to make up
for the future loss.
But with renewables.
Any never going to go away the
sunlight is going to keep
flowing we don't need to have a
severance tax on sunlight for
wind because it's going to be
there or geothermother heat of
the earth is always going to I
mean so the concept of severance
tax the plate to renewables by
definition renewables don't need
a severance tax we will always
have that resource it's not
going to be depleted even your
is going to go away maybe very
slowly as it roads over
thousands of but we're we're
taking something and because
we're losing a future value for
the state that gold is not going
to be in the ground here anymore
we need to tax isn't that the
concept of severance tax or am I
missing something crucial
no material think you're right
on it's it's attacks on
resources suburb from the ground
pulled out usually on on non
renewable resources
representative thank you mister
chairman yeah I I agree with
that severance taxes by
definition or about severing
something from the ground but I
I think an excise tax is much
different because at the end of
the day when we produce energy
or anything it takes land a lot
of land for solar wind farms for
example and then also the
equipment and the tear and where
on the roads so it is also a
very large expense that we
should consider thank you mister
chairman except that the land
doesn't go away a little bit
there forever and we do have
other taxes that we use to to
tax for highway use so mister
chairman the land their oil and
gas produces energy on will also
be there forever.
Yet mister isn't I mean what
what what we I believe we were
two hundred years worth of oil
under our feet according to
certain estimates that i've read
and that includes other states
as well so I think we have we
have a very long time and I
think that's something that we
should certainly consider and
especially it includes our
national security interests are
our country if we buy oil from
america we don't have to buy it
from russia and other places
that we don't want to so it's a
very good point to make thank
you mister chair.
Senator courier handful you you
just came back I didn't realize
you're becomes your terribly
shared I think you jennifer for
the presentation it's great to
you
can you explain where the oil
that we extract in new mexico
goes do we use it here in united
states
yeah mr chair represent sorry
senator
it's all most of its experted
out of the state a lot of it
stays in the us.
Most of it i'd say
mr chair and jennifer thank you
where does it go exactly do we
keep track of that which seats
does it go to mr chair senator I
have been seen it I am sure
somebody is watching where it's
going
um
for the scope of my job we don't
really care where it's going but
I think it's an interesting
question I can look into it for
okay mister chaired jennifer I
with my understanding that there
is different grades of oil and
the oil that we extract in new
mexico isn't the agreed that we
utilize usually in in the US so
it has to go somewhere where
they have that ability to
utilize that type of grade are
you aware of the greeds and okay
okay i'll i'll look into that
myself thank you how much
mister chair and jennifer how
much of our budget really does
come from oil and gas.
The.
So i'm gonna be referring to an
appendix.
It's on page twenty one
and this is just general phone
said this is basically what our
current dependence is the red
line with the orange squares is
our current dependence FY twenty
four we're looking at
thirty five percent
over a third straight to the
general finds how do you night
diverted some of that money we
would be close to fifty m and f
twenty three twenty four thank
you mr chair internet for
and I know that one of the
challenges that we've had
getting all of this we have all
this extra funding more than
about in the history of new
mexico and so the agencies have
a lot of additional are funding
available to them and m PE t
it's an example so they're
dealing with quite a use to
replace of additional funds
however what i've heard from
schools school districts where
there's a lot of need is there
is a light of difficulty
actually accessing the funds we
heard that in the last
presentation there's a lot of
funds that are just sitting
there because we have a lot of
vacancies and these agencies and
so it's kind of those catch
twenty two were we don't
necessarily want to grow
government but when we're
dealing with a lot of additional
funds the only way to officially
get this money out in cases of
emergency especially is if we
have adequate fund are adequate
positions adequate capacity in
these agencies what are our
vacancies like right now I know
c I f d historically has had
significant vacancies can you
talk a little bit about vci
don't have vacancy numbers and
friendly mister chair senator I
know the lsc saw some biggest
data last week I can pull that
for you I do know salaries have
gone up you guys passed six
percent increased last year
across the board and then some
analysis from our personnel
analysts has shown that there
have been increases above that
six percent using vacancy
savings.
Um I can pull out report for you
I think that's trying to address
the speakers the issue I think
some agencies are faring quite
well I know you know it just is
like t o d they reconsidered has
gone down but other agencies
might not be doing as well given
the needs of agency in the
skills that of those of that
work force so I can pull our
personal report for you I don't
have it in front of me today
and and mr chairman dinner for
interns of labor
force participation I know we've
had some low participation reads
what are the sectors that are
projected to be growing though
I think our professional
services sector is doing quite
well our government sector is
doing quite well in terms of
participation rates are just the
number of jobs that growth in
the jobs in those sectors we
don't have participation rates
broken out by industry it's
basically who's working that
could be
we do lag the US and terms of
labor first participation and
yards is as having kind of the
mid to lower sixty percent while
nationally it's in the low
fifties.
And and thank you mr chair and
jennifer have there been
has there been a lot of research
in don on what we can do once
oil and gas production kinda
levels off and we start to see a
decline around twenty thirty I
think is the projected date
where we're going to start to
see that level of what kinds of
investments and our job sector
can we be making right now to
help to compensate for some of
that lost revenue since oil and
gas makes up such a significant
portion of our budget center in
mr it's a really great question
I think
from just to revenue perspective
I think you're strategy of
putting kind of this boom period
now it's kind of like winning
the lattery sticking some of
that in the permanent funds that
will spin out like I said by
twenty forty you're going to
reach that break even where that
investment in the permit funds
is actually going to yield more
revenue than oil and gas
or had you not diverted it so I
think that's a great strategy
but again that only works when
they we have these boom years in
the future when we start to kind
of decline in the general fund
loses that installation we might
be in trouble.
There is an office in economic
development specifically for a
transition that just transition
transition they're working I
think they have a report coming
out very soon that they're going
to recommend
you know a strategy for doing
just that
I know we've looked at sector
kind of cluster analysis where
we can invest money now at the
lfc but I think investments in
human capital and education is a
solid choice in health health
care as well I think you all
have been making the right
investments over the last couple
years taking some of this
surplus pumping it where it's
needed as well as putting some
away I think is the right
balance
thank you mister thinking
jennifer.
Thank you senator a courier him
fill up and I had a couple of
questions
I could you go into a little
more detail about what the
differences between
the matched
grt ngrt revenue I mean what is
included in match that's not in
g r d revenue so the match tax
will grocery seats is the value
of the goods and services the
great he can be taxed on so it's
it's all the spending that is
eligible for gross receipts
taxation and the reason we look
at that is because it's it's
independent of essentially the
ghost receipts tax rates which
can change you guys can change
the tax rate but by looking at
the underlying spending in these
areas without with basically
prior to the tax it allows us to
analyze things over time a lot
easier without making
adjustments for tax rates
or deductions or credits where
all these things that can
distort the g r t revenue from
the underlying economic activity
that's driving that revenue.
Okay it's just a more
defendable or trustworthy way of
measuring
just looking at revenue we're
looking at it post credit post
deduction post rate changes
which is kind of hard to distant
tangle by looking at the
underlying spending that is
eligible to be taxed on gt prior
to all of those credits and and
things we really see
the economy in new mexico for
majority perspective a lot
clearer
i'm on page seven
weekly get the those charts show
pretty much
that we've artificially set
the limit for for for our budget
for a recurring expenditure
level.
And and that and that we've
allocated
a fixed amount to the general
fund but that was an artificial
distinct right there mean it
wasn't related to anything we
just said that's what we're
going to keep it at and what is
that that percentage growth in
the general funds spending that
the the the the lfc and the in
the committee uses to to make
the the the budget projections
how much is it are we growing
year to year
mr chair I will note this these
graphs are only only gas revenue
not total revenue
that level that set level was
basically just set on FY twenty
four levels they said let's just
freeze it right here and keep it
flat
with the intention that the
interest earnings from these
investments will be growing
so if you look at investment
earnings on top of this there
should be some growth there is
growth again twelve percent over
twelve percent growth from
investment earnings from these
accounts
if your question designed budget
spending
on page.
Eighteen
we can see two years of
appropriation history here
this is our general friend
financial summary
you know it has had steady
growth over the last couple of
years I don't have a kind of
budget information with me as a
revenue i'm on the revenue side
of the office and but happy to
pull any of that for you there
are some numbers here you can
see recurring and on recurring
spending f o twenty four and
twenty five.
My question really is we have we
we've made the decision to kind
of slow down how much we grow.
The state's budget each year and
and instead of using this year
more of the oil and gas banana
that's coming in we've said
we're just going to use
then I thought it was a fixed
percentage but apparently it's
not the that we'll hold growth
in the budget to a fixed
percentage but I
apparently that's not the case
you you don't know it whatever
it is your chair
the budget number I don't think
is fixed there's no there's no
kind of triggering
between revenue and spending
there's no we can only grow
budgets by x amount we did cap
on the guys revenues to the
general find without capping
investment earnings of those
will will let me ask you to
switch right now the other seas
project is is coming up with the
projection for how much the
budget should grow next year
over the year we're in right now
what is that percentage growth.
Mr chair
the budget other revenue goes
the budget
the budget that was passed for
by twenty five I think was six
hundred percent therefore a
twenty six budget hasn't been
but opened on the already
working on it and because I know
that department for example
we've had departments come
before since well will we can't
spend more we can ask for more
than that because we've been
told only this percentage is
going to be allowed where that
came from I have no idea
somebody is telling them not to
go over a certain percentage and
and that's what I was trying to
get out what is that percentage
that we're aiming to keep the
budget growth at so that we
don't overspent mr chair
they listen hasn't come out with
their budget guidelines in in
those details yet we don't have
a target number haven't made
agency
you know
proposals yet for for budget
growth agency requests have come
in all but education committees
essentially and compensation and
their request have been eighteen
percent
that's what agencies have asked
for again that's excluding
higher ad and excluding public
education so they're asking for
quite a lot I do think they get
some guidance from the
governor's office prior to
making their requests but that
processes is unknown to us
what i'm getting at is
we've created over the last few
years all these extra phones
the legacy phone the
of the match the fund that we
used to match government moneys
forget what we call all of those
different phones there's about
six or seven that we've well the
early childhood fund for the
larry law in your fund the text
stabilization for the the to
hear rural library phone which
while tiny should be up to fifty
million at some point in the
future we we hope that was of
the target
all of those phones have
provisions in them that if times
get tough.
We can pap tap they're not
they're not like the landground
permanent fund untapable so we
actually have built up in
addition to the which you're
showing here is about a
thirty
thirty two percent thirty three
percent reserves we have in
addition another ten billion
dollars I i've i've heard if you
had the letter in yoga fund up
for the early childhood fund and
then all these other ones on top
of the probably another so we're
really carrying a hundred mi- a
hundred percent reserves right
now
wouldn't you say that's the more
accurate figure over a hundred
percent reserves if times got
tough and we didn't have a cent
of revenue coming in this next
year and we tapped all of those
phones that we've created.
We wouldn't have to raise taxes
we would have to do anything we
would just have enough revenue
dear after that we'd have zero
but this year we we could
operate for a whole year and
what we've created is reserved
funds which I think is a great
strategy and that's where you're
saying we're going to get the
future
interest will be our largest
source of revenue for the state
now where do we find all those
funds in your in europe in your
report here I saw the legacy
fund but I could not find it
really that rural library where
I don't think we include real
libraries I can pull that for
you because it is just not very
large at the moment twenty six
million yeah
there is on page twenty nine a
couple of these the legacy find
later chairman legacy finds
the balances for building grant
permanent find the semester text
from fine early child who trust
fund i'm are all in the report I
can point them out to you
summary narrative summer
independences
but we do have
kind of a general idea of what's
in these grow as well has a
large balance right now
so I can I can pull those for
you and point them out for you
but you are correct there march
so so much my third is this we
we've had in this committee
several proposals over the last
couple of years for creating
trust fund
they would be used to pay for
this for people we have all the
ones that were actually were
created around the
social.
We had one around
what we had proposals for an
alcohol trust fund
uh different you know treatment
funds that would tap different
sources
generally those would not
actually be viewed as as
recurring expenditures and the
budget right that's over and
above and all we would be doing
by creating them is
maybe slowing down future
investment revenue uh in the
twenty forty era but for now we
could we could create a fund
that would generate specific
revenues um I think i'd still
strategy that there would be
consistent with the lfc's
approach of of
note increasing the recurring
budget.
But of of guaranteeing as a way
to pay for things that we would
like to see done that we're not
able to do any others keep that
in mind
do you have any questions
representative
or did you have to follow follow
up christian owner
and thank you mister chair when
we were talking about
sort of labor labor force
participation um
it accrued to me
that you know we have a lot of.
Oh would you call it now the
word um folks who aren't in the
gig economy so is are the the
information that you have in
your report do we consider that
also those folks that are you
know have done their sort of
they're doing their own thing
they've purchased opinion and
that kind of thing yeah mr chair
representative the way I
interpret the survey data this
is all done through senses that
the grip labor success texts in
the senses
it does include those types of
vehicle economy the way they ask
the question
does not exclude that type of
work they're pretty open ended
questions and should be included
in that there could be a case
where
it's under reported in there's
been arguments that this is the
case just for fear of somehow
that getting to the tax
department
if it's an untaxed
form of gig economy work
but the way the question is
asked should include those
numbers.
The.
Anybody else have another follow
up question
did you have a question
representative of her
thank you miss thank you mr
chair and madame president of
the biggest question that has
been raised by several people is
a the gross receipts texas
actually imposed upon those
individuals who are putting
people into homes who have
memory care problems such as
with our timers of those the
request has been to eliminate
that that uh gross receipts tax
because of the onerous burden
that the families are having to
incur is there any way that you
can tell me how we can tell what
that amount is and what affected
might have on the budget if it's
eliminated
mr chair represent have heard
and I don't have the information
today I can do some industry now
says try to figure out what that
spend is
especially there's a proposal I
mean will square any proposed
bills through an f I which would
show you exactly that.
Thank you both before we is in a
bill i'd like to know what that
number would look like so we
know about the like they had of
of helping those individuals and
this one of the questions mister
chair and madame president her
is with respect to one of our
agencies i've been informed that
they've already completely spent
their budget is that it is that
a possibility
are they only given half of
their budget in the first six
months and the remainder of it
in the last experts
I believe most are breeding
budgets the day to day is
dispersed in monthly increments
I don't have the details on any
agency that has has spent down
or is currently not able to
withdraw fines I don't have that
information but I can I can ask
for you thank you mister and
madam presenter and I I will
follow up with your met.
Thanks for representative turned
in and senators several of us
welcome
furniture introduce yourself and
then ask your question thank you
mister chair my name is
alternates to deal beside from
district sixteen in albuquerque
and i'm really happy to be here
the beautiful drive um
but long
I was wondering about
the reserve fences of another
follow up and if you answered it
i'll just talk to you offline
but when we create these reserve
funds and we put these these
guard rails on what they can be
used for
how difficult is it to change
the use or to
you know how strong or these
guard card reals.
Mr chair senator city lopez it's
statute so as easy as passing
any piece of legislation you
know like that
not he's
but it is within your power's
legislature to change kind of
the flow which fund would get
tapped first you know which are
automatically tapped like I
reserve our operating reserve if
it's over a spending of revenues
coming low that's automatically
tapped but then some might
require legislative approval and
and stuff like that but each one
is different and it's kind of
this complex web of authority
but it's all except for language
permanent fund and any other
constitutional funds that
wouldn't require constitutional
amendment within your power in
the legislature to change so
even though it's
constitutionally created the
constitution delegates to us the
authority to allocate it for
different users no not for the
language permanent funds that
when it's constitutional
for example just you know a year
or two ago there was a
constitutional amendment to
increase that distribution and
for schools and for early
childhood had to go before the
voters for some of the other
funds they are entirely
statutory they're not
constitutional and therefore
entirely within your perview to
change okay and so that's the
difference yes okay and that
explains it ok thank you um.
Thank you mister.
Up and I didn't give you a
chance to introduce yourself
representative and go ahead
thank you with deter I am
represented to pamilla heard and
and I am I represent the
exciting house district twenty
eight in the northeast height
where we have the public school
for the performance arts where
they will be performing on the
last saturday in july of twenty
twenty five in linward park
thank you
she's a radio announcement
that your calendar today it
makes sure you're there
which park it's little it park
and it's in the northeast
heights in its near
candalaria and children.
We look forward to seeing you mr
chair
will jennifer thank you so much
for your presentation is
certainly given us apple food
for that and been very helpful
in in helping a shape are on
thinking about this so thank you
very much thank you
so members that we will now take
the time to adopt the minute
since we have a quote
you have in your packet in the
blue sheet the minutes of the
august meeting that took place
in sacrament
we have emotion to adopt the
minutes by representative
charges seconded by
representative for ferrari is
there any discussion or any
questions on any opposition to
adopting them
seeing none will consider the
minutes to been adopted.
And will go now to public
comment and we'll start here in
the in the library with public
comment from a gale simmons.
Of the health care for new
mexico campaign
she'll be followed by mike
mcmillan and by gail strimbler
similar stimbler
you don't have a comment.
If you think of one and you want
to make it
missing it's good.
The.
Thank you thank you for allowing
me to speak to you today
i'm guilt simmons that my
husband and i.
Great my husband craig wents and
I
am operated when selector
company here in silver city.
Of for a thirty over thirty
years before we retired in
twenty seventeen
during those years and from the
beginning our biggest overhead
or another way to say it fixed
cost was health insurance
we paid for it and fourteen ways
through various programs and
policies including workers
compensation and business
liability as well as personal
health insurance for ourselves
and our employees
what I have learned over the
years is that we have in this
country a fragmented health care
system that caused twice as
much.
And delivers less health care
than any other wealthy country.
This complex poorly managed
system is not only bad for
patience and doctors.
It is bad for business.
Because time and effort to
manage these fourteen insurance
policies and programs take away
from other business purposes
such as.
A better services are better
products
we need to focus on what is
causing this costly complexity
in new mexico's health care
system.
The cars drivers project.
Is a wise investment and should
continue to be funded.
Thank you
thank you girl thanks so much
up and in regard to that cost
driver's project didn't we just
let a contract we do after the
public commitment you could just
update a son on where that
stands so that that that
contract there's contract for a
study so we'll we'll hear about
that after the comment so next
we have a mike mcmillan of the
southwest bone and joined
institute
mr madim vice chair members of
the committee
my name is mike mcmellan of
southwest bonning joint and also
a grant county prospector and
i'm going to welcome each of you
to silver city and I hope you
enjoy your visit and and while
you're here learn a little bit
about some of the challenges in
health care in our and our
community in our areas.
Among the panel tomorrow to
present to you
some of those challenges but one
of them that i've presented to
this committee
over the last two or three
meetings is a recent adoption by
nipsier the new mexico public
schools insurance authority.
They've recently believe those
beginning of this year
contracted with the group called
surgery plus insert replus with
that group does is it provides a
financial incentive to all our
public school employees that
have health benefits.
Phyunipsia and that er at the
moment affects primarily or the
pedicare in new mexico and the
hospitals were orthopedic
surgeons operate and patients
receive that care
this surgery plus program
provides zero out of pocket
costs for those members no
copays no core insurance no
deductibles.
It is a zero on a packet cost
but.
At the moment there are two or
the surgeons that are in network
with this program and they're
both in all the tricky and
there's only one facility which
is surgery center that these two
surgeons operate out of.
All the other
surgeons that are a network with
survey plus orient arizona or
colorado or texas.
And so I I believe this i've
mentioned before this program is
voluntary members don't have to
choose to to use these benefits
but with the cost of
deductibles and coinsurance and
in all that's it's thousands of
dollars that to public school
employees could be saving.
For example to drive the to
albert tricky from silver city
and receive their care there
this it goes against everything
I believe this committee and
other legislative committees and
the body as a whole as well as
other agencies have done to help
retain
recruit and keep healthcare
providers not justin in one area
of new mexico but throughout the
mexico and and our rule areas
south was born in joint is
celebrating this month twenty
five years in practice.
And if if we lose a good chunk
of our members
to uh to albert keep our areas
owner or to texas because
they're receiving a great
financial benefit to to travel
to these places to receive their
care it's gonna be damaging to
our practice and.
Thank you for your time today
thank you for bringing this to
your attention that that you're
absolutely right what a what a
strange thing for publicly
funded insurance program to be
doing
uhm we should ask about that the
insurance supported it will be
here I don't know if she has any
say or renew itself but we
should ask for
and then over then gale you
started over and you still don't
have anything
that has never stopped us from
talking about things
we may not understand to the
thing but we still talk about
we do have a couple of people
online
are we available online we're
good with net dean.
The.
Good morning mister chair
mr mad advice chair my name is
now gain i'm a disability
advocate in a person with
multiple disabilities it was
very eloquently stated by uh
senator nancy rodriguez and
legislative finance on thursday
that if someone needed help and
they were death and they needed
to respond to being getting
their turn up on the waver they
might not be able to get it take
that phone call if they were non
verbal or they didn't speak
everybody as a different
preference on the way that's
defined they might not be able
to respond to a call I am
working with a gentleman who
experienced a trekyard america
is permanent due to a surgery
that was necessitated but cancer
and he makes cars and cannot
speak so he is trying to get in
in a using alternative means
like a speech set text at
generates into speed but needed
it's at time to put that in I
recently also had a case where
peer support worker was trying
to get an individual who needed
to be in suburb living into a
subway living house and the
sober living has and the new
pair support worker did not know
how to make the reasonable
accommodation for the individual
to be able to live in the silver
living house and attend the
meetings meetings with an
accommodation so they rejected
from the suburb living house
which then rejects them from the
ability to level improve sober
life.
A person also in another case
could not get into care cornet
tercornation supports and they
were signed up for them and they
were utilizing them but
intermittently in using them
they would get a ride to an
appointment but then not get it
ride back home and were left
needed hitchhiked back to their
home in the dark wants to change
managed care organizations but
doesn't have the skill set to
navigate that on their own and
they even have difficulty
following the pramps and was
interesting the discussions
about that were related to us a
revenue stability stabilization
and tax policy committee that
were brought up today it said in
the test at in the capturing
ceded groceries.
I'd like to see received it when
I grows you shopping but I know
that it was gross receipts tax
but it comes up as seated
groceries it's very important
that we reflect on the accuracy
of our accommodation
methodologies because if you
don't have the specialised
knowledge.
And you can't translate that yet
because you're still learning it
causes people to ask the
question do you not want us here
do you not want us to be part of
the process I myself i'm not
broken i'm only disabled and i'm
here but i'm feeling often not
welcomed because I am asked have
some different understanding of
what is the secret door not to
get into the club house thank
you so much for your time mister
chairman advice chair members of
the committee you know I will
always bring up some test staff
but I will also thank you for
the heavy live because it's how
we do this together that makes
the difference but let's do it
in a way that keeps our ability
to do this together in tax to
accessibility all of the way
from the person needs to be in
suburb limiting to the person is
attending your meetings and
really pays attention because I
wanna be the change I want to
see in the world thank you
thank you.
Getting feedback thank you that
that issue with the close
captioning or whatever we call
it the artificial intelligence
are artificial intelligence
needs to be smarter I think we
we need to to increase its iq a
little bit
next we have thank you
very good kenneth winfrey whose
next I just want to think the
university for the that's the
most incredible idea we've had
and we've been all over the
state as I mentioned and this is
the clearest we've ever had for
a comments done remotely so
thank you university for the
technology here it's been really
great so next we'll go to
kenneth winfrey.
The.
Good afternoon and thank you
mister chairman and members of
the committee for having
today my name is kenneth web
free and under founder of
emotion behavioral health and
intensive outpatient agency the
provides culturally competed
mental health services we serve
clients they wide and took the
pandemic primarily through
telehealt i'm able to speak
during this public comment
section is coming perspectives
on an issue that's threatening
our states mental health care
infrastructure there's currently
an ambiguity surrounding whether
life masters workers can deliver
tell the help service and this
is an urgent problem and one
that could dramatically impact
the most farmer bulk members of
our communities
where the license masters don't
workers are not to deliver
telehealth services is not just
about bureaucracy it's about
people before example a role
provider I work with was
offering tell to a young veteran
with pt and due to the current
certain uncertainty around
element w tell the hell services
that provide a head to stop and
then force the better into drive
hours for in person care for him
tell the help whether just the
convenience it was incentive to
access the treatment so much
applied to it by many reason by
hundreds of residents who rely
on the most services these the
outdater middle the same big
bigger they can be without the
ability for element don't use to
provide tell the help services
every proper reimbursement we
limit the care available to new
mexicans to need it most
particularly the young rural
areas for example in counties
like catch my county there's
only one social worker for the
entire population of thirty
eight hundred people so they're
tell the health in the lifeline
even in our larger counties like
run a leother more than
seventeen hundred social workers
but the demand for load license
social workers still for
example.
Services social workers are
already discouraged by the big
barriers including insufficient
resources that burn out so by
denied element of the ability to
provide reimbursement tell
services we're making it even
harder for our state to also
leverage those medicaid dollars
and serve those in neat
new mexico's are really
designated at the health
professional shortage area and
we only serve about thirty
percent thirty percent of the
population you actually need
mental services the limited
telling out there is provided by
element of use what only
exacerbate this issue putting
additional straight on our
medicated system and making a
part of the secure federal
funding without the proper
statutory language we could lose
the opportunities to draw down
the full extent of the.
They could support our middle
health care system so i'm asking
this committee the port
clarifying the language in our
state tell the help act to
insure their license mass just
also workers and deliver
telehealth services thank you
again for this opportunity to
speak and i'll look forward to
working with all of you to
ensure that we not only
strengthen our medicaid system
but also in hand access to
careful mexicans regardless of
where they live thank you so
much.
Thank.
The
actually that that's an issue
that that uh we have a draft of
a buildings that will consider
in at our meeting in november
when we endorse legislation that
would delete the the word
independent which is the problem
right now the way that the the
telehealth legislation it said
can be provided by licensed
independent masters level social
workers and it should we should
just take out the road
independent it limited that
there's several licenses that
would be
able to do it if we just took
that rude out and it wouldn't
change the quality of the care
or in any way threatened to
public so that something that's
already been a draft has been
prepared
xander is worked on it and so
we'll have that for
consideration and hopefully for
introduction and passage and in
january and part of me mister
chairman but we have learned
that the problem goes the load
of it beyond that
point I don't know if you
remember i'm to also drafting a
bill
to amend the telehome fact to
make it clear that out of state
doctors can participate in
teletel I don't know if it
should be the same year.
It has been proved minus mine is
already and yeah years has been
proved at just need to send it
to you excellent excellent well
we might want to look to see
whether we want to combine them
since they're both amendments to
the telehealth build it will
expand access.
This thank you and I would just
caution that we don't just say
doctors.
Right medical products i'm sorry
yeah
the part of the problem with
thank you
will will check.
Well with that we have arrived
at the lunch hour and for a s- a
change reactually going to break
for lunch at the appropriate
time if you have on your at your
places you have the little
social calendar
very nicely later
so you have a question.
Mr try you have mentioned the
the study you may just talk
about thank you I think so we
wanted an update on the cost
driver steady so basically this
one is
specific to gathering data
with regard to what we're
standing
help account health care dollars
on
and so the contractors already
been let to
be ber at UNM and aerohead at
new mexico state they're going
to be working together to gather
the health expense to data with
the idea of a creating a
database that we can use to make
data driven decisions in terms
of how we're spending our health
care dollars which is really
exploding and i've got the
proposal of any of the committee
members want to see it i'm happy
to
be as I remember it was for less
than sixty thousand so we went
out of the soul source contract
could could somebody could you
update us on how much money we
have this year and and what
we're going to spend then
actually mister chair the the
money we're talking about is
representative travel so nice
grow money so
it's grow that that's why she's
a kind of arranging things they
don't want people to think we
were I don't know working behind
the scenes but a two year grow
money and I believe it was but
it's fifty nine
no I mean but the total amount
was like
like no for
how much about
yeah I don't know it's not them
because we didn't have that much
I will say it's like two forty
or something like that but over
two years maybe
that was that total amount was
that it's two year amount okay
yeah but I just wanted to make
clear so it's too yeah sorry
it's two forty plus one sixty
mister chair and there are their
um studies that we are looking
at.
In addition to this one so do we
have to get any other money for
studies
no it's just that just that one
does just your grow money that's
the only money we have for
studies that's not true I have
money for a study at looking at
behavioral health care and how
to court need the behavior
between the state the counties
in the city is that through the
LCS so it's now residing in the
health care authority is that
the same thing so we don't have
we don't have a say over it and
well that's not true they they
have given us quite a bit of
authority over how this is going
to be a present and then how we
are looking at the coordination
and what are the
recommendations.
S.
Well we have two more meetings
after this one are they're going
to ask us for importer what's
going to happen well we've been
worked at mr chair we've been
working on that with the
with the department of a with
the healthcare authority and the
request has been made to make
the presentation the week of
november nineteenth with the
last week appear of this third
committee meeting
okay so that brings us a band if
anybody knows of any other money
that is available to help
support studies done by this for
this committee's use let us know
actually mister chair working
with the grow money there's been
some talk if we can get the
right information that could
open us up to
foundation grants and things
like that so there's nothing
promised but there's a.
The hope of getting more money
based on what the studies that
were doing that we're having
done now.
Um representative robot coverage
welcome did you want to
introduce yourself we we saw you
come in
thank you mister chair vice
chair members of the committee
that was in the audience and
those viewing uh yes I had
really nice fall morning coming
in and i'm sorry I was a a
little bit late
but there is here roy balka by
yet representing house district
thirteen which is the fire south
was quadrant of alba cricky and
this is one of my most favorite
places to be are you just miss
my arm now deceased professor
who has his room behind that
screen america's professor
fellin umm god so the table the
gaza sorry he changed his name
but he's here with us and spirit
he was the first chicago studies
professor at you tep and
was here with his wife was the
head librarian here are from
many many years and sold I love
being here thank you great.
Thank you representative and
with that will break for lunch I
think how do we get to how do we
get there it's just a second
floor of this building second
floor
somebody will lead it there
okay we will for and then we'll
re- reconvene at one o'clock.
