allocations to the department as
well as road conditions and uh
looking at project scheduling.
So, uh, you can see on page one
of the, uh, the um the brief,
uh, since you all had your first
Legisstat meeting with the
department in June. The
department has provided uh the
uh calendar year 2023, um,
Update to the road conditions
survey and uh overall that we
saw a uh small uh decline in the
road conditions for interstate
highways with larger declines in
road conditions for uh national
highway system, uh, miles and uh
even larger decline for
non-national highway system
miles, as you can see on the the
first page of the brief.
So, um, one of the, one of the
things that are really key uh to
the department, uh, to maintain
road conditions. Is there
pavement pre preservation
program, and that's one of their
key performance measures that
they report on, on a quarterly
basis, uh, uh, on their
performance report. So for
fiscal year 2024, the department
had has a total of 5,023 miles
uh preserved well above the 3500
target more than.
1500 miles above that target. I
should say on, on your copy of
the brief, I don't believe
quarter 4 is filled out, which
that, that result was 882 miles,
so a total of a little more than
5000 versus a target of 3500.
Um,
One of the things that uh that I
wanted to uh show you is on page
5 in your packet. It's an
overall view of the department's
special transportation
appropriations and in
particular, I wanted to point
out line number 31 on that
table. So that's a 2024
appropriation that you all just
made, uh, in this, this
immediately passed session for
road maintenance as 120 million,
the department has uh has pretty
quickly, uh,
moved to get those dollars out
on the road. So you can see uh
about 3 39.5 million of that has
already been spent with uh 55.5
million uh uh under contract,
um, so of the 120 million, all
but about 25 million is already
under under contract for the
that 2024 appropriation.
Uh, moving on to page two of the
brief. Here we get into taking a
look at the department's uh uh
project schedule. And if you
recall when we all met in
Carlsbad in June, we, we
provided you, uh, an overview of
the active projects that the
department was um
Uh, was undertaking at the time.
So there's a summary of some of
the, the major projects as well
as amounts on attachment number
2, that's on page 6 in your
packet. So, uh, when, um, when
we reported to you in June,
there was about 10 $191 million
in projects that were scheduled
for completion in the early part
of 2024, um, and about 539
million uh for the late part of
2024. So, uh,
As of as of October, so looking
at the update for that, uh, the
department's completed projects,
uh, valued at about 344 million,
so 27 of the 51 projects in
early or late 2024 have been
completed, uh, already. There's
still 6 projects that were
supposed to be completed in
early 2024 and 19 projects that
are in late 204. Now, and that
includes all of late, so we're
not quite through the end, so
projects that were supposed to
be
completed in, in uh November,
December, um, still are in that
late 2024, um, area.
Uh, so, and, so you could see uh
some of the uh projects that
were expected to be completed
were not, and that's reflected
in the department's uh
performance statistics for
on-time completion of projects
as you can see from the table on
the bottom of page 2, the
department reported 74% of FY 24
projects were completed on time.
That's below the target of 88%.
I think the good news for that
though is the department has
been
Um, has been successful in
keeping those projects on
budget. So uh they they report
about a 1% cost overrun versus
the initial um uh bid for the
contract, um, that's below the
target of 2%. Well, one thing,
um, I, I'll also point out is,
so we, we see a, a small
decrease in the uh number, the
percentage of uh projects that
are put out to bid on time. So
in FY 23, and both FY 23 and FY
2
To the department performed
really well. Um.
Completing 98% of lettings on
time. That was a slight pullback
to 91%. That's still above the
target of 75%, but this has been
a key performance measure for
the, for the department, um,
keeping that letting letting
schedule consistent to, to help
communicate with the contracting
community.
And so continuing on the wedding
schedule on page 3, you can see
there's a table there that shows
a graphical representation of uh
the FY 25 and FY 26 wedding
schedule. So as you can see in
the first quarter of 2025,
essentially since we last met,
since we last met, and now the
department uh was, was pretty
consistent on the schedule. It
was supposed to, said it was
gonna let about 113 million in
in projects and it, it did let
that much, uh, so 8.
projects versus 9 projects. They
actually have 1 extra due to
some replacement projects. There
were some slight pullbacks in
the wedding schedule in uh FY20
at the end of FY 25, so for the
2nd quarter and the 3rd quarter,
um, the department, uh, moved
back some projects. So, um,
you'll see some of those
projects listed in the FY 25 4th
quarter amount. So as time's
gone on, the department has
built up that that letting
schedule is now expecting to let
257 million.
In projects and I should say
those cost estimates are based
on what is reported in the state
transportation improvement
program, um, online, uh, so this
is just the information that
we're getting from, from the
department's online web portal.
So, uh, kind of the key uh issue
to to think about there is if
you look at the uh from the 4th
quarter of FY 25 to the second
quarter of FY 26. The average
quarterly letting schedules
looking at about $200 million in
projects.
quarter, whereas if you compare
with that with the early part of
FY 25, we're looking at closer
to 100 to 150 million. So just
um, something to keep in mind
there.
Finally, at the bottom of uh uh
page, uh.
3, you can see some information
about uh the the general fund
appropriations that that have
been made by you all. So, uh,
the department has committed a
large portion of the uh general
fund appropriation to specific
projects, uh, and, uh,
You should have a handout as
well. Um, looks like this that
shows you uh sort of a roadmap
for what the, how the department
intends to expand the uh amounts
that have not been placed under
contract yet. So, uh, what we've
tried to do here is take a look
by fiscal year of when the
department is expecting to, um,
to, to make those programs, not
all of them are on the steps,
so, uh, in general, if we
couldn't find a project on this,
we included it in the
current year, um, but, uh, we
aligned that to when we expect
the wedding date to be, um, and,
uh, so,
You can see uh at the bottom of
the, the table here. There's
about $582 million remaining,
um, that is not under contract
of those of those programs,
about 385 million, the
department has uh is either um
Looking at maintenance projects
or projects that are scheduled
to be let in at 425, about 165
million uh in um in FY 26, and I
should say the um the, the last
the last columns are based on,
um,
Uh, mostly the amounts held back
for cost overruns or change
orders. So, um,
The biggest piece of the uh
uncommitted money there is
included in the projects that
you all approved, um, in this
last session with severance tax
bonds. So if you look on page
10.
Uh, or sorry?
Yeah, so page 10 beginning on
line number 80. The you are
authorized $320 million in
severance tax bonds for these
projects. So, uh, you can see
there's a couple of projects
that the department has
scheduled to let in the uh in
the latter half of FY 25. So one
of the, a big one for the
department is the Rio Bravo
bridge replacement as well as
the US 380 corridor, um, and
the, uh, there are 4 projects on
Both on page 10 and 11, that the
department expects to let an
early FY 26.
And so that is basically just a
big, uh, just quick overview of
uh the Legisat brief and with
that, I'll hand it over to the
secretary for his presentation.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
so we need to tell them, make
sure you're on the Zoom link if
you're online, cause you may not
get the presentation.
Showing up. So those of you that
are online can.
Just got a text.
That they couldn't see the
presentation, you need to join
the Zoom link.
Go ahead.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, thanks for your time.
I, I wanna thank Joey for
spending some time with us to
Get to center on the
presentation and the figures
and, and so we appreciate being
able to be on the same page.
I'll just go through a, a couple
of slides here and mostly wanted
to share with you our, our
funding dashboard for FY 24
appropriations. Just a quick
glance here, um, each year when
the legislature uh begins, we
work with the associated
Contractors of New Mexico to
prepare a trip report that
essentially presents to all of
us the gap in funding that's
necessary to um essentially
necessary maintenance and
transportation projects that are
currently within the STI.
And so this number here, of
course, represents the 6.6
billion that was presented at
the last legislative session,
um, and again, just a reminder
that um this represents the
number for existing assets and
doesn't include major capacity
building projects.
Um, this light here, um, the
bridge conditions kind of adds a
little to uh the presentation
that Joey provided with pavement
conditions, but this is, uh, of
course, what we're looking at
with regards to foreseeability
on what bridges we're gonna need
to work on, um, over the next
several years as these bridges
without maintenance funding may
go from good to fair, fair to
poor.
Um, this one is, uh, just kind
of a more consolidated slide of,
of the presentation that Joey,
provided, but it essentially
represents the one-time
appropriations both general fund
and AARPA that's been um
allocated to the Department of
Transportation going back to
2019. And as you can see on the
right-hand side, the projects is
varied from maintenance,
construction, and wildlife
corridors, electric vehicle
charge stations, equipment,
aviation, and, and um some other
things, uh, peppered throughout.
like ports of entry, um, and
beautification projects. And so
just to show you here the, the
percent committed 82% of that
funding committed either um
through expenditures or through
encumbrances, and so just an
important note in particular
about ARPA, as we all kind of
keep laser focus on the December
deadline. We have that project,
um, out to bid currently. The
bids will close up on Monday, so
our expectation is to have that
under contract by the beginning
of December.
Um, this, uh, uh, and, and we've
shared this with you all in the
past, but uh we want to actually
present the dashboard to you so
that you can take a look at what
we were able to do with your uh
appropriations from 2024. And so
the link on the presentation
takes you to a live dashboard
that's open to the general
public. And what we basically
did was take the sum of the
maintenance funding 190 million
and the 320 million of
authorized bond sales, um, and
we put them on a dashboard just
to
track for you all or so that you
all can track where we allocated
that money, especially with
regards to maintenance projects
as you're aware for the
severance tax bond projects.
There were projects identified
in the legislative language, but
for the maintenance projects,
there was a, a little bit more
discretion. And so the dashboard
is pretty straightforward. We've
bucketed the uh projects into
three different categories. I'll
start here with the severance
tax bonds. Um, and so as you
recall, the severance tax bond.
uh authority was about 300 and,
well, not about, but 320 million
in severance tax bonds. The, the
legislating legislative language
in Senate Bill 275 included 9
projects and the total estimated
cost for those projects is about
$66 million.
And so if you scroll down here,
On the dashboard this pie chart
here represents what the
severance tax bonds will fund
this purple pie here represents
the gap to get all 9 of those
projects done. And so what we'd
like to do in working with you
all moving forward is being able
to identify projects that align
with the priorities for the
department, but then also align
all of the funding necessary to
complete the project. So our
goal over the next several
months, understanding that we,
we need to move through bond
sales in December.
in June for these projects is
closing the $286 million gap to
fund all 9 of these projects.
Otherwise, we go to work on
determining which ones we can
get done sooner rather than
later. And then the map here on
the left, of course, shows where
those projects are located in
the state and you can click for
uh additional information on
each of them.
Going back, um, to the, the menu
here, something that you all can
see that really starts to reach
further out is in section 11,
there were multiple projects
listed and attached to those
projects with $70 million in
funding. And so you'll see here
um on the map where those
projects are located across the
state. And if you'd like more
information on the projects, you
can go down here. So for
example, um, the I-10 corridor
project for 1.5 million, you get
a cent.
of the, uh, the project
description and then the
estimated completion date, um,
but we're pleased to report that
the overwhelming majority of
these projects are, are near
completion. And then finally,
um, the statewide maintenance
allocation was $120 million and
we identified 58 projects across
the state and you can see where
they're located. And then just
like with the other sections,
you can um look at each of those
projects to get a little bit
more information.
And so the goal here is just so
that you are all aware, not just
how much of the money we're
spending at a certain time or
what percentage, but you can
identify with where it's being
spent, um, across the state.
Is it control? Yeah.
Um, so just moving forward a
couple of slides, um, a, a
couple months ago in Albuquerque
at uh University of New Mexico,
you saw some consensus revenue
numbers, um, we just want to
pull out a few of those slides
that were presented by uh
Michael Morrison, our, our chief
economist this year, of course,
is the projections for state
road fund, um, revenue stability
uh through 2050. And of course,
as you can imagine the uh one of
the major, uh,
causes for this is fuel
efficient vehicles, alternative
fuel vehicles and uh declining
revenues from fuel tax, gasoline
and diesel, both.
Um, comparing that slide to um
this slide right over here,
we're showing, of course, what
the increased cost of road
construction is gonna look alike
over that same period of time.
And so fundamentally, what we're
looking at here if uh we kind of
stay the course, a decrease or a
diminished capacity over time in
our ability to get road projects
done.
Just to remind you all of the,
uh, the 4 major revenue sources
for Department of Transportation
in this order gasoline special
fuelway distance and vehicle
registration fees. And this
table here just shows you a
representation of that. The 5th
largest, by the way, is that
orange slice, the motor excise
tax, uh, uh point of discussion
with you all over the last
couple of years and, and I
thought about increasing that
distribution.
And so with that, um, as you all
aware and understanding um what
our state road fund challenges
are. We, of course, um, you
know, are prepared during our,
our budget hearing in December
to talk about some of the
priorities for which we would
appreciate your one-time
appropriations for support to
get those projects done quickly,
but one of the discussions that
we think is equally important is
what State Road Fund is going to
do moving forward. So I guess
the, the discussion being split
between the right here right
now. How do we leverage
revenue to get projects done,
but then what happens in the
future so that we can address
the declining state road fund
revenues relative to the, the
increase in construction costs
and these of course are some of
those challenges that we have to
overcome and, and we're working
diligently behind the scenes
with, you know, a number of
stakeholders to identify some
suggestions that we can present
to you all as ways that, um, we
can provide more stability for
contractors because we know that
not only will more recurring
funding provide.
Contractor stability, but it'll
give us some stability to start
building capacity within DOT to
start getting more projects
prepared and out to construction
sooner, so, um, I'll, I'll stop
there and I'll stand for any
questions.
You can refer to me as chair,
uh, Senator Shindo, your first.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Um
Sorry you walked in late, but uh
I just have one question, uh, on
the highway for design, would
that be uh Mr. Chairman, be
complete by the end of this year
as we
And express
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Senator, we
still expect we can get that
done by the end of the
understanding that one of the
heavy lifts is right away and
that the partnership between us
and him is Pueblo might simplify
that. OK.
Representing Chatville.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh
Mr. Chair, from some of our
talks are at other times when
we've met, uh, I know that one
of the problems we have in New
Mexico is a lack of engineers.
Lack of contractors.
My contention.
was then and still is today that
we need to put some funding out
there, so that these folks know
they have a job.
Then they will, people will
start companies. We used, we,
we're missing some of the big
road contractors that were in
play whenever I was a kid when
we built 25 and
And uh
So, my question is,
Uh, we put pretty good money in,
in the pot.
Uh, last year and the year
before, are we starting to see
some of these contractors come
back. What's the situation with
engineers? Are you doing some of
that, uh,
Um
Where they trying to think of
the name of it where they
engineered the road and and
build it too can you give me a
little update.
Sure, Mr. Chairman
Representative, so, uh, we, we
keep a really good relationship
with the contractors throughout
the state. And, and they're
continuing to, they continue to
be dedicated to be sure, some of
them are doing work outside of
New Mexico as well. They have
capacity to be able to do that
in neighboring states. And so,
um, if, if that's an indication
of um, you know, their ability
to do more work for us directly
instead of leaving to other
states and certainly they have
that capacity.
With regards to engineers, um,
we, we obviously struggle with
that. Um, we've made major
investments in what we're paying
our engineers at the Department
of Transportation, um, and, and
again, noting that our, our
budget is developed by tax
distributions, the more
investments we make in our
personnel, those investments
directly come off the state road
fund. What we're doing is trying
to facilitate our part in
internship and engineer
development. And so we're
expanding our internship.
programs for engineers to, to be
year-round opportunities to keep
engineering students employed
throughout the year and to
essentially move them through a
comprehensive rotation that gets
them one connected to us and 2
prepared to work for us, uh,
when, when they graduate.
Mr. Chair, uh, recently,
You completed a third of a
project up in our area and, and
the contractor for, for that was
out of Colorado.
They did a meticulously
beautiful job. I mean, they
They went the extra mile and
people are just really
Really talking about what a good
job they have done.
And we appreciate that and
And uh even if they were out of
Colorado, they came to New
Mexico to go to work, so I hope
to see that we get the capacity
to fix our roads while we, while
we have some funding when the,
when the funding's gone, the
roads will still be here.
And that's been uh something
we've struggled with uh in New
Mexico since I was a child, I
know.
Uh, you
In Texas and you hit that in
Mexico line and, and you can
kind of tell it and I'd like it
to be the other way. I I'd like,
so it's getting there. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman, um.
Starting off on uh
I know.
Well, uh, looking at, um,
On the revenue and I forgot the
page on that.
But they.
This
Yeah so
So on that pie chart.
So,
Right now,
Are we
Getting any revenue from the
electric.
Autommobiles
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Senator, we,
we don't have a surcharge that
um EV or hybrid EV car owners
pay, uh, currently in the state.
We do not.
We do not
OK.
Oh, thank you. um.
Then on page 10.
On that forecast that we're
seeing of actual too.
Or it goes to 2050.
That will be a big big.
Reduction
To the fund, you know, from,
from that point of.
Say, I guess we're looking at
20.
Probably 2023 right now where
it's at the high there.
And uh
The question that I have is, so
So we do we see from uh
The administration coming to us
with any recommendations to see
how we can keep, you know, at
least, at least at the level
that we should be.
Mr. Chairman Senator, yes, we
have a, we have a pretty robust
team that's, that's working on.
Scrubbing essentially every good
idea that any other state in in
the country has leverage to
essentially sustain the work
that needs to be done on, on
their public, public roadway
systems.
And then at the same time, we're
going through the process of
looking back at some past
legislation and measures that
have been introduced, scrubbing
them to see if um one, we can't
provide you all with a more
comprehensive analysis on them
as opposed to a 24 hour analysis
and two, maybe we could craft
them in a way that makes more
sense than originally presented,
but we expect by the end of
November to be able to say, you,
we, we've done the research and
analysis and feel like these
measures might be good for
New Mexico's long term, uh, road
funding stability. Mr. Chairman,
on page 3.
Uh, under the New Mexico Bridge
conditions.
On the the poor areas.
Or any of this, so.
School bus routes.
Mm.
Mr, Mr. Chairman, Senator, we,
we could go back and look to see
if we have any that um would be
considered school bus routes.
OK.
Uh, very well because, um,
I think those uh.
Definitely should be uh
To a higher priority.
Mr. Chairman Senator, we, we, we
would assume that in McKinley
County in particular, there
might be some bridges in that
condition that would be school
rugs.
I think those are counting
bridges, right, that school
buses travel over there.
There's some flooding in early
June, I think.
But there's no structural, I
don't think the school buses go
over that one.
There are some bridge issues in
you, yeah, thank you, Senator
Gonzalez. Senator Gallegos.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you all for the presentation.
Just a couple of questions, um,
Mr. Chair, um,
I was looking at the project
attachment for and there's 4 in
Southeast.
Uh, 38128 31, and I went to your
website, well I, I'm still
waiting for it to populate, but
in the presentation on page 6,
you only have 21 looks like Karl
Rosman.
And one looks like Carl's bed.
Uh, it would have been on page
6, and I'm wondering what those
are and if they're related to
these four now, uh, this shows
actor special transportation
appropriation projects for uh
from 2019 to 2024, so they may
be different projects.
And in the same thing.
Uh, in that discussion, uh, is
that one in the Carlsbad area, I
wait uh 285 by Loving.
And is that complete?
Great. Mr. Chairman, Senator,
great question. So the, the
dashboard here is showing the,
the one on page 6 where we went
to the web on the website,
that's representing only the
projects funded by the 2024
appropriations and the
spreadsheet that LFC is
providing is uh going back I
believe through 2019. So you'll
see a more comprehensiveness
there. So the two that we see in
Southeast, what projects are
those?
Oh, this
question.
So, Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator,
uh, so there's a number of
projects in Southeast New
Mexico, um, I probably should
have put the district on here.
That would have made it easier
for you, but I can do that and
get you a list of products. If
you wouldn't mind, I'd
appreciate that and then my last
question is, uh, Ms. Stern.
Gentleman is on the way up here,
uh, I was diverted on 285 is one
of the bridges route between
Artis and Karls Artesian and
Ross was that already on the
maintenance list or did that
bridge need repairs or is that
just due to this flooding.
Yeah
Um
Yeah.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, we, uh,
Senator will ask Mr. Padilla,
but, but, um.
Yeah, you're right. That the
bridge is now closed because of
the floods, but I'll let Mr.
Padilla talk about its condition
ahead of.
Mr. Chairman and Senator, uh,
those, those structures, those
bridge structures at the 88 are
fairly new bridges, probably
maybe 5 years or less old, so
they're fairly new. So they
weren't up for maintenance. So
we did have some scour as a
result of the flooding down
there, um, and, uh, we've had
our structural engineers in
there, we, we were lucky. Um,
they're not as damaged as we
initially had had.
Yes, um, the northbound bridge
is in fairly good shape and
mostly 95% intact will do some
backfilling. I think I'm gonna
have traffic back on it by
Sunday. Um, the other one is a
little bit more involved, um,
but until I can get equipment
and men in there because it's so
muddy, um, I'll lose it back or
or a or a dozer down there. So
I'm waiting for it to dry out a
little bit, but once I get under
there, um, I'm thinking maybe 2
weeks before I have it open,
worst case a month. So we, so
we're very lucky. Well, thank
you for that, Miss Charr, just
uh
And, and it's probably the
counties.
Directions uh the diversion.
Uh, I do construction.
And we have to give arrows all
the way out.
They do not, uh, I spent more an
hour trying to figure out how to
earn my French, get the hell out
of there.
Uh, and, and they've got a lot
of damage. I mean, the county
does.
But they don't have a direct
route out.
And I talked to the um
Sheriff's department about that,
uh, but it's just something that
we might look at because there's
a lot of people out there trying
to figure out how to get to 285
between closers, so I appreciate
that. Thank you, Mr.
Thank you, Mr. Church, Senator.
We'll, we're, we're managing the
detour route and, and I was down
there as well and, and, and see
where you're coming from, but
we'll, we'll work on additional
signage to make sure they know
where they can take New Mexico
to on the north side and further
on the south side.
And.
Yep, Senator Sheer.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um
I, I wanna start.
First with page 6, which is page
6.
Yeah, page 6 on the LFC portion
here.
Uh, so we start out with 27 of
the 54 projects were complete.
Were we expecting all 54 to be
complete?
So, um, Mr. Chair and senator,
uh, projects do run behind and
so this was just based on um
what the department was
projecting at the June meeting,
so we asked them to give us
when, when do you expect that
this project to finish, um, and,
uh, they provided us essentially
a quarter, so it's just gonna be
like spring, spring of 2024.
Well, we would expect projects
that were supposed to close in
the spring.
2024 to be already closed, but
in some cases, that was not the
case.
So
Mister Chair.
Half of them weren't done.
Exactly half of them weren't
done.
So, um, so, Mr. Chair and
Senator, uh, so of the ones that
were supposed to close in the
first half of 2024.
Um, and I should say this is
calendar year 24, not fiscal
year 2024. So of those, so 14
completed in 6 were still on the
list. So that's
Well lost and so about 3, let's
call it. Um, so, and I would say
for the, for the late 2024,
they've completed 12 projects
and uh they're 19 active
projects, but that uh includes
projects that we're supposed to
close in November or December,
which obviously has hasn't
happened yet. So, um, I, so
you're correct, there are some 6
projects with a cost of $88
million that we
would have expected to close in
the first half of the 2024 that
didn't close.
OK, thank you. So, Mr.
Secretary, Mr. Chair.
Um, how do we choose what
projects we're gonna do, or
you're gonna do.
Sure, Mr. Chair, Senator, we'll,
um,
Have our chief engineer talk
about those relative to the
stiff and.
The information we have on the
pavement, uh, Mr. Chair, Senator
Sher, thank you for the
question. Um, so we go, we work
with the districts obviously,
they have their project
priorities that they identify
whether it's through their uh
maintenance, our maintenance
system. Um, they also
communicate with local
governments within their area to
identify projects, um,
priorities for those folks as
well to roll into the step, um,
but we take our direction from
district priorities, uh, working
through the planning process.
With the RPOs and NPOs to get
those projects into the STI, um,
as you're aware, we have a
6-year ski, the 1st 4 years are
fiscally constrained, um, and we
have the outer two years for
planning purposes, um, those
tend to be overprogrammed beyond
what our formulaic dollars will
give us, um, but a lot of those
projects in those outer years
are currently going through
either the study phase or um
design preliminary engineering
phase basically, uh, so we can
get those projects shovel ready
and then bring them.
Into the 4-year stiff when we do
our um biannualI update.
So, Mr. Chair.
Um
I, I've just, I'm looking at the
projects here and I go, OK, so
the I-25 Williamsburg Exchange,
so that's the top one on this
page.
Page 6 that I was just talking
about.
OK.
Why that one and not
Something else by
To, um, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator,
that particular project, there
was a bridge condition. We had
to replace the bridges, uh, on
that, on that interchange. So a
lot of times it's gonna be, um,
you know, we, we inspect our
bridges on the national highway
system annually and um off
system biannually. So we have a
comprehensive uh um record on
all of our bridge conditions
throughout the state and we
prioritize those projects
according to, you know, whether
the, the worst, um, you know,
replacing the worst and
Uh, maintaining some that are in
maybe fair condition to keep
them in fair condition and not
get into the poor, uh, but we,
we keep a very good um track of
our, of our bridge conditions
throughout the state for our own
bridges as well as locally owned
bridges.
OK. So, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Secretary,
You have a, a
Scorecard for lack of a better
term, to say, OK, this one, this
one, this, um, so one of the
things that I've, I don't live
down in Eunice.
I'm grateful I don't live down
in Eunice, actually, they have a
tree. I saw it.
Um
But
But we've been talking about the
roads down there around Hobbes
and Eunice.
Forever
And so I was, I've been down
there twice recently, and I'm
thinking, wow.
This is a place that needs
roads.
Uh, for a variety of reasons.
One, because, well, the roads
that there are not very good. 2,
the traffic was unbelievable to
me. Uh, that's where you need a
train because it's a constant.
Constant, uh, you know, bumper
to bumper trucks.
Yeah
And I know that we've been
talking about it forever. Why
aren't we doing that one?
Because
On the other hand, why aren't we
doing that one because
That's the county that's paying
all the bills in the state at
the moment.
Yeah
Mr. Chairman, Senator, um,
So I think there's two
questions. One is, how does DOT
identify their priorities and we
answered that question and then
the, the next question is then
how does it, you, how does it
get discretion to fund those
priorities.
I just came back from Hobbs and
Carlsbad on Monday night, was
down with visiting with
community leaders Mo um mobile
Exxon, the key partners, right,
from Premium strategic
Partnerships. And they're asking
the same questions, right? And
so, one of the easiest ways to
get the roads done there would
be if we were to go to this.
Dashboard over here and
Listed as one of those major
priority projects. And so that
would be one way to do it. But
if you go to this dashboard now
and you look at the 320 million
in major construction funding
that we received, you'll see
that we need another 286 million
to finish those projects.
And
If we're gonna finish all 9 of
those listed projects, we're
gonna need to find that funding
from somewhere else.
And so the the ask is there's a
team back here of individuals
that work with consultants alike
to identify those major
priorities.
And what the agency is looking
for in both one time
appropriations and long-term
funding solutions is how do we
then get the discretion to say
this is the priority. We're
gonna go there as opposed to
balancing that decision making
with, but we also have to do
this too. And so it's providing
our engineers and our experts
with that discretion to say, we
got $600 million.
Where do we get, where are we
gonna put it based on priority.
So, Mr. Chair, I
I can appreciate that, but
sometimes I, I wonder about the
priorities. They just
wondering where it came from.
Um, so maybe, maybe they all
make sense, maybe they're
perfect makes sense, but
sometimes I just like, why are
we doing that one versus this
one? And I picked the top one on
this list, uh, at Williamsburg
just because, well, it was the
top one on the list.
Um
But
So how much money do you think
you're short to to maintain our
our roads.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, it's not
so much a thought, it's on slide
2.
It's 6.6 billion according to
the latest trip report and, and
we can provide you with a copy
of that and you can break that
down for you.
So Mr. Chair, so 6.6.
Put on
Well, this is your slide.
Um
So it shows here
That
We've put an awful lot of money.
Into DOT just in the last couple
of years, is that, am I reading
that one right? That one right
there?
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator, that
would not represent legislative
appropriations. It would
represent state road fund
revenues.
OK. And so it wouldn't include
an addition, the additional, I
think the exact number is about
1.8 billion since 2019.
So 1.8 billion.
General revenue plus whatever.
The road fund revenues are so
gas taxes, special fuels, all
that stuff, OK. But that's still
a big number.
So,
so if we have that much
Revenue, which is
Dublin in 5 years.
More than doubled in 5 years.
And we still can't
You can't do the
So, so the, the
I think the next question is,
and it was mentioned over here
about engineers and so forth.
Hm.
Um
Or
Maybe it's two questions here.
So we're talking about just
civil engineers that private
businesses out there that
Design roads and engineers that
work for DOT.
We have enough of either of them
or both of them.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, no, we,
we don't, uh, at the Department
of Transportation. And so, um,
the consultants, the private
industry that you're, that
you're talking about is, of
course, the competition and so
there aren't enough in the state
and for um DOT, the private
sector, of course, is one of our
major competitors. And so there
needs to be a measure that both
imports them from other states
and grows them at a higher rate.
So, Mr. Chair, Mr. Secretary,
how many engineers?
How many engineers do you have
and how many do you need, you
know?
Well, Mr. Chair, Senator, I can
get you the exact number of how
many positions we have available
for with, with engineers
specifically, but it's right now
in that area that we struggle
with our highest vacancy rate,
essentially. And so, um, we've
been working on and, and you can
look back a few months ago, uh,
when the fiscal year changed
over is investing in every
single employee that sits within
our engineering salary schedule,
um,
With a 10% salary increase on
top of the legislated 3% salary
increase and now we're starting
to hear from the private sector
that we're becoming increasingly
competitive.
But again there
That's uh still from Peter to
pay Paul's situation as a state,
we have to be a little bit more
creative. So, Mr. Chair, I think
Um, so even if you had the $6.6
billion.
I'm looking at, you know, lists
and lists and list of things to
do.
And uh the things that weren't
done yet.
Um, but we have the money to do.
So what's, what's holding us
back from finishing the things
that we already have, finishing
the projects, where do you have
money to do? Sure.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator,
there's a probably a few things.
One is, of course, the
challenges that we run into in
getting projects ready for
construction. That's everything
from environmental clearances to
securing right away, getting
design done, things like that.
There's no question that there's
timelines put in place, but
starting a project from start to
finish, the front end of that
work, getting it to design and
construction can take up to 2
years. And so that's big. The
other piece is certainly
capacity.
And so my closing remarks when I
was doing the presentation is
foreseeability in funding
doesn't just provide some
stability for contractors, it
provides it for us too.
And so for example, one division
that we'd like to develop out at
the Department of Transportation
is a division of engineers
responsible for alternative
alternative methods to
construction.
So right now, we're
predominantly doing design build
projects, right? We designed
them, we bid and then we build
them. But if you look at the
project in Albuquerque, which is
the first design build in I
think 11 years, we'd like to
build a team that does
essentially focus on alternative
to construction methods,
traditional construction methods
that will give us capacity to
design projects more quickly and
it'll give us capacity to manage
projects that are aimed at
getting to construction and done
more quickly. And so we
worry about building that out if
we know that we're building it
out on the basis that the spurts
of funding we get are subject to
year to year allocations by the
legislature.
So Mr. Chair, that, that brings
on my list of questions asked as
you were doing it, but
Um
So I'm talking to some um
Contras.
And one of the comments that was
made is, is a five-year budget.
Uh, so that
Their point was
Uh, if they're going to invest
in $10 million piece of
equipment or several $10 million
dollar pieces of equipment.
The bank wants to know that
they've got a 5-year contract as
opposed to a one-year contract.
Um
Is that something that that we
could do, should do? What are
your thoughts?
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator,
probably would push against a
whole lot of procurement, um,
you know, restrictions, but I
think, I, I think the broader
point is, we can tell you today
what our five-year budget
forecast looks like. And if you
were a bank,
And you saw that slide.
Followed by that slide.
Would you lend a company $40
million for equipment.
When the revenue outlook for the
state says they're going to be
doing less work.
More and more every year. Each
year this department is going to
have less work for you to do.
And so what we're trying to do
is say, OK, each year this
legislature has been very
generous with us since 2019, an
additional 1.8 billion at one
time appropriations.
But you all know that for
contractors and their lenders,
they're not looking at what
happened as much as they're
looking at what's gonna happen,
right? And so, as much as we
want to work with you all for
one-time appropriations for
major projects, we also want to
work collaboratively identify
what what's the stability
outlook look like to? What's the
recurring revenue look like?
But back to this chart.
Yes, you, you show up.
Starting when, about 2032 or
something like that, just
guessing at that.
Uh
The things are gonna go down.
And of course, on that one,
costs are gonna go up and of
course we know costs are going
up, we know costs have gone up a
lot just in the last few years.
Um
But we can also see that that
there's just a lot of money in
there.
Um
The $6.6 billion. Is that
something
I mean, if you had that, you had
that in the bank today, what
could you accomplish this year
or next year?
Did you accomplish any more than
with the money you have
currently?
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator, we
believe so, especially if
there's discretion to move on
projects that are ready to be
moved on.
And so, for example, if, if we
go back to the dashboard.
There there are projects in
there that we're concerned with
aren't ready for construction
given the timeline in which we
have to get them done, but we're
gonna work on trying to
accelerate them and get them
done because they've been
identified by the legislature as
priority projects, right?
And so what we would work on
doing is where are the projects
right now in the design where
are the projects relative to
construction and where are the
projects that we can just get to
work on through contract
maintenance. And so the 6.6
billion isn't all major
construction projects. So if
you're looking at the number
provided by LFC, those are major
construction projects. But if
you also look at the number that
LFC provided on maintenance, you
saw, you see that in just 4
months, we have 80 million of
10.
2 $0 million in maintenance
dollars already under contract,
if not already spent. And so the
6.6 billion to be sure, would
include some expensive uh
construction projects, but just
to put perspective on whether or
not 6.6 billion seems like a
high number. We have one project
in Albuquerque right now, more
than a quarter of a billion all
on its own. And so if you look,
if you go down to the permium,
you could spend a billion
dollars there, all on its own.
And so there's a, there's a
number of things that we would
do between construction, major
construction and maintenance to
get that money out the door. But
we're also
I think realistic, we would be
honest about telling you, and I
think going back to the last
legislative session, there was
an effort to surge the agency
with billions of dollars all at
once through bonding, and there
was concern about how much time
we would have to spend that
money and get it out the door
and would it also be attached to
projects that perhaps aren't
ready for construction yet.
So
What kind of discretion, Mr.
Chair, what kind of discretion
do you need?
I thought you already, you had a
list of things to do.
So, what's the discretion? Sure.
So, Mr. Chair, Senator, so if
you look, um, for example, with
the section 11 projects, the
section 11 projects attached to
the $70 million were all
identified for the department.
And so if you go to the
dashboard, you click on the
section 11 projects. It included
a number of projects and those
were identified by the
legislature. So, uh, the 190 in
maintenance, 70 of it identified
projects.
The 320 million that was
identified in the severance tax
bonds, uh, was attached to 9
projects. Of those 9 projects, 6
of them were identified by DOT
as priorities. The sum of all of
those projects will be about 600
million plus, but the bonds
provide $320 million in funding.
And so what our challenge is, if
we want to get all 9 of those
identified projects done is, how
do we turn 320 into 600.
And if we go and do all 9 of
them, the discretion to spend
that money elsewhere now gets
shifted to the identified
projects.
Mr. Chair, one of the
One of the projects that's been
in San Juan County for
A long time since Tom Taylor was
the mayor of the town, and he
was the mayor in the 80s.
Um, that's literally.
Maybe the early 90s, but it was
a long time ago.
Was the Pinon Hill's extension,
which we're doing now.
What we would not have done had
it not been in the law
somewhere.
Um
So how would we have, how would
we have moved that up to
something that was important.
Uh, without actually writing it
in the budget.
Well, Mr. Chair, Senator, I
guess to answer your question,
if we were to get the 6.6
billion to address all of the
projects, then it wouldn't be a
question of priority necessarily
would be a question of order. It
would be you have enough money
to do all of these projects that
you've identified in what order
are you going to do them? Not
necessarily which ones can you
afford to do.
And so under that scenario of
it, we gave you 6.6 billion to
do all of these projects you
have in the queue.
When can you get them done as
quickly as possible.
Otherwise, when we don't have
the resources to do all the
projects like Mr. Quintana
stated, we've got to go do the
areas that are the worst. We got
to go find the areas that
present the most risk and
exposure for the traveling
public. Case in point with your
example about the I-25 project,
we go to a bridge that we know
is failing. We go to a, we go to
pavement conditions that we know
are soon going to fail.
And so it's difficult because
statewide, you all are very
vested in the communities that
you represent.
And within your Senate or, or
House districts, you can
identify a project as being the
worst in your whole district.
And so what we're doing is
throwing it in the mix of the
worst.
Projects in the state and making
decisions based on that. And so
I think that drives the, the,
you know, the, the arrangement
to work with you all on
identifying projects, you know,
throughout the state.
So Mr. Mr. Secretary, if we had
Want me to shut up now?
OK.
This big list.
I, I, I don't know what it, what
it means. So on here we've got
projects from starting in 2022
or something like that, 2019.
Um, so let's take the very first
one on the list.
So it's a 2019 project.
Uh, over here plans and
encumbered funds, uh, 2025. So
we did nothing for this project
from 19 to 25. Sorry, um, Mr.
Chairman, Senator, no. So if you
see for that project under the
expended column, they spent 12.6
million. Uh, there's a, there's
about $5000 encumbered, and
then, uh, according to the
information we have, there's
about 6000 remaining. So that's,
I would say that one is likely
to be spent on a different
project. I don't, I don't know
that for sure. So uh
The other example would be on
line 3, the I-10 project near
the Arizona state line. So that
The project was made possible,
essentially, so there's other
projects on this list. Uh, this
is only where there's funding
available, right? So if, if I
were to include all of those
projects, this list would be
even longer. You'd have a
twenty-page report in front of
you. So, um,
The department's planning to
spend about $7 million on that
project in
Fiscal year 2025. That's what
the columns mean. So the columns
essentially show, uh, where,
when those projects are expected
to be spent.
So even though, even though, OK,
let's go down to
To line number 10 Srios Road. So
in this case, we're looking at
planning encumbrance of 2026.
But it's still a 2021 project.
So Mr. Chair and Senator, uh,
that's correct, that particular
project is being funded with uh
2021 appropriation.
So that means that we've had the
money since 2021.
It's just taken us 5 years to
spend them, 5 years to encumber
the money we haven't spent it.
Mr. Chair, that's correct.
OK, and I think that now I think
we get, so even if we had the
money, could we do the job? Do
we have enough contractors? Do
we have enough engineers? Do we
have enough whatever.
To do it, or it's the 6.6 just,
you know, that's what it takes,
but we couldn't do it anyway.
Um, Mr. Trian, I think that's
accurate. I, I think that
representing the amount of
funding we need is different
from representing how much we
could spend in 1 year or 2
years. I think it's pushing
against a point that the DOT has
all the funding it needs to do
the work that's in front of it.
That's what that number
represents. And so, again,
If we were tasked with walking
away and providing you with our
finance with the capacity to
spend X amount of dollars in a
certain period of time, we'd be
more than happy to provide you
with that information.
And so by showing you a $6
billion gap and showing you that
our revenue forecast cast is
declining against increasing
construction costs, it's really
making a statement about our
need to address long term
revenue stability. It's not
making a statement that if you
give us 6.6 billion now and ask
us to spend it in 3 years that
we have the capacity to do that,
because the cost of some of
those projects includes costs
associated with their right of
way with design and getting them
ready for.
instruction as well. And so it
also doesn't represent 6.6
billion of projects that are
ready to work.
Um, that are ready to go to
construction at the same time,
there would be a question to
Representative Chapfield's point
is, if all of the contractors
were here now saying if we gave
them a check for 6.6 billion,
could you do all of that work in
2 years too, they'll probably be
some request to go back to the
drawing board and answer that
question more appropriately.
Well, Mr. Chair, the last thing
I do, um,
One of the things we're not
doing, we've talked about on and
off here is how do you register
an electric vehicle. Obviously,
it's not using any gasoline.
Um, unless it's a Prius, and
then it uses a couple of drops
of gasoline.
Um
But, but, uh,
But how would we register those
so that it made up the
difference, plus they're
heavier, which means they do
more damage to the road. So, we
have a recommendation on what we
would do.
To
To an electric vehicle.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Senator,
actually the gentleman to your
left, Senator Gonzalez has
introduced legislation in the
past to establish a surcharge.
The weight of the vehicle is
addressed in the current uh
matrix for registering vehicles
by weight and year, and so there
has been uh uh there has been
legislation proposed and, and
pushed to establish a surcharge
that is rooted in the tax lost
based on the average miles of a
driver.
OK. Would that make up the
difference for this revenue that
you're talking about not having.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, um, no,
um, because at the present time,
uh, well, today, no, the present
time I believe less than 2% of
all vehicles registered in New
Mexico are, are electric.
And so the, the forecasts are
anticipating moving forward, but
right now, one of the, the
biggest impacts are fuel
efficient vehicles, and those
would be gasoline vehicles with
um very efficient gas mileage.
All right, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative Armstrong.
Oh, I'm exhausted, Mr. Chairman.
That was a lot. I do.
I do. So, uh, one of the things
I, I was looking, uh, Mr.
Chairman, and, and secretary
that the New Mexico passenger
vehicle registration. So, um,
just so everyone knows, my
oldest daughter has 6 children
and she has to have a passenger
van and she has to pay those.
A higher rate to register the
vehicle.
Uh, so it's not just for
commercial use, but just so
everyone's aware of that. It's,
it's, it's not just for
commercial, it's for any
passenger.
Um, the, all the, all the
meetings that I've been in and
everybody that's been chewing on
my ear, um, on what
is needed.
Um, to Senator Sheer's point.
Is
When we, we talk about, we have
these districts, we have 6
districts. I want it in my area.
I want stuff done in my area.
You want it done in your area,
you want it done in your area.
So I, I, I looked up the
districts because I, I have 3 of
them in my district. I represent
3,
Um, districts, so of course I'm
gonna fight for all of them, but
the way that, that it's the, the
district's goal, 2 of them, 2 or
3 of them touch Albuquerque.
And, um, and so, you know, a lot
of funding goes to Albery, which
I'm not.
Complaining about whatsoever.
But, you know, we, I don't know
when those districts were made
or maybe we need to rethink
those districts so that we could
possibly get some more money
down in the, in the area that
needs it down in the in the
southeast.
Um
One of the things that everyone
is telling me is that there
needs to be a foreseeable
funding.
Because I don't know if everyone
knows how contractors work. It's
not a 9 to 5 job 40 hours a
week, or they have a certain
thing that they do every single
day.
Uh, it's not an office job.
It, it's just not like that.
It's not banker's hours. It's
not counting, uh, that type of
thing, but
It is about bidding projects out
into the future.
And it's investing in the state
of New Mexico, investing in your
employees and investing in um
opportunity.
To bid those projects.
But when there's only a certain
amount of money.
In there every year, how much
risk are they going to take?
Um
in full disclosure, my husband
and I just put up a hot mix
plant in the middle of
Albuquerque.
It took us 2 years.
To get that done.
Because of the permits.
And the electricity and the air
quality and everything else that
goes with it.
Um, so we do this kind of work
through the bid.
Process.
But all the contractors are
telling me when I sit down at
the table with them, they want
to see foreseeable funding.
Into the budget to see if they
can to be prepared to do this
kind of work.
Um, I was, I was also curious to
know how does what has happened
in Roswell and Riodoso affect
your funding and do you have a
pot of emergency money that can
go in there and help these,
this, these areas.
Sure, Mr. Chairman
Representative, and if I came,
if I can, Mr. Truman, I, I want
to apologize if this can be my
last response. I can ask my
colleagues, but I have uh an
appointment, a medical
appointment. I've been waiting
to get to for months. Um,
Um, yes, we do. Yes, we do not.
No, we do not have a fund
available for emergency
contingencies like this. And so
we will pivot from a financial
perspective to go in and do work
that we need to do. But we
worked very quickly to recoup it
wherever possible. In some
instances we'll move to Federal
Highway Administration for
support on emergency repairs
like we did, I believe, we made
that attempt with the I-40 with
the I-40 failure, the I-10 uh
accident uh when a truck caught
fire there and I think a couple
other, you, oh, I think.
over in Los Lunas, uh, when we
lost to New Mexico 4, right?
Um, 6.
And so what it does is, uh, we,
we work on tracking all of the
repair work that we do so that
we can report up either to
federal highway, Department of
Homeland Security, the track
time resources and person power
that we spent on a disaster
recovery, and then we work on
reimbursement where it's allowed
so that we can recoup that. So
for our larger projects like the
Mora San Miguel fire. Um,
obviously, we, we are knee-deep
in FEMA reimbursements for all
of that work and the governor
supporting all of that, I think
from a cash flow perspective,
we're
likewise with Riodoso and with
Roswell right now, but needless
to say, we don't kind of worry
about that. We just kind of do
first.
So we pivot then what also
happens is, so does the focus,
right, of the work that needs to
be done. So for months we were
the focus of our district 2
employees in that region we're
working on Riodoso flood
recovery, and now they're
pivoting over to Roswell flood
recovery, the bridge repair, the
New Mexico 2 Dexter area, you
know, work that needs to be
done, so, um, we're, we're
learning, I think as, as a state
as we get hit with these things
one after another. The
recommendations that we're
working on like um changing
to procurement for more on-call
contracts for fire flood
recovery, our relationship with
Homeland is a lot better in
roles and responsibilities and,
and things that we have to do
there. So, um, it's, it's
difficult.
Thank you for that and I'll let
you switch out. Um, one of the
other things quick question
before you leave and you were in
Hobbs this last week and I want
to clarify this, and you told
the Hobbs to ask the legislature
for more money, but you're,
you're not a general fund
agency, correct?
Mr. Chair, correct. OK. And
then,
The, the big question down there
I guess was you had moved some
money from 128 to the project in
Albuquerque.
How did that money get moved
when we started the session and
you said, we have enough money
for Albuquerque and that
project, and how did we
Move the money from 128 to that
project when during the session,
we said identify roads that you
can complete in a 3-year time
frame.
And how, how come
That money got moved when we
were told that all that money
for that Albuquerque project was
complete, that we didn't need to
put it on the list.
So, Mr. Chair, two things. So my
request from our our colleagues
down in Carlsbao to ask for what
we're asking for today, which is
to ask for discretion.
And surely every agency is
asking their stakeholders to ask
legislators for more resources.
And that's not to say that
that's going to happen through
recurring general fund, but the
revenue that we do receive for
one-time projects is in fact
general fund. It's
non-recurring. And so we did
support our colleagues and, and
partners in the premium to
support increased general fund
appropriations to the Department
of Transportation and we did, of
course, uh, share with them what
we're sharing here today, which
is the
to work on projects of most
priority are, are, are, are
really, is really paramount for
us. And so, I'll uh allow for
Mr. Quintana to talk about the
1228 project, and, and
Montgomery Comanche.
I think this go back to
Representative Armstrong's
question and.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
just, just in
Just in closing, um,
There's also some of the reasons
that this list is so long and so
drawn out is because they chase
federal dollars.
They're waiting. Hurry up and
wait. Hurry up and wait, hurry
up and wait. Uh, to see if they
can get some matching federal
dollars for some of these
projects, the Los Lunas corridor
is one of them. And so there's,
there's money there, it's been
sitting there, but they need
more, and they'd really like to
do more lanes. They have the
funding for 2 lanes. They'd
really like to do 4. So it's
also about chasing the, you
know, it's bureaucracy in the
process, um, and so I, I would
just uh also request that we set
up
kind of, of recurring funding,
some kind of pot of money where
there is foreseeable future
funding for road projects and
infrastructure across the state
of New Mexico, uh, it's all
intertwined with people wanting
to come and do business here.
People coming, wanting to come
in and open businesses here,
tourism, everything else, so,
uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I appreciate it. Thank you. The
Lostlous project.
17 million was ARPA, replaced
that in 2020 or
I think then.
And, and we were told this last
year that that project was
completely funded with the
federal money.
We didn't get put on that list
for the 320 million or 400
million package that we built.
We built packages that they said
they can complete and other
projects didn't need money.
Now we're hearing we're moving
money from one project to
another.
And and it's becoming a bigger
and bigger issue in DOT is is
shuffling money wherever they
want to shuffle it and not doing
what, I mean, each and no one of
us drives the roads. Well, Mr.
Chairman, the other point of
that is exactly what the the
secretary said is
Every once in a while they're
told what projects to make a
priority. By this.
People sitting behind this desk.
I've never told him one time to
do a single project. We, we
worked through the session and
said, we, we, everybody in the
house put the word shawl.
When it came to the Senate, we
put the word may.
And so the Senate didn't
prioritize roads as a shawl, we
put it as a me. Am I correct,
correct?
And so we didn't pry towards
roads in that way, and
So I don't know what legislators
are telling them they got to go
do these roads, but I we've,
we've, I've given them since
I've been here, the opportunity
to pick and choose on roads that
they can get done and roads that
they can complete and how that
funding works, but it seems like
the funny just keeps swapping
around and swapping around.
And so we gotta figure that out.
Representative Garrett, you're
next, and then Senator Woods.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
everybody from transportation
for just persevering in the
department, but two questions,
um, there have been two very
bipartisan bills, um, the
public, uh, private partnership
with Senator Padilla, um,
representative Brown,
Representative, uh, Lindstrom
and others have worked on when
the secretary mentioned
scrubbing bills to see what's
good for this upcoming session,
has the P3 bill been looked at?
that
that came out of the concern in
southeastern New Mexico that
some of the oil and gas
companies were willing to
participate in such an
agreement.
Um
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Garrett, good question. Right
now, we really don't um
Require the legislation to enter
into P3s. We've done that
before. I'll give you a couple
of examples. The first one being
599 and Jaguar Interchange. Um,
that was privately funded by um
uh Cook Industries out of, out
of Espinola they funded it. It
was basically, um, uh, a brand
new interchange to access
property that he owned on both
sides of 599, so obviously it
was an investment for him. Um,
that was identified through a
corridor study uh basically an
interchange um improvement.
Prioritization study that we did
back in 202007, I believe, is
when it was done and um we had
identified what locations along
599 would you um get upgraded to
interstate or to, excuse me, an
interchange, um, Jaguar was the
last one on the list as far as
priorities go, just because of
um it wasn't, it wasn't needed
as far as safety or anything
like that. There was some other
outgraded interchanges that
intersections that needed
upgrading first, but private
partner came in, stepped up to
the plate, and
funded that project ahead of any
of the other projects that were
in the prioritization list. The
other example is an overpass
that we're doing down right now.
It's under construction, um,
south of Los Lunas in Jarales.
Um, it's an overpass over the
NSF railroad, uh, BNSF provided
us, um, right away as well as 12
million to complete that
project, um, that wasn't enough
to do the entirety of the
project, but those are two
examples of some public private
partnerships that we've gotten
into in the past.
Thank you. And the other bill,
um, Mr. Chairman, I want to ask
about is uh the transportation
trust fund, that was a idea to
make this pot of money
available. Is there any uh
feedback from the DOT on that.
Um, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Garrett, so I
think what or not I guess our
concern is, uh, from the DOPT's
perspective, but that large
investment would need to be
significant enough to yield a
return, um, to really benefit
the department on an annual
basis,
you know,
and, and to keep the body of
that investment intact. I mean,
we'd be talking in significant
investment where it, I think the
preference would be for us to
get the.
investment, uh, and, and utilize
it on projects that are that
that are in the step.
And maintenance.
Thank you very much. And then
Mr. Chairman, my final question
is, um,
Um, the senator was asking about
the EV charging your list on
page 12 identifies.
All the things we've had all
these, you know, policy and
bills when you come up at the
end of November with some of
your proposals, will you be
including any specific
recommendations.
On gas tax, which, you know, one
since got knocked down, Gary
Johnson removed the 6 cent
increase, but will you give us
any specific suggestions wish
lists of the committee
representative Garrett
absolutely we're looking at ways
again, we've made numerous
attempts in previous legislative
cycles to increase or close the
gap uh Secretary mentioned the
fact that we're being right
around 2% of overall vehicles
that are now electric in our
state. So right now is a great
time to start considering that
because of the impacts are are
minimal, but as those numbers
grow, uh, those gaps are going
to become a much more profound
and we're going to be feeling it
on our maintenance projects
throughout the state.
So there will be some
recommendations not only from
the perspective, uh, and I'll
give you a peek is what we're
looking at. We're looking at the
registration, um, gaps, closing
out that uh from hybrid as well
as full electric, uh, most of
you guys have seen those bills
come through the the legislative
process last 3 years. Uh, we're
also looking at getting um
reoccurring costs, uh, so that
we're, again, uh representative
Armstrong talked about uh
stabilizing and giving
a forecast of funding that are
contractors can really use to
make those determinations of
investments that they need to
make. Uh, so we're looking at
excise tax, you know, as you
know, the 4% excise tax, um.
We only received 2.5%. We want
to make sure that we look at
that. I know the other 1.5 goes
to critical items that you guys
have to prioritize, but we would
love to get some of those um
those areas that already exist
within the system. We don't need
to recreate the wheel. There's
already areas within our tax
systems that can uh really help
bring a stabilization of
reoccurring funds to the agency
to ensure that we have what we
need to maintain our roads.
Thank you very much. That's it,
Mr. Chair. Representative.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
to the presenters. uh, Mr.
Chair, presenters, is there any
way to control some of these
escalating costs. Is there, are
we building with the same
material we built with 30 years
ago, 20 years ago, 10 years ago.
Is there any sort of innovation
that's out there that, you know,
doesn't lower cost but maybe
manages the increase slightly.
Uh, uh, Mr. Chair representative
small, that's a great question.
Um, and we are looking at ways
we can reuse some of the
existing roadway, for instance,
we um have what's recycled
asphalt, um, when we do, um,
roadway projects, pavement
projects, we allow up to 35%
recycled asphalt within within
our mix. um, depending on where
we're at in the state, those
percentages vary, but we're
looking at increasing that as
well as doing some other things
with um recycling some of the
existing concrete that we may
have on the project and we we.
Reusing, um, um, like say
existing materials, they're um
the I-25 uh uh university
project down in Las Cruces is a
great example of a project that
went through a, it's almost like
a lead type of of um of a
process which is for, for um um
uh home building, right? Except
for, for horizontal
construction. So the, the
contractor and the consultant
actually got scored on how they
could recycle some of the
materials that were available to
them, um, public
Outreach, different kinds of
things that, that Chekhov scores
that can't help mitigate some of
those costs, um.
Bottom line is, is we, we've
seen some construction or
construction costs stabilized
over the last few letting, um,
letting cycles, um, with the
exception of Bridges. Bridges
still continue to be coming in a
little bit high, um, and I think
that's a function in a lot of
cases of the remoteness of the
areas that these bridges are
being replaced, um, but we're
doing all we can to, to kind of
look at some different recycling
things that and recycling
materials that we can
incorporate into our projects
and help reduce the, reduce the
cost a little bit, but bottom
line, we're just dealing
With escalations of costs that
that, you know, there's no, I
don't think they're gonna come
down, so Mr. Chair, thank you
very much, and I think the
interact I think I'm interested
in, I'm sure others are
understanding sort of what that
innovation curve recycling new
material, other things, very
interested in that. Relatedly,
um, in terms of the, what you
plant after in sort of
controlling the erosion, there
are
Do we use like native grass
species and do we, OK, great.
But just for the record, Mr.
Chair, um, representatives,
well, yes, we absolutely
revegetate with natives, with
native species depending on
where we're at in the states, so
we do, um, in fact there was an
op ed, uh, uh, response to an op
ed that was, that I provided a
few months back in the New
Mexican and the Taos news, um,
that kind of talks about our,
our process of how we kind of
revegetate and, and um we're
trying to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions with our projects.
Great, that's awesome. I'll
Well, thank you for flagging
that. There's more for me to
look into there, Mr. Chair, um,
wanna just briefly mention on
the uh uh wildlife crossings and
whether that's overpasses,
whether that's underpasses, you
know, we're the 4th or 5th most
biodiverse state in the whole
country. Um, just a big horn
sheep down in, in the Oregon
mountains down there, um, the,
the wildlife collisions are
deadly. They're expensive, and
obviously for uh
A very wide diversity but pretty
low density of wildlife. They
can be cataclysmic. So, uh, I
think that's something that I'll
be looking forward to engaging
more understanding the whole
suite of options that the
department has, again, whether
that's overpasses, underpasses,
or other ways of mitigating. I
know you guys have done a lot of
work there, um, but there's a
lot more to do. We've not really
built too much yet, um.
Finally, Mr. Chair, um, as I
understand last year, as we and
we, we have, obviously, we,
we're approaching new this year.
The um
The inclusion of funding and of
direction.
Uh, was based off of your, the
Department of Transportation
recommendations.
Sort of that first iteration. I
think we hear pretty clearly a
desire for more transportation
funding.
The sources of that, I think are
have to be under a wide
consideration. We don't want to
penalize folks who are getting
newer, safer,
Cleaner sorts of vehicles with
exorbitants registration fees.
This
Yeah, that's not an appropriate
way to go. But there's clearly a
need for additional resources
and the best that we can finding
stable resources, um, I think
it's a shared, a shared goal.
Appreciate very much
Representative Garrett's
question, uh, and it sounds like
as it relates to sort of private
sector partnership.
There's right now an open door
with the department.
For potential collaboration. Is
that a fair way to say it, Mr.
Charity represent a small,
absolutely, that is fair. That's
great. So, as we have potential
opportunities that are out
there, uh, that, that's great to
hear. Um,
OK. uh, Mr. Chair, I think that
does it for me. Thank you all
very much. Thank you.
Thank you. I appreciate that.
Uh, you guys are gonna have to
take some real quick notes or
listen back to the video.
Uh, I, I want to know how much
money has been shuffled around
from project to project, and how
much cost overruns are.
I want to see that for the last
year or two. I want to see the
dates.
The project was approved, the
dollar amount that was put in
there, and if that dollar amount
got moved to another project.
I mean, this, the shuffling of
the deck seems to continue to
happen and I don't know why it's
happening.
Uh, whether you had shortfalls
in that project with the
shortfalls were. Uh, I'm looking
on this sheet and you had no
cost overrun in 2021 MIPS and so
there were no cost overruns or
no change orders listed there.
We list these individually and
cost overruns or change orders
per project and.
Want to see if you have that. So
just to clarify, Mr, Mr. Chair,
so, um,
The department does not have,
they may have had change orders
for that, but there's not
currently money specifically
dedicated to future change
orders.
OK, but I, I mean, it, I mean,
there's something there, right?
You know that.
If I, I'll give you the example
gallop to Window Rock, the, the
contractor doing the soils,
right? The soils are not stable
and he was on hold for a month.
Trying to figure out what DOT is
going to do if they're going to
remove those or not. So there's
a change order that they didn't
expect or see underneath and so
there's a cost overrun or a
change order that had that. I, I
want to see all those and I want
to see those tracked.
They're tracked, um,
Let me ask you about the Los
Lunas interchange since that's
ARPA money is
That we were told that that
project was fully funded during
this session.
The in is fully funded and we
didn't need to, you guys didn't
list it anywhere that it needed
additional funding.
There was some mention of that
project. Where is that project?
And is it fully funded? Mr.
Chair, uh, good question. So,
um, it is fully funded as of
now. We have to provide Los
Lunas with $8 million out of
state road fund to make it
whole. It wasn't put on our
request last year because that
was strictly for our DOT major
investment projects that we
wanted to request for, so we
didn't include any TLPA for
tribal or local government
projects in our request. We
typically don't. We, we
typically just provide up um
projects.
priorities that are NMDOT led
projects.
You know, and I guess maybe sent
Representative Armstrong was
right. I mean, legislators put
money in Rhodes and Gallup, a
$30 million road and there's no,
no infrastructure there, there's
no other infrastructure there,
no water, no sewer, no nothing
for development. You have this
Allison Road corridor.
Which has been on there for a
while.
And you guys have done that
design and when it lands on the
other side of the freeway, and
the other side of Route 66, it's
underwater.
And you guys continue to do a
project that don't make sense. I
don't know why we're doing that
when
No matter what you design.
You, you can't get above grade
and and so I don't know how
you're going to do that, but
there's certain things that you,
I, I think the legislature
really is to the point now.
Of
Each drive roads, right, drink
drive by 40, I mean if if.
If we want things fixed in our
district, 128.
Whatever the roads are down
south, right?
Rhodes and gray. We're gonna
have to start listing them, and
we're gonna have to start
putting the budget number.
And they're just gonna have to
be held to and you're not gonna
move the funds to another
project.
I mean that seems to be what
happened, especially in the in
the 128.
Question, and that was the
The secretary's comments in, in
hubs.
That
At the Albuquerque project took
priority over that.
The legislature was told during
the session that the Albuquerque
Interchange in Montgomery or
Jefferson that that project was
fully funded and didn't need to
be listed.
And then he tells them a
different story.
And then he tells them.
That the legislature cut his
budget. You're not a general
fund agency.
I mean, if anything, the
legislature did is, we had 320
million plus.
Whatever we added and road and
maintenance and repairs. I mean,
there were no budget cuts, so, I
mean, if you can be honest, be
honest with everybody so they
know where we're at. If you're
not gonna do 128 for a reason,
then they should tell them we're
not doing and the reason is.
But we funded that project. That
projects are gonna be sold in
the December sale.
Unless you change the name of
the project. Did you guys change
the name?
For the December sale in the
bond sale that
That the Board of Finance is
gonna be
doing to move the 128 money to
to the interchange that in
Albuquerque.
Comanche.
Uh, Mr. Chair, we know, we're
the the projects that were
listed on Senate Bill 275 are
still going out to sell the ones
that we that that we can.
Make holes, because there are
some projects in there, you
know, 180 and, and some of the
projects that, that um
That weren't fully funded, so,
yeah, I mean, I'm, I'm a common
sense guy. I mean, you have a
$60 million bridge at Church
Rock. You just did a bridge over
the railroad tracks for that
one, right? And, and
Do we really need an interchange
or someone saying that, I mean,
that, that's the real question,
I mean.
sure the traffic's high, but
there's exit ways, there's
interchanges within.
2 miles or 5 miles on each side
of that.
And and so, is it really right
to spend $60 million on a bridge
that.
I don't know what the traffic
count is.
But I mean, that's, that's a big
project, and then the widening
of of I I-40, right?
I mean, I forget who I was
sitting with last night, and I
just did a rough guess.
Each bridge is $60 million.
rough.
Right?
That's what you have for Gallup
to go over I-40.
And and so each won $60 million
and we counted from Gallup to
grants, right?
And we counted 30 bridges,
right? At least so you need.
$1.8 billion just to do the
bridges at 60 million.
1.8 billion, just to do the
bridges, and that's not even the
road wide.
I mean
I think realistically for me and
just because we traveled so
much.
Drive to Oklahoma. Watch those
trucks in the left hand lane.
In the right-hand lane and
driving at 55, it changes the
traffic pattern.
Um, I mean, look at it in
California.
It changes the traffic pattern
in the, and that may be a less
costly relief to try that first
before we say we're gonna spend.
$20 billion in reality to get.
And get to Albuquerque's.
There was a truck fell off the
bridge the other day, both both
sides of the interstate.
There's another truck that
flipped in the middle of the
road and went across the median
and closed both sides of the
interstates, whether you have 4
or whether you have 6, that's
still gonna we appreciate your
time, make sure you get that
note, you'll get it to Charlesy
tomorrow morning at 8:00 a.m.
Yup.
There's plenty of daylight left.
Thank you guys.
Uh, who's next? Who's next,
player?
Charles.
Uh, no, the auditor is, oops, I
got 2.
Or running behind Mr. Auditor,
so hit your highlights.
You need to fire away as quickly
as you can and
You're on your own. Good
afternoon, um, Joseph Maest
state auditor, um.
Good to see you all, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee. I just wanted to also
thank Senator Rodriguez for all
her service, um, she's not my
senator, but she is my friend
and uh thank you so much for
your service. Uh, before I get
going, uh, I do want to
introduce members of my team,
uh, behind me is Deputy Director
Ricky Bejarano.
Um, my policy director, Mr.
David Pena.
And then we also have my
administrative services
director, uh, Cheryl James CPA
and then, you know, we have a
new program, it's a small local
public body assistance program,
and we have the coordinator
here, Manuel Luna, and his
intern who's assisting him in
Gabriela Gabaldon.
So with that, uh, if you look at
the agenda, uh, you had a, a
recommended order of our
presentation. Uh, we're gonna
change the order if, if that's
OK. Uh, our presentation, we're
gonna address kind of the status
of the accounting industry, uh,
what, what's happening
nationally? What's happening
here in New Mexico and how it's
specifically affecting the
office of the state auditor, and
then we're gonna present on our
budget request, and then we're
gonna end with a summary.
Of the deficiencies report.
Um, so we'll get going uh on
that.
So, what's happening in the
accounting industry? I know
many, many of us have heard
about kind of the high profile,
uh, issues with respect to
teachers, teacher pay, nurses,
but I'm really here to tell you
that we have a very serious
workforce crisis in that there
is um a significant talent
shortage in the form of
accountants, um,
First off, about 75% of the
licensed CPAs are baby boomers
and are eligible to retire in
2020.
Um, also, what's happening is
that folks that get into the
industry tend to leave it in
their 1st 3 to 5 years.
And so
And there's this perceived lack
of work life balance. There's
another perception on the part
of college students that
You know, it's a, it's a mundane
field. It's uh, you know, it's
all about getting overworked
and, and not having enough of a,
a starting salary.
And
There's a, there's a requirement
that's universal across the
country.
Um, in order to get your CPA,
you need 150 hours of college
instruction. And as we all know,
it really just requires 120
hours to get your bachelor's, so
you need another year, an
additional 30 years.
I'm sorry, 30 hours of, of
college instruction, but here's
the deal, you know, a lot of
students are, you know, they're,
they're weary after 4 years,
they want to get into the
workplace.
And they're kind of saying, you
know what, I, I just, uh, I
don't have the, the time or the
resources to do that. So it's
becoming a deterrent in
additional folks entering the
accounting field.
And um
This is an issue nationally, and
The reason why this 150 hour
requirement exists is to allow
for the portability or the
mobility of CPA licenses.
From state to state. So it's a
reciprocity, uh, issue.
And another alarming factoid in
a, in a national studies, and
this was in 2018, uh, less than
50% of accounting graduates
pursuing this is bachelor's and
master's.
We first time CPA candidates.
Prior to that, it had been well
above 50%.
So, you know,
How does this affect New Mexico?
Um, it, it affects the number of
qualified candidates.
Of that, that can work at my
office and actually pursue other
auditor positions across the
state.
We've seen just in the last year
to year from 22 to 23, we've
seen a 20% increase in late
audits. Why late audits? Well,
because there's fewer
independent public accounting
firms. They're carrying a higher
client workload, so there's less
time to give the clients, uh,
To provide the necessary
information for them to initiate
the audit is called a provided
by by client of PBC.
Um, we've also seen a reduction
in license CPAs, we've seen
about a 30% reduction in
licensed CPAs over the last 5
years based on data from the
public accountancy Board.
Um, we've also experienced
Uh, a significant reduction in
the number of independent public
accounting firms that my office
certifies every year. And once
we certify and vet them, um,
they go out and contract with,
with public entities and conduct
their audits.
Um
So just to give you an idea what
the reduction has been, we had
about 8010 years ago, 80
pre-approved independent public
accounting firms that would fan
out and contract with public
entities across the state, um,
today we have about 46.
That are doing full financial
audits. So we went from 80 to
about 46 in 10 years.
Um, another, another alarming
sign is many public entities are
coming to us and saying, Mr.
Auditor, um, no one wants to
come out of this. Can we request
an exemption to the auditor
rotation rule, so we can keep
our same accounting firm.
So the auditor rotation rule,
basically you can, you can have
the same auditor doing your
annual financial audit for a
consecutive years, you have to
go to RFP after 4, but you can
rehire the same accounting firm.
After 8 consecutive years, there
needs to be a two-year waiting
period until you can hire your
previous accounting firm.
So what we're seeing is that
more and more entities are
asking us for this exemption.
Um, and lastly, the last bullet
is
If it gets to the point where
public entities can't find a
public accountant to do their
annual financial audit by
statute, my office has to do
that, and I can tell you right
now, we don't have the
bandwidth.
Or the capacity
To meet this demand that we
anticipate and we're seeing some
signs where this demand is going
to increase.
So, like, what's being done
nationally, uh,
The American Institute of
Certified Public Accountants,
kind of commissioned an
independent effort. It's called
the National Pipeline Advisory
Group.
And they, they're looking at
this national problem that I
just explained, and they have
some, some recommendations for
the industry, and the first one
is to make the academic
experience more engaging. Many
undergraduates that initially
pursue accounting, end up
leaving it.
And while they're in school.
And so there's a role for higher
education to make the curriculum
much more interesting, uh, to
start talking about the, the
potential of technology, whether
it's AI or blockchain learning,
um,
Also, it, it's asking that
employees kind of change the
overall experience and culture.
Uh, in accounting by uh offering
competitive salaries and, and
offering managing uh or or
manageable workloads because I
think everybody, especially post
pandemic,
They want a work-life balance,
and I think that's what this
national study is recommending.
Um
They recommend prioritizing
strategies to expand access to
the underrepresented. This 150
hour rule.
has caused many uh students of
color, uh, to avoid pursuing uh
the 150 hours cause they just
can't afford it. So we're seeing
that the industry, uh, lacks,
um, people of color. Uh, it's
recommending that we provide
better support to CPA exam uh
candidates. We just had our
conservatorship uh review team
leader achieve his CPA and, uh,
you know, we're providing
support for them to purchase
study guides and
we're giving him the necessary
time off to pursue their CPA,
um, so we're doing everything we
can to support the CPA exam, uh,
candidates.
Here's another recommendation
that I really want to bring to
your attention, um, it, it
recommends addressing resource
and funding constraints.
to offer competitive salaries
and competitive fees to CPA
firms auditing governments, as
you know, we give you the median
and average cost of annual
financial audit contracts, and
then you determine the budget,
uh, generally for state
agencies. So
We feel that these average
numbers are suppressing the
actual market value of the true
cost of an audit.
And so we think that we think
the market should determine the
cost of audits instead of the
legislature based on the average
data that we provide to you.
And the last recommendation of
this national uh pipeline
advisory group study is that you
benchmark government salaries.
And uh we're gonna talk some
more about the Deloitte study,
um, that was commissioned by the
state personnel office to look
at comp and class.
Uh, we definitely have some
comments about that.
So what's the, what's New
Mexico's response to this? Um,
we have a partner in the New
Mexico Society of CPAs and uh
they're gonna convene a work
group to look at this, uh, but
we feel that there should be
some legislation considering at,
at a minimum, a memorial to look
at changing the 150 hour rule,
states like Ohio have recognized
this. What is Ohio done? Is that
OK, if you apply for a C
in Ohio, and you come with 120
hours of creditable, um,
transcript hours towards your,
your accounting degree.
You can meet the additional 30
hours.
through experiential learning.
So there is an option.
To, to meet that additional 30
hours, uh, because the other
thing is the additional 30
hours, there's no accounting
required. You can take
underwater basket weaving, um,
for the additional 30 hours and,
and it doesn't really matter.
So,
And the last thing that I think,
you know, we, we should consider
as uh higher education
department has uh an endowment
program, and there are
priorities designated.
And I did write a letter of
support, I believe, for New
Mexico Highlands, they applied
for about a million dollars
endowment for their accounting.
Um, department.
And
They applied for it under this
general category called
workforce initiatives.
But we'd like you to reconsider
and revisit those in endowment
priorities and have them be more
targeted to address this
industry.
All right, so I'm gonna pivot
and just
remind all of you what we have
to do, what our statutory
mandate is.
We have to review every single
public entity every year. We're
talking over 600, um,
There's many states that don't
do that, that do not conduct
annual financial compliance
audits at that frequency. If you
look at the other side of the
spectrum, the state of Nevada
doesn't even do.
Annual financial compliance
audits.
They do performance audits on a
select basis of certain state
agencies.
We also uh have the authority to
examine all the audit reports
from audits done by these
independent public accounting
firms, these, what we call IPAs,
they're an extension of my
office. They're basically agents
of my office.
And so, uh, we review all these
reports, as I mentioned, I think
we receive about 650 audit
reports every year. Uh, we're
also authorized to audit, you
know, any
Uh, any public entity in whole
or in part, so we do have the
authority to designate um a
certain public entity for a
special audit. It's more of a
narrow scope, kind of audit, um,
unlike the annual financial
audit.
We also serve in a regulatory
role uh in overseeing the
independent public accounting
firms that represent my office.
So every spring, we ask for
their um their profile. We
ensure that they have the
necessary training, uh, and
Between the time that we
approved them, and they come
back for reconsideration, we
monitor their performance.
So, excuse my, I'm losing my
voice.
We monitor their performance
throughout the entire year. So
we do have the authority to
place certain accounting firms
on restrictions if their
products are inadequate or if
any staff, uh,
Desires to to lead an audit, and
if they don't have the necessary
training hours, we will restrict
that individual. So we do have a
lot of discretion in evaluating
the performance and placing
restrictions on these accounting
firms.
So the last bullet and, and we
have a special slide designated
to this in in 2021, uh, HB 236
was passed.
That basically mandated us to
work with the courts, uh, to
review annual.
Uh, financial reports of
conservatorships.
And, you know, conservatorships
basically, you know, uh,
Uh, a vulnerable adult who can't
um
Manage their own financial
assets, they basically have a
conservator do that.
Uh, and we'll talk some more
about that, but that, that's a
very unique charge, um,
Based on our
So
HB 234, I think I talked about
the mandate, but
You know what it, what it does.
is it sets a precedent.
In that it augments our, our
mission.
To work with private financial
information.
And
The history of the office is
only involved.
Public financial information.
So what have been the
consequences this unfunded
mandate has basically siphoned
resources away from more mission
critical positions, which is our
financial audit division.
And um we did, we did do a, an
estimate of the financial impact
on our budget. It's almost
600,000, but that excludes
overhead and other costs, uh, to
review this private financial
information. So it really limits
our ability to fill other
mission critical FTEs.
And it really taxes our office
of general counsel because, you
know, we do have subpoena
authority, and we've never had
to exercise that authority to
request public information.
But
In in auditing, if we, if we
choose to audit a
conservatorship, these financial
institutions are, are not
readily inclined to share
information. So we have to issue
subpoenas. And those are very
work intensive for our Office of
General Counsel basically only
has 3 folks.
Uh, a chief.
And a deputy general counsel and
a paralegal.
Um, so we recommend that this,
this role, this function.
Uh
Possibly be relocated to the
Department of Justice or the
administrative office of the
courts, uh, the Department of
Justice, they already administer
guardianships.
Uh, so we'd, we'd like you to
reconsider this, this major
change uh in our role.
So, um, let's get into our
budget, um.
We're requesting a 15.8%
increase in the personnel
services.
Um, as I just explained the, the
contraction of the accounting
industry, the, the, the sheer
competitiveness of pursuing uh
accounting majors is tough, and
let me tell you, I think, you
know, last time I came before
you, I presented a, a
comparison, an average salary
comparison of my office with
other offices of of the state
auditor in in the region.
And we were last. We were dead
last. And so we know that our
salary structure is lagging
behind the public sector and
certainly we can't compete with
the private sector.
So there's a, you know, kind of
a danger there of trying to
compete and we're not in a
position to compete, uh, given
our current budget and the
salary structure.
Um, and also, you know, our, our
request was under the, the, the
forecast. It was about 8, about
90,000 under the, the
projection.
I do want to talk a little bit
about the Deloitte Compton class
study, you know, we had had an
appropriation poised and ready
to submit, and we were waved
off.
Uh, we were told there's gonna
be a statewide comp and class
study, your office will be
considered, uh, guess what? It
was not. It completely missed
the boat. Uh, they didn't
include any auditor positions.
Because there's so few of them.
But here's the distinction
between auditor positions and
other agencies in ours.
There's a whole host of other
additional qualifications.
And so
It's very difficult, you know,
to fill these positions and so
we're gonna stand here before
you and we're gonna make another
go of it and request our own
comp class study, uh, to really
look at
Particularly the private sector.
Uh, we know we're lagging behind
the public sector, but the
Compton class study that that
state personnel office did just
completely missed the boat on
that.
So the 300 category, I think
we're getting down to
miscellaneous stuff, but I will
address the specifics under the
300 category, the contractual
services, um, we're basically
gonna maintain our, our budget.
Um, we're asking for, um, money
for professional services and
strategic planning to see what
we can do uh to address this
contracting uh accounting
industry.
We, we are asking for 40,000 for
our new case management system.
This is an established hosting
fee, um, that the contractor's
case IQ that manages our uh
fraud, waste, and abuse intake
system, um, and then the rest
are just, you know, the, the
request for audit services, uh,
for, you know, updating our
website. Uh we are asking for
something very new that I don't
believe we've asked for in the
past. And this is something that
we audit for. We're
asking for $30,000 for IT backup
and disaster recovery.
Um, we've heard about a lot of
the, the, the cyber incursions,
uh, affecting a lot of agencies
and so, uh, we feel that we need
to be prepared and we're not
credible as an agency, if we're
auditing other public entities
for just that, having an IT
backup and disaster recovery,
and we don't have one ourselves.
So that's what that's about.
And I, you know, here, I'm, I'm
not gonna go through this. I
know we're short on time. If you
have any questions on these
miscellaneous expenses, you
know, please, please ask us.
But um
No, no, no.
You know, go, go to the
appropriations.
All done, just just go there.
There you go.
OK, I just want to summarize the
appropriations, um.
We're requesting a million
dollars.
For our audit fund, as you know,
we have an audit fund that's
capitalized through fees that we
charge for some of the audit
work that we do.
The the use of that audit fund
is restricted to 200s to
personal services.
But we, um, we're asking for
this to conduct um any special
examinations in the form of
referrals from the legislature,
uh, some of the things that
we've done recently is we were
asked to audit the local
economic Development Act program
and the, the job training.
Improvement program, um, we're
also asked by higher ed to step
in. I remember Mesa Laz was
Teetering on, on insolvency.
There were at least 2 fiscal
years behind in their books.
Um, we are, we stepped in and we
conducted the audits for fiscal
year 22 and 23, and
That higher ed institution is in
a much better.
Financial position as a result
of us intervening and conducting
those two audits, we do, we're
just gonna, we're gonna, we're
almost ready to have the exit
conference for the fiscal year
23 audit.
We held off on conducting a
special audit to look into, you
know, some of the past
governance decisions that led to
its insolvency. Uh, so we're
poised to begin that, that
special audit. And those are all
funded.
Hold on a second.
And then we're asking for
$200,000 to implement a singular
audit, you know, I've stood here
and advocated for New Mexico to
join the rest of the country.
And call for a consolidated
audit of all state agencies.
Us and Hawaii are the only two
states.
That do not have a singular
audit. Some states have had a
singular audit for as many as 20
years.
And why is this good? We feel
that the state would realize
much better state bonding terms,
lower interest rates.
Given the fact that our state
receives probably
Almost the the top in terms of
federal funds per capita.
I guarantee you federal agencies
would love to see how their
money is being spent in one
audit document. So, uh, we're
gonna push hard for this. The
last time legislation was
introduced was 2018. Uh, we're
gonna make another go of it, but
we have a plan.
To, to, um,
To develop the the transition.
To a singular audit. Right now
we have a study underway. We
hired the Bureau of Business and
Economic Research.
to study the pros and cons of a
singular audit and we'll have
the results to present to you or
in the form of maybe a, you
know, a, a report, uh, they
should be done at the end of
December, and if the legislation
passes, the transition to a
singular audit, uh, we're gonna,
we're gonna hire a Bureau of
Business and Economic Research.
To come up with that transition
plan to assure you that we're
not gonna just jump into it.
We're gonna make sure that
there's a, a very reasonable
transition to a singular audit.
Um, we're asking for another
half a million for services to
help our small local public
bodies.
Um, this is a new service that
was identified by a consultant
that we hired to assess the
program.
The consultant said, Mister
Auditor, you know, when you
dispatch uh an independent
public accounting firm to help
an eligible local public body
for your assistance program,
they're not ready.
And the accountant's not gonna
go over there and start
gathering all their, their,
their documents and, and
preparing them for an audit. So,
so this consultant said, you
need
A, a new services approach, and
that is to assist the small
local public bodies with audit
preparation.
The last appropriation that
we're requesting is just to
maintain a small local public
body uh funding to make sure
that they're in compliance. I
think one of the senators asked
us, well, once you get them
compliant, how do you keep them
there?
And that's what this is for, to
make sure that we, you know,
that they have the tools that
they need.
To do just that.
And so this is kind of the
little dashboard of how we've
done since you all began funding
this program, um, I'm happy to
tell you that we're already um
We're, we're often running and
obligating the million dollar
appropriation that you granted
to us. Uh, you gave us an
initial appropriation of a half
a million. We spent almost all
of it. We reverted about 80,000,
but this 1 million, uh, we have
already signed 3 contracts with
accounting firms throughout New
Mexico.
To assist
And we've also um hired or or
signed a contract to uh have a
consulting accounting firm
develop a tool kit.
To help these small local public
bodies. So we're very, very
happy about that. So the
achievements, uh, we've brought
154 small local public bodies
into compliance. Uh, we've
helped free up about 3.1 million
in capital outlay and about
another 400,000 in pandemic
relief funds in about 50,000 in
federal funds so you can see the
great potential that this has to
assist these small local public
bodies who can't access their
awarded funding because they're
not in compliance for.
Executive Order 2013006.
With uh delivered 464 financial
certifications and we're
continuing to build capacity on
the part of small local public
bodies.
Um, I already discussed the
million dollars in a, in the
appropriation. One thing that
we've done with the initial half
a million is we vastly improved.
OSA Connect, it's an online
platform that really all of our
stakeholders and particularly
the independent independent
public accounting firms used to
communicate with us.
Uh, we inherited a very clunky,
non-user friendly system, and so
we have, we have done a lot of
these enhancements to to make it
more make it more user friendly.
The challenges that we have in
this program, we still have
about 318 small local public
bodies that are not in
compliance.
And uh one thing in the initial
goal of it with a half a million
when we issued a request for
proposals, we did it on a more
localized basis, but
The lack of independent public
accounting firms really curtail
the response that we expected
with that initial half a
million, so that's why the 2nd
iteration of our procurement, we
went statewide and that's how we
awarded the 3 contracts.
So the last thing I'm gonna
cover is just the deficiency
appropriations request, you all
were very concerned in the last
session with uh exorbitant level
of deficiency appropriations.
Um, we identified an increase in
137 million from 2014 to 2024,
um, and what we found was the
justifications weren't always
available. There was some
circumvention of the process,
uh, by some, by some agencies
and so we're recommending that
um
That you really add more
transparency in the whole
process. By conducting
additional hearings and, and
making related documents public,
um,
The other recommendation is you
may wish to stop funding
deficiency appropriation request
or increase the rigor, uh, of,
of your review of such requests.
And we also recommend separating
deficiency appropriations from
supplemental appropriations.
Uh, and the last thing is, you
know, there, there are uh laws
that, that call for enforcement,
right? of violating uh budget
controls, um, we recommend that
you revisit those laws regarding
penalties uh of budget authority
violations.
Is that it?
All right,
that concludes my presentation.
I'm, I'm open for questions, Mr.
Chair. I'm kind of glad you were
up right before we go into some
of these small budgets. If you
go back to that slide on the, on
the deficiencies. I mean,
That's a key point for the
legislature. That's 137 million
that we have to appropriate to
deficiencies that weren't in a
budget.
I mean, that
That tells a tale.
Of how much agencies
Don't pay attention to their
budget, don't care what their
budget is.
And and that becomes a problem
if you take that number in the
healthcare number.
That we had to do last year and
150 million and now we're
talking about another.
50, 10, 50% in health increases
over the next 5 years, cause
that never adjusted by itself
and become, becomes an enormous
number into the 20 or 300, so
there, what you have questions?
Yeah, just a quick question, and
it's on the very same slide.
Mr. Chair
And I was just wondering when
you start talking about revising
elements of state law.
Have you got some kind of
wordage in there that you're
thinking about, uh, well, here's
the thing is some director some
direction there. Mr. Chair
Senator Woods, you know, we're
Finly referred to as the kind of
the tattle tales we inform and
notify based on findings from
audits, but we don't have an
enforcement role, that primarily
falls on Department of Finance
and Administration. And so,
I'm reluctant to specify.
What changes may be required in
DFA's enforcement authority for
violations of, of state agencies
and their budget controls, uh,
but one thing I can tell you is
that particular statute is very
outdated.
Um, it calls for, uh, some
punitive uh responses like, you
know, diverting tax revenue, um,
which, as you know, these days
most.
Most revenue streams are tied up
in bonds as an example. And so
we feel that and and also, if
you look at that particular
statute.
Um, it's strictly optional.
In terms of sanctioning agencies
for violating their budget
authority.
It's me, me, me, me. There's
only one shell, and that is if
they're late on their audits,
they have to provide, I believe,
uh,
Progress reports.
So there's really no teeth in
it.
Uh, so it's outdated, uh, it, it
really lacks, I think the
The necessary seriousness that
violating budget authority, uh,
really calls for. The part that
I'm getting at is, is, you know,
as the
As the body that's supposed to
be appropriate.
When someone disp spends more
than their appropriation.
And uh DFA approves the transfer
and the state treasurer pays it.
All of a sudden, the
The money's gone.
And
There's no way for the
legislature to get the money
back. It's already spent.
Uh, you know, and I, you know
the examples I'm talking about.
Uh, we
are not taking.
A hole to the budget.
And we're allowing the budget to
be overspent.
And
It seems to me $137.5 million is
It's quite a bit of
overspending.
So,
Somehow, we either take that
role back.
Or we can't quit coming into the
committee.
Let the executive beside the
budget.
So
That's what I'm getting at. I, I
do appreciate your help with
Maain's College. It was
It was uh
I think they needed a lot of
upset there to, to get back on
track and I appreciate that.
Uh, a lot of people was looking
the other way that shouldn't
have been looking the other way.
Uh, I think we've, we've got
some people on that board now
that
That understand.
Uh, state financing and, and
budgets and we're doing a lot
better there now.
But uh thank you for your help
with that. Thank you, thank you,
Mr. Chair and Senator Woods. I,
I do just want to make a
statement too and uh in the most
recent.
Audit rule, we're we're calling
for the audit of share, uh, you
know, the statewide enterprise
resource program.
To find out who's overriding.
Who's pressing that override
button.
To overspend their budget.
Uh, as you know, DFA now is
responsible for SHAR. Uh,
they've done a required
assessment, but there's an RFP
out on the street to do what's
called a system organization
controls or so.
It's gonna be a sock type 2
audit of share.
It's never been done as I, as I
recall in the history of the
state, but we're not going to
stop with Cher. Uh, we updated
the audit rule, and I have the
discretion to identify other
financial software systems in
use by state agencies.
For this sock audit.
And we intend to move forward
with that. I'm not gonna name
specific software platforms, but
there are some that have come to
my attention that, that may
require a sock audit.
And, and there's.
Again, is a lot of the problem.
Is that
We go through an accounting
system and kind of get someone
comfortable using the accounting
system.
And then all of a sudden we
changed something, but if you
could clean up what we had, it
would be a great thing because
You know, the, the treasure told
me she never knew that.
A fund was being overspent, you
know. Yeah. So.
Who do we throw in jail? Not me.
OK. Thank you. Thank you.
Senator Rodriguez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good
afternoon, auditor and your
staff. Thanks for your work just
quickly because I know we are
running a little behind, but I
just wanted to thank you for
your forward thinking. I know
since you came on board, you
were, you've been looking for
ways to improve not only the
systems in place, but to improve
this, the whole agency and, and
audits for people in public. Um,
I just have a quick question. I
hope um that the $500,000 that
you're requesting auditor on
page 10, uh, for services for
small.
local public bodies, those would
help like domestic water
associations and aseas because
they can't afford it. They, they
work only on membership dues
from their own families. So,
would that help them out? Yes.
Good. OK. That's, I thought it
would, but I wanted to confirm
that. So thank you so much. I
don't have any questions. I'm
sorry to hear that. You
mentioned the compensation study
has missed the boat when it
comes to compensation of your
staff, so we take a look at that
serious look.
The intent was to make everyone
as equitable as possible in
that. So thank you, and we're
gonna move on. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, and, and Senator
Rodriguez, and I just want to
assure the, you know, the
committee that we're doing
everything, everything we can to
kind of optimize our processes
to reduce the burden on limited
resources. I've tasked my IT
department to scour.
The nation for any kind of
commercial off the shelf
software programs, um, that
would save time in a lot of the
repetitive tasks that auditors
do in reviewing audit reports.
We're looking at uh AI we're
looking at blockchain learning,
so we're constantly evaluating,
you know, what kind of
applications can we apply to
streamline our operations, and
again, reduce the burden on our
limited resources.
Thank you. I, I think I know who
pushes the button in DFA but we
had that conversation one other
time, but I, I'm gonna blame it
on the chief of staff because I
seen him walk in the room cause
these are his agencies where
they overspent 137.5 million.
Cha's not like you to not name
names.
I know who pushes the button,
but I mean shares at a point
where it needs to be replaced.
We're always worried about
what's happening in the share
and what it's reporting and what
it's not reporting, and we can
calculate a different.
Set of numbers out of share.
Then the executive can and so
that's some of the conflicts
that we have as we move along.
Is that share is not accurate
enough to, to reflect.
Everything currently because
it's outdated so.
All right, I appreciate your
presentation. I'll have a few
more questions. So thank you
all. Appreciate your time.
Or represent Chatfield last one
I'm sorry. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair, just quickly, I
really wanna
Thank you for what you did at
Mesa Les.
Uh, that was a magnificent wreck
going on.
You guys got in there,
straighten it out, and it looks
like we're up and running and in
good shape now, we got a good
man there at the helm, and I
have high hopes for Mason L
today and uh
There was a day when I was
called into a meeting and I did,
it was a bad day for me. Um,
second thing.
A small
Local public entities. We've
talked about this for a couple
of years and uh you're very
graciously have offered your
services to help them. I've sent
several of them to
contact your office.
And they always, uh,
Return and say that.
They couldn't be helped. And uh
I think the last one said it was
because they're, they were a
level 5, tier 5 or whatever,
which means their budget is
pretty good sized budget, but uh
I just wanted to put it out
there that the, the enabling
legislation for severance tax
bonds.
Which Fans of many of our soil
and water conservation districts
and so forth.
Uh, it does not allow for a
fiscal agent fee.
Even though if you look at the
water trusts board, uh, policy,
it'll say 4%, uh, the severance
tax bonds.
Do not pay a fiscal agent fee,
and they, so this agency may
have a good sized budget, but if
that budget is funded by
severance tax bonds, they do not
receive a fiscal agent fee and
therefore they do not have money
to pay for a 7 to $10,000 audit.
So that's the situation that
they're in, so I, I think uh
sometimes
Staff will look at their budget,
say, well, you've got a budget
of
X number of dollars, but not
realize that they are forbidden
by policy.
Uh, several tax bonds of
receiving a fiscal agent fee to
pay for an audit, so your help
with these, these small, and it
looks like you're continuing to
move down the line, but it's not
just many of them, they did get
an audit last year. They do have
their books straight.
But how do they pay for their
audit this year and maintain
their self in good standing.
You, you missed it a while ago.
It's not just getting, bringing
them into good standing. It's
maintaining that good standing,
and if they can't receive a
fiscal agent fee.
Oh
They can't pay for an audit. Uh,
we funded them a little extra
last year, uh, through a
legislative appropriation. We'll
see where that goes, but
Uh, your help would be much
appreciated. Thank you, sir. You
bet, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Chatfield, uh, we
just issued a call for
applications for assistance, and
we've actually developed a
Pretty comprehensive intake
form, and so we just announced
it last week.
And so, um,
I, I, I encourage them to visit
our website, I believe the
application forms available on
the website.
Uh, so we've had that and also
we, we, we will assist any small
local public body that falls
anywhere between tiers 1 and 6.
Uh, if you're, if you have
revenues over a half a million,
you require a full financial
audit. That's where we draw the
line. We don't have the
resources to assist and, and,
um, and fund a full financial
audit.
So, but we may consider
extenuating circumstances
because what we've seen happen
is local public bodies will be
in a tier 3 and all of a sudden
they get a big influx of funds
that that puts them out of
The tiered system, but yet then
the revenue levels returned to
their tier system and they can't
afford that the expenses of a
full financial audit. So we're,
we're trying to consider that
as well that that is exactly
what I'm talking about, and even
if they go into the area of a
full financial audit. It
doesn't.
Exempt them from the rules that
uh service tax bonds cannot pay
a fiscal agent fee.
Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you all.
Appreciate your time.
But you wanna
So now it's quick and you're
gonna be the fastest presenter
on earth, correct?
We're ready if you want to
start.
We don't worry about the screen.
We got the presentation.
Who's it over there? Where's
Joey or?
So
John, can you help me get that
up on the screen?
Oh, you're switching computers.
Turn on that mic.
All right, now we're ready. All
right, Mr. Chairman, members of
the committee, thank you for
allowing us to come before you
today, as you indicated, I will
go through this pretty quickly.
And that's usually not too big a
problem. Uh, my name is Clay
Bailey. I'm RLD superintendent.
I think everybody knows what RLD
does. We have 7 divisions that
cover all the way from
construction to, to funeral
homes.
You stay up with me.
On a strategic plans, uh, we'll
go through that really quick.
We're still trying to do
recruitment uh handle employees,
keep them here, uh, teaching
everybody about cybersecurity
and that stuff. We're going past
that slide. So the main stuff
we're going to get into, uh,
this year we're coming forward.
Uh, I've been asked as much as I
possibly can to keep a flat
budget we've done a really good
deal except for two areas, uh,
the increase to the general fund
would be a $3.973 million
increase, that's gonna be the
manufactured housing which we're
asking to put.
into the general fund this year,
uh, been as a Murf fund and
other funds are starting to get
depleted and also for the CCD uh
increase that will be going over
here shortly.
Our special request, our
cannabis control division.
Everybody understands cannabis,
it's in the news, we're
constantly being bombarded, the
legislators are being asked
about it. Uh, so we're asking
for an increase of 745,000 on a
special request, not general
fund. Another 560 for cannabis
control Division vehicles as I
get into it, I'll explain why
we're gonna need them, uh, some
for zero emission vehicles and
465,000 for cannabis control
division vehicles if in fact we
get some legislation passed.
which be for the law
enforcement.
We're also asking for the
authority again for the
additional 5% you gave us last
year for the boards. It starts
us out on an even keel and helps
us, you know, maintain and get
the, the payroll and things
done.
CID kept it flat.
Except for just the GST and do
it increases, uh, for the most
part, it's only 72,000 and
that's a real flat budget. FID
same deal, just a few increases,
uh, for the do it increases. We
are also dropping the fund of
the 1.3 million, taking it out
of other funds if that's where
the manufactured housing was
coming out of and that's what
that's for.
ABC, uh, the big increase
request there is 100,000, that's
for Salesforce program, we just
got them online. Uh, we're still
working through the bugs, but
that's gonna be a licensing fee
that's reoccurring every year.
ASD program support again 28,000
very flat budget, and that's
just the regular increases from
GST and operational.
BCD, uh, the increase there is
1.5 million, it's all from
300,000 of that substitute care
advisory, uh, that's the only
thing out of the general fund,
the rest of that 1 million is
from other funds that's 500,000
to do their Salesforce licensing
as we got the other 20 boards
back on or online now, uh, which
is handling up to 104,000
licensees and renewals.
Securities
Small budget, only 330,000 of
that comes out of general
account, uh, the other 21 comes
out of other funds. The one
thing I wanted to point out
about securities though, out of
all the money that we put back
in the general fund.
22 million of that came from
securities. I mean, securities
really put some money back to
the general fund. I think in the
beginning of the slides, we
reverted 32 or 35 million, so
the the largest support of that
is uh from securities. MHD big
as there is requested 100,000
for Salesforce, but we're also
asking MHD to put in the general
fund, just like CID inspectors,
it's a common thing, it's going
to be occurring all the time.
It's been coming out of other
funds, uh, last year we asked
for that, so if in fact you do
it, that's where the increase
comes.
For a big chunk of ours. CCD,
that's the one I want to spend
some time on uh being as senator
asked me to hustle through this.
CCD this year, uh, like I
indicated earlier, everybody
knows about the illicit market.
Everybody knows the issues we're
having, commissioners are being
called, legislators are being
called, we're being called. What
we have at CCD is administrative
authority only.
I can
Go out, I can find them. I can
take the license away or if it's
illicit, I don't have any
authority whatsoever that falls
into the criminal. This year
we're coming forward and we're
asking to give us the criminal
authority to get law enforcement
authority so we can seize,
embargo, and destroy.
And why am I asking that? Law
enforcement has that authority,
they're supportive of me, the
state police are. I, I don't
know about all the locals, but I
know state police is uh
supporting it. They don't have
the time, they have other
issues, they got a lot of other
bigger things to handle.
Recently, we just got our first,
I feel like really big win that
was up in uh San Juan County.
We were able to get the TRO. We
filed 5 of them so far, this
one, the judge granted and law
enforcement went out there and
destroyed and, and collected, I
think 160,000 pounds.
Uh, they took 50 or 50 state
police officers, 3 days, 12 hour
days, plus a lot of another
equipment. So when we come
forward and we're asking for
this authority, it's because
they have so many, so much to
do. It's a 4th degree felony,
it's not at the top of the list
and somebody needs to chase
these folks down. As we chase
them harder and harder, they're
backing in and they're starting
to go into iner grows harder to
find. We're sending our CID or
CID or CCD inspectors out in
areas where we do need law
enforcement with us, a
A lot of times when you pull up
an illicit grove, these aren't
the, the most easy individuals
to get along with, as you can
imagine. So what we're asking
for this year is uh an expansion
of $1 million to get 7 law
enforcement officers and then to
get the authority. Now, if we
get the authority and we don't
get the officers vice versa,
it's not gonna do us any good.
It's kind of all or none. We got
to have it. We're willing to
take it on. You'll see that I'd
be one, I'm one of the, I think
cabinet members that will ask
for more work. I'm asking for.
Cause right now it's simple for
us to walk away. Once I see it's
criminal, we're done. We truly
are. We've taken the calls, but
we're done, but somebody's got
to chase this stuff. These folks
are putting stuff out there with
mold in it, they're putting it
out with pesticides, it's unsafe
and it's dangerous. So that's
gonna be the big ask. I'm also
asking for another 1.9 million
to add 10 more compliance
officers.
Uh, and that would be the, and I
say compliance officers, but
they're inspectors. These will
be the inspectors in the 7 y'all
added to us and allowed us to
get in August of 23 our
inspections jumped from 2022, we
had 138 in 2023, we had 1,122.
In 2024 we're up to 2,232. So
add the officers has made a huge
difference or at an inspectors.
Uh, we need another 10 of them
regardless of whether we get the
uh the law enforcement
capability and law.
enforcement and the embargo and
seizure and destroy regardless
if we need that, we still need
the new, at least another 10
inspectors. If we get the other,
these inspectors when we do go
in and destroy and, and
confiscate, inspectors will be
used along with law enforcement.
The law enforcement individuals
will be handling the, the TROs
they'll be handling the search
warrants, they'll be going with
us when we're delivering the
TROs and that type of stuff. So
with that, um, I'm tickled to
say that, you know, the one TRO
we finally got through.
We've got 5 of them out there,
uh, 4 of them are still
Having a difficulty getting the
judge to order it, uh, there's
various reasons why, but we're
working hard at it and we've
really stepped up our
compliance. So the MHD is the
big request getting it into the
general fund and then ask the
request to move in another 10
inspectors and then the law
enforcement. And with that, um,
That's going through it quick
like you asked. I had a lot more
stuff. I stayed up the last two
nights right now things but uh
we can go with that.
Senator Sheer.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. First
question, what is a TRO?
Temporary restraining order. uh,
Mr. Chairman and Senator,
apologize for that. That, uh,
he's got me hustling, but
anyway, that's temporary
restraining order asking the
judge to put it out there, they
have to cease and desist until
we uh get. So I'm assuming that
the one that says ABCD, that's
boards and commissions, is that
right?
Yes. OK. No? Oh, what, what did
you say?
Yeah, yeah, Mr. Chairman and
Senator, that's the alcohol.
And beverage control division.
But you do boards and
commissions, right? Yes. OK.
That's,
I've had a couple of questions
from various people about.
About, uh, the responsiveness of
RLD to the various boards, you
know, who they can't get anybody
to answer the phone, they don't
have to, they can't get
questions answered. One of them
said, hey, you know, we're
doing, going through this budget
and we don't even, we didn't
even have a chance to put in our
2 cents' worth, uh, on the
budget.
So is there something grander
going on, Mr. Chairman and
Senator, I, I hope our response
has been gotten better. Uh,
we've set up a call center that
people can call in, get direct,
get set up to have meetings and
set up to have one on ones, uh,
we had that issue with CID.
We've got that ironed outboards,
I believe we're getting better.
That has always been, it seemed
to be a, a complaint that we
get. As for the budgets, when we
sit down and we go through these
budgets, each director from each
division of the
get to sit with us and we go
over the needs, we go over what
the wants are, um, obviously
this year we've tried to keep it
as flat as we possibly can,
that's been a request.
And I, I think we've been able
to do that. Now board's one
thing we have had, and it is one
of the
Uh, divisions that I have the
Challenges of keeping uh
employees, which slows things
down for the simple reason that
it starts, you know, the 45s,
50s, and 55 is the lower pay
grades. Right now, um,
everywhere you look, whether
it's in the private or in the
public, there's help wanted.
So, people have been moving
around quite frequently within
agencies and out agencies, uh,
so we're combating that, we're
trying to get them, we're trying
to promote within and get them
up and where they'll stay with
us, but uh I do believe we've
worked diligently to get a
better response on the uh the
calls and the complaints, but I,
I've known that for quite some
time and we've worked, I mean,
we're really working hard to
correct that. Mr. Chair, I'll
share a little bit more with you
offline, but, well, I was told
to shut up after I was told to
talk.
Who,
Well,
Mr. Chairman, Senator, I would
appreciate sitting down with you
and finding out the concerns and
getting down to what, what
you're hearing.
I think he's hearing things.
Representative Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Uh, and thank you for the
presentation. So right here on
the cannabis control division
vehicles, you're looking for 7
vehicles and how many agents are
you looking for?
Mr. Chairman and Representative,
that's for the law enforcement.
And if we get that, we're
looking to get 7 law enforcement
officers.
Uh, and these are gonna be law
enforcement certified. We're not
going to promote an inspector
into this. This is genuinely
going to be a full-fledged where
they have the authority just
like any other law enforcement,
but we're looking for 7 and
that's why we need 7 vehicles.
If I don't get 7, then I don't
need 7. I need the vehicle to
go, and these are gonna be
specialty type vehicles, right?
A little bit different.
OK. Thank you very much and on
these, on these 7.
Personnel that you're looking
for.
They're already going to be
commissioned law enforcement
officers and have you, have you
put your feelers out there to
see if you're gonna, you know,
cause our, our police forces,
they're having a hard time
recruiting and retaining people.
And if I was an officer, I'd way
rather work for you as this
cannibal cannabis control
division.
However, um, are you looking
for, are you looking for
certified officers to come in,
they're already certified.
Mr. Chairman and Representative,
that is correct. I need him to
come in, I need them to be
certified. I'm hoping and
thinking maybe we get, you know,
individuals that are wore out on
the beat. Some of them that are
getting toward the end of the
retirement age, um, you know,
it's not gonna be like traveling
the roads like state police and
up and down, but I'm hopeful
that we can pick some of that
up. If we get this authority,
I'm obviously going to sit down
with Secretary Bowie and with uh
Captain State Police Captain
Wessler and help us go through
how to find the best individuals
that will fit.
what we need.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and,
and how did you come up with
this number, and do you think
it's sufficient to take care of
the entire state. Well, Mr.
Chairman and Representative, uh,
it's interesting enough, prior
superintendents want to put this
started out trying to look at
law enforcement. So to give her
credit with that, we've just
followed up with it, you know, I
don't know what the proper
number is, but I know what we're
doing with inspections. I know
how many, I don't know how many
illicit we have, but I know some
of the big ones we're working
with. My thought process is
cannabis is a revolving thing.
This is our 3rd year.
Right? We're gonna be back.
We're gonna have to work on the
statute. We're gonna have to
change things to fit to what
we're finding. And what some of
the other states are doing and
how they're doing it. But we
came up with 7 because I think
that'll be sufficient, uh, to
start with, uh, maybe, and
hopefully that's what we get.
But time will tell if that's the
correct number. I do know like
on inspection site and you
didn't ask that, but for the
inspectors, I see we doubled was
7. We got 3000 out there, we
need to get inspected. We've got
some we've never gotten to, but
we're working hard. I think by
the end of the year.
So I'm hopeful with the 7,
they're gonna be very detailed
or very uh directed on what they
do. They're gonna work on
absolutely the criminal side, or
they're gonna go with some of
the, the inspectors to go with
them to make sure they're safe.
We send some of these folks in
some really situations that
really, and I've been out there,
I've been boots on the ground. I
went in with, where they don't
want to allow us to go in. It's
not like I stepped from the
back. I'm not a superintendent
that rides and sets at the
office. I'd rather be out there
with him. So we believe 7 is a
good start, uh, if we can
get that many, but it's a start.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, in this
control division, will they be
dispatched? So, say I have, say
you got a report of something in
Lincoln County.
Would you dispatch those people
to Lincoln County.
And would they do their business
and stay the night and come back
or they go up there, how, how
does that work? Mr. Chairman and
Representative, it kind of
depends on where it's at, right?
Or how long it's gonna take. I
mean, I run down to Riodosa one
day and come back and get a lot
done and I, I travel up there
and back in one day. So I think
it will depend on how much we're
looking at and what all we're
doing and how, how much stuff we
really get into. If you get into
an illicit grow and we can get
in there, you know, we may be
looking at 1010, 2030, 40,
50,000 plants. I mean, look at
the one the state police.
took out 160,000 pounds. So
obviously, then we'll take more
days so they'll be incurred for
them. They could be overnight,
and if we do go to the point
that we're taking it, you know,
then obviously that's gonna be a
lot of overnights for a lot of
individuals, took 50 people 3
days.
So if I had 23 + 7, I mean, it's
gonna take me a week to get it
done.
And Mr. Chair, was that, uh, was
that an illegal grow or did they
have a license? Well, Mr. Chair
Representative, it was
interesting. It was two girls.
One of them was legal.
But they far surpassed, which is
an uncommon. And I think that's
going to change. I think they're
gonna quit trying to get
licenses, right? Just go and
listen. So one of was uh a
licensed grow that was far
surpassing what they should and
the same individuals, and then
the next one, the second one was
totally illicit.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and just
to comment.
I bet a lot of people don't know
when they go in there to buy.
You know, uh, uh.
Joint or whatever they're
buying, it's got pesticide and
mold and stuff in it.
That's something that I, I
wouldn't even anticipate, which
I, I'm not a cannabis user, but
You know, I, I appreciate what
you're doing, trying to keep
people safe from that.
and representative, I appreciate
that, you know, that's why we
have these testing labs, you
know, hopefully we catch and see
what, if they have the mold
habit, but if it's coming in
illicit and they're getting
stuck in these, uh, and they're
retailing it or even if it's an
illicit retailer, which we've
had them, I mean, one of the
news channels, you know, had it
on TV that that was out of a
garage, which didn't have a
license for that. That's when it
gets real dangerous and it gets
serious and some of these folks,
they're not just using it for
recreational, they're using it
for their children, you know,
they're, you know, medically
wise, but they can go in there,
so it's, it's.
important and it's really a
health issue.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Thank you, sir.
Thank you. I don't have any
other questions from anybody
else.
Um
I, I, you know, sending somebody
in that's a trained officer into
one of those situations, right?
I mean, you guys are gonna have
to be very cautious.
Are you planning on hiring like
current police officers or you
plan on recruiting them from
another agency or do you have a
plan for that yet? Well, Mr.
Chair and members of the
committee, we want to get
certified officers. If we hire
them, they need to be certified.
Like I mentioned earlier, I'm,
I'm hopeful that we get some
that are either near retirement
age, uh, somebody that wants to,
to come back and do something
that's not quite as strenuous,
not quite as much on the road or
or out by theirself in the
middle of the night making
traffic stops, so they'll have
to
come from somewhere, but I don't
think we'll be getting the, you
know, the, the, the top end of
the, and what I mean by that,
the ones in their prime the ones
like myself that, you know, you
leave construction because
you're crippled up, you don't
want to keep doing it, so, you
know, the ones that are slowing
down and ready to end their
careers or, or maybe ones that
want to start a second career
with it, but it's not gonna do
me any good. I don't believe if
I don't have certified ones. I
need people that have the
education, have the experience
to know what they're doing as
opposed to like state police and
Secretary Bowie, you know,
they're getting to train, they
got
Enforcement academy and all
that. So I'm looking and that's
what we're gonna try to do is
get ones that are already
certified.
Are you, are you basing that pay
off the current state police
plan or how are you basing that
pay scale the higher hire those
officers, right? I just trying
to figure out and make sure
you're not short, Mr, Mr.
Chairman, I'm getting some help
from the background. It's off
the Special Agent pay within
the, the
system.
And do you think you, I don't
know what that pay is. Do you
think you can recruit at that
level.
Mr. Chair, I believe so, and
I'm, I'm hopeful. I mean, we
have some law enforcements
already that's within
securities, that's within
pharmacy. I, I believe we can,
uh, that's my plan and I hope I
can. I mean, one thing about it,
it's like the representative
said people line up to come to
Cannabis. Nowhere else, but I
usually have a pool there, but
I'm hopeful that it will be
sufficient enough.
We're still gonna rely heavily
on the state police like I don't
want my group out there
arresting folks, I really don't,
but uh there'll be times when we
come in and, you know, state
police will work with us, but we
can take the brunt and the
lion's share of it. I, I really
want you to look at that because
I don't want you to come back
and say we wanted 7.
You could only hire 3 because we
had to hire at a higher rate.
Right, or we could only hire 5
and had to leave 2 vacancies to
higher and higher rate when
you're trying to accomplish
something, right?
So take a hard look at that and
just make sure, right?
Mr. Chair,
yes sir, we will do that. It's
great advice. The other only
other concern I do have is we
haven't, we didn't request in
the budget that what it's gonna
cost if we do destroy. I do know
this last one for uh and how
many do we do a year? Maybe 2,
maybe 3, I don't know what it'll
be, but the last one, the state
police was 104,000. In a sense
it was the perfect storm, they
had some equipment there on that
property that the the the
property owner, not the person
that had the cannabis, but the
property owner assisted with uh
there.
of scales that P&M was already
down there doing some work that
allowed us, uh, Secretary Cerna
sent some of the dump truck and
a couple of people with that. So
it could fluctuate. That is one
concern that I haven't figured
in. I didn't know how to figure
it. This is the first one we've
had, and I think the 104,000 is
probably a little bit on the low
side of it.
But yes, I will check salaries
and make sure we're there.
I mean, don't leave your self
short. You don't want to be back
on Larry Barker again.
And, and so that's my cautious
word to you again, right? And,
and you did reach out to the
state police chief when I had
that conversation with him
because he thought it was
$500,000 he was spending, but
you got an actual number, but
Mr. Chairman, uh, uh, Chief
Wessler was out today or
yesterday, uh Secretary Bowi
sent it to me. Uh, that's a,
that's the figure I got. Now,
there could be times it's, it's
different that and uh yeah, and,
and you mentioned Larry Barker,
absolutely. He, uh, I finally
made the news yesterday and it
was positive as opposed to being
not positive. So let's, let's do
a round of applause.
Well, that's what we're trying
to help you to be in the
positive, not in the negative.
So just make sure those numbers
are right. Don't leave yourself
short.
All right, Mr. Chairman, thank
you for yourself short when
you're trying to create this
just like you said, DOT came and
helped us and there was a scale
there. You may have other
situations where you got a
little truck that thing and.
Maybe you're gonna burn it, this
is Zobra or something
Oh, we can't do that, sorry. Uh,
but, uh, don't leave yourself
short because you may have to
truck at some other distance to
burn it or incinerate it or
How you're gonna do that. You
can't sell that because it's not
inspected or not.
Yes, Mr. Chairman, that, that's
correct. It's not in the bio
track, it's not seed to sell
trace, and besides that, the,
the, the possibility of that
having insecticides, um, all
kinds of stuff, mold, bugs, I
mean, there's so much that goes
to and through this, and I mean,
a lot of folks thought this
cannabis was gonna, it's just
like growing corn or something,
but it's not. You've got to be
extremely careful with it and
it's not as easy to grow as a
lot of folks, or at least I
thought, I know more about
cannabis than I ever thought I
would know.
I thought it was a weed.
Well, it's
All right. Anything else you
wanna add? No, I believe that's
it. I appreciate the time. I'm
sorry I hustled through this,
but uh because I had quite a
bit, I could have went over and
said, but this is the main high
points. I mean, I think you did
perfect. We got the points in in
where you need funding, where
you need help, and you are one
of those guys that just ask for
what they need.
And doesn't come in here with
I reverted a million and I want
2 million back.
And so that's very important to
us as we move forward that your
numbers are correct, but
When you're trying to stand
something up, don't I I.
Anything we can overdo is
overfund you and then say, OK,
well, we overfunded you and now
you're not short, so.
All right. And Mr. Chair, you've
watched me if I don't spend it,
I don't, I mean, if I don't need
it, I don't spend it, I revert
it. Sometimes that hurts me, but
to me that's the business way to
do it. So thank you. And we
appreciate that.
Anything else?
No, sir, that's it. Thank you.
OK.
Thank you. We're gonna split
into subcommittees, which ones
staying here? A A A stays here.
He goes to 2 across the hall,
321.
You're going across the hall,
take the binder.
Subcommittee A will get started
in a couple of minutes. Go ahead
and uh get situated, uh, those
individuals that are have
conversations going on, just uh
go ahead and take him outside of
the room and then uh a couple of
minutes we'll get started and
I'm gonna go ahead and defer if
you will, to Doctor Courtney.
He'll, uh, kinda give us the
outline in terms of how we're
gonna go ahead and handle the
various agencies uh that are
assigned to uh to this
particular uh subcommittee.
OK, thank you all very much.
We're gonna go ahead and get
started and if you will, uh,
doctor, go ahead and outline if
you will, the process for this
afternoon, and then I understand
possibly um or uh those assigned
to the agencies will go ahead
and present, but I'm gonna let
you go ahead and outline in
terms of uh how we expect to go
ahead and conduct the afternoon
business. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. So, uh, good
afternoon, everybody. Uh, John
Courtney, deputy director here
at the Legislative Finance
Committee. Um,
For your FY 26 approved budget
guidelines, um, you all approved
a new process, uh, for, um,
smaller agency budgets um to
basically do those as staff
reports this year. So, um, the,
the setup for that will be, uh,
about half of those budgets are
here in subcommittee A. About
half are in subcommittee B. Um,
we have in your binders, uh, by
agency code.
Um, the budget requests.
From each of those agencies.
I'll provide an overview and and
we'll be presenting uh those
requests from each agency, um,
and, uh, and, um, acknowledging
the
The uh representatives from
those agencies who are in the
audience, um, the
Intention uh outlined in the
budget guidelines was basically
to um
Uh, to, uh, create a, uh,
A template so that we could, so
that you could spend additional
time on those very large cost
centers of the budget, which we
were able to do um just this
morning, um, you know, building
in some time for uh for Yasi
Martinez. Um, if you all have,
have questions as, as I'm going
through, um, please feel free
to, to raise those uh agency
staff should be here to answer
those. We also have uh most of
our LFC analysts here uh today
if there are questions.
for them.
Um, so with your permission, Mr.
Chair, I, I'd get started with
the first agency. Uh, thank you
very much, and before we
proceed, I just want to thank
each and every one of you for
your, your patience and uh
Working with us as we start this
uh this different process and so
the members of subcommittee A
that are here, uh, if they do
have questions, uh, we may ask
you to go ahead and come
forward, identify yourself and
then uh help us and provide the
answer, but for the most part,
what the intent is to go ahead
and go through each one of these
agencies and uh and go through,
if you will, the prescripted
pieces. So, uh, please proceed
and we'll start with the uh
Division of vocational
rehabilitation, uh, agency code
644. Please proceed. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. So that's right,
um, if you'll turn in your, in
your binders if you'd like to
agency 644, that is the
vocational rehabilitation
division, um, I'm told that we
should have uh their budget
director, Jeremy Bangs here
today, and perhaps uh perhaps uh
David Sovain.
Soberans also.
Um
The DVR requested 7.3 from uh
$7.3 million.
Uh, amount from the general fund
which represents a 6.6% increase
over the FY 25 operating budget.
Uh, they requested an additional
11.8% increase in federal
revenue, uh, DVR also requested
an increased of 200,000 in fund
balance for the administrative
services program.
Um, the Independent Living
Services and disability
determination programs
respectively requested a 50.4%
and 5.5% increase in federal
funds. The request for uh the
rehabilitation services program
included a 7.3% increase in
general fund revenue and a 17.3%
increase in federal funds to uh
support an increase in
rehabilitation care and support
services along with a 3 point.
3% increase for personnel, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you very much. Any
questions from the committee
going to uh
one quick question. I noticed it
had a significant deficiency in
the audit finding.
Has that been corrected? Are we
good to go there now?
So if you, if you're going to be
responding, please come forward,
identify yourself, uh, and then
respond to the question.
Thank you all very much.
Hello, my name's David
Silvaanes, uh, ASU uh deputy
director for DVR, uh, last
year's audit schedule, uh,
granted to minor infractions.
One was related to fixed assets.
And the other one was related to
lost receipts. So, uh, major
infractions, DVR did not have
major audit infractions.
Thank you.
Thank you, sir, uh, apologize
for that, uh, the introduction,
Senator Campos.
It's, it's not a problem at all.
We're gonna continue to move
forward. Any other questions,
Senator Woods? No, I have no
more questions. I'm ready for a
temporary table. Thank you very
much. There's a motion for a
temporary table without
prejudice. We have a second
Senator, uh, excuse me,
Representative, any other uh
questions see on then, uh,
that's been temporarily tabled,
we're moving on, if you will, to
the next, which will be the New
Mexico compilation commission uh
agency code 208. Please proceed.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And the,
and the rest
should go in sequential order as
far as agency code goes, so you
don't need to be uh uh going
back and forth. Uh, so Mr.
Chairman, uh, the New Mexico
Compilation Commission, uh,
today I believe we have, uh,
Ralph Trujillo, the executive
director, and Wendy Loomis,
their CFO along with Maria
Rodriguez, their financial
specialist, uh, in the audience.
And if I may, before you
proceed, uh, whenever we
recognize you as individuals
with your agencies. Uh, do you
mind just either standing up or
raising
your hands so that the members
of the committee will know who
you are. There you are. Thank
you.
Great. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Uh, the New Mexico Compilation
Commission agency 208 uh request
they keep their revenue flat
with FY 25, including a
reduction of 25,000 in fund
balance, and the corresponding
increase to other revenues for
uh civil action filing fees.
The request also includes a
41.7,000 decrease in personnel
service and benefits and a
corresponding increase in
contractual services. Uh, this
is because the agency's director
retired at the beginning of FY
25, causing a surplus since the
retirement contribution
liabilities no longer budgeted
for the retired retired
director.
Um, that surplus will be
utilized for contractual
capacity, Mr. Chairman.
The agency does not project
budgetary changes in FY 26. Um,
please note that the agency
increased uh permanent FTEs by
one and uh there's a
corresponding reduction in term
FTEs due to the AOC approving
the term to perm switch for the
position at the end of FY 24,
Mr. Chairman.
Thank you very much. Any
questions from members of the
committee?
a temporary table. Thank you
very much, Senator Woods. We
have a motion. We have a second.
Uh, that has been temporary
tabled. We really appreciate the
presentation. And as we go
through this, if there is
something that has been left out
on behalf of the agency that you
really want to, uh, to bring
forth. Uh, please raise your
hand and let us know, and then
of course, we're gonna ask you
to come to the forefront here so
that we can uh we can uh address
that concern.
Thank you very much for moving
on to the next item and what I'm
gonna do, Doctor Courtney is
just let you go ahead and uh
introduce the agency, uh, agency
number and then we'll go from
there. Yes, sir, Mr. Chairman.
Uh, so the next agency is the
New Mexico Sentence Commission
Sentencing Commission, excuse
me, Agency 354.
Um, notably, there, uh, um.
Longtime director Linda Freeman
recently retired, um, I believe
we have their acting director,
uh, Doug Carver.
In the audience he used to work
for a council service a while
back. He's a, he's a good hand.
Um.
Mr. Chairman, for FY 26, the New
Mexico Sentencing Commission
requested a $265,000 increase in
general fund appropriations
representing a 17.5% increase
from FY 25.
Uh, bringing their total
requests to about 1.8 million.
Um, these additional funds are
intended to cover new staff
positions, including a staff
attorney and a senior grants
administrator, as well as
compensation increases for
existing staff, which the agency
was unable to fund uh after the
last session, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you very much. I don't see
any questions. Is there any
emotion?
We have a motion for a temporary
table, and of course we have a
second, uh, see no other
discussion. That has been
temporarily tabled and again,
thank you very much to those
within the agencies that are
here with us after the
presentation has been made, uh,
you're, you're free to go. So we
appreciate it again, uh, your
participation. Please proceed.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Uh, our next agency is uh the
governor's office, agency code
356.
Um, I believe we have their CFO
Cindy Montoya with us today.
The Office of the governor
requested a general fund budget
of 271,000.
Um, which rep uh 271,000
increase, which represents a
4.1% increase for FY 26.
Uh, the request included an
increase of 202.4,000 in
personnel for the employee
liability insurance premium
rate.
Increase
The office also
Requested a $50,000 increase in
contractual services for legal
services and an increase of
18.6,000 in the other category
to fund, uh, do it rate
increases, and FY 24, the office
received a $819.9,000 increase,
17.8% increase in personnel to
fill vacancies. However, the
office reverted uh 510.6,000 or
9.2% in person.
and FY 24, uh, in addition to
moving 145,000 out of personnel
to purchase uh cubicles
furniture and technology
equipment for new staff, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you very much. Any
questions from the committee?
See none then
Move for a temporary table, we
have a second.
Thank you all very much. This
has been temporary table and
again regards to the governor
and thank you very much for
being here with us this
afternoon, Sydney.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Our
next agency is the State
Commission of Public Records.
Agency 369, um, I believe Rick
Hendricks is in the audience,
their agency director.
Um, for state commission of
Public records for FY 26. They
requested a budget of slightly
more than $4 million requesting
an overall increase of 612.6,000
or 17.7% relative to FY 25.
The request included a total
general fund revenue increase of
662.8,000 or 21%.
The commission requested an
increase of 611.9,000 or 20.9%
in personality give raises to
staff and fill vacancies. Um,
the commission also reports
challenges in achieving full
staffing, uh, currently they
have 7 of their 35 positions,
uh, vacant based on our most
recent data.
Um, due to those staffing
shortages, uh, the agency's
reference room began operating
on limited hours.
The agency reverted 65,000 in FY
24 uh due to the inability to
hire an additional FTE.
As a result of those staffing
shortages in FY 24, um, they had
some moderate vacancy savings
about 167,000 in funded vacancy
savings, um, but without the
full staffing, the agency still
met their uh performance
measures and, and actually
exceeded some of those, Mr.
Chairman.
Uh, thank you very much. Just,
uh, one question, Rick, if you
just come forward, please. And,
and this is gonna be in regards
to uh the technology that is
used with our public records,
uh, are there any issues in
terms of how our public records
are being maintained, and do you
have the adequate uh space
whether it be bandwidth or it'd
be facilities in order to ensure
that our public records are
safeguarded.
Mr. Chair, members of the
commission, we are currently in,
in good shape. We have a
We, uh, currently only have one
IT employee, we're in the
process of trying to fill one of
those vacancies, um, and, um,
they're staying on top of that
and, and we're in constant
communication with do it. So I
think we're, I think we're as
safe as
Any agency can be in this world
that we're living in right now.
Thank you very much.
You know other questions here
from the committee
motion for a temporary table
without prejudice, and we have a
second. Thank you very much for
uh your responsiveness and
again, thank you very much,
members of the committee. Moving
along.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Our
next agency is the Public
Employees Labor Relations Board
Agency 379, um, their agency
representative uh is Tom Griego,
their director.
Um, the public employees' labor
relations board is one of the
smallest state agencies, um,
the, also the, the acronym uh
that we use around the office is
Plurb. Uh, they requested
25.5,000 representing an 8.4%
increase, mostly in the
personnel category as the agency
prepares for a transition with a
new executive director. Uh, the
agency also, uh, requested a
sizable increase in the other
cost category to purchase
equipment.
Uh, improve webcasting and tele
uh for teleconference
capabilities for hearings
conducted by the board, Mr.
Chairman.
Uh, thank you very much, and I
do have one question if you can
just come forward, please.
And, and so Tom as we move along
in terms of the number of
meetings and the attendance, uh,
are you getting full
participation when it comes to
uh the board and its action. For
participation, yes, sir, that's
part of the reason for our
request.
For an increase in the budget so
that we can improve the
electronics and letting the
Public observe and participate
in our meetings and hearings.
Um, and once we have that on
board.
The new director, I'm retiring
at the end of this year.
Will be able to function much
more efficiently, I'm sure run
those meetings much better than
we are.
We want to thank you very much
for your years of service.
You've been good to us here at
the State of New Mexico. Thank
you,
we have a temporary table
without prejudice, and again, we
have a second, so no other
questions. Thank you all very
much, Doctor Courtney, please
proceed.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
next up we have uh Agency 404,
the board of examiners for
architects. I believe we have
Director Gonzalez with us today.
Uh, the board of board of
examiners for architects
requested a budget of $590.4,000
for FY 26, it's about $800
greater than their uh FY 25 bud.
Um
The board is requesting to use
13,000 or 3.8% more of its fee
revenue and 12.2,000 or 4.9%
less of its fund balance for FY
26. The change reflects the
board requesting to use 352,000
of its fee revenue and 238,000
of its fund balance. The $800
increase will be used for
contractual services to cover
increased audit costs. Uh, the
board is requesting a, a flat
budget for personnel services
and other services for FY.
26, um, their op bud for FY20 um
5 represented an increase of
about 7.2%, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you very much. Any
questions from members of the
subcommittee.
See no then. Thank you very
much. Thank you, Senator Woods.
We have a motion for a temporary
table without prejudice, and we
have a second. Thank you very
much, uh, representative here
and uh.
Any other questions, see none.
Thank you all very much and
we're moving along.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Our
next agency is Agency 417, the
Border Authority.
We have their executive
director, um.
Uh, director of Firo in the
audience, I believe. The border
authority requested a general
fund increase of 15.9,000 or 3%
and maintained a flat budget for
other revenues compared to their
FY 25 Obud.
The request includes a general
fund increase of 4.6,000 for
personnel and 10.8,000 for
operational costs such as
mileage, lodging, IT,
telecommunications, and
advertising.
Between 2020 and 2023, the
legislatures appropriated about
$18.5 million to the Border
Authority for capital outlay
projects, including 8.3 million
in reauthorized 2019
appropriations.
Um, another notable item in
2024, the legislature
reauthorized 1.5 million for
flood control infrastructure at
the Columbus Port of entry.
Um, as of August of 24, uh, a
chunk of that, uh, capital
remains unspent about 16.6
million, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you very much. Just one
quick question if you'll come
forward and while you're coming
forward to let you all know,
those of you that have been here
or here today, uh, we really
thank you because as you stand
up, uh, and you're being
recognized, it shows not only
the interest in the agency that
you represent, uh, but that
you're available and you've been
here with us uh most of the
afternoon as we go through this.
In terms of the capital outlay
that has been requested and, and
uh utilized uh what portion of
the resources do you still have
that haven't been
and fully applied to, to the
capital outlay improvements.
Good afternoon, Mr. um, I will
have to check the balance on the
capital projects since we have
Uh, around 9 projects that are
that are about to let this
fiscal year and we've been uh
doing some uh payments already
to some of the entities that
are, that are working on, on the
projects.
Uh, some of the projects are on
the development and design of
the project. So, and they're all
happening simultaneously, but I,
I can get back to you and give
you the exact amount.
Thank you very much. And with
that, the key is, as you
continue to make those
improvements. I know there's
still a great need and we want
to ensure that those dollars are
being wisely spent and that we
continue to go ahead and make
those border improvements. So
again, thank you very much for
the work that you all do.
Quickly that proceed very
concerned, Mr. Chair, very
concerned about this, uh,
Particular one at Columbus, the
flood control project there.
Uh, that's been on the books for
quite a while and
That was, that was presented to
us as a great emergency.
And it's still on the books, so.
I hope that some action takes
place on that shortly.
Mr. Chair and senator, yes, we,
we've been in constant contact
with Luna County regarding this
project, um, as you all know,
construction prices have
increasing in, in, in costs over
the years due to inflation.
Uh, we're currently looking at
the possibility of facing that
project to to start it this
year. The project, uh, did the,
the beat, uh, in September and
it, it came around 5 million.
On top of, of what we had, uh,
uh, the, the engineer estimate
was
It was 5 million or to 6
million.
Uh, over budget.
Yes
But we're looking at the
possibility of facing the
project.
That pre already consists of
two, the west side.
And the side of the project and
we're, we're
Right now in constant, constant
meetings with LuA County to
phase the project and to be able
to start the project as soon as
possible.
We're looking at starting the
west side, uh, part of the
project, uh, as soon as possible
and phase one of these projects.
Mr. Chair, that's all the
questions I have. No one else
has a question, I'll move the
temporary table. Thank you very
much, uh, just a minute,
representative, do you have a
question or no? OK, good. OK.
Thank you very much. Thank you
for your candor. Thank you for
the information. Uh, if you
will, just pass that along to
Kelly. I wanna make sure that
we're addressing that one
particular issue, particularly
if
you will with the overrunner, if
you will, for the additional
cost may be in order not only to
take care of that project, but
some of the other ones that you
might have that are still held
in abeyance, so we appreciate
it. Thank you very much. There
was a motion for a temporary
table. Senator Woods,
Representative Serna, thank you
very much for the 2nd. No other
questions, we're moving right
along. Please proceed. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Our
next agency is 446, the Medical
Board. Um, we have Monique Parks
in the audience, their license
licensing manager.
The medical board requested an
increase of 1.5% above the FY 25
Obud. uh, their request
increases licensing fee revenues
and it reduces the use of fund
balances. The board requested an
increase in contractual services
spending for legal services.
Much of the requested increase
in person and the other category
is for personnel, specifically
for an expansion, FTE for a
public information and relations
officer.
The agency also requested a
decrease in the use of fund
balance in the OA for FY 26.
Unbalances at the close of FY 25
are projected at nearly 1.8
million.
The board received 2.9 million
in revenues over the past
several fiscal years.
Um, while expenditures were
closer to 3.4 million, resulting
in a slight decline in the fund
balance.
Uh, the agency has issued over
6500, almost 6600 physician
licenses and renewals in FY 24,
that's 658 above the previous
fiscal year, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you very much. I do have a
couple of questions if you'll
come forward, please. Uh, one
has to deal directly with the uh
with the board and all those
positions filled and what type
of uh activity are you having
there with the board and then
the second, uh, in terms of the
licenses as you go forward, uh,
with the
that you do have, uh, are you
able to go ahead and keep up, if
you will, in a timely fashion,
turning around and ensuring that
those licenses are issued to
those individuals who qualify in
a very timely fashion.
Good afternoon.
Chair members of the committee,
yes, currently we have our
executive director position that
is advertised, we have had no
applicants and that has been
advertised for a couple years,
um, our chief legal counsel,
same thing that has been
advertised. Um, we do have
One applicant, and they are
looking to interview that as
soon as possible.
Um, we're looking at the PIO
position that was highly
recommended from the governor's
office to help educate, um, our
licensees, our constituents, our
legislators, and our public
bodies.
Um,
and we also just two of our
vacancies were actually just
filled.
As far as the vacancies with our
agency. So please help me a
little bit in terms of the
licenses and the turnaround
whenever someone applies if they
meet the qualifications. What is
the average turnaround time and
of course I know it depends in
terms of the area, the, the, the
qualifications and so forth, but
uh is that being addressed in a
timely fashion or
Are you running short with your
FTEs and you're not able to go
ahead and get those out as
quickly as you'd like.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, we have made great
strides in the last couple of
years now that we have gone
online with our Salesforce
database. We are turning over,
um, licensees and issuing
licenses as quickly as possible.
We have an average turnaround of
about 40 days, um, for a
completed application which
includes that they complete
their criminal background check.
The only time that it really
slows the process is if there's
any red flags that are brought
to our attention.
But as far as um licensing staff
goes, that's not the slowdown,
um, within licensing.
All right.
Really appreciate that. Thank
you very much for sharing that
information with me. Sure, go
ahead, representative.
So you said you didn't get any
applications for the, what
position?
Uh, for the executive director
position. Mr. Chairman, can you,
you have an idea why is this not
enough pay? What, what's the
problem? Yeah.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I, I do not know. I
know that it's um it is
advertised on the governor's
website. It's on, we put it in
the New Mexico bar. We don't
know why we are not getting
applicants for that position.
And Mr. Chairman, is, um, the
pay you're putting out there.
Comparable to outside, outside,
same position outside.
You know, Mr. Chair, um, members
of the committee, I am, I am not
sure on what is comparable
across the state as far as the
executive director and what
their um base pay is. I
apologize. OK. Thank you.
Just to go and follow up, do you
have any information in terms,
no? OK. So, so if we could
possibly follow up and, and try
to assist, find out possibly
what that uh rationale would be
why people maybe aren't applying
for that executive position, so.
Again, thank you very much.
Uh, go ahead. One quick
question, Senator Woods.
Can you tell me, uh, we've got
some numbers in front of us
here.
Uh, but can you tell me how many
licensed physicians we have in
the state of New Mexico
presently.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee we currently have
11,810 physicians that are
licensed.
And can you tell me, uh, Mr.
Chair and, and madam, can you
tell me if that's an increase or
decrease from the year before.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, yes, that is an
increase. We have been seeing a
steady increase every year.
That
Everyone to think that we have.
So how, so, Mr. Chair.
Is there any statistics as how
many that we have practicing in
the state.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I do have that
number. Give me.
So right now we have 4,496 that
are showing with New Mexico
addresses.
Um, that can give or take as far
we don't probably have a
Exact number for that.
So, so if I'm hearing right, Mr.
Chair.
We've got 11,800 that are
licensed to practice.
And we've got 4,496 give or
take.
That are actually practicing in
the state. Mr. Chair and members
of the committee, I, I believe
there's probably more than that,
of course, but that is just the
what how we are able to track it
within our database that hold
that do show in New Mexico
address.
That show in New Mexico.
Correct, a current New Mexico
address. Yes, sir. And can you
tell me whether that's up or
down from the previous year. Mr.
Chair, members of the committee
that is up from last year.
The last few years I have been
told that we lost 500
physicians. So I have been told
wrong.
And you've got the numbers, you
told me the answer. I won't, I
won't deliver the point. No, uh,
um, members, uh,
Mr. Chair members of the
committee, I do see that there
actually was a decrease in um
In the New Mexico, the
physicians that hold in New
Mexico address.
Yes, there was a decrease. Yes,
sir. And if you could get that
to the committee or to the
staff.
To kind of
Let us know if the medical.
Emergency in the state of New
Mexico and
I would just like to know that.
Thank you very much, uh, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you very much for your
cooperation. Thank you very
much, Senator Woods. Uh, I moved
for a temporary table. Thank you
very much. We have a motion for
a temporary table or seconded.
No other discussion. Thank you
very much for being here with us
this afternoon.
Please proceed.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Next
agency is agency 449, the Board
of Nursing. We have their
director, Sheena Ferguson, here
with us today. Uh, Mr. Chairman,
the board of nursing requested a
5.2% decrease.
The decrease requested by the
board is still well above their
FY 24 actual expenditures, uh,
the board receives their
revenues from uh licensing fees.
Uh, the board in their requests
slightly increased um the
personnel category, which would
help them fill um some FTE Mr.
Chairman.
Uh, thank you very much and the
question that I have and again,
thank you all very much for the
work that you all continue to do
in terms of the board, the
meetings, and the participation,
any vacancies, any issues with
the uh the board of nursing at
this point that you can tell,
uh, or that you can share with
us. Um, Mr. Chair, thank you. We
have one vacancy on our board at
present, and it's a public
member.
I, uh, how long has that been,
been vacant. We have had a
vacancy for 2 years. We just had
a uh medical resignation, and we
have had that position replaced
promptly.
Thank you. So, so what are the
lessons for all of us as we go
forward and you all know with
several of the boards and
commissions, there have been
vacancies for extended periods
of time.
But in terms of the work of the
legislature, uh, our intent is
to ensure that these boards are
fully filled, and so that the
citizens are not only
represented, but the work can
continue uh with the full board.
So if we ask that question, it's
just to bring to light that as
we move forward, our intent is
that we'd like to see these
boards, uh, fully operating and
we just really appreciate. Thank
you very much for the candor and
again, thank you all for the
work that you do. I know you
have a tough job as you.
I continue to go and recruit,
uh, recruit the nurses across
New Mexico.
Thank you for your service.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, one quick question.
OK, here we go.
One quick question is simply, I
noticed that you are no longer
uh
Allowing the first time nurses
to have a
A freak pass, you're now
charging.
First time nurses for their
license.
I
Am I reading that right?
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator, uh, one
of the things that we've done
with the uh excess that we had
under the nursing excellence
Fund is we are covering the fees
for those first time licensees
and we are in the 2nd of a
3-year proposal funds
permitting.
OK.
All right. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Chair, I'm, I move, uh, a
temporary table. Thank you very
much for motion for a temporary
table in a second. No other
discussion.
We're moving along.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Our
next agency is agency 464.
The State Board of licensing for
professional engineers and
surveyors.
The border requested a budget
increase of 93.1,000 or 6.5% for
FY 26.
Uh, they requested 1.3 million
in fee revenue and use of
250,000 in fund balance.
The majority of the agencies's
requests are for salary
increases, um, approximately
88,000 or 11.5% to the board's 8
FTE. The remainder of the
request is for 4.9,000 to cover
do it and GST increases. The
agency also requested a
reduction of uh just over 31,000
in fund balance.
Um, the board requested a flat
budget for its contractual
services cost.
As of September of 24, their
fund balance is at 1.36 million.
Um, and today we have their
executive director, I believe,
uh, Perry Valdez.
Oh, go ahead.
OK.
I'm sorry, um, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, um, I
am Crystal Busmante, the budget
and finance manager and CPO and
I have our administrative.
Thank you. So one of the
questions and this is, uh,
related, if you will, to the
retirement, if you will, of so
many people as they age out in
their careers, and I know with
our uh engineers throughout New
Mexico that continues to be
another area where we're seeing
a shortfall. Can you help us a
little bit to indicate what the
agency is doing in terms of not
only the recruitment and
licensure, uh, but maybe the
educational aspects of how
are we gonna get more people
into the field of engineering,
uh, to continue to fill that
void that's uh that's occurring
at this time.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, currently we have
a scholarship fund, um, where we
are offering scholarships to
students with the AE accredited.
So we do have NMSU, UNM, and New
Mexico tech, um, our degrees are
required to have a bit
accreditation, those, um,
those
Universities, I'm sorry about
that, um, they all were um
having a better accredited
degrees. Um, we are also waiving
um the fees for first time
applicants, um, for their EI
certification, um, their PE exam
application, um, for surveyors.
It is their SI certification.
They're serving exams and then
the 2 hours, uh.
Exam as well.
In terms of the field itself,
what what are some of the
projections?
In terms of how we're going to
feel, if you will, that great
need, let's say for example,
with the Department of
Transportation, uh, as 11.
Um, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um,
We are increasing, we have.
Not just with new licenses, but
we have increased with an
expedited path for um engineers
and surveyors. Uh, we have seen
an increase from 2023 to 2024,
um, a 4% increase for PE uh PE
applications, uh, 6% for
professional surveyors with an
overall of a 4.
the work that you're doing
because we are hearing, if you
will, uh, of that void that is
uh happening in some of the
areas and so again, thank you.
for being so proactive, not only
with your budget, but with the
agency as well.
Any other questions?
Senator Woods, please. I have
one question about the uh
It shows the board gave
employees an average of 17.6%
salary increase.
Could you explain that just a
little bit.
That is correct, uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, our
board has approved uh salary
employees, um.
The main reason was most of our
positions were either at or
below midpoint. So, we wanted to
bring up the salary retention
purposes.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you very much, Senator Woods,
please. I move for a temporary
table, the motion for a
temporary table in a second.
We're done. We're moving along.
Thank you all very much for
being here with us this
afternoon. Thank you,
um, our next agency is Agency
469, the racing commission. Uh,
we have their director Ismael
Trejo with us today.
The state racing commission
requested a $2.2 million dollar
increase in general fund
appropriations representing a
about a 71% increase above the
FY 25 operating budget.
A portion of that request is a
$1.5 million dollar expansion to
add 7 positions, including the
expansion requests, the agency
requested an increase of 1.9
million or 88.7% for personnel
services to fund 2 veterinarians
and the 7 FTEs requested in the
expansion.
Uh, the agency also requested
increasing contractual services
by just over 100,000 or 3.4% for
audit costs and other services.
And requested an increase of uh
almost 118,000 for other costs
such as supplies uh for the FTEs
requested in the expansion.
Without the expansion, the uh
request.
Uh, represents a general fund
increase of uh just under
700,000 or 202022.7% above the
FY 25 operating budget.
Um
As the state racing commission
uh also requested an increase of
just over 30,000 for other costs
to pay the rent for their new
building.
Um, in FY 25, the commission
received an increase of 191,000
or 6.6% above FY 24, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you very much. Just a few
questions. Uh, I, if we may, uh,
go through a couple of things.
Of course, we know about the
floods there in the Riodoso
area, the track, of course, is
uh having serious issues and
with that as the racing days uh
had been moved up, if you will,
to Albuquerque Downs, the
question would be, uh, what is
the agency doing number 1, to
assist and are those racing days
going to go back to Riodoso and
then the second issue as we go.
forward, I know the 6th license
has always been an issue, and I
don't know what the future
thought process there is, and I
know those might sound like, are
they really related to our
budget, um, but I just don't
know if you've been uh out there
having to go and spend
additional time, resources uh to
go ahead and deal with these two
issues as you move forward.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. uh
Ismael Ereo known usually by
Izzy by all you folks here. Um,
thank you for having us,
committee member.
Uh, the situation in Riosa was
very unfortunate, um, the, the
agency was prepared, uh, as we
move staff out of that area
during the um
A natural disasters and uh we
moved to Albuquerque pretty much
without any hiccups. Horses on
the other hand, with all
different ballgame, I think the
move was far more difficult for
horsemen.
I was far more difficult for
Redoso Down's personnel, the
Downs at Albuquerque, which had
to prepare their racing facility
in a moment's notice. Uh, once
we got running in Albuquerque,
uh, things went fairly well
through the all-American
futurity that was run on
September 2nd. Uh.
Well, we're looking at the, the
increases is because of 2023 at
the race tracks where we had a
high catastrophic injury rate
for horses. It was uh probably
double the national average of
starters per 1000. That's how
that.
That mechanism is, is measured
and starts per 1000, so we
probably averaged over
2.something horses of every 1000
dying on our race tracks, which
is an unfortunate number.
We have employed 2 vets this
year.
And number for thoroughbred
catastrophic injuries has
decreased almost 50%.
And the quarter horses has
dipped just a hair under last
year's. So we've seen progress
and the big difference is that
every horse that is entered to
race in a, in a horse race in
New Mexico is now being pre-race
examined by a veterinarian on
the New Mexico Racing Commission
staff.
And we feel that it's a game
changer because before
approximately 30% of the horses
were being pre-race examined. So
here we have these animals with
no voice.
put out there to run based on
the trainers.
Um, evaluation, and sometimes it
was inaccurate these horses
shouldn't have been running, and
they were getting injured during
the races.
Who are proud to say that uh
we've met the performance
measure, uh, with the addition
of one staff veterinarian that
works for the most part, most of
the year, and another retired uh
veterinarian from Arizona that
comes and helps out with big
events and uh Sunland Park race
meet and redo his race me a
little bit, uh.
We're able to evaluate every
horse now that is in a race, and
we feel that that's a component
to seeing the catastrophic rate
decline, as well as other
variables in which uh
racetracks.
Such as Ridoso Downs have
implemented new house policies
as well that stand to protect
the horse. They have a safety
agreement that they've been
implemented in which the horses,
private veterinarian, has to
sign off and say, yes, when I
evaluated this horse, after the
horse had been entered to run,
the horse's sound and good
enough to run. So it's like
getting a
Doctors evaluation before you.
Go out and compete in the
marathon, just get a checkup. So
we're trying to do that for
these horses cause in reality,
they are athletes. We need
someone to protect them. So, uh,
our mission.
It's a lot of our uh expansion
is based on animal welfare,
protecting the horses. We, we'd
love to add two more
veterinarians that could
evaluate these horses when they
train in the mornings.
Cause there's really no
oversight there during that time
of day, horses train almost
every other day or every day,
uh, on any given day there's 500
to 1000 horses training on our
race tracks with no oversight of
veterinarians. We'd like to
evaluate those horses because
these horses suffer catastrophic
injuries during the morning
workouts as well. And so, uh, we
filled the commission.
In our mission to protect the
horses.
All the time when they're on the
track would be needful of uh two
more veterinarians.
Thank you. And just uh in, in
brevity if you will, on the 6th
license, we don't see any
activity over that. Well, uh, as
I told our good friends in
Clovis, uh, it's, it's always
live as long as it's in the law.
But uh as of recent, there
really has been no turning up of
the dust at all on that, on that
item.
Thank you. And uh just for the
uh committee's sake as we go
forward, the reason I'm posing
so many of these questions is
that there are still a lot of
things that are out there that
we're all dealing with, and uh
for our staff as we move
forward, I hope that uh we're
able to go ahead and bring forth
more of these issues because the
only way you can make things
better is to know where the
problems are and help to go
ahead and bring the resolution.
So again, thank you very much.
Is there a motion?
Going to Senator Woods, please.
How about the number of horses
that are racing today are
Is our horse population at the
track? Is it staying up?
Are we declining?
Uh, Mr. Chairman Senator Woods,
members of the committee, uh,
I'll answer that in two facets.
The Thoroughbred population,
which is a different breed of
horse from the quarter horses is
declining on a national level.
That's population has dropped
over 50% since I believe 2008.
It's, it's dropping steadily.
Quarter horses, we still have a
good abundance of quarter horses
here in New Mexico. And the
unfortunate thing is we race.
Uh, meets where we run both
quarter horses and
thoroughbreds. So there's not a
lot of opportunities for all
these horses to get an
opportunity to run.
But if we had split meets, you
would have 10 races a day for
quarter horses, 10 races a day
for thoroughbreds versus 5 and
5. So, uh, when we're around 4
days a week or 3 days a week,
it's, it's real difficult for
people to
Participate in our industry and
make money to keep the industry
going. But uh as far as that
question goes, I believe we have
plentiful quarter horses, but
not a lot of thoroughbreds.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much, Senator
Woods. Excuse me, go ahead.
Representatives or no, Mr.
Chairman. So the, the additional
people is one investigator, 3
new veterinarians, 1 attorney,
one deputy director, and one
financial coordinator. So how
many veterinarians do you have
and you're adding 3 to that? Is
that what you're saying?
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Sarah Nana, um, we currently
have
One vet on staff and one
part-time veterinarian on staff.
We deal with two contract vets,
and they're, they come and work
one race meet, one at
Albuquerque, one at Riodoso, and
we're looking to add 2 more
veterinarians on staff to uh
really cover what we really
should be covering. So, Mr.
Chairman, so you, you're saying
the one you have already and
then.
2 more. Yes, yes, ma'am. And all
the other ones, all the other
positions. I, I live in a world
of reality. We don't get those
positions.
I'm not gonna be crying. OK,
thank you.
Thank you very much,
Representative Seana.
Remove the temporary. We have a
motion for a temporary table
without prejudice by Senator
Woods. Thank you very much,
Senator Serignano, for a second,
you know, the discussion, we're
moving along. Thank you very
much, Izzie. It's good to see
you. Thank you, folks. Good to
see you too. Bye-bye.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh,
next, we'll have agency 479, the
Board of Veterinary Medicine,
uh, their director Deborah Shank
should be with us.
For FY 26, the Board of
Veterinary Medicine requested a
budget of 1.5 million. Uh, it's
about a $15.7,000 decrease or
1.1% under the budget, under the
board's FY 25 Obud.
Uh, the board does not receive
general fund revenue. It's
supported by revenues from
professional licenses, permits,
and examination fees.
Uh, the board is requesting to
lower its personnel services by
31,000 or about 10%.
Which leaves 275,000 allocated
in personnel services for uh FY
26 while increasing an increase
of 15.6,000 for other costs to
increase, uh, for increased IT
costs. Um, the budget for
contractual services remains
flat for FY 25 and FY 25, the
board increased its bud by 1
million or a little over 200%
increase from the FY. Thank you
very much. So the question, uh,
it seems like we're decreasing
instead of incre.
What, uh, what seems to be going
on.
Uh, in, in your area.
Mr. Chairman.
Members of the committee, uh,
I'm Lawrence Young. I'm the DBM.
I'm the chairman of the board.
So, actually, we will have to be
Increasing, uh, we've had
several things that have
happened our uh filemaker.
is defunct I guess is the word.
So we're having to get a whole
new system, our website is just
static at this point.
And uh we are in the midst of a
contract and having that bill.
The other things in the future
are, uh, that we need to uh
increase our
Uh
You want to call them
contractual employees,
particularly, um,
Licenses, uh, the facility
inspector, we have uh 315
clinics.
Approximately, we haven't had an
inspection in several years.
Um
And then we've were added the
animal sheltering group
underneath us. There's 35
shelters.
Um
approximately that are like
adding a facility inspector.
We're trying to do a
supplemental right now is what
we're trying to do, um.
Just because we looked at the
budget and we looked at what we
require,
um, like Doctor Young.
Website do it told us about that
they were no longer going to
first.
So that we're kind of behind, we
are doing um a rules change,
we're trying.
So, so go ahead.
Yeah, so I'm just saying that
it's
We haven't had an investigator
for 3 years or, yeah, and
We have
All of a sudden all the and I'm
new, very, very new. I've only
been
Like
Um, so,
We're, we're having to do with,
um, we're trying our hardest to
So, so with that, uh, I just,
uh
Doctor Courtney, maybe you can
help me a little bit with this.
How are we helping this agency
in order to go ahead and move
forward.
So, Mr. Chairman, the, um, I
just talked with uh their
analyst Noah Montano. You will
connect with them to um uh
basically see what the current
situation is and, and uh how to
best move forward from here.
The, the good thing is it's,
it's early and we, we have time
before you all actually approve
the final budgets in December.
Thank you very much. Go to
questions, Representative
Chatfield, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So Mr. Chair, we're gonna put a
little footnote here, a little,
little mark, we're gonna come
back in and see if these folks
have what they need to.
To do the job that we ask him to
do, correct? Yeah, you're
correct, uh, Representative
Chatfield, that's exactly what
we're gonna do and we really
appreciate again your candor and
uh and expressing the needs that
you do have. Yes, sir. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Moving along then to uh
representativeana, please. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. So Dett told
you you needed a new system for
your thing. OK, and that's just
so we don't compromise the
network. So that would be a good
thing as soon as, if we can get
that up pretty quickly. And
we're working with them, um, and
I'm so sorry. It's my first.
time, so
Just, just, just, yeah, just,
just relax. We're just like a
conversation. So please proceed.
Um,
but, um, they, they told us
that, yeah, that we couldn't
have, we, we used to pay $1500 a
year for file.
Uh, this new one, with the
implementation and so we have to
pull 50,000 lower and we don't
have that so it's just two of us
trying to run it, so
Um, so we were able to pull
money from there, you know,
getting, keeping their.
Mr. Chair, uh, concerning the
new
IT system.
It will actually bring us from
the old snail mail the way we
did.
Uh, and we've run into that this
last month with veterinarians.
wanting to know where's my
license. So under the new one,
Question was brought up about
under the doctors and getting
their licenses on that, it's, it
is a game changer.
I know I'm licensed both in
Texas.
As well as in New Mexico.
Whereas I'd have to send in the
past license for renewal every
year and wait for it, uh, to get
on Texas, you go on the website,
go through it, it took me 8
minutes.
And so
That is gonna change and
revolutionize everything.
For our profession.
I will also
Like Deborah's job a lot better
because any complaints, and
that's what we deal with mainly
with the veterinarians. All the
complaints, keeping up with
that, keeping up with the logs
and what's going on is all in
that.
Yeah, it's all in the system,
uh, yes, there is a
A capital outlay for that.
But it is gonna pay for itself
very, very rapidly.
But like we said, if, you know,
spending $1400 a year and now
having to spend
Ongoing 36,000 a year.
That's $35,000 that we didn't
have.
hit us. We don't have a
shredder, we do our own
cleaning, we take out our own
trash, we, we do all that stuff
for ourselves, you know, we
don't, we don't spend any spend
a lot of money.
You know, Mr. Chairman, you
don't have to apologize. We, we
probably should have upgraded
this a long time ago to make
your job more efficient, so, so
this is good for the state, but
thank you. Thank you all very
much and thank you for sharing
with us. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, 11 quick.
Statement. I know we're running
short on time.
But in the past I've run two
different things.
To the legislature, one of them
is trying to get more money to
New Mexico State to help support
the large animal that residency
is within the state.
Uh, to, to help some.
Some students out of uh Texas
Tech.
Large animal clinic uh school
over there to come to practice
in the state for the residency
to hopefully attract them to
stay here and the other one is
some kind of scholarship, uh,
or, or debt repayment.
Situation
For, uh, attracting vets in our
state.
Uh
So I, I would hope for support
for those two different
programs.
Uh
If, if
It would be great help to us if
you could do that.
Yes, sir, uh, Senator Woods, um,
I'm involved with that because
I'm a mixed practitioner.
And at the present, I'm not
gonna retire.
That's just the way it is. The
tech program.
I
has a lot of promise.
Because, uh, just in its
infancy.
But their students there that
will come to New Mexico clinics
that have qualified.
And we'll get hands-on
instruction during their 4 years
of the veterinary medical
program.
That does several things is one,
it gives them uh access and
exposure.
To future employers.
As well as employer associates.
So that has great promise.
Thank you very much, Senator
Woods.
Miss, I moved for a temporary
table. Thank you. We have a
motion for a temporary table
without prejudice. We have a
second by Senator Baca. Excuse
me, Representative Baca. I like
that senator sound though it is.
It's good again, uh thank you
all very much. So we're moving
forward. Uh, please proceed.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Our
next agency is uh 604 commission
for the Deaf and hard of
hearing.
Uh, we've got agency
representatives, Director Nathan
Gom, budget director Debbie
Deborah Romero, excuse me, and
uh from DFA uh Laurie Sciacca.
The commission for Deaf and hard
of hearing Persons requested
just over 2 million in general
fund revenue, a 21.9% increase
over FY 25 to offset a continued
projected decline in
telecommunications relay service
revenue.
The agency request maintains FY
25 funding levels fully funds
FTE and continues the increased
contractual funding allocated in
FY 25 for deaf and deaf blind
support service provider
programs, um, the agency met two
of its 6 FY 24 performance
targets, Mr. Chairman.
Uh, thank you very much for the
presentation. Any questions from
members of the committee?
See
We have a motion for temporary
table and I'm gonna go ahead and
say representative not uh I'm
not gonna say senator this time,
Representative Baca seconds
that. No other discussion, we're
moving along. Doctor Courtney
please. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Our next agency is 605 the
Martin Luther King Jr.
Commission, uh, their agency
representatives Beverly Gaines.
She's, uh, uh, their new
director, excuse me, their new
director, um,
I'll uh give you all a, just a
heads up that um uh being their
new director, um, we've had
conversations with Director
Gaines about um uh her basically
looking at the budget that was
submitted and potentially
wanting to um
Uh, communicate with us some
priorities for um moving forward
in the next fiscal year, um,
we've asked her to uh
potentially send a letter to us
and to DFA uh outlining uh those
items to, to supplement the
budget request that was
submitted back in September. In
that request, the commission uh
asked for $493,000 budget for FY
26, representing a 26% increase
over FY 25 that request included
an additional
FTE increasing the personnel
request by 81,000 or 28%.
Uh, the request for contractual
services increased by 12,000 or
26.
3% for audit costs and to expand
the commission's annual
conference, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you very much and again,
welcome to New Mexico in that
position as you move forward, we
really appreciate that, if you
will, please, uh, share maybe
some of your early observations
and analytics with us in terms
of what you foresee and how
you're gonna be uh helping this
organization.
Good afternoon, commissioner.
I'm sorry, good afternoon,
chairman and members of the
committee. My name is Beverly
Gaines. I am the acting
executive director for the
Martin Luther King Commission. I
have been with the state for
over 15 years in various
capacities. I'm here for the
Martin Luther King Commission,
um, I just received this, um,
assignment as of Friday.
And um one of the things I did
want to say is that the board
according to the statutes, is to
approve the um budget.
The, um
Permission has not had the
opportunity to do so because the
executive director uh resigned
along with the chair. So that is
why we are looking to send a
request letter so that they have
the opportunity to do so. We are
hoping to meet on November 8th,
um, so that the commission can
have an opportunity to be able
to look at the budget, um, and
so that we can be able to move
forward with that as it pertains
to Martin Luther King.
Um, we are looking to expand our
youth leadership program as well
as the Martin Luther King
commission um during weekend
commemorative marches that we do
across the state. We work with
different entities and other
Martin Luther King commissions
across the state to be able to
promote the life and legacy of
Doctor King, as well as
educating our youth um through
workshops and programs with the
youth leadership conference. Um,
so those are
Two of our main um agenda items
that we do promote uh for Martin
Luther King. We are looking to
expand both of those, um, and
as, as far as everything else,
we will um work with the
commission to do so.
When uh are we expecting to go
and have that letter put
together and submitted, if you
will, to LFC so that we can
further review that for
recommendation.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, the commission will
be meeting on November 8th, and
they are having um um plan to
have it submitted by November
11th.
Thank you very much. Any
questions for members?
We're going to Senator Woods,
please Mr. Chair, uh, one quick
question. Uh, I know that you've
just started and I understand
that, but uh you've had the
commission has got 2 audit
findings and one is, is still
not resolved.
Those audits are so important.
For the state budget to, to, so
that we know that uh money is
being spent as it
is supposed to be budgeted for,
so I encourage you to, to get
with that and, and find this uh
audit and and get it on track,
and thank you for
Your willingness to serve. Thank
you.
Senator Woods.
Miss Chera moved a temporary
table. We have a temporary table
without prejudice, we have a
second.
Thank you all very much. Thank
you for the presentation. We
appreciate that. Moving along,
please. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Next up we have agency 606, the
commission for the blind.
Uh, with us today is um their
director Greg Trap is at a
conference, so we have budget
director Kevin Romero.
Who I worked with over a decade
ago at CYFD.
It's been a while.
Um, the commission for the blind
requested 3.2 million in general
fund revenue of 13.6% increase
over FY 25.
That requested increase is for
independent living services and
to leverage more federal
revenue.
The agency's other revenues are
generated from contracts to
provide food services for the
federal law enforcement training
center in Artesia, and Kirtland
Air Force Base in Albuquerque.
The commission's request for
personnel costs supports
projected FY 25 expenditures,
the other category spending
requests representing an
increase of 15% primarily to
support care and support
services, uh, largely supported
with federal revenue. Uh, the
agency met 1 out of 4
performance targets, including
exceeding the target for the
number of people.
who have waited or delayed
moving into a nursing home or
assisted living facility because
of receiving independence. Thank
you very much. Any questions
from members of the committee.
See then I just have one quick
question when it comes to the uh
outcomes and meeting one of the
4 goals on the other three, what
seemed to go ahead and, and hold
you back when it came to meeting
those particular outcomes. Uh,
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, I'll have to go
back and review our um
performance measures submission,
I believed we had missed one,
and we met 3, but I'll go back
and check those numbers, and I
will get you.
detailed information.
Thank you very much. We
appreciate that. Anything else
in regards to this particular
budget.
OK.
Senators.
We have a temporary table
without prejudice, we have a
second. Thank you very much and
thank you for your patience and
being here with us past 5
o'clock. Take care of yourself.
Please proceed.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
next up agency 645, the
Governor's Commission on
Disability. Today we have their
CFO Crystal Benavides with us.
For FY 26, the Governor's
Commission on Disability
requested a budget of 2.5
million, reflecting an increase
of uh just over 265,000 or 17.3%
relative to the FY25O bud. The
request included a general fund
increase of 20% or 265,000.
Um, the commission requested an
increase in personnel of 233,000
to fill vacancies, and it has
reported challenges and
achieving full staffing since
the COVID-19 pandemic. Currently
two of its 15 positions are
vacant and FY 23, the
commissioner averted 107,000
despite their staffing
shortages, all performance
measures were met in FY 24,
which is a marked improvement
from FY 23, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you.
Any questions from members of
the subcommittee.
See and then Senator was we have
a temporary table with
prejudice, and we have a second.
Thank you very much for being
here with us and thank you for
your patience this afternoon.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh,
last up we have agent C 647, the
developmental Disabilities
Council.
Um, Alice Lou McCoy, their
executive director, is with us
today.
For FY 26, the DDC requested
11.9 million in general fund
revenue, an increase of 2.5
million or about 27% over the FY
26 Obud. The request included an
expansion of 98.6,000 to fund a
human resources administrator
for the DDC. The agency also
requested 393,000 just over that
to fill a deputy director role,
hired contract general counsel
and for increases in rent.
Uh, GST rate increases and other
operating expenses.
Uh, in addition, within the
office of guardianship, the
request included an increase of
1.2 million in additional
general fund revenue to support
an increase in the number of New
Mexicans applying for and
receiving guardianship services
as well as an increase of uh
over, just over 800,000, 80,
18,000 in the uh personnel
services and employee benefits
category to fill positions and
provide targeted compensation
adjustments.
Thank you very much and uh we do
have some questions by our
visiting member to the
subcommittee, the Honorable uh
state senator, Senator share,
please. Uh, thank you, Mr.
Chair. I've just got a couple of
questions about the guardianship
waitlist. What does that look
like now?
Thank you, Mr. Chair,
Senator Sheer. Uh, so currently
the waitlist is almost 300
individuals. It is the highest
it's been maybe ever, and uh
with our
Current funding levels for this
fiscal year FY 24, uh, we expect
to not be able to do anything
about that waitlist. In fact, we
barely have enough to address
emergency guardianships as well
as priority, um, guardianship
referrals from APS Adult
Protective Services, and other
state agencies that have um
really urgent requests, that's
also including medical
facilities. Uh, we predict that
our um waitlist will be over.
500 by the end of this fiscal
year.
Senator Sheer, wow.
So with the current budget, Mr.
Chair, uh,
We have a plan to try to
Lower that number
Over that time.
Thank you, Senator Cha. I one of
the, uh, Mr. Chair, uh, one of
the, uh, reasons why we got
into um the budget crunch that
we're in is we've gotten really
good at doing these guardianship
cases, so they're actually
getting done fairly quickly, um,
in the past, uh, cases before.
I arrived here, cases sometimes
sat around for over a year, um,
after they'd been assigned off
of the waitlist and now we're
reducing that time to as little
as 3 months. So we're moving
these cases really quickly.
Another thing that we're doing
is we're really front loading
those cases at the beginning of
the year. Um, if you
Was throughout the year,
sometimes at the end of the
fiscal year, it's hard for us to
get those cases done based on
the court's schedule, you know,
we can't control that. And so it
gets really
Difficult for us to plan from
year to year in our budget and,
you know, going over under
having all sorts of um
reversions and things like that.
And so we really front loaded
our cases at the beginning of
the year and tried to push as
many of them out as possible.
And again, we've gotten really
good at that. Um, there are
different reasons why these um
Waitlists have grown. Uh, we
have a rapidly aging population.
Uh, we had the DD waiver rapid
allocation that was done back a
couple of years ago. It was um
really put a lot of applications
on our waitlist. We have tried
to reduce the waitlist by
working a lot,
I'm sorry, a lot on alternatives
to guardianship. Um, we have a
little bit of funding from the
Legislature to work on those
projects we have been doing
those since uh FY 24.
20, yes, FY 24, um, and so we
are trying to help people get
off the waitlist and connect to
some kind of assistance that is
not guardianship because it
should be the last resort. Um,
But at the end of the day, when
people are
In need of guardianship, we have
to provide them, um, these are
income eligible New Mexicans,
they have no other way to gain
this kind of service, um, and
they really do need our help.
What kind of vacancies do you
have? It's my last question.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Senator
Sheer, um, the
I, I think at the time we
submitted our request, it was
towards the beginning of the
fiscal year, and we did have
some Vegas vacancy student
people leaving in uh new
positions that had um started at
the beginning of the year. And
we are now only at 2 funded
vacancies, uh, we plan to make
an offer by the end of this week
or next week. So we should be
down to one, very soon, and uh
we do have one unfunded vacancy,
the deputy director.
which um uh we referred to
earlier, um, and that has not
been funded.
Pretty much the entirety of my
um tenure here at DDC nurse
here.
Thank you very much, and you've
been there with the agency now,
is it a couple of years? I'm,
I'm not.
Mr. Chair, I've been here since
2019, um, at the end of August
2019. OK, so it's been that long
that you've been dealing with
this, and I want to thank you
for it because I know through
your compassion and your
tenacity, you've been able to go
ahead and accomplish a lot, but
in this with uh the projected
possibly uh 500 individuals that
are going to be on a waiting
list, um, is there any way for
us to take a closer look at this
and see if there's something
that we might be
to go ahead and do to assist,
uh, to see that list
continuously growing, uh, it's,
it's unconscionable. We need to
really find some way to address
that. So, uh, Director Courtney,
if you would please, maybe have
someone look at that and uh if
we can take a look at that and
see if there are any
recommendations that we can
Yes, sir.
Uh, any other comments before
we, uh, before we finish.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and uh
Senator Sheriff for your
questions. We have asked for a
special appropriations for this
year and next year to help us
work on the waitlist starting
this fiscal year. So in terms of
that, if you'll help me with
this.
What does it mean to help you
work on that wait list.
It's simply a matter of funding.
We have a really strong um
workforce of legal providers to
get people off that waitlist and
into guardianship. We have a
strong workforce of guardian
providers as well. And so it's
really a matter of funding, Mr.
Chair. Again, thank you very
much for your dedication in this
particular room. Thank you.
OK, Senator Woods, Mr. Chair,
Madam, Mister Chair.
Mr. Chair
I, uh, move a temporary table.
We have a motion for a temporary
table, and we have a second.
Thank you very much for being
here all the way with us to the
very end and uh director
Courtney, thank you very much.
The way you handle this today
was excellent. We really
appreciate your leadership in
it, members of the subcommittee,
we stand adjourned and of course
we'll, uh,
Uh, begin again in the morning
at 8 o'clock as a full
committee. Thanks again.
