Just practicing, see if it's
still, is it going?
We got it. Thank you, Tim.
All right. Morning folks.
Um, if it's all right with
everybody, we'll skip
introductions. I think we've
been introducing each other in
front of each other for the past
6 months, we're well aware of
each other. Hi everybody. It's
nice to be with you all. Um,
Director Senna, please. Morning.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Um, did
you want to go to minutes?
Yes, we shall. So we have
minutes from our December
meeting, which I'm sure you all
as studious members of this
committee have already read.
Yeah.
All right, so we have adoption
of a few minutes by
representative Garrett, any
opposition.
All right. And then the agenda
for today, the first time
probably this interim where
we've been able to adopt the
agenda, should we? Um
Before we actually delve into
the agenda.
Introduction of the
All right. Thank you. 2nd. So we
have a motion in the 2nd in the
oppositioning none.
We have an agenda. So again,
back to you, director, Morning.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good
morning, Mr. Chair, Mr. Vice
Chair, members, we're off to a
great start. So I'll try to keep
that up.
Um, first thing I'm gonna do is,
is swap just one little thing
under the director's report
there and go ahead and do our
personnel update first.
And so the first thing I wanted
to say, and a lot of you already
know this, but I wanted to
announce it publicly, is that uh
we have a new deputy director at
the LESC, Jessica Hathaway.
Jessica's been with the LEST for
about 4, 4.5 years now, and
she's got policy experience at
NCSL before that, um, so we're
really happy to have her here.
Um, the team, I think is
extremely happy to have her. She
keeps me in line already, so I
know she's gonna, she's up to
it. Um, the other personnel
update is that we have hired a
new um
You, you might remember, uh, we
repurposed our receptionist
position to be a more
research-based research
assistant slash commit services.
And um his name is Arlo. He'll
start with us immediately
following session. He had some
session work that he was going
to do a fellowship during
session, and so he'll start with
us, um, right at the beginning
of April. He'll, he'll be on
soon, and we're in the process,
uh, we have a position posted
online for
Um, a policy analyst, because
it's Jessica moves into the
deputy director position. We
have an analyst position now
open. So if you know anybody,
and they're gonna be good, uh,
let us know.
The last person I'll update, and
I did get OK from at least one
of them to be able to announce
this publicly, um, that we have
our LESC team is growing.
So we have 2 analysts who are
both expecting children.
Uh, in, in May and June.
And so we've, we're, it's been
an interesting time in the
office. A lot of baby
conversations, and, and we, we,
we're really excited for our
team and our, and our, and our
analysts and their families. So
just wanted to say that, um.
And congratulate them publicly.
OK. So the first thing we're
gonna do and, and analysts are
going to hand out to you right
now.
The draft of our annual report,
that's, you're gonna get a copy
of this in a second. This is not
the final version.
This is, uh, we're gonna take
this back from you when, when
we're done.
Or you can keep it if you
promise not to share it with
anyone, only because it's
missing some pieces actually.
There's a few small, a few small
edits that we're gonna make in
the final version, um, after you
After you endorse any
legislation today and approve
your budget recommendation,
that'll all go into this report
as well. So this is not the
final version, but that, but it
will be done in about a week. As
soon as we get it done today,
we'll send it off for final
printing, and it'll be done, uh.
Before you get into the
substantive part of session we
promise.
So, I just wanted to walk you
through a couple of things for
in the report, as a reminder of
how we, how we use this report
for you all and for the
legislature as a whole.
So, at the beginning, you'll see
uh a letter from our chair, a
short executive summary, but I
want to direct you to page 3.
And all I'm gonna do here is
walk you through the format very
quickly. We've, we've done this
for you before, but just so you
understand how to use this
document, and, and if anyone,
uh, this will also be posted
online, and so once it's
finalized, folks can access this
online as well at our, at our
website. And so for folks who
are interested in using it,
you'll see that the, the first
section here is educator
workforce, the, the report is,
is divided up into our major
sort of policy blocks, and it's
broken up into
Each of those blocks is broken
up into 3 sections.
The first one is background.
And so that provides some
context and research around the
topic in general, on page 5.
And again, this is the same
structure you'll see in each of
the sections.
On page 5, you'll see our
research agenda. And that was,
that was the work that was
outlined for you in the work
plan.
And it shows what
You all did as a committee and
what we as staff presented to
you, including digital links, if
you access the digital version
to the briefs and reports that
we presented to you during the
interim that are related to this
particular topic. So if you have
a question about, for instance,
school leadership.
If you're accessing the
electronic version, you should
be able to link directly to the
presentation that you all heard
about school leadership in the
interim, right?
And then the final piece.
Is
On page 11.
Of this report, of this section.
Or the policy considerations.
And so you'll see the structure
here is
The background and context for a
particular topic.
All the work that you all did
during the interim and that
staff did for you in
presentations.
And what we heard from
communities,
And then the final piece of
those policy considerations
where we suggest either budget
or policy.
Um, for you during the session
and for the legislature as a
whole, so if folks are
interested in how we got to some
of the
The Committee endorsed
legislation that you'll be
considering in a few moments.
They, it's all outlined here.
We, we felt really, uh, I'm
proud of the team they really
did a great job, I think, and
for folks who wonder where did
these bills come from?
This is where they come from.
It's the work that you do during
the interim, and anyone looking
at the report can see how we got
to those considerations.
So with that, Mr. Chair, I
won't, I won't belabor the 0.0 I
should also point you to, in the
middle of the, of the report.
Is a divider.
And that, and that is divides
the sort of narrative research
portion of the report.
From our data reference guide.
And I have to say, uh, I didn't
know this report existed when I
first came to work for the
legislature, and I got a, you
know, everybody gets a copy
because you got to read all the
things.
And I realized that this is a
super
helpful reference for all the
data for education in New
Mexico.
So it's got um basic demographic
data. It's got finance data,
it's got enrollment trends,
historical trends of the unit
value. I won't go through it all
here, but it's um
A really great resource for you
during the session, if you're
wondering, well,
How many kids are in this
district, or how much money are
we spending in a particular
place? What was the unit value
10 years ago, and how much more
is it today? You'll find all of
that in their data reference
guide. And for those of you
familiar with the report, uh,
you know that this is something
that you get every year. Again,
it's also available as part of
the report online if anybody
else wants to access it.
Uh, so that, Mr. Chair, I do
believe you do, uh, would take a
vote to approve this draft and
then we can finalize and and get
it printed and ready for you.
All right, members, questions,
or we go to an adoption. Oh,
representative.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So John,
the expected final draft of this
is
After this, at the end of the
week. So, uh, Mr. Chair,
Representative, uh, as soon as
you approve this, we'll and and
the endorsed legislation and the
budget.
We send this off to state
printing. They tell us it takes
8 days.
It usually takes less than that.
So if we're lucky, we'll get it
to you by the end of the week at
the very latest mid next week.
We deliver copies of this report
to every member of the
legislature, you'll find it on
your, on your desk in the, in
the chambers. Thank you.
No pressure state printing.
Senator Stewart.
Oh, Mr. Chairman I move, we
approve this just excellent
resource.
So we have a motion to approve,
seconded by representative La
Moya. Is there any
Objection
To adopting our animal part.
All right, so we've adopted it.
Thank you all. Um, thank you,
director, deputy director, whole
team on putting this together
for us and the entire
legislature and all your hard
work that has gone into this
report, um.
both writing it and doing the
research on it. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, last
thing under the director's
report item that's not listed
here, but I, we, we didn't know
it was coming. We had a, we've
been working on a website
redesign in LESC website
redesigned for a little while,
um, someone from IT was really
helpful in helping us with that.
Then they left the legislature
and things kind of
You can imagine what happened,
there was some transition
things.
We got really lucky that person
actually decided to come back.
Kayla, I'm gonna give Kayla a
shout out because she was really
helpful in in developing the,
the development site of this,
and this week it just went live.
So we've got a, a few, a few
tweaks, I think that we have to
make to it. But overall, the,
the gist of it is that now books
should have an easier time being
able to find the work of the
committee and staff.
Um
By category, essentially by
topic area. It used to be if you
wanted to find a report or a
brief, you had to remember the
month that it was presented to
the committee.
So some of us who have been
doing this a little while could
kind of remember, I think that
was September of 19, maybe. Um,
you can actually now go and find
by category, uh, the most recent
work as well as historical work,
um, in those contexts, in those
categories.
So hopefully that's helpful for
people who to access all the
work that you do and the staff
produces for you on a regular
basis. And I should give a shout
out to Tim Bado um
coordinated our team in making
sure that we labeled all the
things correctly and uh did a
lot of work, probably about 6
months' worth of work to get it
ready, and we were like this
close when Kayla pursued another
opportunity, but now she's back
and we're really grateful. And
so that's up and running so
director, if I could ask you, so
this will be the website that is
linked on the legislative page.
So that's the other one's gone,
and this has taken its place.
That's right. It was a straight
swap. Yeah.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Are we ready to go to committee
endorsed. I think so. It's good.
So, Mr. Chair, members, this is
behind tab 3.
In your folder.
I'll go through each of these uh
blurbs. You've seen this page
before. We have a couple of
additions to this page as
members have worked with staff
to, to draft a couple of other
pieces of legislation. Um, I'll
go through each of them
separately. The first two,
you'll remember the committee
voted to endorse in December, so
the revision of the SCG along
with those capital outlay,
waiver extensions, and the
reduction.
Extensions, you've already voted
to endorse those in those bills
have already been filed.
The first one we'll talk about
today is the changes to the
administrator prep programs and
establishing separate licenses
for principals and
superintendents. As I said in
December, uh, and you all know
this is the work.
2 years' worth of work actually,
that went into revamping.
How educator prep programs
prepare principles and aligning
those programs to national best
practices.
That was the first step.
And a bill was brought, uh, that
you all endorsed last session to
do that piece of things. That
bill was eventually not heard.
But the folks who um worked on
that bill that included LESD
LFC, PED, schools, educator prep
programs, all the folks that we
felt needed to be part of that
conversation, continued that
conversation this past interim,
and added another piece of that,
which was to differentiate
licensure between
superintendents and principals,
those jobs are similar but
different.
And so this would actually
create two different licenses
and a pathway to those licenses
for folks, uh, to become
principals and superintendents.
One thing I've been very uh
intentional about saying
publicly here is that anyone who
is already a principal or
Uh, won't have to do anything
different to become a principal.
They stay a principal.
Anyone who is already a
superintendent.
Doesn't have to do anything to
stay a superintendent, so they
are grandfathered in these these
provisions will apply to to
folks who are seeking those um
Programs and licensure in the
future.
Um, and with that, Mr. Chair,
I'm happy to answer questions
about that particular bill.
Obviously, there are more
details to it. If you want me to
go through a little bit more in
detail. Um, but I think, uh, I
don't know, Representative
Garrett, I know you were part of
that process as well if you
wanted to say anything, and then
I think we'll stand for
questions and a vote.
Resume care.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, John, um.
Well, I have to read the final
version.
But the practical question, the
3B administrator license would
be repealed. Is there gonna be a
new numbering system. I know
that's kind of a trivial
question, but.
Mr. Chair Representative, no, I
don't believe there'll be a new
numbering system. They're
they're gonna have specific
names. So for instance, a
superintendent, similar to the
way that it's a level one
teaching licenses are
technically a provisional
license, right? They're only
good for 3 to 5 years as a
teacher, you have to move to
level 2 or you lose licensure
eventually.
We actually are introducing
provisional licensure for folks,
um, so that they can continue to
get trained and then eventually
get a professional license and
those names are associated with
that particular process. Thank
you. That's I.
Any other questions, folks?
Right
I move uh.
I moved committee endorse
endorsement of the separate
licensing for principals and
administrators.
Right, so we have emotion for
endorsement, the second I
represent or Senator Brandt
rather. Oh and
Opposition.
no
We have another endorsement
bill. Thank you, Director.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair,
quick question, do we have to
decide who's going to carry it.
Oh, I assume since you had
worked on it so much that we
would give it to you. Is that
all right? Uh, thank you, uh,
Representative Baca.
And Representative, you all can
sort that out, and I think the
LESC folks will get it, get it
ready for you.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh,
moving along to restrain and
seclusion, uh, again, this is
work that uh is the product of a
couple of years' worth of
effort, um, starting with uh the
special education working group
that merit coordinated for us
during the 23 interim, um, this
last year there was a working
group that was part of that was
a result of a memorial to talk
about specifically about
restraint and seclusion, um,
The gist of it is that this
bill.
Better defines what restraint
and seclusion are prohibit
prohibits certain kinds of
restraint and it prohibits
seclusion outright.
Um, it also defines what is not
seclusion so that school
districts have some resources uh
to keep kids and adults safe in
school. So, essentially, you
know, in layman's terms, you
cannot put a kid in a room and
lock them in there all day long
without supervision. That's
prohibited.
As if a student were to throw a
fit in a classroom, which we
know often happens.
It's OK to leave the room, take
all your kids out.
Have an adult watching through a
window, for instance, as that
kid sort of calms down and have
supervision. That's OK. So the
bill really gets at.
Um, allowing schools to still
have their to have tools
available to keep people safe.
While outright prohibiting
certain kinds of behavior that
we just that we know are not OK
and that research has shown
don't actually um change
students' behavior at all.
Um
With that I'll stand for
questions, Mr. Ja.
folks.
All right, Senator Brent.
Thank you Mr. Chairman and uh
It's hard to decide whether to
put the glasses on or take them
off because I can't see you if I
have them on, I mean off, I
can't read if I have them on,
um, but, uh, what are we doing
in here to protect um our staff,
you know, my wife used to
Do some uh
Sobbing before she actually
became a teacher and I had one
student that.
Began throwing very heavy things
and attacking the staff.
That's where I have concerns
about Mr. Senator, so part of
the bill is also a requirement
for training, and so that every
school has to have um
It's not outlined specifically
in the bill who, but it has to
they have to have a team of
folks who are specifically
trained and restrained, um,
techniques, and so, like I said,
in that particular case, it
would be OK for a teacher to
say, OK, kids, we're moving out
of the classroom while the
student does what they're doing.
And to make sure that they have
someone in the school that they
could call who is who is trained
to be able to provide those
restraint techniques in the case
of of someone who is either
hurting themselves or others.
Mr. Chairman, um,
John, um,
So, we let the student destroy
the classroom.
Um, some of these students are
very strong, and when they start
Throwing desks, throwing chairs
and breaking things, um.
What do you do? Yeah, Mr. Chair,
Senator, absolutely, and as you
know, my wife is also a teacher,
and, and I, and we've, and I was
a teacher, we've seen these
kinds of things happen. I think
the the
The intent of the bill.
is to deal with the specific
restraint and seclusion pieces
of that. It doesn't address
Whether or not you let a student
destroy.
property, for instance, I would
assume in that particular case,
ideally you have folks who are
trained to come in and restrain
a students so that they're
unable to do that. Thank you.
Thank you. Other questions,
folks?
Right?
Do have of emotion?
silence.
All right, Senator Stewart.
Chairman, I do have a question
about this. Has this have we
brought in the PED.
Uh, we've been working with them
on this bill.
And perhaps somebody can tell me
how that's worked.
Senator, yes, absolutely. We've
been in close contact with PED
in the drafting of the bill
there, uh, general counsel for
their special education office
has also participated in
drafting this bill. Again, this
is a product of a of a task
force that included advocates
and school officials, as well as
as PED. So we've, we've gotten a
lot of feedback and we've made
some changes to the bill
according to that feedback. So
we feel it's been pretty well
vetted by
The folks that have, that it
would be affected by it.
Well, thank you for that, uh,
uh, Mr. Chairman, I, I've been
able to meet the the new people
in our office of uh special
education, and we have just some
fantastic and her counsel, so,
um, I'm, I'm glad we're working
with him on this.
I move we approve this for LASC
endorsement.
All right, so we have a motion.
Endorsement.
Do you have a second. All right,
so the second by Representative
Garrett.
Um, is there any opposition to
the endorsement?
All right, see then, have
another door spill. Thank you,
director.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I think
the next one is gonna be easier.
Uh, the next, the next bill is,
is sort of a formality, uh, in a
minute, I'll talk about our
budget, um,
Our budget recommendations, this
bill is, has to go with those
budget recommendations. This
increases teacher salary
minimums.
To 55, 65, and $75,000 for
levels 12, and 3 respectively.
And again, that, those funds are
both in our LESD rack that we'll
talk about in a little bit. It's
also in the uh LFC's wreck that
came out last week, and so this
is the the statutory work that
has to go along with raising
those minimums. Um, I'll say
that principal salaries will
also go up as a result of these
of this bill because principal
salaries uh are a factor of of
level 3 teachers.
salaries, and so will level 3
counselors salaries, I believe.
Because they're also connected
to this.
All right. Discussion folks,
questions.
Right, I'll go to Senator Souls.
Just thank you, Mr. Chair, uh,
just uh
sort of a question. I've had
several people come that are
concerned about raising the
bottom salaries and not the
others.
Is that in the finance committee
that they're doing that, or is
it across the board we're
raising all of them or is that
just misinformation that's
gotten out there that we're only
raising beginning teacher
salaries and not the others. Mr.
Chair, Senator, uh, both the
recommendation that we'll talk
about today and LFC's
recommendation both have
Um, salary increases for all
school employees. So LFCs came
out last week and they have a 4%
increase for all school
employees. The version that we
showed to you in December and
then one that we'll show to you
today has a 3% increase for all
employees, uh, which is similar
to the executive recommendation
for salaries, and so all school
personnel receive salary
increases. The way the sort of
mechanics of this is what
usually happens is everyone will
get that.
Salary increase first,
regardless of the percentage, 3
or 4, whatever you all decide.
Whoever doesn't get to those new
minimums based.
On those percentage increases is
then brought up to those new
minimums, because there may be
someone who, you know, with 3 or
4% doesn't quite get there.
Which is why you'll see in the,
in the budget recommendation,
it's actually the cost is pretty
minimal because we do the, the,
the percentage increases first.
OK, thank you. I, it didn't
sound right that we were only
raising the bottom ones, and so
thank you for the clarification
because you know I've had a
couple of people ask me and so I
think somebody figured out
something and thought this and
told others and got people
stirred up about nothing. So
thank you, not unusual.
Madam Purton.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. I, I
just wanna add ourselves on the
back a little bit.
I don't think I do that very
often, uh, we passed this bill
in 2003.
Uh house Bill 212.
put in place these levels,
30,000, 40,000, and 50,000.
So 22 years later, uh, we're
25,000 above.
Uh, so about $1000 a year is
what we uh our mechanisms have
raised these salaries at this
salary system, it is part of uh
uh the learning policy Institute
book on how you do salaries for
teachers, so, uh, we can be
proud of, of what we did with
this and increased it over the
years and uh made it so that we
can attract and retain teachers,
so.
Good for us.
Other questions? Oh, Senator
Brown.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman,
and, and, um, I do think that
what we've done with increasing
the salaries has been very
important for us to to get
teachers back in. Can you tell
us with this increase where
we'll sit kind of compared to
the states around us.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator,
that's a good question. Um, I
wanna say that we are currently
the highest paying state in the
region. We're still below the
national average, but of course
we're competing with with
states, especially in the
eastern part of the country
they're paying significantly
more, but regionally, we
actually pay more on average
than than our neighbors.
I thank you as chairman. I think
you have to really look at this
one regionally, not nationally,
because.
And you really can't compare us
to the east and the west coast,
they're they're very.
Very expensive cost of living as
well. Um.
I I do share a little bit of the
concern that Senator Souls was
bringing up, mainly because if
we're doing the 3% 1st and then
we bring them up to the
minimums. You are causing a lot
of compaction. And, and so that
almost seems like it should be
done the opposite way.
Um, and then the other concern
that I have is we have seen over
the last few years, when we've
increased what we think it's
going to be a good increase for
for teachers and for staff, uh,
we have huge increases in
insurance and things like that
that they actually end up with
their take home pay either being
the same or sometimes even
lower. Um, and so those are a
couple of things that I will be
taking a look at this session
and and keep my eye on it as it
comes to finance, um, but those
are a couple of things that I
think we just need to be aware
of.
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator, just for
additional information, I would
say is um a lot of teachers are
getting paid more than these
minimums already uh for various
reasons. Um, we felt like this
was the right time to, to
Senator Stewart's point. This is
in some ways an inflation
adjustment.
For those minimum salaries, if
you look at the last time we
raised minimums to 50, 60, and
70 was 22.
Um, and we're very close to that
sort of uh inflation adjustment
number. It's about 548 or
something like that. So we feel
and and to your point, it is
important that we probably
continue to monitor those
minimum increases so that we
don't stagnate at a place where
they start to become um.
not something that recruits
people to the, to the, to the
field. We were at the deans and
directors meeting on Friday, and
almost every program there
reported increased enrollment in
their educator prep programs. We
were, they were very excited to
report that out. So we're
pleased and we hope that these
kinds of things continue to draw
people to the field.
was.
You represented me the one way.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I,
I think
I wanted to take a second and
see if um uh Senator Souls, but
he was saying is that, is that
just the bottom ones get it or
like a newly um hired teacher
starts there, but I think um
what it correct me if I'm wrong,
someone like me that's, that's
been there for a while, I have
that base pay and then there's
then there's other pay that's
for my education level, and then
there's other pay for my years
of experience and, and those,
those are certain things that my
base pay goes up to here and
then those still are added on,
and that's kind of
what the, the rest of the
teachers were worried about that
they're not going to see that
and it's, yeah, so, um, and like
a new teacher's not gonna have
those little pieces, unless they
have them from somewhere else,
but is, is that kind of how
things are still
Gonna be working. Mr. Chair and
Representative Mirabba Moya, the
school districts decide on their
own uh salary schedules. In some
ways, the state has almost a de
facto salary schedule because we
do set minimums. It's also
another reason that you probably
want to be conscious of not
waiting too long to increase
minimums because to to the point
about compaction is if you, if
you wait a few years, right? Uh
5 years, let's say, school
districts, those
Teachers are seeing very minimal
increases in their, in their,
um, yearly salary.
So when you bump that minimum,
somebody can come in as a level
one teacher and get very close
to what someone was making as a
level 2 teacher before you raise
the minimums. And so you want to
be careful not to wait too long
to do minimum increases as you
go because otherwise it does
create this huge compaction
between folks who've already
been in the system and people
who just came in, it's, it's
about watching those two
together.
Excellent. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
and I do want to say kind of,
uh, you were mentioning that the
educator prep programs where
there's a higher enrollment and
stuff like that. I just want to
say that we just hired our first
um ed fellows as our, we filled
our our position. She was the Ed
fellows in the science
department, uh, last year, and
now she is the the new teacher
of record for our uh one science
position that has been um
Vacant for a couple of years, so
I'm so excited because it's I
see it filling things, so it's
like it's making full circles,
so I'm, I'm excited to see that.
Right.
Thank you. All right, other
questions?
emotions
And
Right, so you have a motion for
endorsement by Senator Brown,
seconded by Representative
Garrett. Is there any
opposition?
All right, see none.
Got it.
Represent Garrett's gonna carry
that for us.
All right.
And then, so we'll move on. OK,
director. All right, Mr. Chair,
uh, the next bill that we're
going to talk about is uh a bill
that establishes a STEM network,
STEM innovation network. You've
been hearing about the STEM
innovation Network for a couple
of years as well. We've had a
lot of folks coming to you to
talk about the need to
coordinate.
Stem resources in the state.
And so, uh, over the last couple
of years, you've heard from
folks, uh,
Uh, New Mexico State University
at the Lano Foundation, along
with other advocates who are
really calling for sort of a one
stop shop that will help school
districts better access the
stem uh resources that are
available in the state. And so
this bill would create a center
of excellence at a higher
education institution that would
serve as the primary hub or
central hub for this STEM
network.
Um, the way that we're
proposing, uh, the bill and
associated funding is part of a
3 year pilot.
So that those folks can
establish what a STEM innovation
network would look like,
coordinate with local
communities and other providers
around the state and then allow
for the creation of regional
hubs as well. So if another
institution wants to create a
hub, they could do that if a
tribal entity wanted to create a
stem and hub in their region,
they could do that as well. Um.
So the bill creates the the.
Infrastructure and framework for
that innovation network.
The budget will, and it does
have an appropriation, the
budget we'll talk about it in a
little bit. Uh $6 million it's
$2 million a year to fund the
operation of that STEM network
at uh NMSU.
This is something that um
Senator Pope has has been
interested in, I know he's not
here yet, but.
The results.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I was
gonna ask, I know New Mexico
State probably about 2 years
ago, made a cluster higher of
faculty in the College of
Education, but that also spans
into engineering, the math
department, some other places to
support doing this and whether
this was kind of based out of
there and then their model of
getting satellite positions and
so they're at the end you, you
indicated, so this is that.
You know, helping to fund that,
that process that NMSU has
started, but spreading it
statewide and the ability to do
so. Mr. Chair and senator, um,
NMSU was called out in the bill
because it has a lot of the
infrastructure that's already
necessary to do this. So it
would, it is a a sort of
continuation of some of the work
that they do with probably some
additional duties that would go.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thanks, sir.
Represent
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for this, um, I think was one of
the first things when I came 2
years ago that we started
looking at and working. Uh, my
question, is there some, um, I'm
thinking like for instance, some
of the programs in explore and
some of the other organizations
who are working towards
something similar, how can that
be integrated to this.
Mr. Chair Representative Gurola,
that I think is, is what the
network is intended to do. I
think the what we heard from
folks is, as I said, is that
there are actually a lot of
STEM, um,
Resources around the state.
But they're not, they're not
necessarily coordinated with
each other and so it maybe leads
to some redundancy or
inefficiencies. It also means
that school districts don't
always know where to access
those resources if they're not
getting particular reach out
from a from a individual
organization. So, um, the one
thing I forgot to mention in
Connor, Connor knows all this by
memory. He's been working on
this all interim, he knows all
the things, um.
Is the steering committee. So
this would actually create a
steering committee that would
that would that would meet
quarterly, I believe, just to
guide some of the processes of
the network, and so it would be,
there would be some opportunity
to make some those decisions in
the, in the process of
developing the network and, and
that would be the, the work of
the pilot.
Thank you, thank you, Mr.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I really
want to thank women in
engineering. I think there's a
couple of people here who have
been tenacious.
And constant, I think we all
know that, but I think the power
of this is as you said, I get 6
different emails from 6
different organizations all
related to this.
And so it's just vital that
everything is connected for
career and technical education,
the future industrial
development where quantum state,
all these things, um, and my, I
don't think is I think this will
help us increase our population
of incoming and keeping young
people with this, so thank you.
Other questions, folks?
Emotions.
I try movement endorsement. So
we have a motion for endorsement
seconded by Representative
Malmo. Is there any objection
dare I say.
Right, no, we have another
endorse bill.
Thank you, folks, and I think
Senator Pope is carrying this
legislation, so the other
folkssurola, um, carrying it on
the house side. Oh cool.
All right, Director.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, so our
next bill is our universal Basic
Income pilot program, um,
actually, uh, if, if it's OK
with Senator, I'll defer to him.
You've heard about this bill
before, but I'll give him a
chance to talk a little bit
about it.
Thank you. And lots of the idea
for this bill came from when I
read the book Addicted, uh, a
year and a half ago, which talks
about how traumatic, uh, being
evicted from houses, not just on
the family, but particularly on
the young children. And we know
if we're gonna make a difference
in education, we've got to start
very early on. Um, there have
been numerous, uh, small pilots
done that all show exactly the
same thing, including one very
similar to this that was done in
Delaware, that when basic income
is given to families that are,
um, at poverty or slightly above
that, the outcomes for the
children go way up. Uh, the
research from James Heckman, the
Nobel laureate, uh, economist,
uh, who quantified the ROI for
investments in early childhood
and indicated, you know, with
some of the highest ROI you can
get for almost any program, um,
and the earlier the better and
the more it targets specifically
low income, the better.
And so this particular one would
provide a $1500 income to uh
families in New Mexico that are
pregnant or have children under
one year old, uh, it would be a
grant type of program that they
would apply to, to get into when
they meet that criteria and
would continue until the child
turns one year old. Um, couple
of very good economics. All that
money will get spent in the
local community, so it's in
infusion of money into the
community.
But the family didn't have to
worry about eviction, doesn't
have to worry about food
insecurity, doesn't have to
worry about child care or
getting the car fixed or all
kinds of things that add stress
to young families. Uh, it's set
up so the only requirements of
the bill, they must participate
in prenatal care. We know that
makes a difference and in
talking with Secretary
Greginsky, low-income families
are the ones that are having the
most difficulty getting to
participate in prenatal care,
um, and this is a big carrot to
to assist with that. Uh, once
the baby is born, they have to
participate in home visiting,
and again, low-income families
have the lowest uptake of home
visiting, uh, usage with things,
and that would be a requirement
for this, this plan. I can talk
lots more about it, but it's got
lots of economic incentives for
the community beyond just the
family. The money gets spent
rolls through the entire
community, but it helps those
families.
Get out of poverty when it's
most in need and that the child
is, doesn't have the trauma of
being evicted or the family
poverty early on when it makes
the biggest difference later.
Questions, folks.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman, um,
Senator, I, I have a couple of
questions on, uh,
How, how would this impact since
they're already 150% poverty,
how would it impact other
benefits that they would be
receiving, like, you know, food
stamps, things like that. Thank
you, that, that's a great
question, uh, in talking with
Secretary Greginsky, there are
ways that can be carved out that
this does not count as income,
that this is a grant program
that would not affect those, at
least the state level of
assistance kinds of programs.
OK, so, um, Mr. Chairman,
Senator
we know on the federal programs
cause a lot of the low income
programs are federal, not state.
So do we know on those, um,
because I could see a situation
where we think we're helping
someone, and we actually
Makes them ineligible to receive
benefits.
That that are worth more.
Yes, and I don't know exactly
how it will impact that. Uh,
those are some things as that
will need to get worked out with
rule and as people are applying,
having people that are
knowledgeable about things,
helping to counsel families as
to whether this is going to
knock you off of, of other kinds
of benefits. Uh, it's more
likely it would be people that
are towards the higher end of
the 200% of poverty that are
kind of sitting right on the
cusp, uh, but the incentive is
large enough.
That it, it should make a
substantial impact into the, the
family's resources during that
first year. But there may be
somewhere that it doesn't work
for them. Uh, the 2000 that are
uh expected out of this is about
10% of the cohort of babies born
each year.
And, and so you, you mentioned
um this chairman Senator, the
200%, this has 150% in the bill.
I, I maybe last year's had 200%
so and so that was, that was
another question I had if if
someone's, you know, right
there.
And then this would come in with
this count towards the 150%
where it would then would that
adjust it to where they would
only get up to, I mean, I'm just
trying to figure out how that
would work, Mr. Chair and
senator is, as I indicated, the
idea is this would not count as
income towards the 150% of
poverty. The idea is to give
them a real lift up out of
poverty when the child is in the
most vulnerable state. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Other questions?
Right, Senator Stewart.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Uh, this reminds me of when the
EESC was looking at no time to
lose, the NCSL International
Education Study Group. We
actually heard from people in
England, um, about uh this
program.
They had a program like this,
uh, for, but it wasn't a pilot,
it's a basic program. They do a
basic income for uh women uh uh
uh.
High poverty who are pregnant.
Uh, so, uh, so the, so did the
Scandinavian countries. So this
is not unusual. Um, this is
something that other countries
have tried and find it very
useful. Um, I think it would be
a good measure, so I'm hoping we
will get there.
Thank you.
Other questions?
All right,
I move approval. All right, if
you don't say so yourself, all
right.
So we have motion for
endorsement by Senator Soz
seconded by uh Senator Stewart.
Is there any opposition to the
endorsement?
All right. So we'll have
too in opposition, right?
So we have it endorsed.
Mr. Chair. If it's OK with you,
do you mind if we, we skip the
next one. This is something that
representative Vedetta asked us
to to bring before you. She's
supposed to be here. I can come
back to it at the end and she's
still not here, we can consider
it then.
So, uh, the next, the next one
I'll go to then is actually the
career development success pilot
program. Uh, this bill would
create a pilot, um, to
essentially create incentives
for career technical education
and would provide uh school
districts with money after
students uh receive uh industry
recognized credentials or
certificates, and this is
something that Senator Bratt has
asked us to do, and I will just
say one thing is, it's an, it's,
it's a really nice fit actually
in this, in this.
continue of of career technical
education.
We have a pilot program at the
department that is funding sort
of startup pieces, obviously,
our recommendation for you all
for SCG is to provide school
districts increased funding for
secondary students that could be
used on on career technical
education, and this is sort of
that piece on the back end and
create incentives for high
quality programs that actually
result in industry recognized
credentials and certificates and
and senators, I don't know if
you want to add some other
comments. Thank you and this is
uh a bill.
I've actually carried a couple
of years we, uh, you know, have,
have really had no opposition to
it. It really kind of
Takes what we've done at the
higher ed level, and, and brings
it to the CTE program to where
we're rewarding districts for
really making sure the students
get a certification where they
can leave high school and go
straight into work.
Um, so it's just that entry
level certification, I, I think,
uh, it's a good step forward to
what we've been doing, uh, like
John was saying, it's a, it's a
good in cap, uh, the districts
have no restrictions on how they
would spend that money.
So it's, it's a bonus to the
districts. Thank you.
Questions represent.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, let me just see if I
understood this correctly. This
will be like um traits.
Um
Certifications in um
Some uh
out of my head right now. I work
in like the labor certifications
that they have right now,
something like that.
And, and it would vary, right?
So you can get certified to be,
uh, this is the one Jessica uses
her analysis as an example, CPR
certified, for instance. The way
that the pilot would work is
that districts and this somewhat
dependent on the on the
department creating some rules
for this would get different
amounts.
For different kinds of
certificates because some of
them are just more expensive to
to provide, for instance,
welding, right, versus a CPR
training that you could get over
the course of. Thank you. Thank
you. One more question then, um,
Will any of these um credentials
or credits will work towards
like um a math credit for a
language art credit. Can they
students take those classes
instead of the traditional.
Algebra 3, trigonometry,
Representative, I always love
the opportunity to talk about
how the work that you've done
has actually been really uh
intentional and well thought
out. Hospital 171 and the new
graduation requirements actually
allows for school districts in
the PED to to work toward um
Some of those career and
technical education programs and
courses, uh, counting toward
their core credit like math and
English. So it could be both.
The courses themselves could act
for credit.
Um, but then, of course, when
they actually got their
credential or certificate in the
school district could receive uh
essentially uh a stipend.
Thank you. This is a really
exciting, I think, I mean, my
ideal in high school will be a
student to be ready to, to not
to go to college if they don't
feel like I have a
certification, but have the
opportunity to continue if they
want to, so having the best of
both, so thank you.
Senators.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I
think it's a great idea. um, we
brought, you know, we ought to
have an incentive for the kids
that finished too, that kind of
like a, a moving stipend for
wherever they're locating or
getting started on their job.
Uh, my question though more uh
director Santa.
Maybe it's for uh Greg back
behind you is, you know, does
this, is this supported by the
pet? Do you have the FTE to
administer another grant program
out to people, or is this pretty
much it's all on the computer,
you push a button and anybody
that did these, the money flows.
Are you all on board with it, I
guess it's the, the basic
question.
Mr. Chair and
Mr. Vice Chair, the public
education department has not yet
taken a stance on this bill, and
it would be premature for me to,
uh, especially without having
read the new version to say
whether or not we support it.
Thank you, Greg. You'll be a
great politician if you ever
decide this, this chair if I
could, and, and this is, I hope
it's not obligate the PED to do
anything.
Um, this data is already
collected by the public
education department, and so as
far as, you know, identifying
students who who are receiving
these certificates that
shouldn't be too much of an
additional burden, but the
actual administration of the
funds is, is a good question.
Thank you. My only concern, and
it's with, you know, anything
that we do that the adminis the
department that's required to do
something doesn't go, we don't
want this type of thing, which I
don't think would be the case
with this, but just kind of
always want to check that the
people have to administer it are
on board with what we're trying
to do. Thank you. I will say in
defense politicians, we do have
to take a stand either yes or
no.
Representative Garrett.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just quick
clarification, you said that the
funds that they get, there's no
restrictions on them, but
wouldn't it have to go into
their career and technical
education program, just
clarification.
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Garrett, it's a good question.
Uh, I don't think the bill
outlines specific uses of the
funds, the, the idea is that a
district would be able to
essentially put that money back
into the program, because
you're, you're, you're receiving
the money because you have this
high quality.
Welding program, for instance,
and that would could be used to
to uh sustain that programming.
It doesn't call that out
specifically and that could be
something that the department
talks about in terms of the
administration, um.
This is me editorializing just a
little bit. I think that
Um
The incentive is then to
continue to do that so that you
continue to get more funds and
ideally school districts would
be using either these funds or
others to continue to build up
their.
Other questions?
Motions
I,
I move proof. All right, so we
have an adoption by
Motion for ah
endorsement, all these different
endorsement, all right, from
Vice Chair souls, 2,
I saw him go up, OK, by Madam
Purte. Is there any opposition?
none.
Yeah, another one.
Oh, looks like it.
Oh.
Cool. See, we got to take a
stand, yes or no. All right,
directorson.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, so the next
one is um also a product of a
lot of the work that you've been
hearing about over the last
couple of years going back to um
the road map that director
Warnament presented to you, I
want to say in October of 23,
um, in terms of overarching
systems that support education,
right? This isn't just about
programming at the school level,
or um money in the SCG.
What kinds of systems actually
support a successful
Um, education system, and data
is one of those, and you've
heard about uh data governance
from Tim, this interim.
This is a memorial that was sort
of formalize a further study of
that work into both the
The possible formation of a data
data governance agency or
structure that provides some
overarching support, not just
to, for instance, PED but also
ECCD EWS, higher ed, and other
state agencies. Some of that
work is already ongoing with
other agencies. Um, you heard
from folks uh at New Mexico Tech
in the fall about this, so this
memorial.
Talks about those kinds of
governance, and it also talks a
little bit because it is
connected to um the use of AI in
in schools. And so that's
primarily has to do with that
governance piece because right
now we don't have an agency that
is sort of providing uniform,
um, guidance to folks about how
to, how to do that and so this
would create, make that part of
the purview as well. So this
would continue that study in a
more formal way, uh,
representative Garrett, I know
you've, you've been in
discussions with Tim. I don't.
If you want to say anything else
Mr. Chair and, uh, yeah, it's
really vital. Again, it's that
collaborative piece, and it, it
just systemized.
It systematizes that.
And uh, so Representative Bach
and myself were both involved in
conversations, and it does
include the NM tech people
who've been working on data
governance, so it really
includes everybody who's been
involved.
Mr. Chair Representative
Garrett, you spoke him into
existence. There he is, uh, they
just mentioned your name
representative Baca. We're
talking about the
memorial for data governance. So
you'll get some, some, some
documents right now. With that,
Mr. Cho, Stanford, any other
questions right, questions,
folks.
I move an endorsement by LAC.
Alright, so we have a motion for
endorsement for Garre.
All right. Thank you, Madam
Protem. Is there any opposition
to the endorsement no.
endorse. All right. Thank you. I
I will say before you go on,
director, though, um, is that I
appreciate the work you and
staff have done to actually
honor the memorials that have
come out of the house in the
Senate because for a long time
it's been kind of like, um, uh,
You run the memorial, then
that's kind of the first and the
last time you hear of it, so we
appreciate the follow through
on, on these memorials and the
subsequent work. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I, I have
to give a lot of credit to staff
for that. As you all know, but
um it's not always apparent, I
don't think, to folks watching
those memorials are often the uh
uh sort of a critical first step
that leads to maybe a year or 2
or 3 of work before we get to
that, that policy piece, but in
the case of restraint and
seclusion, for instance, and
some other things that we've
done, uh, those are the product
of a lot of conversation that
that started with memorials.
Uh, the last one on our list,
although I'll circle back to the
one that we skipped is uh
expanding LESC to study all
public education, um, you all
have endorsed this bill in the
past. It's actually passed the
legislature a couple of times
and been vetoed uh by the
governor, um, Mr. Chair, I know
you've asked us to do this. I'll
say a couple of things uh going
back to the deans and directors
meeting on Friday.
Another concern that comes up
when we raise teacher minimums
is that uh higher ed faculty
salaries don't always go up. And
so higher ed is actually
sometimes facing competition
from K-12 public schools or
employees because they're
potentially not always able to
keep pace with the salaries that
you provide for a K-12 teachers.
And so that kind of thing, I
think demonstrates the need to
coordinate and communicate
between K-12 and.
higher education as well as
ECECD is doing the same thing on
the front end, because we know
not childcare providers are not
always provided with that same
uh salary levels and and
Secretary Gerginsky and her
staff and other folks are
working on a salary matrix to
try to provide some uh parity
between uh early childhood.
Educators and K-12 educators. So
just one example of where that
communication and collaboration
and study across
Um, multiple agencies and
multiple areas of education is
probably pretty critical.
Um
It's it's hard for me to explain
this because it feels like this
bill doesn't really need much
explaining because you are, we
all are the experts in this, and
I think um certainly over the
past few years, we've done a lot
of good work, and we have a road
map to continue that work, and
why shouldn't it extend
obviously into early childhood
and to higher education, um, I
think it's critically important
that we start aligning all um
education in the state, and I
think that here
with us, but Madam prod him.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, I was just
gonna say that, of course, I
fully support this. I supported
every other time we've done it.
It's really necessary, um,
You know, I'm going to be
carrying a bill that that that
directs our colleges of
education to use structured
literacy, um, as the basis of
teaching teachers how to teach
reading. So, um, we can at least
as an LESC look at teacher
preparation, but we're just
missing out on other things, so
I fully support this, and I just
wanted to say that I think this
should be carried by you and
Senator Soul as chair and vice
chair.
I've already agreed to that. I
don't know if vice chair of
Souls. 00, you could, you could
take the, the political stance
as you say, you need to evaluate
it first.
Oh no, dance. I absolutely
agree. And some of it is the
fact that we don't currently
LESC have jurisdiction over
early childhood and higher ed.
Makes it really difficult when
we get to session, because all
those bills are going to come
through our committee, yet we
haven't had the summer in the
interim to study some of the key
issues and the processes and
things, and therefore, sometimes
I think higher ed is happy that
there isn't somebody they answer
to, but lots of times when
they've got needs and issues,
they need an interim committee
to come and present to, and
there isn't one other than just
finance, which is more focused
just on budgets. Same thing with
early childhood is
You know, and for the no time to
lose that we've spent.
We're probably getting chords
almost a decade of working
towards, uh, one of the key
pieces of that is the alignment
of the entire system, which is
prenatal all the way into
career, and when we only have is
the LESC committee jurisdiction
over K-12, we don't have
alignment through the entire
system and, and I think that's
an important piece. So I'm happy
to, to run with you and whether
we want to start in the House or
Senate, I don't care which. I'm,
but I'm happy to, to work.
with you.
Great.
Thank you so much. Yeah, I mean,
like vice chair mentioned, it's,
it's a good governance bill. Um,
and I don't think it's directed
at any one executive, even
though obviously through
legislative approval, we have to
get um the governor's approval
as well, but I think it's
something that um is vitally
important that that we, the
legislative branch, are able to
look into and spend our interim
time um with you all looking
into your early childhood and in
higher education.
Um, with that, any other
questions, comments?
All right, motion. All right.
All right, so we have motion for
endorsement by Madam Prote,
seconded by Representative Mina
Bay. Is there any opposition?
See none
Another indoor or on a roll.
Director.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. So
we'll just circle back to the uh
to uh 123 bullets above that
last bill, which is establishing
a minimum annual salary of
30,000 for public school
personnel. Um, you are a couple
of years ago, voted to change
the minimum salaries for
educational assistants, that was
statutorily $12,000 although I
don't think anybody's really
getting paid that much. Um, and
you move that to $25,000. Uh,
this bill would
raise minimum salaries for all
public school personnel, you
know, so EA is part of that
cafeteria workers, custodians,
other folks who might
potentially be making less than
$30,000. Um, this would
increase.
Those salary minimums for all
employees. I will say there's a
couple of things, um,
About this bill, um, it does
come with a price tag that is
not included in your, in your
budget currently.
In the in the proposal that we
have for you. Um, and part of
the reason for that is it
These employees, uh, in
particular,
are hard to track in terms of
how much they work. Some are in
12 month contracts, some are a 9
month contracts. Some are hourly
employees and and clock in and
out, that kind of thing. And so,
it's the estimate is, is there
for you to see, but it's also a
little bit hard to track down,
um, but Representative Vereira
asked us to, to bring this bill
for your consideration, and so
we put, put it together, you'll
see the bill and the analysis in
your packet, and I can stand for
questions.
All right, question to Senator
Brown.
Mr President, uh, not really a
question, I just need to
disclose that this would affect
a personal a very close family
member.
All right. Thank you. Any other
comments, questions?
Mr. Turing move in endorsement.
So we have a motion for
endorsement.
I'll take it.
OK, so is there any opposition
to the endorsement motion.
no.
It's also endorsed. Thank you,
Director.
All right, thank you, Mr. Chair.
That's all your bills for the
session. I hope that, um, as you
see this sort of uh
Your work culminate in in some,
you know, concrete things you,
you recognize one that you
already know this, but the
interim does mean something.
You, most of these bills are a
product of multiple
conversations and presentations
if not just for one year, but
for multiple years in some
cases, um, and I think it's
important that the public know
that you're putting a lot of
thought and intention into
bringing these before the
legislature. So that's, that's
your bills.
The next thing we're gonna talk
about, and I believe they're
going to be handed out right
now.
You're gonna get a high level
different sheet, and I'm gonna
walk you through uh the proposed
budget recommendation for you
all.
I, I'll try to highlight a
couple of, not a couple,
highlight the differences
between the recommendation that
we have for you all and those
that others might have between
the executive and LFC might have
different recommendations for
Um, I do wanna say, um, we are
tentatively scheduled to present
I am tently scheduled to present
whatever budget you you uh
approved today along with DFA.
And um LFC to house
appropriations on Thursday
afternoon. And I, and I bring
that up because that's not
something that we've done in the
past. We've been asked to do
that, and I think that speaks to
uh the quality and the work that
went into the recommendations
and, and we're very fortunate
and, and grateful that we have
that opportunity to share your
budget in a public meeting with
House Appropriations as they
consider um
Their budget wreck.
To let people settle down a
minute and then we'll get
started.
Like Senator Brant, I'm having a
hard time deciding whether I
should do this or this, cause,
you know.
I, I, I don't know how many
focals I need on these glasses,
but this isn't enough.
Um, so we're gonna go ahead and
get started with the top piece
of this, all of you know that
below, below the line above the
line, nomenclature at this
point. We're gonna start with
SCG, all these above the line,
um,
recommendations. And so I'm
gonna walk you through first
lines.
456 and 7.
Those, those lines in addition
to a couple more that I'm going
to talk about in a second, are
associated with the revision to
the state equalization
guarantee. So there's a little
bit of accounting that's
happening that I want to point
out here. When we repeal
At risk as it currently stands.
We're actually taking out all of
those units and the money
associated with those units.
This is all an accounting
exercise to some extent, but
it's good for you to understand
that that money essentially gets
pulled out. So between that and
the removal of mobility, moving
Title I and removing mobility,
you see those those numbers in
parentheses, those are
subtractions from the base
amount.
When you add family income index
mechanism as the sole poverty
indicator in at risk.
You create additional units, and
that $300 million that's there
are associated with putting
money into that at-risk factor.
And to be clear, because we've
talked about the bill in the
past, but just a couple of key
components. One, again, is using
that family income index
mechanism to identify poverty,
and it's actually raising the
at-risk factor to 0.40.
Right now it is 0.33, so it's a
couple of things happening.
And the reason we did that,
Going back to the Martinez Yazi
case and some of the testimony
that we've heard from uh Doctor
Steven Barrow.
Is this the idea that at risk
money should actually account
for about 25% more funding.
And even though you had a factor
of 0.33.
When you look at demographics
and characteristics in a
particular district. Most
districts were not getting to
that quarter, quarter more
funding.
These adjustments get us very
close to that number.
So it's, it's again, um
replacing the mechanism but also
increasing the funding to a
certain extent.
Line 7 is that $3.3 billion.
That is for the standalone
English learner factor.
That will apply to all students
classified as English learners,
as well as students in their 1st
2 years after exiting Yale
status.
Again, that's a, that's an
incentive that we hope districts
will look at that and say I
actually continue to get funded
if we get students who exit EL,
um, hopefully we do that in the,
in the right way.
The big difference that you're
gonna see here are lines 8 and
9. I should say, obviously these
are legislative proposals that
second column the exact
recommendation does not include
any of these, um, as these came
from your staff.
8 and 9, line 8 is an increase
to the secondary factor for
grades 7 through 12.
Right now, 7th through 12th
graders generate 1.25 units in
the formula, this would raise
that to 1.30, so an increase of
0.05 units per student.
That
Our estimate for that is $51
million and you'll see the LFC
does not have that
recommendation currently in its
budget recommendation.
In line 9 is uh doing what you
asked us to do, which is to
include 6th grade in that
calculation as well, because we
know that the vast majority of
6th graders in New Mexico are
actually served in a middle
school. A lot of them are still
served in Kasich schools, but
Albuquerque public schools, Las
Cruces, a number of our larger
districts actually serve 6th
graders as part of the middle
school model, and we felt it was
appropriate, and you all did to
to include them in this uh
factor increase.
They are currently funded at
1.045.
And this would bring them up to
that 1.30 as well at a cost of
about
I'm gonna stop there in case
anybody has any questions about
that's, that is.
The the the most substantial
difference you'll see in the
recommendations in the SCG.
Madam Burton.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman. So,
Well, I'm getting mixed messages
cause what I've heard from LFC
is that they supported and
agreed with the SCG changes,
they may even have a bill, um,
but that they were putting it
into the budget, so this is
really not helpful to have
instead of the $91 million that
we need for the SCG changes.
They have 15.
So, uh, what's, what are our
efforts to change that LFC rack,
or at least HB2 rack. Mr. Chair,
uh, Senator Stewart, thanks for,
thank you for that. Um.
We're still in in conversations
with with staff both at LFC and
HAFC and and Senate Finance. And
so, I do think the inclusion of
the 15 million while not
anywhere near what we need to do
this. Uh, you'll see that that
15 million, actually we don't
have it outlined here is
actually associated with a
smaller factor increase to
almost as a phase-in or a half,
a half measure, if you will. Um,
This is why I think it's
important, and I wanted to point
out to you that the, the uh
presentation, the House
Appropriations on Thursday.
Again, this will be
In my short time here, the first
time that Ella ESC will get to
sit at the table and go through
these differences with members
and be able to answer some of
the questions about why they
exist. And so that's definitely
a part of our work.
Um, we're working with Senate
Finance staff as well. Um, and
we'll continue to advocate, uh,
obviously we have our piece of
legislation that you've already
endorsed and will continue to,
to work on that as well.
Uh, well, Mr. Chairman and John,
thank you. Thank you for that.
I'm, I'm thrilled that you have
to be in front of them, but uh.
You know, this is a year where
we have significant new funding
we've taken 2 years on our SCG
study. Thank you, Representative
Garrett, for putting that
memorial in, and we've done a
good job, so this is the time to
pay for these when we have
record revenues, so, uh, I think
all of us need to be loud voices
about this, so, uh, thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
And I think that was uh
Representative Herrera that we
have to thank for the SCG
Memorial, but um still it's
stands, yeah, hey, it's Joy's
day today. Um.
But yeah, I will say as well
that um in house education, the
first full week of session we do
plan on having all of the budget
folks, so LESC obviously LFC and
the governor's office in front
of us to talk about the
differences and and make
suggestions on where we should
be going with uh the education
portion of the budget and how
education that first full week.
Director.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, thank
you uh for the questions. So
I'll move on very quickly to
these, this next group of
numbers, and you're going to see
K12 plus unit changes. And so I
do wanna, I do want to point out
that it's important, um,
You all recognize that when we
talk about K-12 plus units and
any additional money that goes
into K-12 plus.
Um
These are all a result of House
Bill 130 and the, and the
provisions about schools
generating additional funding
when they add days. And these
are, these are, uh, you know,
the last year was, was a little
bit complicated, but a lot of
districts have actually chosen
to add days to their calendars,
and they're generating
additional units. So I wanted to
point that out here because this
is not necessarily something
that LEST, PED or even LFC is
asking for. This is you.
fulfilling essentially the
promise you made to school
districts with House Bill 130,
that when they add days they get
additional funding.
We put a certain amount of money
in the budget when that bill was
enacted.
But as school districts continue
to opt into those days, they're
going to generate more units in
the formula, and that's gonna
cost more. So in some ways,
you're sort of cashing the check
that was written a few years
ago. These are not new
priorities or someone asking for
more money for a program,
they're doing what the law asks
them to do in their and they're
generating more funding because
of it. So that line 11.
You'll see some differences
between the executive, LFC and
LESC's wreck. That's because
we're still getting some
information from from um PED
about how many units were
actually generated based on the
calendars of school districts,
right? So, um, that's that. I do
want to point out line 12 and
line 14, uh, that you'll see
neither we, uh, LESC or the
executive.
have numbers there. Those are
both negative numbers. These are
adjustments that LFC makes based
on enrollment declines.
And so the the argument there is
that enrollment drops.
Um, so do costs.
And so they actually take credit
for some of that enrollment
decline. LESC has never done
that. I think part of the, the
reason I'll, you know, use this
example a couple of days ago is,
if you have 2020 kids in a room.
And um
We've experienced about a 1%
drop in enrollment every year.
And two of them leave. How many
teachers do you need?
You still need one.
We know that enrollment declines
are not distributed, uh, equally
across the school.
We also know they're not
distributed equally across
districts and probably more
importantly is that they're not
distributed equally across the
state.
And so, even though you might
have a school district with uh
a large decline in enrollment,
you might have a district that
stayed flat, and that gets you
to that average 1% of, of
declining enrollment. When you
take money out of the formula
like this, it affects every
district regardless of whether
or not they've experienced
enroll with their clients. And
so, as staff, we've never
recommended that to you, but I
do point it out so that you see
that that's something that's
been done, uh, in the LFC
recommendation.
Uh, OK, so line 17, again, as I
mentioned earlier, both we have
staff and and the executive have
recommended that 3% salary
increase, the number that you
see for LFC is a 4%, that's a 1%
change.
Um, the line 18 difference, the
difference between our
recommendation of 7.4 and LFC's
recommendation of 4.3 is
attributable to that 1%, as you
give a higher percentage
increase, it costs you a little
bit less to get everybody to
those new minimums. Um,
Line 19.
I, uh
Increases to insurance premiums
and we've worked with uh NIMSA
and their folks over the
interim, we know you all know
probably that over the summer
they had to adjust some of their
rates because school districts
were saying they just weren't
going to have enough.
To, uh, to pay for those
increases, they adjusted their
rates. We think this is enough
to cover next fiscal year's
premium increase of about 10%.
I'm looking at Daniel Risk 16%.
I remembered.
And then, of course, we always
do a uh fixed cost increase, um,
we generally go ahead and match
the executive's requests here,
they do an inflation adjustment.
They use a calculator to do
that. Um.
You'll see here that LFC's
recommendation is a little bit
lower.
And then the bottom line here,
For the
I'll go take you all the way
down to lines.
27, 28, and 29.
Those are the overall
recommendations for the SCG.
You'll see the LESC has a, we
have a staff for you at $4.5
billion recommendation, an
increase of 333.
$334 million 8% increase.
Obviously that the larger number
there is attributable to the
secondary increase that we've
recommended to all that other
folks do not have in their rec
currently.
OK.
Any questions about SCG?
OK, great. All right, doesn't
look good.
Right.
If it seems like I'm killing
time, I am just a little bit.
We're gonna make sure we get to
public comment, but I won't draw
it out too much.
Uh, so next is our categorical
appropriations, our largest, our
first cat categorical
appropriation, there's
transportation, um, always
remember that transportation
compensation actually goes here.
So when we have a 3 or 4%
increase for all school
personnel, uh, in the SCG that
percentage increase is actually.
captured in this categorical
appropriation. So that's why
you'll see some of the
differences in in the
compensation piece there. Um,
you'll also see in line 38.
What we've called adequacy
funding, you all continue to get
uh comments and concerns from
school districts about the cost
of transportation.
Prior, prior to this fiscal
year, the current fiscal year,
we had a lot of concerns from
larger school districts who um
who told us and, and have been
saying for a while now that they
continually have to subsidize
their transportation.
With operational funds.
As a way to try to to to solve
that problem.
The legislature included
language in the budget bill last
year.
That includes the removal of a
density factor, um, in that
transportation formula. So
essentially what happened before
was that all the appropriations
would be figured out, the
allocations would be figured out
in this formula by public
education department.
And then those districts that
had high density, a lot of
students in a in a smaller
square mileage area where
essentially assessed the
penalty.
Or their density because the
rationale being that it costs
less.
To provide transportation in a
dense urban area than it does in
a rural area.
The way that that was applied
was to remove the density factor
and add a rurality factor to
make sure that no one took too
big a hit. The way that that was
applied this year meant,
unfortunately, that a lot of
rural districts did take a hit.
And so we're we're hearing from
big urban districts the prior
year that they didn't have
enough funding this year, we
heard from small rural districts
that they didn't have enough
money or got less funding at
least than they had in previous
years.
Um, that number on line 38 is a
number that we brought to you
last year as well, that was a
result of Tim's transportation
study where he worked with
transportation directors from
across the state, he worked with
uh superintendents, and the
number represents an inflation
adjusted increase.
Based on the high water mark of
transportation back in 2000.
1614, something like that.
Um, that was not included in the
base last year, so we're putting
it back in for your, for your
approval. Uh, we'll see what
others think about that.
The other major categorical uh
change that you'll see here is
on line 43.
That is an appropriation to pay
for your universal school meals
program.
Um, this is the 2nd, the current
current fiscal year is the 2nd
school year where you all are
paying for school meals.
That money was paid for in a
non-recurring below the line
appropriation previously, uh, as
staff.
We thought that putting it in
categorical is actually the the
appropriate place for this.
You all through Senate Bill 4
essentially committed to paying
for school district reimbursing
school districts for school
lunches.
And the department has a formula
that it uses, um, to think, to
think through federal
reimbursements and what it costs
the state to cover the
difference. And so we thought uh
that a recurring categorical
appropriation made the most
sense that we, you all don't
need to fund that in a year over
year basis in a non-recurring
appropriation. This is something
that you're probably going to
want to continue to do until you
change that law, if you did.
Uh, the executive has a similar
number, a little bit smaller.
They're actually asking for for
the same amount that we are, but
they have a $5 million
appropriation somewhere else.
Both of us are recommending 55
million, 557 for that LFC has a
uh recurring
Related recurring, and I'll take
you very quickly to line 68.
You'll see universal school
meals there.
And they're, they're
recommending $42 million.
I think the biggest discrepancy
in the numbers there has to do
with data and how confident we
are in in whether or not in the
true cost of the program, it's
fluctuated a little bit as more
and more students participate,
um, I think we were on the
Better have more than not enough
side of things and, and maybe
some folks thought the other way
around.
Line 44 is your Indian education
fund, and you'll see a flat
funding there at $20 million.
Uh, standards-based assessments
where the state pays for
assessments across the state for
school districts. Uh, we've got
a, a slightly smaller number
than the exact there, but very
close.
emergency supplemental at a
million and we have a little
less for out of state tuition,
um,
Again, that out of state tuition
is, we actually pay for
students, uh, who live very
close to other states, um,
Lordsburg, I think is a good
example where we actually have
some students who are in the
Lordsburg district, but actually
go to school over in Arizona
because it's much easier for
them, and as a state we pay.
Uh, we pay for that.
So it's, it's pretty rarely
used, but it does, it does
happen sometimes.
That's our categorical.
Uh, again, categorical funding
usually is tied to some sort of
statutory requirement, school
districts and the PED can only
spend that money on the
purposes uh outlined in the
budget. So you can't take
transportation and spend it
somewhere else. You have to
spend it on transportation, and
only on to and from school
transportation.
Questions, folks?
Right.
OK.
We'll keep moving here, Mr.
Chair. Um, and again, I know
this is a lot of lions, um, but
it's also a lot of money. Sonny
likes to tell the story, and I'm
gonna get it wrong, but, you
know, in 1617, 18, something
like that. There were maybe 3 to
5 below the line appropriations
to the legislature because there
wasn't enough money, and I
think, you know, I, he tells
stories about people asking for
$10 million and people being
aghast that we would spend $10
million and just give the
department $10 million to do
something.
Um, we've got hundreds of
millions of dollars flowing out
now. I think it's important that
you see those numbers.
Uh, line 55 is a continuation of
the state's early literacy and
reading programs. Again, this is
to continue to fund teachers.
Coaches, other professional
development and training for
folks to teach kids how to read,
and this is pretty much in line
with what you've continued to do
over the last several years, um,
We believe that this is going to
start to transition a little bit
from training all the teachers
because you've almost trained
all the teachers.
To continue training, which may
not be as intensive, but also
additional reading supports that
go out through some of the
grants that Merritt talked about
in her reading uh report in the
fall.
We have model and support
schools that receive additional
funding and uh coaching support
through through these programs.
Um, line 56 is $6 million for
science, technology,
engineering, arts, and math
initiatives. This would flow to
the department to fund some of
the programs and we've talked to
them. Uh, they've been asking
for this. They did not receive
any steam funding this this.
The current fiscal year, um,
So we've, we've put some money
back in there for that.
School leader Professional
development and teacher leader
professional development are
programs that you have continued
to fund over the last, I would
say, decade or so, this is the
work of the priority schools
Bureau at PED they train new
teachers, as well as new
administrators, uh, is part of
their school improvement.
efforts
New Mexico grown foods, uh, is
something that you all have been
funding as a way to get New
Mexico grown foods into schools.
Your REC budget, um,
Line 61 is traditionally has
been used for uh to, to pay for
tests.
International Baccalaureate in
Advanced Placement tests for
students with the department,
uh,
Deems eligible based on um
Income requirements. Uh, this
year they've mentioned that
they're going to add and you
heard from some students back in
Albuquerque this year, adding um
the PSAT for juniors.
All kids, all students already
take the PSAT as sophomores, but
in order to qualify for some
merit scholarships, you have to
submit, you have to take the
test as a junior, this fund
would, would pay for some of
those test fees for students who
qualify.
And then, uh, line 62 is your
grads program, and again, this
is uh a program that's provides
support to pregnant and
parenting teens.
So, with that, I'll take you
down to line 80.
This is your grand total
recurring.
Recommendation.
I'm gonna take my glasses off
because the grade doesn't help.
$4.8 billion in recurring funds,
um, in your, in the LASC
recommendation, an increase of
8.4%.
And, and Senator Stewart's point
earlier, and I think Daniel said
this to you last month.
The number and the percentages
is clearly higher than than some
of the other recommendations.
We've been, uh, very conscious
to watch what's happening at the
budget at the state level as a
whole.
Uh, the total sort of new amount
of money that the LFC and that
Craig uh identified was about
$850 million.
The additional amount of
recurring that we're
recommending to you all actually
represents about 43% of that new
money, which is
Traditionally been around the
amount of money that education
gets, uh, as a proportion of the
state budget, but we were very
conscious, even though we know
these numbers are higher than
other recommendations that they
do fit with.
Sort of general spending
patterns that the state has,
has, uh,
appropriated to education.
Wanted to point that out.
I'll stop with recurring, Mister
Chair, and then I'll go to below
the line.
Yeah, Senators.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, up at
the top of this page on the
bilingual multicultural Hispanic
education, the executives got
money in there. The other two
don't. Where is that money? Is
it in the budget for the other
two?
Where does that show up or why
is there the discrepancy, Mr.
Chair, uh, and Senator Souls,
yes, we also have a
recommendation for those acts as
well.
And Daniel would be able to get
you the line very quickly.
But I'm gonna struggle with it
100. Thank you very much.
Good work everybody. Um, so that
$1.5 million in online 100 is,
is uh representative of those
three of the same line, we have
ours in a below the line,
non-recurring recommendation PED
is asking for that in a related
recurring request. Same amount.
Mr. Chair, and John, but the LFC
doesn't think we ought to be
funding those anymore.
I'm asking you to project, but I
will not do that. I'm curious
why that is not in who decided
to take that out? Why is that
not there? And I guess that
really is a question for them,
but I think that's pretty
glaring omission when we worked
so hard on trying to make sure
that we're providing for, for
those key areas in such a
multicultural state as we have.
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator, uh, I, I
don't want to speak for LFC. I
do think that there are other
places in the budget that both
we and LFC are are supporting
some of this work in other
places, but to the specific line
item, I can't speak to it, I
think that's probably another
one of those things that will
continue to have conversations
about during the session.
Thank you. And, um, Mr. Chair.
And John, I appreciate that the
LESC, which is full of the
educators who know and
understand education and
education budgets is higher than
the recommendation of the other
areas. Um, I get very frustrated
every year. It always seems like
as a state we are trying to do
education on an efficiency model
of how much can we get for how
little? Uh, we always are trying
to, to do as, as little as we
can get by and then complain
about the outcomes, you just
You know, I'd like us to do it
on an excellent model where we
determine how much we really
need an education and fully fund
and and support that than trying
to see how little we can get by
from. You indicated 43%.
As historically been the
percentage, well, that only goes
back to about the year 2000.
Prior to that, we were much
closer to 50% or above of the
budget. And so, yeah.
I guess my, my hope and similar
to what our budget that we're at
least getting the percent
increase going into education of
the new money, but we really
ought to be looking at getting
back towards the support of
education at 50% if we really
want New Mexico to have
excellent education, not just
How can we get by with? So I'll
get off my soapbox, but, you
know, that's frustrating, but
I'm glad the LESC is the one
that's pushing for the best
education budgets so that we
really are doing right by our
kids.
And teachers. Thanks.
Right. OK. Thank you.
Mr. Chair.
Uh, so I'm gonna, I'm gonna
point you to and then sort of
skip over a little bit, uh, line
83, and you'll see that it's
called the public education
reform Fund.
Both, uh, LESD and LFC staff are
recommending a
A general fund appropriation to
the public education reform
Fund. You'll remember that the
PERF um was created as a sort of
catch all for money that
reverted when you all were
paying for K5+, an extended
learning programs every year,
you uh appropriated a certain
amount of money to the SCG for
those programs, that was based
on optional takeup by school
districts, and so every year you
had reversions to that public
education reform fund.
And out of that fund, you
actually paid for a lot of other
education initiatives and
there's some statutory
requirements uh for the use of
those funds.
That money, since you've stopped
K5+ and ELTP, the money in the
fund is actually pretty much
running out. There's about $14
million in there currently.
Well, we're recommending is uh a
transfer of $150 million to that
fund.
For the purposes of paying for
3-year pilots.
For a number, a number of
innovative um programs that we,
that we're going to recommend to
you. I'm gonna skip over those
programs for just a minute
because that's on the back of
your sheet here, but I did want
to explain that $150 million is
a is a general fund
appropriation to that fund.
And then we're going to have
some appropriations out of that
fund to pay for some pilots that
we'll talk about in a few
minutes, but that's the first
big number there I didn't want
to skip over it completely.
OK,
so, um,
Line 84, as I said before, in
the SCG conversation, we're,
we're putting in another.
You know, 35 $40 million for
K-12 Plus.
Because school districts are
already generating those units
in the PED is having to pay for
them this current fiscal year,
they didn't have enough to do
that. And so this $40 million is
a is an appropriation to the
state support reserve fund.
Essentially a supplemental
appropriation to the department
so that they can pay for current
fiscal year expenses and hold
the unit value flat.
Uh, when, when the final unit
value comes out this month.
So that $40 million will pay for
any shortfall that was created
based on the additional takeup
of K12+ units, and we're paying
for that in next fiscal year's
SEG.
Um
Line 85, uh, is our structured
literacy summer program. That's,
that's the $30 million
appropriation that you have for
the current fiscal year, and we
continue to recommend for next
fiscal year.
Line 86, um, is where you're
going to start to see some
divergence between the
recommendations. It really has
to do, and I won't try to point
you to all the lines. I can tell
you that both the executive at
LFC as well as LESC are all
around the same amount of money
to fund career technical
education and work-based
learning, but we're all sort of
taking slightly different
approaches about how to do that.
So you'll see some of it here,
you'll see some of it in
different line items, and then
you'll also see some of it in
the.
public education reform Fund
initiatives that I talked about
a minute ago. Overall, it's
about 40 to $45 million across
all wrecks. So even though you
don't see them all in a
particular line here, you will,
um, it is reflected somewhere.
1987, is educator fellows, um,
again, this is um another 20
million, that's what you're
paying for, that's what you've
appropriated for the current
fiscal year, out of school time,
learning summer enrichment and
high dosage tutoring, we're
recommending $20 million.
Um, K-12 plus online 89, that
$15 million there is essentially
contingency.
So that if additional units are
generated because school
districts want to continue to
add these to their calendar.
There's a little bit of money uh
in non-recurring that the, the
PED can use to supplement SCG
payments, um.
If demand outstrips what we've
put into the SCG.
Let's see here, uh,
supplemental meals, uh, 91
school improvement and
transformation. This is
something that the PED asked for
in its initial recommendation,
it didn't land in the final exec
recommendation, we have $10
million here. You'll see the LFC
also has uh funding for that in
its PEF recommendation. So
again, there's gonna be some
crossover just a slightly
different approaches about how
to pay for some of these things,
and for how long?
Community schools were
recommending $8 million and
that's what they, the PEDs
receiving in the current fiscal
year.
I'll point out line 94, uh, the
PED, um, and the, and the
executive is, is asking for $90
million in a 3 year fund for
Indian education.
So the proposal that we've heard
from PED is the $20 million in
Indian education fund.
And an additional 30 million on
top of that, each year for the
next.
3 years.
Um
We kept our Indian education
recommendation flat at $20
million for the fund. We did put
in additional $55 million here
to support sort of the increased
funding out to tribal
communities and school districts
and charter schools for
indigenous education
initiatives. I don't have a uh
an exact balance, but that
Indianed fund also contains
between 15 and $20 million
dollar balance currently.
So, so they've got 20 million
that you would appropriate for
the next fiscal year in addition
to this 5, in addition to
whatever is in the balance. So,
Close to $40 million available
to the PED to distribute to um
Tribal entities as well as
school districts for Indian
education initiatives.
Um, let's see here.
Again, you've already pointed
out the acts that we talked
about, and some of these are
smaller appropriations that we
continue to pay for on a regular
basis or that the department has
asked for this year, you'll see
online 113, that's the $90
million that the executive is
asking for Indian.
Education fund additional
funding for that.
And I think I'm gonna skip to
the next page.
We're we're pretty much done
with our non-recurring.
A general fund non-recurring and
again that's $366 million.
The last piece that I'll spend a
significant amount of time on
here is the uh
Two pieces, I guess they're kind
of connected. One is the public
education reform Fund, which is
the current amount of money in
that fund.
And there's some some uh
learning management system that
we recommend using per funds to
pay for, as well as some fun
cleanup that the department um
identified.
One big uh state transfer is the
$50 million on line 143 for
school security. This would flow
from the public school capital
outlay fund.
Similar to how you've, uh,
appropriate money from that fund
for school safety in the past.
Um, we're recommending $50
million that schools can use for
a variety of purposes here, um,
including physical
infrastructure of schools as
well as uh potentially student
wellness initiatives as well.
That would flow out on a formula
basis.
So lines 166 through 172
represent our our recommendation
to you or how to use that public
education reform fund transfer
or appropriation from the
general fund.
So line 166 is $45 million.
Currently, the department is
funding its innovation zones
initiatives at about 15 million
a year, and so this would
actually create that 3 year
pilot at $45 million a year for
innovation funds, uh, innovation
zones, I'm sorry.
Uh, Obviously, we've all heard
about the importance of
attendance, support, and so our
recommendation includes about
$10 million a year for 3 years
for attendance supports.
Line 168.
Uh, would fund $10 million a
year for the uh support for
unhoused students, and you heard
about this pilot in Albuquerque.
This provides cash stipends to
students as long as they
continue to attend school and
participate in after school
tutoring as well as some other
requirements for school
districts. That's $500 a month.
students
Um, this $10 million a year we
believe would pay for about 1500
high school students a year. Um,
The graduation rate of the pilot
was upward of 90%, whereas
unhouse students in general,
their graduation rate is closer
to 600 to 63%. And so we feel
like this is actually a very
high impact pilot, uh, if you
choose to to support it. um,
we're the only group that has
that in its in its
recommendation currently, but
we'll continue to work on that.
Um, and we've got, and we know
we have some other members
supporting other uh committees.
So that's
$10 million a year for 3 years.
The department has continued to
ask for uh support for math
achievement, um, in some of its
microcredentials and other work
that it's been doing,
potentially having some coaches
in schools to help uh with math
intervention, and so this would
fund that at about $5 million a
little over a year for the next
3 years.
Secondary educator literacy is
similar, uh, the department you
currently are appropriated about
$5 million for the current
fiscal year, this would continue
that for the next 3 fiscal
years.
Lane 171 is innovative staffing
strategies, and this is based on
the work that you heard about in
Carlsbad. We had another uh
innovative staffing presentation
to you this year. And so those
models where you take really
high quality educators and
expand their reach by uh they
they're providing support and
coaching to teachers as well as
to students in those classes.
And so we've seen preliminary
results coming out of Carlsbad
for one model.
of innovative staffing that have
been very promising. So this
would create a 3-year pilot for
that.
Uh, associated with the bill
that you all endorsed earlier,
the STEM Education Innovation
Network.
As I said earlier, that's $2
million a year for 3 years.
I won't go through all the LFC's
recommendations for this
particular fund, but you'll see
very similar things, a little
bit of overlap.
Some differences.
Um, where there are differences,
it really is a matter of
mechanisms.
Um, in most cases,
If they're funding something in
Perth, we're probably doing
something as a, as a one time
non-recurring for this fiscal
year in the same amount, and the
same thing is true. Uh, so for
instance, online, um, I'm gonna
get this.
On line 173 LFC has 29.
4 $5 million for school
transformation, which is about
$10 million a year. We have one
line item for $10 million for
the for the next fiscal year
only. So there's, there's some
overlap and some differences
about how we use the mechanisms
over all the funding levels are
very similar.
Uh, with that, Mr. Chair, that's
all non-recurring and I'll stand
for questions.
the resources.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, on the
one, the supports for students
who are unhoused where the LESC
has 30 million, the others
don't.
Is this something, does it need
a bill to hang it on or we're
hoping it's going to be in the
budget across the board and we
don't need to.
Where is it as far as getting
that or to, to get support from
the executive and the LFC so
that that shows up, seems to
have a very high ROI that goes
long term into the kids who have
graduated and now are good
citizens instead of dropouts and
it's got lots of benefits. How
do we move that forward, Mr.
Chair, Senator, thank you for
the question. So we have talked
to the department, uh, and
their, and the folks who support
their McKinni Vento programs as
well as some other programs for
at risk.
students, they're huge fans of
the program. Um, obviously,
everyone is balancing budget
priorities right now, we're
going to continue to work with
other staff, um, this came out
of a pilot as you, as you know,
that apple seed, uh, did it, you
know, from Albuquerque, I
believe they're also working,
uh, to gather some support from
other members, including on the
finance committees, and so we'll
continue to support them in
that, um.
Whether there's a bill or not,
as you well know, um, is, is, is
important, but certainly we want
to work to make sure that the
money gets into the budget, so
we'll continue Representative.
Thank you for having the same
issue with our glasses.
Um
And forgive me if you already
mentioned some of these. I was
trying to keep up, um.
When, um, secondary education
literacy is that part of the
conversation that we're gonna
have at the end about where are
the programs or what is this, is
this attached to a bill.
Mr. Chair Representative Gorola,
that particular line item is
something that you all funded
this current fiscal year, um,
and, and I'll let PD speak to it
if I get it wrong, but I believe
it's supports for secondary
teachers, um, content area
support for for secondary
teachers to support students who
are still struggling, struggling
with literacy, and so I can't
speak to the specifics of what
that program looks like, but I
believe that's what it does.
So
OK, so it's attached to a bill,
Mr. Chair representative,
there's no bill. This is
something that the executive
asks for last fiscal year that
you all agreed to fund. And so
it is a department run
initiative that was not run
through legislation. We need to
talk to thank you. OK, um, I
guess my other question probably
is in the same line, my
achievement will be something
similar to this, Mr. Chair,
exactly. OK. Thank you.
Resume the wrong one.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, quick
question on the, the supports
for students who are unhoused.
Um, I know the, the initial
pilot uh was Appleseed with
Albuquerque students, correct?
Um, and I think you answered it,
but I don't know if I caught it
right. Um, what we're hoping is
that pilot products, uh, it's
gonna be 1500 students and
expanded to the entire state,
not just in in that area,
correct, Mister Chair
Representative Mirabel Moya,
actually, the pilot was in Cuba.
Las Vegas, and I always forget
the 3rd 1. There were 3 school
districts, uh, not APS actually.
um, but yes, the hope is that we
would be able to expand, they
would be able to expand the
reach of that program to, if I
think there's some, some
logistical challenges with, with
a program like this. So it would
depend on the school district's
ability.
To actually implement some of
the requirements. I think um
based on our conversations with
uh Appleseed in the department.
Um
It would be available to
everyone, but not everyone would
necessarily meet the
requirements of the program and
and have access to the funding.
It would be an application
process, I believe.
And um, Mr. Chair and um and
John, I, um, from what I
remember correctly, that 1500
was going to take care of a good
chunk of those students that
were in that statistic, right?
That what who they're trying to
to service. It was going to, it
was going to, to take a good
chunk of them if we were to able
to, to um to use, utilize it for
all 1500 students. So, I mean,
if we could, if we could get
1500 more students graduating.
That aren't that aren't now,
that's huge for for for us at
this point,
Mr. Chair Representative, uh,
our estimates are based on about
1500 students, which accounts
for approximately 50% of all
high school students in the
state who are unhoused. And so
in initial conversations and
some of this would be left to
the department in in developing
the program with assistance, um.
It would be focusing on juniors
and seniors, to your point about
graduation. So
This cohort of juniors and
seniors, and then if you
continued funding for the next 3
years, you'd be able to get more
students who are currently
sophomores, and then eventually
students who are currently
freshmen as they work through
that process. But um,
Those are all details that would
have to be worked out.
Yeah, and, and, um, thank you,
Mr. Chair. I, I really
I liked it when we heard about
it. I think it was in um here in
Albuquerque or there in
Albuquerque, right? I, I when we
were talking about it, um, I
really like it because we've
always talked about um the
attendance not having teeth,
the, you know, the act, and but
this is not necessarily teeth,
but it is a incentive, um, if,
um, your family, you know, I'm,
I'm sure that uh whatever,
whatever issues that are around
there, if we can take care of
some of it.
Then it, it would, it would
definitely help and, and give
more security to, to these um
high school students. I see them
all the time that, that can get
themselves to school and, and,
and finish this portion of their
life and go on, so I, I really
like that. Thank you.
Other questions, folks? All
right.
Um
Oh, so we do have emotion for
endorsement of the LASC budget
by Vice Chair Souls, seconded by
a man of prote, um, before I
take that motion and that
there's any opposition. Um I
just want to take a moment to
thank Daniel, um, for his hard
work on
The budget.
And being our resident budget
expert in education. We really
appreciate it, Daniel. Um, but
with that, is there any
opposition to adopting the LESC
budget for education.
All right, so we have
A budget for the LESC. Cool.
Thank you, Director. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. I just want to very
quickly thank also, um,
Esy staff, PED staff, all the
school districts and charter
schools that help us think
through these proposals, um, as
we know the, the, there are
implications for a number of
people and and they've the
agency and LFC have been great
partners as, as I said, there
are some, some differences here,
but you're gonna see a lot of
similarities across the across
the recommendations, and that's
because we actually do talk to
each other on a pretty regular
basis.
All right. Thank you so much.
So, we're gonna take a moment to
transition to
Public comment more last agenda
item.
All right, so as usual, folks,
thank you all so much for
joining us. Um, you're gonna
have up to 2 minutes to address
the committee, um, so we have
that, please.
Just make sure that microphone
goes on.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Vice
Chair, my name is Nat Dean. I'm
a person with multiple
disabilities and I'm a
disability advocate. Can you
Hear me OK?
Thank you. Um, I, uh, will be
brief, I hope. Um, vice chair,
Mr. Chair, Mr. Vice Chair, Vice
Chair much uh
Uh, the programs that might be
impacted by the $1500 per month
or another example of a program
is a baby bond, which I'm
completely in favor of them, but
there was some question about
what programs.
That might be influenced,
there's SSI Social Security
income. Um, there are sometimes
clawbacks that happen 3 to 5
years later, there's a maximum
asset, um, and, uh, savings that
you can have in combined
accounts of $2000 some children
might be on SSI and some parents
might be on SSI.
Um, Medicaid waivers that
through turquoise Care, um, such
as, uh, the DD waiver, the
waiver, those are state and
federal partnerships, um,
Medicaid, um, which is a state
and federal partnership, snapped
the supplemental nutrition
assistance program, Lehi, which
is the energy assistance for
utilities, um, Medicare Extra
Help, which helps to pay the
Medicare premiums if you're low
income. Um, income support
division or ISD.
cash assistance, which can even
be for something like your car
breaks down, you can't get to
work, that can be a special um
cash assistance program
available through ISDN and
special circumstances brought
that assistance programs, the
federal one ended, but there may
be some reconstruction of that.
At low cost cell phone programs
such as the Assurance,
proximity, low-cost cell phones.
Um, first time, uh, homebuyer
special, uh, programs, uh, state
appointed guardianship programs
where the state pays for the
guardianship.
And that could be for an adult,
it could be for a child.
Um, legal aid such as qualifying
for intigen representation
waving court fees or some court
costs, um, hospital, county inju
in funds injuent cremation
assistance, childcare
assistance, unemployment
benefits, and transitional and
re-entry programs. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, Mr. Vice Chair. We
appreciate it.
Um
Fran Stewart.
Welcome. You have up to 2
minutes.
Um, I'm sorry, I thought it was
on, or can we restart or do you
just want me to go where I was.
OK. So,
I mean, I am retired engineer.
I'm also a fellow of the Society
of Women Engineers, as well as
the distinguished Service Award
recipient and a stem advocate as
you started calling me.
Uh, Jan Williams unfortunately
was unable to join us today. Um,
well, it's been about 2.5 years
since we started working on this
bill. We do want to thank you
very much for your endorsement
today of what's the result of a
lot of effort by many STEM
advocates and others.
Um, um, so we're looking forward
for, to continuing everyone's
efforts that have been ongoing.
And that it resulted in this
endorsement to be able to pass a
bill in this 2025 legislative
session, um, one of my favorite
sayings is an individual can
make a difference, but it really
takes a team to make a change
and what we've gone through in
the last couple of years is just
a prime example of that
statement.
Thank you very much.
All right, thank you. Athena,
Christal Lulu.
Chair, members of the committee.
My name is Athena Christodoulou.
I'm a retired Navy commander,
and energy and environmental
engineer and also a member of
the Society of Women Engineers.
I grew up in North Carolina as
it transitioned from
agriculture.
To technical.
I was a product of a focus on
STEM.
Being allowed to be in algebra,
and I think if I recall
correctly, 9th grade.
And beginning that transition,
that movement into science and
technology.
And I hope you remember that in
North Carolina there is now such
a thing as the research
triangle.
I was part of that start.
This is something that New
Mexico can actually do, because
we also have a research
triangle. Right now it's in our
national labs, but we can
With a focus on engineering and
science.
Um,
education and coordination, we
can develop that here and
transition from a fossil fuel
extraction industry.
To better. Thank you.
Thank you for joining us. Uh,
when?
Oh, if you would come up to the
microphone, please. Make sure
it's on so we get you on our
webcast.
Thank you, uh, thank you,
Chairman Romero and
Uh, LESC. My name is Lynn
Bickley. I didn't realize I'd
signed up to make a comment, but
since I'm here, I will, um, I'm
a retired physician. Uh, I've
worked with Mathamigos here in
Santa Fe and northern New Mexico
for 8 years. Uh, our focus is to
Help teachers inspire kids to
love math.
Uh, we've accomplished through
grant funding, 4800 teacher
training hours of over 1000
teachers in Santa Fe and
northern New Mexico.
So what I would like to say is
we would really like to see a 5
year plan in math.
With good data analysis and good
implementation.
We think if all hands are on
deck, including educational
nonprofits like ours, we can get
some fresh ideas and some fresh
energy, sometimes the nonprofits
are left out of the stakeholder
list, uh, and sometimes parents
as well. So we hope that you'll
give that some consideration,
Um, other states.
Uh, have looked at a broader
context for educational reform.
Uh, I'm sure you're aware of the
Kerwin commission and Maryland
and uh some of the other uh
statewide commissions for
innovation, but we would really
like to see a focus on math and
reading as a start.
And whether that requires an
independent commission that
would be uh for a lot of thought
and discussion.
Thank you very much.
All right. Thank you for joining
us.
Loretta Trujillo.
Good morning.
Um, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, uh, my name is
Loretta Trujillo and I'm the
executive director of Transform
Education in Mexico, and I'm
also speaking on behalf of the
legal team representing the Yazi
plaintiffs. I'm here today to
express our deep concern and
unwavering opposition to budget
proposals that have eliminated
funding for the Hispanic in
Education Acts.
Critical pillars of equity that
honor and address the needs of
historically underserved
students.
We recognize that your budget
includes funding, and that is
deeply appreciated, but we
believe that the funding should
match the need and it should be
recurring.
The 2018 Yazi Martinez ruling
cemented this truth,
underscoring the state's duty to
meet the needs of every child.
Yet the eraser of funding for
these acts and 2, if not all 3
recent state budgets ignores
this obligation.
It also highlights the urgent
need for a comprehensive,
transparent planning process
that includes input from New
Mexico's education experts and
community advocates.
Such a plan aligned by an
aligned such a plan is supported
by an aligned budget is
essential to addressing the
systemic failures.
This funding gap also highlights
a deeply concerning connection
between the unacceptable funding
requests in the PD stance on
addressing the systemic racism
faced by students at the heart
of these acts. When the
plaintiffs called the PED to
fully implement these laws,
ensuring extensive multicultural
and multilingual programming and
anti-racist inclusive learning
environments in which at-risk
students are treated equitably,
free from discrimination and
margin marginalization, they
respond in a recent response in
a recent court filing was
alarming.
The PED stated, quote,
eradicating racism is not
addressed in the court's orders,
and while this is a worthwhile
goal, this overly broadens the
scope of the lawsuit.
One final point we think is
essential to bring up is how the
lack of lack of money
demonstrates that advisory
councils for each act are not
functioning as intended.
These councils were established
to inform policy and practice,
ensuring that the multicultural
framework demanded by the Yazi
Martinez ruling becomes a
reality. Their advice and
guidance should shape your
budgeting decisions, and yet
their potential remains
untapped.
Thank you, Laura. Thank you.
All right, we have Jennifer
Gomez Chavez.
Please, welcome. Buenos dias,
Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee, I'm Jennifer Gomez
Chavez. I am a retired
administrator from the
University of Mexico and
currently serve as a member of
the Hispanic Education Advisory
Council. I'm here today to
address the elimination of
Uh, funds that were um allocated
to the Hispanic Education Act,
although I hear that that is now
uh uh different. However, I want
to address the importance of the
Hispanic Education Act. So just
to be clear, the Hispanic
education advisory Council plays
a crucial role in shaping
initiatives to support Hispanic
students.
Yet it is the only New Mexico
public education department
advisory council that prohibits
compensation for services. Um,
so this year we have 2 requests.
One is to bring parity with the
New Mexico public education,
Education Acts to allow for
mileage per diem, and I believe
there is a bill moving forth, so
I hope uh that to gain, we hope
to gain your um support, but
this will provide per DM.
and stipends for the Hispanic
education advisory Council,
where we have been traveling for
the last few years on our own
funding.
The other is that we want to
establish a biannual Hispanic
education summit to impact
policy systems and programs for
Hispanic students and families.
This summit will offer
participants the opportunity to
provide feedback on the Hispanic
Education Act and to our council
as we provide advisement to the
Secretary of Public Education.
So
Our final comment is neglecting
to fully support the Hispanic
education advisory Council and
the Hispanic Education Bureau is
an indirect violation of the
Martinez and Yazi ruling.
Hispanic students in New Mexico
deserve equitable opportunities
equal to those of their peers.
We thank you for your leadership
and your support. Gracias. Thank
you. All right, so we have our
folks online.
We're ready to go to folks
online, we got Adrian Sandoval.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Yes, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
uh, we're gonna wait to make
sure we get you on our
microphone.
We can hear you.
Fantastic. Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, can you hear me?
Yes, the volume's a little bit
low. Give us a moment.
OK. We can hear you, but we'll
need everybody to be quiet. So
we, everybody can hear you.
Fantastic. I'll give it another
try. um, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, uh, hopefully you
can hear me relatively decently,
I have two specific concerns.
One actually is aligned with the
whatenator Sos had mentioned a
little bit earlier, which was uh
uh the black and Hispanic uh
education and uh the lack of
funding thereof, um, again, such
a critical thing that's.
This is mentioned by some of my
other colleagues there sharing,
um, just making sure that at a
very minimum,
As we have uh funding to support
a variety of things within
education that we do, um, at the
very least provide based funding
for both black and Hispanic
education in New Mexico.
Secondly, I'd like to just uh
speak very specifically about uh
HB 63 and the ELL EL factor,
forgive me, um, just keeping in
mind, uh, I have another, a
number of reflections, but
definitely not, not enough time,
right, within the 2 minutes to
share, but, um, uh, keeping in
mind that Title 3 Federal
education, uh, supports.
Grant's monies that exist
specifically for English
learners, and just making sure
that there's no redundancy.
Or perhaps, um, a, a potential
tendency for districts or school
sites to kind of lean towards um
the EL factor as opposed to
bilingual education, um, keeping
in mind that uh uh bilingual
education, when you look at the
uh research-based evidence has
much greater impact on students,
uh, acquisition of English
language, uh, as opposed to
specifically or strictly an
English language acquisition,
uh, approach. And so, uh, just
again, I could
go much more deeper and broader,
uh, but I do want to recommend,
uh, you know, greater reflection
on HB 63, uh, specifically as it
speaks to the EL factor and how
it speaks to or in some
instances, doesn't, uh, the
importance of language other
than English instruction. Thanks
so much.
Thank you. Uh, Michael.
Rodriguez. Good morning.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee.
Thank you. Uh, Michael
Rodriguez, I'm the executive
director for dual language
education of New Mexico and back
in September I had the honor and
privilege of being able to
present to this committee on the
the power of dual language
education and the overwhelming
research that shows how we can
best support our students while
many of our districts are not
equipped at this point with
current funding to support it
through dual language. The key
in that is making sure that as
we support our English learners
that we're valuing their home
language and their home.
culture and you can't separate
the two. So as we look at
culturally sustaining supports
for students. We also need to
make sure that we're valuing and
utilizing and leveraging that
home language that they have,
because that's really what
research is showing us is most
effective, and sometimes it's
seen as a as a
Opposite of what what uh people
think could happen. So, again,
just echoing what Mr. Sandoval
had just mentioned, looking at
how we can make sure that we're
honoring that. I know that Title
II funding is very specific in
how we can use it, but as a
state, honoring the language of
our English learners in some way
is going to be critical. Uh, the
other piece I wanted to just
mention quickly, which has
already been mentioned, is uh
equity and funding for our, our
different acts, uh, Hispanic
Education Act.
and, uh, critical for a huge
number of students in our state
and just wanting to make sure
that we're being equitable in
how we are funding and
supporting these acts, as well
as the number of students that
they represent. Thank you very
much.
All right, thank you. And we
have Elizabeth Valenzuela. Good
morning. You have up to 2
minutes, please.
Buenos Dias, good morning. My
name is Elizabeth Valenzuela and
I'm the executive director for
the Association of Bilingual
Education, New Mexico, who serve
over 400 bilingual educators,
they're part of our members of
our association. um, thank you,
Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee. Again, I would just
like to echo what Mr. Sandoval
and Mr. Rodriguez have just
mentioned in terms of the
importance of having equity
among all our acts, the Hispanic
Education Act, the Black Act,
the Indian Education Act, and of
course,
The bilingual multicultural
Education Act. Um, one of the
things that was mentioned this
morning in terms of the
collaboration that the um Mr.
Senna mentioned with, you know,
PE and other stakeholders. My
question would be, has um has
there been conversations with
the advisory councils of all
these acts because I feel like
um they have important insight
and have a lot to offer in terms
of when you're uh really
creating this budgets to really
meet the needs of our students,
um, especially
given the Martinez and Yali
court case and just the continue
inequities that we continue to
see in um in our schools in
regards to the groups mentioned
in the court case. Uh, the other
thing too that I would just like
to just reiterate is the um
decades and decades of uh
research that we have in terms
of the power of bilingual
education, the impact that it
has not only in terms of, um,
you know, really supporting the
uh bilingualism and biliter
among our students, but also
just um
In terms of looking at the
impact that it has in our
students with uh learning
disabilities, um, most recently,
there's even research that has
come out in terms of the
positive impact, um, bilingual
education has for our students
with autism. So again, I would
just like to thank you for, um,
you know, again to continue to
support the acts and again to
reach out to those advisory
councils, they can really offer
a lot of insight. Thank you.
Thank you so much.
So those are all the folks I
have on my list. Thank you all
for joining us in your input and
we look forward to working with
you all over the next 60 days
and counting. So number up.
Madam Prote, please.
Um, Mr. Chairman, I, I just want
to thank you. You, you, you've
led us down the right paths for
2 years now and so we really
appreciate your chairmanship and
or you do it with humor and
intelligence and grace, and we
all appreciate that. So thank
you for what you've done. Great.
Thank you, Madam.
Thank you.
It's been an absolute honor to
chair this committee. I know
it's been, it's been difficult
for me because I'm in school,
um, the rest of the time that
I'm not here, um, but thank you
all to the staff, um, certainly
directors and uh and all of the
staff for being able to uh put
this all together into um talk
with all the members and make
sure that that you all are
reflected in the work that they
do, both during the session and
and um here in the interim. So
thank you all very much and
the members. Thank you all for
being here. Um, asking your
questions and uh keeping us on
task. Thank you all folks. All
right, with that, we'll see you
all tomorrow at opening day.
