2 days, so
We're very grateful for their
help.
And with that we will move to
the afternoon's calendar.
Agenda
And first we're gonna start with
the behavioral health Services
Division.
Oh, and we have the whole, we
have everybody there, OK.
So we won't have to change.
Chairs afterwards.
So we have the Healthcare
authority with us today and
we're gonna start with Nick
Bucas, the head of the
Behavioral Health Services
Division, and we have a
PowerPoint. Is this for all
three of you?
OK, that's correct, Mr. Chair.
We have 8 PowerPoint for the
afternoon.
And we also have another
committee member has joined us.
Representative Chasey is here as
well.
So we're up to 77 committee
members now.
So go ahead and and and get
going, Nick. I think we're
ready.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, it's a pleasure
to be with you, uh, here today
and to present. Uh my name is
Nick Bucas. I am the director of
Behavioral Health Services
division with the Health Care
Authority, and with me today I
have on the far side, um, Dana
Flannery, who is our state
Medicaid director and Alanna
Dances, who is our chief medical
officer for the Medicaid
division. So, uh, we have uh a
series of slides that are in
front of you and about halfway.
Through, we're gonna pause so
that I can take questions on the
behavioral health side, and then
we'll continue over for the
Medicaid side and then have
questions for Dana, um, if
that's OK with you all.
Sounds good.
Thank you. And again, thank you
for having us, um.
So as you can see, the
Healthcare Authority was enacted
on July 1, and with that we have
an updated mission vision and
goals, uh, those are slide 3 in
your presentation and in the
interest of time, um, I'll just
let you read that at your
leisure, but wanted to just make
you aware of that.
Excuse me, uh, with that, uh,
you know, as I'm sure you are
all well aware that New Mexico
has the highest social
vulnerability in the United
States as a state, um, the CDC
classified or calls it the uh
SBI or social vulnerability
index, and many of our counties
are ranked very high uh in that
category and one of the things
that we're trying to do is
rectify how we can get services
out
To our predominantly rural and
frontier communities as well as
our tribal partners. Um, we
recognize that there's a lot of
areas which are underserved with
providers, but over the past
several years, as you'll see in
the presentation, we have made
great strides in that, um, not
only for what we have been doing
as a state, but with our managed
care organization partners and
we're gonna go a little bit more
into that and some of the things
that we're doing, which I'm very
pleased to say.
They are very innovative across
the nation, um, for the way that
we are approaching not only how
we're trying to work with
providers and services provided,
but using our Medicaid waivers,
um, to facilitate that and, and
that's gonna be one of the big
topics that we talk about today.
So I just wanted to kind of put
that on your radar and uh tell
you, you know, just a little bit
more about what we're working
on, but.
As we're kind of moving forward.
Um
If we move to.
In your packet what would be
slide 6. we like to at the
Healthcare Authority, um, give
you a little bit of a, uh, of a
case study, if you will. Now, we
are calling this the pool family
and I just want to, for the
record, make sure that it's
clear that the Poole family is a
family that is an actual family.
We've changed the name and the
location just so that they're
not identifiable, but these are
folks that we've actually
have encountered that have come
through the doors and have had
to use services provided and
covered by the healthcare
authority and in this particular
case we're talking about uh a
young lady named Lindsay, who's
age 34 and for the purposes of
this, we're saying that she
lives in San Miguel County, and
she has 3 children, um, 28 year
old twins named Zach and Eric,
and a five year old named Dan,
um, Lindsay completed a
four-year
Prison sentence and she received
re-entry supports housing and
employee uh employment
assistance.
Uh, now these are all services
that are available through a
number of the providers and one
of the things that's really
important, and I know this has
come up, is that she also
received case management
services um to treat and address
her substance use disorder.
Lindsay is supported by a
certified peer support worker,
Danielle, who works at Lindsay's
treatment center and together
Danielle and Lindsay are finding
permanent housing for her and
her children.
And this is something that we
hear unfortunately on a on a
regular basis, um, in various
forms, and some of the work that
we're trying to do is to make
sure that these folks are
supported across the spectrum so
that they have those resources
to become uh, you know, valuable
and
reintegrated part of their
community.
And what does it take to kind of
do that? Well, one of the things
is, um, we have a, a behavioral
health continuum of care and
when we talk about that and uh
it really compromises four key
categories and trying to work
across these four categories is
very important to us.
Um,
And the first part of that is
prevention and some of these
programs I'm sure that you have
heard about before, um, such as
harm reduction, the pack's Good
Behavior program, um, and yellow
ribbon suicide prevention
training. I just want to
highlight a couple of these
things real quick, OK? For
example, um, the pack's good
behavior games is something that
we do with schools, which
teaches children to have empathy
and to work well with others so
that they.
can have the resources to not
only figure out when there's an
issue, but who do they go to to
have that issue addressed
whether that's bullying or
problems in school or
understanding and that's where
we want to try and address early
on so that children aren't
running into problems later on
and we've had some very, very
good success and that that
actually has a very good return
on investment.
Our early intervention, um,
phase there is encompasses, uh,
screening brief intervention and
referral to treatment or what we
call Et and Espert is a training
program for providers where they
can recognize, uh, and question
folks about their use of alcohol
or substance uses and then try
to refer them to treatment, um.
I would like to note that um
through the legislature last
year, um, and part of that was
from the opioid settlement
dollars we received $2.3 million
and that went out the door and
we trained a number of
providers, um, in Espert, and
we're seeing those numbers start
to go up, um, you know, and
you've heard me say this before,
there's nothing more frustrating
than when you go to your
physician and they ask you a
bunch of questions and you're
like, are we asking these
questions just to check.
a box or are we doing it for a
reason? Well, this is we're
doing it for a reason and we're
actually seeing results.
OK, um, we also funded, um.
Additional evidence based um
practices, uh, which takes some
time and we're seeing results on
that as well and, and just
wanted to thank you again for
that uh support in those areas.
And then as you'll see below,
um, in that third category is
treatment, and these are the
areas that uh Phil had mentioned
uh earlier today and how we're
kind of growing those, and I
think some of the things that we
really need to talk about.
is and what's not really listed
here is CCBHCs, but that's a key
component of that treatment.
Um, but, you know, we've
expanded IOPs or intensive
outpatient programs. We've
increased the number of AARTCs,
um, we're working on Crisis
triage and core crisis services,
which really is um the three
components and, and I really
want to, uh, highlight one thing
that we should be very proud of.
New Mexico is one of 12 states,
uh, not including the District
of Columbia that has all three
course.
Services in place and
functioning right now and those
are the crisis hotline for 988
Mobile Crisis teams.
And having facilities for
stabilization.
And we are, um, actually just
one of 13 across the nation, um,
and that has taken a lot of
work.
Not only on the health care
authority part, but with our
providers and community and from
support not only from the
governor but the legislators, so
I just wanted to do a quick
thank you on that. It's really a
very important component to
address these problems as we
move forward.
And then the last um part of the
continuum is recovery when we
talk about what are some of the
resources as folks are coming
out of treatment. How can they
have that support moving
forward? And one of the big
things, and we're going to talk
about this in a little bit, or
our certified peer support
workers, and these are
individuals that have lived
experiences.
That act as a resource that they
someone can talk to as they're
recovering and say I'm having a
bad day. What does it look like?
And one of the things that we
want to try and promote is most
lived experience is that you're
not alone. These are the friends
that are in the trenches with
you that can point you to the
resources that got them through.
And it's a lot easier for
someone to listen to that
individual than it is somebody
like me.
Who works for the state and you
know, I'm, I'm just a
bureaucrat, but they have that
lived experience of what they
need and and how to get it, um.
And so this is the four parts of
the behavioral health continuum
of care, and I know that's a lot
of, you know, words and so
forth, but basically what we
want to do and we're working
towards is having that where
it's interchangeable. So for
example, if I'm in recovery and
I have a bad day and I call 988,
that doesn't mean that I go into
another little snow globe,
right? That just means I had a
bad day and I'm gonna get it
addressed and I'm going to keep
moving forward.
And I should be able to move
from spot to spot to spot. It
should be interchangeable and
that's what we're currently
working on.
The this next slide, which is a
slide 9, excuse me.
Um, just kind of talks about not
only what you know, you've heard
a lot as to what we're doing
with, with Medicaid dollars, but
we're also leveraging our
non-Mdicaid funding to work on
behavioral health, um, and, and
under that first bullet, um, you
know, the behavioral health
services division is what's
known as the uh the state
authority, the single state
authority, um, where, uh, in
short, uh, I'm kind of the point
of contact.
You know, from Samsa and the CDC
and so forth so we can talk
about what programs do we need?
How do we fund them? Where are
the gaps and making sure that
we're getting data and support
from the federal level, um, but
also so that we can bring that
to you and say this is where
they can't cover, but we're
seeing a need and we would like
your support in that area so
that's kind of a a fancy uh way
of just saying that, you know,
they asked me to sign a lot of.
Stuff, I guess, but it's all
good.
Um, but the non- Medicaid
dollars uh that we do receive,
uh, they align the behavioral
health services with Medicaid
services, and then that is to
fill that gap for those
individuals that are
underinsured or uninsured, um.
Until we can find appropriate
coverage for them.
So
This helps pay for in addition
to state funds, federal dollars
also pay for in and outpatient
services for behavioral health.
As well as prevention
initiatives such as harm
reduction, pure-led recovery,
wellness centers, um,
One thing that's really
important to highlight is that
the federal dollars now they're
becoming um.
I don't want to say more
expansive, but they are covering
more of the traditional Native
American healing um programs
that we are really wanting to
support in our state given that
we have the privilege of
partnering with 23 pueblos of
nations and tribes. So that's a
very important component for us.
But then also we need to kind of
move into that next phase, which
is how do we use things like
apps, how do we use things like
AI, um, in areas in which, you
know, we, uh, and I'll be the
first to admit I'm not, you
know,
an AI expert by any stretch of
the imagination I.
Completely relied on Google to
get here, but that being said,
um, as we're doing that, we need
to reach, uh, new generations
that need these services. Can we
use them and in what lane do
they fit? Um, we certainly don't
want to have those services run
amok and then we have to figure
out how do we rein it back in.
So how do we kind of balance
that and, and these are a lot of
initiatives that when we talk
with our federal partners.
Um
We try to figure out how does
this work, what's working in
other states, what's not, what
can we learn so that we're not
just doing something blanketly.
That, that map there.
Nick, yes sir, are those dollars
in thousands.
That yeah, Mr. Chair, that is
correct.
This next slide, uh, just kind
of shows the behavioral health,
um, core.
Provider group, and the progress
that we have made over 4
calendar years from 2019 to
2023.
Um, I think one of the things
that's really important is that
a lot of these providers are not
just going to Bernal Leo, Santa
Fe, and Dona Ana County. They're
going across the board.
OK, it's incremental and it's
not as fast as we would like it
to see, but in this county
alone, just in this pet this um
time frame, you see a growth of
4 providers in those core areas
and we continue to try to figure
out ways how do we attract folks
to go into those areas that are
underserved and how do we um
really make sure that
communities are supported. I did
want to also just note um
because, and, uh, you know,
there was an
article in uh in unnamed
newspaper last week that said
that there was only one MCO that
had brought in providers um.
And, and I would just counter
that by saying we do have data
that shows that all 4 of our
current MCOs and the one that
did exit prior to this, the, uh,
changeover to turquoise care
worked very diligently in
bringing in providers and some
of that growth is due to them,
and I just wanted to say that I
think that that was a
misrepresentation of the hard
work that a lot of people are
doing to bring in providers, so
forgive me for that little edit.
editorial, but I think it's very
important that we just know
that, you know, there was a
misrepresentation of how that,
uh, actually has been going, so
forgive me. When you say core
behavioral health providers
does that exactly mean? Sure, so
those include um uh uh late act
so licensed alcohol and drug
counselors, those include, um,
the, uh, support workers, um,
social workers, um.
So these are the folks that are
able to provide one on one
services and uh um.
You know,
If you will, um, you know, be
part of that wrapround type of
continuum that that we're always
looking for, so these are the
ones that we really need to
ensure are coming in.
And uh they're the ones that can
actually work with folks that
are, whether it's substance use
or behavioral health issues.
Mr. Chair, could I, does that
include peer support counselors?
Yes, ma'am. OK, thank you.
And on slide 11, you'll actually
see that we've grown our peer
support workers, um,
So since 2019, we've actually
trained 780 certified peer
support workers across the
state.
Um,
we did put a pause on this last
fiscal year for a couple of
months and in large part that
was due to a revamp of our
training system and we're
actually um very happy that uh
we've graduated, uh, 60 peer
support workers since the uh uh
since April.
And we have plans for more
programs and we're actually
looking at how we can do this
hybrid so that people don't have
to travel to.
Las Cruces or Albuquerque or
Santa Fe, and we can do this in
a way that's a little bit more
convenient for them and
hopefully that attracts more
individuals to complete this
certification, just as a
reminder to you, um, CPSWs, they
have 3 years of um being sober.
They complete a series of uh
entrance uh components into the
program and then they go through
things uh as part of the
curriculum, such as.
How do you empower them, uh, and
have mutual respect for folks
that are in recovery.
Um, including things like how do
you do things like motivational
interviewing to try and keep
folks in recovery and what is
their role, whether they're
working at a CCBHC or an IOP.
Um, or any other.
Of the number of programs that
we um fund and they are a real
important part of what we are
trying to promote here and one
of the things that we are
working on right now with NMSU
is the uh create a justice
involved module for peer support
workers so that they can be.
Um, part of the criminal justice
program in an organized fashion
because we are using peers now
in some facilities, but we want
to make sure that that training
and support is, um, transferable
regardless of county or
jurisdiction.
The other thing I wanted to just
kind of uh.
Um, give a little shout out to
is we've been working very hard
on community health workers and
how we can use them as Medicaid
providers, um, so when we talk
about community health workers,
this also, um, includes CHRs, a
community health representatives
and Pramatoras um and one of the
things that we've been able to
measure on this and you see this
in your handout on slide 12.
that this is reducing um costs
per patient on a regular basis
and and monthly you can see that
this is a savings of anywhere
between $1300 and $1800. Um,
that's very significant, not
only in the cost savings but I
would just also um say that this
is what's really important in,
in my opinion is that these are
folks that are now taking charge
of their health and are aren't
not going to.
emergency rooms.
So that cost savings transfers
not only to that but saving time
and effort for ER um staff
personnel.
Um, you know, we also see that
when they are being
hospitalized, um.
You know, if we're catching this
early enough, we're reducing
hospitalizations, but that also
reduces readmissions, which is
also a very costly, uh,
endeavor, so we, we are seeing a
real return on that. Some of the
big things that we see is that
folks are, uh, reporting to us
that they've had their diabetes
and hypertension under control.
Um, and don't need to go last
minute to an urgent care. They
don't need to go last minute to
an ER.
And so this is, uh, you know, a,
a pretty significant savings on
our part, but more importantly,
this is an investment that we
have been working on and how do
we increase the number of CHW's,
um, CHRs or Paramatoras um
across the state, um, because we
do know that there's a lot of
folks that don't really
understand what a CHW does and
how they can be used and so
we're also trying to educate the
community on what that looks
like, um, some of the things
that they can.
is to help people not only
enroll in Medicaid, but they can
work with uh clinics on billing.
They also can, um, do things
like verification when we talked
about before, like how do we get
uh or I should say when Phil
talked earlier, you know, how do
we get people enrolled and kind
of minimize some of the
administrative hurdles. These
are folks that are able to do
that, but also do it in a way
where, again, it's not checking
a box.
So they are trained in
interviewing. They're trained at
working with people so that they
can ask the right question and
get them to the right place and
we're not having them navigate a
bureaucracy.
Now in this next slide, um, you
know, we did include what this
model looks like, um, just for
your uh review, but one of the
things that they do have is a
certification process, um, you
know, we do require, Medicaid
does require for reimbursement
that CHW's are certified and um
they have to have an attestation
that's provided to the
Department of Health and then um
that's shared.
With us uh at our Medicaid
assistance division so that we
know who is and who isn't uh in
that category.
Um, but there's also a structure
there.
That you can see about where
they are working and for the
most part they're working in
hospitals, clinics, FQHCs, um,
they can work as an individual.
It can also work in uh DOH
public health offices. So the
idea is to try and get them into
community areas where people are
accessing care.
And then lastly we have some
information for your, uh, review
just on the payment and the
payment model, um, that, uh.
Uh, graph on the right hand side
of the slide just kind of shows
the three billing codes that
they can bill against.
But they can build in 30 minute
units and uh there's no maximum
number of units that they can
build per day. So if someone is
there for, um, 20 minutes or 3
hours, they're gonna be able to
get that service. This isn't
something where we're trying to
rush somebody out the door. What
we're really wanting to do is
make sure that they have that
linkage to care.
And that really the important
part is, is that we're
understanding, and when I say
we, it's more the CHW than me
personally.
But we're understanding what the
conditions are because they
might not understand, so if
someone is saying I'm having
headaches.
And I feel dizzy and so on and
so forth. The CHWs get training
to kind of ask a little bit
more, well, what's going on?
Maybe it is your blood pressure.
Have you had it checked?
Do you take medication? Are you
compliant with your medications,
and they can relay that to the
clinician to make sure that
folks are getting that care.
When and where they need it and
that's what's really saving us
on the back end for
hospitalizations. That's what's
saving us on the back end of
people having undiagnosed
problems that become bigger
problems down the road.
So as we're uh moving forward to
slide 15, 1 of the things that
uh I, I did want to kind of uh.
Talk a little bit about since
2019 we've been increasing
services and you can see the
growth of the number of people
that have been using AARTCs
since 2019, um, and in this
graph you can see at the end of
fiscal year, um, 23, we had over
2400 people that had accessed.
Um, and, uh, an adult accredited
residential treatment center.
Um, that's a, a really
exponential growth when we look
at that that span of 4 years,
um, and we had hardly any of
these types of centers now that
they're accredited and up and
running, people are accessing
them.
And we are working hard to try
and figure out how can we get
more of them in areas that, uh,
still need that service so that
somebody doesn't have to travel
from one end of the state to the
other.
Um, we know that when the time
is right, it's good to have that
family support network or other
supports that you might have in
place to be part of that.
And so we want to make sure that
people are kind of staying
closer to where they can have
that support. So when they do
exit.
Um, they're not feeling like
they're just left on their own.
Other things that we've been
working on and this also came
out of our, um, the, the opioid
settlement dollars we, uh, which
was appropriated from the last
general session was supported of
housing.
Um, to try and keep people off
the streets and figure out ways
when people are at risk of
losing housing, how do we keep
them housed and so that we're
continuing to meet some of those
social determinants of health
that plague people and and.
You know, as I'm sure you're all
aware when someone is feeling at
risk for losing a house or a job
or other supports that that puts
a drain on them in other ways
that affect their behavioral
health, so we need to try and
continue to work on some of
those items there.
Um
We've also started O Crisis
teams and stabilization services
including the crisis triage
centers and we're working to
stand up some of those rules,
and I know that there was a
question earlier, uh, and I'm
sure that you'll have a question
for me, um, when we take
questions, um, but you know,
these are things that we are
trying to make sure are going to
be stable and are going to be uh
a network across so that there
are additional resources for
people to access.
Um, not just for when there's a
substance use disorder, but
again, when they're having um a
behavioral health issue that
might not be the best place to
send them to, um, jail or to an
ER. Let's get into some place
where folks can actually treat
and stabilize them.
And I think the other part of
that that I I just wanted to
kind of uh emphasize and we're
going to talk a little bit about
that is that um we received
funding last year uh through
legislation for $1000 on um
telehealth services for
medication-assisted treatment
and I'm really proud to say
we're we're gonna show you in a
little bit. Um, we partnered
with the Department of Health,
and I know that a lot of times
people think that state agencies
don't talk to each other, um, we
actually did and uh.
We were able to expand from 10
public health officers doing.
MET to 33.
Uh, using the telehealth model
and this year you allocated us
an additional $1000 and we're
going to be bringing in
additional providers for areas
that DOH is not covering.
So that we can get more and more
folks, um, the ability to do MAT
via telehealth.
So again, I wanted to say thank
you for your continued support
in that area.
Um
One of the things that I, I did
want to also mention is some of
the things that we're doing with
those, um,
Those opioid dollars and.
Part of that is doing outreach
in ways that we haven't had to
do outreach before multimedia
campaigns, um, this past year,
we were able to reach uh through
social engagements, ad clicks,
and website visits over 740,000
New Mexicans, um, and I, I wanna
just
Uh
Quantify that by saying that,
you know, it could be somebody
that has clicked twice, but we
count them as unique because
they might have done it on their
phone, they might have done it
on their uh iPad or other
device, and it just counts those
devices, so you know, we, we.
Recognize that we still try to
figure that part out. I'm not
sure exactly how they, um,
Separate them out, so I
apologize for that, but this is
something that's really
important that people are seeing
the ads and then it's clicking
them through to the NM recovery
website where they can access
and say what services are in my
community. How can I get
services, for example, in
Roosevelt County, um, if I'm in
Eddy County and I want to know
about peer support or I want to
know about um IOP.
Um, how do they do that? And
it's putting them right through
to that that website.
And then one of the things that
we've also talked about is, um,
The growth in MAT prescribers.
Um, now, last year, the X waiver
went away where physicians did
not have to do the 8 hour
training, um.
For uh providing MAT and as a
result of that, we continue to
see more and more prescribers
for MAT.
And specifically we've seen a
36% growth in all MAT um
prescribers.
Uh, the chart on the right can
kind of show you where that
concentration lies, but I would
say that uh one of the things
that we're proud of is that we,
um,
I've seen that over 3200
individuals have received
treatment for opioid use
disorders, um, meaning that
they've received one of the
three medications people are
offering, methadone or uh
naltrexolone. So this is a
really positive step for us in
that direction that more and
more physicians and and
clinicians are, are prescribing
this and we are also seeing that
folks are accessing.
recovery services over 11,000
people last fiscal year Access
recovery services, whether
that's peer support or community
recovery groups.
So, um, we're really making some
big progress in those areas, um.
And I would say also that, you
know, we do have a lot of folks
that are kind of trying to do
more and more trainings and
technical support to um give
that assistance to physicians to
look at some of those things, as
we mentioned earlier, using
Espert. How do they kind of
screen people in and get them
into treatment.
OK
And then on this uh next slide,
as I mentioned earlier that we
partnered with uh 10 DOH
facilities. I'm sorry, with DOH
and uh went from 10
public health officers to 33.
Um, that's 23 additional sites
and you can see where they are
on this map, um.
If you're asking why, uh, Berna
Leo and Dona Anna are the
darkest is because they were the
concentration of areas that
we're doing it and now we've
expanded it into the other
shaded um counties to include
them as well.
I know you've seen the Crisis
now model and um but I did want
to just kind of talk a little
bit about those four core areas,
um, and how we're kind of
working to kind of uh do this.
So those core areas are, um,
someone accessing a call center
to say that they're having uh an
issue, um, them being able to
access a mobile crisis team.
Getting them to crisis
stabilization and then what are
the um.
Principles and services that
they need to continue,
um, along their path to better
behavioral health.
I wanted to just kind of share
with you that uh and I left uh.
On at your site there are a
little magnet there on 988
because we're celebrating the
second birthday of 988 this
month and for folks that are
here, there's some magnets
there, so please feel free to
take them home, stick them on
your car, file cabinet, hand
them out to folks, um, but we
really need to promote this and,
and I, I'm really proud to say
that New Mexico continues to see
a steady growth month over month
of the number of people that are
accessing 988 and just to give
you a little bit of.
Uh, numbers.
Last year and this is uh an
increase of over 13,000 from the
previous year from when I spoke
to you last time, uh, last year
at this time, uh, we saw just
under 50,000 people accessing
988, the average call time lasts
about 23 minutes.
Um, and here's what's really
important, um, you know, 92% of
those calls are stabilized, and
what we mean by that is that
they don't require law
enforcement. They don't require
an ambulance. They're referred
to community resources, and
they're getting help outside of
that direct.
Um, line that would have been
911.
And as a former paramedic, I can
tell you that a lot of times
when I was dispatched to
someone.
I didn't have that training.
I had a couple of hours in a
classroom.
And then I was told, good luck.
Now we're sending qualified
folks, and those that are
answering the phone are
qualified and they're able to
de-escalate a situation and
we're not making it worse.
When we're sending somebody who
has minimal training, and this
is not a knock against law
enforcement, paramedics,
firefighters.
But that's not what they've been
trained in.
And we're getting the
That person who's calling at
that moment or texting or
chatting, we're getting them
someone who's gonna be able to
talk to them to address the
situation at hand and not say
let's just go see a nurse who's
then gonna put you in another
system.
That's really, really important.
And um the numbers that we've
been provided 28% of the folks
that have called 988 said that
they have had at some point that
that they're calling at that
moment.
Suicidal ideation.
16.7% say that they're calling
for substance use, whether it's
for them or for a loved one.
Yes, sir. It was at 28%, did you
say for the exact number is
27.9%.
And I want to be clear again,
they're not calling at that
moment about suicide. They've
either had suicidal ideations or
they're calling for a loved one.
At some point, OK.
That's a really, really high
number, and I want to share with
you a story that we just found
out last week and we just got
the release, um, but I don't
have the individual's name. So
we were doing an outreach and
someone came over and said that,
um, I want to let you know that.
I'm somebody who thought of
suicide.
And I called that hotline and
they helped me and they talked
me down and I got help.
And then he went out and I have
a picture of it, which I
unfortunately wasn't able to put
in a slide. You got a 988
tattoo.
And he said, this is what
reminds me to keep going and to
tell people about what it can
do.
So as we kind of look at what
some of those supports are, a
lot of these folks, as you well
know, kind of work behind the
scenes, but it makes a
difference and it certainly made
a difference for this individual
and, and their family.
And so, um, when you have funded
that, I just want to say thank
you and I know that we're gonna
be talking about it during the
upcoming regular session.
And I appreciate your support,
but that's a real life story and
um it, it, I.
Still have goosebumps because of
it.
That's a success, so thank you
for that.
And then I do have a couple of
little slides here just to kind
of show you, um, how if you like
bar graphs with that growth is
year over year, um, this first
one is um.
You know, when we look at call,
text or chat for compassionate
non-judgmental conversations.
With a professional mental
health crisis, um.
Uh, specialist that they're
getting a referral for service
and you can see the yellow being
um the current fiscal or the
this past fiscal year, that
growth.
Um, and I'll remind again that
988 has been two years now and
you can see that incremental
growth is pretty substantial.
Um, and then I, I would be
remissed on slide 22 if we
didn't also talk about special
populations, um, but that bottom
one I think is really important,
which shows the growth for the
veterans, um, access. So when
someone calls 988, it has a
couple of prompts and one of
those prompts is if you are a
veteran calling, please press
and I believe it's number 3.
Forgive me if uh if um.
Uh, misrepresenting that number.
And they will be put through to
someone who has experience in
working with veterans and that
number has gone up and up, and
we see some really good results
there as well.
We're really proud of that.
Lastly, before I take questions,
I'm just gonna uh ask your
indulgence for just 2 more.
Excuse me, uh, 2 more slides
before we take questions and
then we'll turn it over to um my
friends and colleagues, uh, to
talk to you about, uh, Medicaid,
um, but some of the justice
involved initiatives that we're
working on.
And one of them is for the, uh,
what we call the rise program
which stands for Re intervene,
support, and engage, and this is
a program in which we've been
working with um.
Uh, county detention centers,
um, off of a 2020 piece of
legislation um to support folks
that are incarcerated at the
moment so that they can access
services and treatment.
And have community supports as
they exit the system.
Um,
And in Hidalgo County we've seen
really great success in this,
um, where people have said, uh,
and they've gone back, how can I
be part of this? I was when I
was incarcerated, I was part of
this program, and now I want to
pay it forward.
Um, and these are the types of
programs that we've been trying
to work on so that we can have
folks that, you know, and we
recognize that it's not always
going to be a 100% success rate,
but if we're changing just a few
folks, um, that's a big thing
where they can re-engage with
their family, mend those
relationships, and be a part of
society which wants to see their
community improve and and
better.
Um,
So some of the things that uh um
they work on. I just want to
kind of clarify that this is all
research based so when they go
into these programs, um, this
isn't just kind of like, you
know, their opportunity to, um,
get out of their cell and um,
you know, have a free hour.
They're actually engaging in
programs to learn about
recovery. They're engaging in
programs, uh, like, um, how can
they do things like, for
example,
Um,
Be part of counseling sessions
whether it's individual or
group. How can they mend their
relationships with family or
people that they've wronged.
Um, and we work really hard on
this, uh, in large part because
um.
You know, when Rise first
started, it was kind of just uh
a small program, but we've
partnered with our, our friends
at the managed care
organizations and they're
funding a lot of these things
and using folks like care
coordinators to make sure that
whatever started in the prison.
Is continuing outside of that,
so that treatment.
path that they're on, they're
continuing.
One thing that we really don't
want to see is someone that's
gonna start and stop and start
and stop because that's not an
effective way to recovery.
That's not an effective way to
stay in recovery.
So we continue to work on some
of these things and there's also
a program called Reset.
Um,
And that one is, uh, basically
where we kind of talk about how
do people start over.
Uh, when we say reset, we
actually really mean that.
And that also is part of an
appropriation that came to us
for $2.5 million in the 2023
session again we appreciate the
support and faith that you have
in us in doing that.
But these dollars are going out
and they really are helping
folks start over and we do hear
stories repeatedly.
Um, on how they are able to mend
some of those relationships.
So I know I've talked a lot. I
apologize for that, but you
know, once you get me started,
it's time tough to stop in large
part because my wife doesn't let
me talk at home, so I have to do
it here.
I'll stand for questions, Mr.
Chair.
Very good. So we'll start with
you, Representative Vincent, and
we'll work our way back this
way.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and uh
thank you presenters for that.
As you're talking about the 988
program. I can't help but to
think about the people in my
community right now in Lincoln
in Otaro County that have lost
their houses and they're
continually hit by floods.
And you talk about the
situational stress and anxiety.
I try to provide, you know,
we're so into the crisis part of
it right now.
And bracing for a flood pretty
much every day.
And I've, I've taken a tour,
I've looked at the devastation
and
I can't imagine what's going
through these people's minds
because they're just, they're
limping around right now is what
they're doing. And um,
In order to.
How do you implement a program
like this just where it's a
resource they have access to it
if you need it.
And it says, anyone, any
struggle, any time.
And how did you implement that
program, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
uh, Vincent, um, first, let me
say that, you know, continually,
um, please know that the
communities are in my thoughts,
uh, as well as everybody at at
HCA and and um.
So to answer the question, and
I'll just add one more thing to
that, um.
You know, 988 was an initiative
that was started just a little
over 10 years ago and uh
actually was fully implemented
two years ago on a federal
level.
And we have been supplementing
that with state general funds,
um, to keep that moving forward,
um, and it's taken a lot of
community support to get out the
word of what 988 is and we
completely recognize that when
we talk about um social media
campaigns and so forth. We can
do a lot more. We've actually
been, uh, in talks with a couple
of uh.
Um, well-known groups, I, I
would.
Hesitate to mention them out,
but um, you know, in the
sporting community that have
some weight to help us with that
and, and can we do things like
TV commercials, can we be out in
the community?
Um, to specifically the
wildfires and what we were doing
then, we did deploy some CPSW's,
um, certified peer support
workers that were in the
shelters and were handing out
information on 988 and trying to
explain to folks that it's not
just because.
Of a substance use disorder,
it's if you have anxiety about
what's going on at home if you
have your home damaged or has
been lost, you can call and just
talk to somebody, um, and we did
have, uh, support not only from
the American Red Cross, but our
federal partners and we had um
behavioral health groups that
were on the ground promoting not
only 988 but doing um, face to
face contacts and working with
folks and from the onset.
Of when the shelter was open to
July 21st, we had 1,039 contacts
for behavioral health alone, um,
and one of the takeaways was,
uh, they were given information
about 988.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and you
know, just as an online
conversation that I, I mean
offline conversation that I'd
like to have with you is.
I want to make, you know, I've,
I've talked with several folks
from the uh Hermit's Pe Calf
Canyon fire and sometimes we get
so engaged in the crisis that we
forget about the folks and I
like for things to be happening
simultaneously and uh I'd love
to.
Pick your mind, pick your brain
a little bit on how to help us
have this as a resource to where
they could go somewhere and some
sometimes people didn't, they,
they don't want to tell you that
something's wrong. They want to
talk to somebody a little bit
different and we're such a tight
knit community and we know each
other. Maybe they don't want to
tell me they want to tell
somebody else, but I'd, I'd like
to get that out and I appreciate
that. And secondly, on, um,
I guess it'd be Paige.
16
On the opioid use disorder
prevention and it talked about
the technical assistance and
trainings for first responders
and community providers.
What, what does that look like?
Do you bring people in to to
train?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Vincent, um, we have, uh, hired
folks uh as contractors
regionally so that they don't
have to come to Santa Fe.
And we've trained, um,
providers, uh, such as first
responders, law enforcement,
firefighters on the use of
Narcan as well as um, you know,
recognizing signs and symptoms
of someone that might have a
substance use disorder, um,
we're trying to do that in the
community. Um, we've done in the
last year 42 trainings that
include our tribal partners as
well, um.
But we, we do try to do it on a
regional basis so that um it's,
it's tough to kind of hit every
volunteer fire department across
the state, as you can imagine,
um, but that is one of the areas
in which we're looking to do
that, but we also have set up
resource web pages so that they
can download materials for
review offline.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Vincent. Representative Cates.
Uh thank you, Chairman and thank
you very much, uh, secretary for
this uh presentation. Um, I, I
have, once again, um, so I'll
just start at the beginning, um,
your
Real yet fictitious name Poole
family. Um, I don't understand
it says, uh, Lindsay is
supported by her certified peer
support worker Danielle, who
works at Lizzie Lindsay's
treatment center.
So when did Lindsay go to a
treatment center?
While she was in corrections for
4 years.
So,
Mr. Chair, Representative Cates,
uh, first, just as a point of
clarification, uh, I'm a
director, um, not a secretary. I
appreciate the promotion and by
all means, please feel free to
call me Nick. It's a lot easier.
Um, but for this particular
individual, uh, this person when
they left the detention center,
then entered a treatment center.
OK, so, so thank you, Nick. So
they're in corrections for 4
years, um, but they, which um.
We're going to hope or assume
that they are not actively using
during those four years. So then
they step out and they go into a
treatment center to make sure
that they're transitioning, um,
in a supported way so they can
transition successfully outside
of the correctional facility.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative
Kates, so for this individual,
they were engaging in some of
the services that were provided,
such as the rise and reset. And
so they were working with
someone. Um, I can't say
definitively that they receive
treatment while they were in the
facility, um, but they were
encouraged throughout that time
and supported and then when they
exited the facility they were
able to get long term treatment
because part of that also is
that motivational interviewing
where they can talk to them and
Say if you want to continue.
To have a fruitful relationship
with your children, um, here are
some of the things that you're
gonna need to work on and so
it's to try and meet them where
they're at.
And thank you, thank you, Mr.
Chair and thank you, uh,
Director. No, I was just uh the,
the treatment center.
I, I guess there was an
assumption because it was a
treatment center was the
verbiage that it was a housed
facility, um, and, uh, although
detox is not always a part of
that housing. That's why I
wanted clarification on that
process. Um,
Uh, thank you. So then I have
another you, um.
Hm, let's skip that one started,
um.
How many, so, so, uh, thank you
very much
To withdrawal inpatient.
Uh, 54 are residential beds for
substance use disorders and for
our youth shelter uh 4 beds in
youth shelters.
And that is 101. I did use my
calculator for that. I, for full
disclosure. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, and thank you, Director,
uh, for being so thorough.
You've just endeared me, um, and
so, uh, I, so, um, given, you
know, you're looking and I
understand there.
Data in a very moving target per
se.
But given the data that we have
on the on on the unhoused, the
data that we have um regarding
alcohol and other substance
abuse. The data that we have on
the outhouse veterans. What do
you, how many beds do you, how
many additional beds do you feel
like the state needs to invest
in.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Kates, um,
First, thank you for the
question and I, I would just
say, and I think um Phil covered
this this morning that the open
bed system is a little
cumbersome for providers to use,
and I think that those numbers
are underreported. Um, that
being said, I think what we
really need to look at is how do
we do the overlay and see number
one.
Where the reports of issues are,
so if, for example, we're seeing
high alcohol misuse and a
particular county.
Um, then what resources do we
have and what's it going to take
to get us there. I always
hesitate when we say let's add
beds because one of the things
that needs to really go with
that is we need to add staff and
we don't want to create a a
staffing crisis or a treatment
crisis inadvertently because now
we're taxing someone that should
be.
And I'm just picking a number
here, doing a a ratio of 5
patients to one staff member and
now they have to do 10 to 1 and
we're doing a disservice to the
people of New Mexico. Um, I
don't know that there's a real
clear answer to your question is
what I'm unfortunately saying.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So, um,
and thank you, director, and
thank you for that honest, um,
that honest answer, but for us
to be able to do any kind of
planning.
To address any kind of services
we need a good strong
guesstimate, at least, um, of
what kind of investment is
needed, and yes, the next
question would be what kind of
workforce is needed, that would
be the second question. The
third is, is how many of those
facilities currently are capable
for evaluating competency.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative
Kates, so, uh, I will say that
we are currently working on a
plan that we can share with the
legislature, um, Senator
Steinborn in the last session,
um, did put into a Senate
memorial, uh, for this, and we
are working on that currently,
um, and part of that will be
looking at how can we best do
stuff regionally where it's
feasible, um, because it's also
Difficult to ask someone to open
up a facility in an area which
has a very small population that
they might not be able to
support, but the other part to
that is to look at what services
are needed in there so we're
meeting those needs of the
community, um, and forgive me,
ma'am, for uh the, the 3rd
bullet that you had asked about
competency,
yes, um, if I may, if we can get
you an answer on that. I, I
don't know that I, I can answer
how many right now are able to
do competency. We do.
have um BHSD is charged to do
forensics evaluations, um, but
when they are ordered by the
court, and we have uh
Um, across the, uh, judicial
districts I I believe we have 18
contracted forensics evaluators,
but I can get you that exact
number, and we are always trying
to bring in more, um, to meet
those needs, so, um, we're we're
looking at that as well.
I, I very much appreciate. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. these are very
and this is a a a legislative
meeting. It's not a planning
where we're grinding down the
details, but we need to know the
details as legislators so that
we, uh, know where the funding,
what kind of funding is needed,
what kind of policies, you know,
you're, you're right, you don't
want to be, um.
You don't have all these
facilities and no workforce.
You, you don't want to have, um,
the appropriate amount of beds
and workforce, but not, um, that
will handle certain issues as
well. And so that's why these
details, I don't mean to put you
in a gotcha moment. I just
wanted to make sure that we, uh,
we as legislators have the
information that we need to be
able to move forward, um, in, in
developing our policies.
Our leadership will start to and
our brainstorming sessions. So
thank you very much for your
time.
Uh, I just want to get some
clarification. Oh, did you want
to respond?
One, OK, um, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Kates, can I just
get a little bit of
clarification, uh, um,
Do you mean capacity versus
competency, so talking about
clinicians who can evaluate
because clinic, like clinicians
can usually evaluate capacity
and then courts evaluate
competency.
Um
I I guess the big answer would
be yes, yes, Mr. Chair, yes,
that, that I'm looking for how
many more beds do we need? What
kind of workforce do we need?
and then what kind of workforce
do we currently have that is
capable of um.
Of having the time, which means
we need facilities and staff as
well as the expertise on
competency, so yes. Thank you,
thank you. And let me just get a
little clarification, Nick, the
numbers you gave of 101 beds,
that's total beds or open beds
currently those are, um, Mr.
Chair, those are open beds as of
noon today.
And when you say those figures.
I mean what's the universe
you're working from? What are
the total, what are the total
number of beds?
Uh, I would have to get you that
number, sir. Um, and does that
include like turquoise ludge?
Yes, sir.
So when you include the
turquoise lodge figures, are you
using 40 or 28 as their total
capacity.
Uh, Mr. Chair, I would have to
go back to see how they're
reporting in the system because
the secretary in our last
meeting testified that, well,
Because he had the census
figures and there were 28, and
we said, Well, I thought you
were licensed for 40.
And he said, yeah, we're
licensed for 40, but we never
take more than 28.
Because we don't have the space
at the Gateway Center for the
other things we need. Are you
asking for more space? Well,
we're thinking about maybe
asking
I mean.
What we need to know is, do we
need more beds, or are you
sitting on empty beds because
you don't.
You have other criteria. Sequoia
Lodge is another great example.
26 license capacity.
They've never had more than 15
in the last 5 years.
But they, they just don't, they
turn them away. People come in,
they turn them away, so they are
you counting them as having 10
vacant beds or zero vacant beds
because they're not going to
take more than 15 even though
they're licensed for 25. Sure,
um, Mr. Chair, and, um, I, I
would, um, hesitate to speak for
the Secretary of Health, but I
can just tell you that the open
beds system is a self-reported
system
so, um, we can only go off of
how they are counting.
Beds and what's available and
did they include the uh
Rossville facility, the New
Mexico rehab Center in Rosville
that has never had any patience
in it, but his licensed and
certified to take alcohol and
drug treatment patients, Mr.
Chair, I don't have that
available at this moment. I can
follow up with you on that
though, it, it, I mean, there's
a difference between, you know,
paper availability and real
availability and that's what we,
we need to get our hands around.
I think that's what
Representative Cates was.
Also struggling with Senator
Hickey.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And uh just to start my
comments, I, I would like
sometime in the next year to
actually address you, Nick, uh,
and Mr. Chairman, as secretary.
Um, the reason being that states
that have severe addiction and
behavioral health issues have a
separate department.
Other than health and Medicaid
to deal with it and, and this is
an issue, uh, as people have
heard me say
it the addiction impacts almost
every single nuclear family. It,
it doesn't matter that it's
Medicaid or, I mean,
socioeconomics plays some role,
but this is an issue that
impacts all of New Mexicans and
it should merit a bill from the
governor that we create a
separate
Department of Behavioral Health
that, that's what is plaguing
the state at the moment. I mean,
again, I won't recite all the
numbers, but highest alcohol
mortality double the national
average. I mean, just think of
what's plaguing the state.
And so I hope to address you as
secretary at some point in the
future, and I will certainly be
happy to carry such a bill in
the legislature. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. That, that, that was
just a prelude to, uh, I have
questions for you on page 1011,
15.
13 and 15. Um, and this is,
these are questions that are
meant to help you in the
planning because I've, uh, in,
in my career, I've had to plan a
lot and uh I know that, uh,
You know, damn statistics you
can find any number you want
anywhere to justify whatever
you're doing, and I'm just
wondering as I look at page 10.
And you've got Bernalio County
and dark brown in Santa Fe and a
little lighter and so on and so
forth.
What does that mean and who is
the standard you're using for
that, um.
What's what's the denominator,
what's the association, uh,
Can you help me with that?
Certainly, yeah, um, Mr. Chair
and Senator Hickey, um, so these
are, are, uh, general count
numbers they're the, so there's,
it's not really a, a, it's more
on the concentration, um, we can
certainly provide you with the
scale of
where it goes from medium brown
to dark brown, I actually, I'm
gonna encourage you not to do
that, um, because if you follow
what we do in primary care,
which we have in in
You've heard or others have
heard me say this over and over
and over. We always have Bernal
Leo County as having way too
many primary care doctors.
That's that's the data that that
is presented by Medicaid from
the primary care committee to
this committee.
And they're using the double
AMC.
Um, the American Medical
Association, and if you go in
and ask anyone and people in
Washington, they will tell you,
well, no, those are old numbers
and we know they're way behind.
But we, but we take them and we
put them out and just the smell
test isn't primary care. It
isn't even close.
In fact, the folks who we got to
do a look at it, we're coming up
with a shortage of 8, around 800
in primary care at all levels in
the state which is uh.
Um,
50% of what we need and this is
the point I want to make and
that I've learned, um, the
university who's looking at more
medical students and so forth
are very astutely looking at Hsa
numbers, and hers has got a, uh,
you, you can go in and Mike
Richards can show you um how to
use it and um think New Mexico
is using it, looking at her
calculations which say agree are
under the number that's needed,
and they know that.
There's more, but it's what we
need.
It's not what we have.
And, and, and I want you to take
the star away from the 73%.
Because it's like we put two
thimbles in the bucket, aren't
we good?
We got a bucket to fill, not two
thimbles.
And, and after the Martinez
administration, the destruction
that did to the state.
We are still way down. So, um,
I, I just want to be sure that
next time you come, you're
looking at.
start with her so, then go to
the various behavioral health
associations. What are the
ratios and it should include
CHW's peer counselors, MSWs,
clinical psych psychiatrist,
psychologist, RTC staffing. I
mean, when you add all that up
and what we need in the state,
we just talked about it. We're,
we're not even close. So, um, I
applaud the progress that you're
making absolutely do, but as
I used to be told when I worked
in business, don't confuse
effort with results. The results
are not near, not even near.
What we need in this state, so
come back with what we need and
then start that. And again, I'm
proud of the work that you're
doing and so forth, but don't
get fooled by, oh, we increased
73%, you know, that's like.
Anyway, I, I won't go, you, I
think you get it.
In the future
Yes, a little pat on the back,
but.
We are woefully short and this
is what we're doing to come up
with it in all those categories.
That's the plan, and I know that
Senator Steinborn gave you some
money. They are $300,000 ain't
gonna get close to being able to
tell you what a plan is and the
needs for New Mexico, not even
close. I mean, you need a multi
several million dollars study to
go into all these counties and
see where the shortages are, get
an accurate account of the beds
instead of this is what they
called and told me.
Um, you know, verify, verify. So
from now on, please talk about
what we need and where we are.
And again, I applaud the effort,
but it's not a result that we
could be proud of.
I mean the result we can be
proud of is when we're starting
to meet the needs.
So that's
That's page 10
page, um.
11, um.
The certified peer support.
Fantastic.
Fantastic.
Do we pay them
So, um, Mr. Chair, Senator
Hickey, uh, they are in most
cases they are paid, um, they
are not
uh employees of the healthcare
authority. We have them, we try
to encourage clinics, uh,
practitioners, um.
Detention centers to be the
employer and to use them in in
that capacity.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and,
and, uh,
Uh, Nick, um, that's good, but
they got to get money from
somewhere to pay them.
So is that coming from you? So
they, their services are I'm
sorry, um, Mr. Chair, Senator
Hickey, their services are
reimbursable. Yes, sir.
OK, so, and then I see uh on
page 13 that you're paying the
uh CHW, what looks like $60 an
hour.
So would they get a a
commensurate pay?
Would that be the, the pay that
you're passing through for the
build services, does that equate
out to the $60 an hour?
OK
Mr. Chair, Senator, that's the
reimburse the rate that we
reimburse in Medicaid for CHWs.
He's asking
MCOs, Mr. Chair, that's I don't
the CHW for CHWs.
But yeah,
so I, I just, Mr. Chair, I just
want to get clarity because so
often we get, we're not quite
sure and, and the issue, you
know,
the observation, Mr. Chair, and
we don't have the people. Uh,
mostly we don't have the people
because we don't have the pay.
although it's getting better,
it's getting better, but I just,
and, and I'll have a follow up
question, but how, so the MCOs.
Bill, they hired the CHWs. No,
who hires the CHWs, Mr.
Chair, Senator, so we rolled out
CHW reimbursement, direct
reimbursement, not, not employed
by MCO's about 3 weeks ago. So
they are just starting to get
onboarded. The reimbursement
rate is a floor of $60. They
will get enrolled in
credentialed with MCOs just like
any other provider. They can
work for FQHCs, community-based
organizations.
etc. now, but what they get paid
personally, you know, we don't,
we, that will be between them
and their employer, uh, $60 an
hour is the highest
reimbursement in the country for
CHW's, um, and peer support
workers will be making more
money. They have more
requirements, more
certifications to do that. Um, I
think it's, it's almost double.
I that that's more Nick's boat,
but we made sure there was kind
of tears between CHWs and peer
support workers.
But just, just so,
so when you're reimbursing the
service, the community health
worker service, it's $60 per
hour as a unit.
Downtime doesn't count in that.
Travel time is encounter. I
mean, so the 60s sounds like
they're going to be making a lot
of money, but in fact, that's
what, that's what comes to the
agency and then the agency
covers their administrative
costs and the downtime and the
benefits and all the rest of it.
So maybe they'll be realizing
25, something like that.
Uh, Mr. Chair, I think I, you
know, I mean, we'll have to see
this is just starting. This was,
we worked very closely with
Department of Health and
stakeholders to roll this
benefit out, um, I think that
we'll get feedback within the
next year.
About, about what their pay paid
they can actually reimburse as
individual contractors too, so.
If they don't want an employer.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. That's
where I'm going, uh, and thank
you for that clarification. Uh,
as you, as you know, um, and as
I am now working with the
hospitals systems, uh, primary
care providers who work for
systems we're very proud of the
fact that we got up to 120 and
now we're going to 150, but
guess what?
Can you finish my sentence?
And what, how would you finish
my sentence.
Look, you're gonna have to deal
with this that they're not
realizing the change.
The actual provider is not
seeing the change.
Thank you.
So, um, I am, I, I, uh, working,
I'm meeting with all the big
systems and some of the smaller
ones and saying rather than me
just saying I'm going to do an
audit on you and I'm just going
to write this into law and too
bad. I know it's very
complicated how people get paid
through either through the MCO
and then to the entity that
employs them. Um, and there's
lots of things, bonuses and
value and all this kind of stuff
that we're floating.
Around, you know, but at the end
of the day they're doing the
work that they're getting are
they getting paid? They're not
getting paid.
If you talk to the people in the
systems. They are not seeing
that extra Medicaid money. Now
it's complicated, I agree, maybe
only a third of the patients
that they see in the system and
yada yada. Medicare is the worst
payer and, and I'm basically
gonna try and work out a law
with them to assure
That
The providers are getting paid.
That is the intent of the
legislature. Um, I have brought
this up with Secretary Armijo
several times. It is complex.
I, my wheelhouse used to be
managing. There's no such thing,
physicians and, and paying them
and pay programs and so I know
how it works and I've managed
systems and I know how we can
scrape off the money, um, but in
this, it's critically important
that you are in these instances
that that I won't have time to
cover, but I would like you to,
I would like, Mr. Chair, a
report by the end of our
hearings.
And what
The HCA is doing.
To, and again, I agree it's
complex and they may be, and
they all should be independent
contractors if that's a fact.
You know, with maybe a $5
takeoff on that $60 an hour and
then also all the other pieces
of it, but we really need to
learn to understand, is that
what they're getting and out of
the systems taking back and what
are you is the oversight agency
doing
Um,
To Lana and and Donna, what are
you doing to be sure that
they're getting the money and
how is that averaging out
otherwise, we're spinning
wheels. Again, I've run systems,
insurance companies, medical
groups.
There are 1000 ways to to take
that money away.
And not get it to him. So, um,
again, I applaud the effort, the
result is that 95% of that money
is getting to him for that time.
So, um, thank you for that. The,
um,
I'm assuming just one last thing
on, on your handouts.
Mr. Chair, sober housing.
Um, which is a component and,
and someone asked about beds.
Well, beds availability of beds
is are you doing 15 days, 30
days, the recommended at least
90 days in an RTC and then
another 90 impartial and then
sober housing for uh essentially
a year after that, if possible,
or something, um, I mean that's
what the standards are coming
out and that's what we need to
be achieving. So we're gonna
need sober housing, but there's
a lot of scam out here.
in sober housing and I would
hope that you are going to come
up with a regulatory mechanism,
kind of like JCAHO, uh, for
hospitals that that Medicaid
accepts as a substitute for
accreditation to accredit the
sober housing.
Um, talk about money
disappearing, um, again, I've
had a lot of personal family
experience with that and know
how fast it can disappear and
that there are not legitimate
situations going on out there,
but it's such a critical piece.
So I just wanted to point that
out. Uh, the other pieces are
just, um, uh, said it before,
repetitions the essence of all
learning.
Stop the washing machine IOP
without housing is worthless.
Worthless. So we got to get the
housing. We got to put that into
the planning, um,
And uh oh, I want to
congratulate you for getting
attached to NAP.
In the end, that's huge. They
are by far, uh, and I, this is
not a critic, but the National
Council of State Legislators,
other.
Council of State governments.
They aren't coming close to what
Nashby is doing around the
country and for us not to
reinvent the wheel because
mostly it comes out square
instead go to states where
they've been able to make it
around, so I'm wonderful to hear
that you're looking beyond the
horizon. And lastly, I want to
go back to Mr. Chair's Senate
Bill 273. Yeah, I wrote it, but
here, this is the law.
And the law states.
And, and the law states that the
MCOs must abide by state law.
So, um, yeah, I'm getting
overexcited. I apologize, but
this is the law.
You have to do the MCOs and and
probably you as their contractor
by law have to assess what
Behavioral health providers in
all the categories that I talked
about.
What
is being paid in surrounding
states.
Those studies have to be ongoing
and soon the OSI will be
enforcing that in commercial and
then we'll pop it over to, to,
uh, the Medicaid, uh,
what are we calling it, 0.3 now?
Um, it's not turquoise, right?
It's
anyway.
Um,
But the law is you have to do
that survey.
So I hope you're doing that and
the, and the point is.
To make up for our reputation?
Which stinks in New Mexico as a
place for providers of any sort
in healthcare.
You have to pay more.
Than surrounding states.
And maybe with 150 if it gets to
him.
We are paying more, but, but
again, all these are.
They're little technicalities,
but they make all the difference
in the world. I mean, at the end
of the day we will attract
people if in fact what we
legislate ends up in their
pockets at the end of the day,
and today it's not happening
except for.
Private practice, private
entities, and behavioral health.
They are, and I'm hearing great
things from them. They thank you
so much and thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Senator Hickey.
Representative Chasey will go to
you.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman and thank you for your
presentation. Um, first I want
to congratulate you on the 988,
and that's really wonderful
story and I hope that it's
utility could extend for um my
co-sponsor on House Bill One,
representative Vincent.
Uh, to, to the residents in his
area because those are all
different kinds of major crises
and people would certainly feel
helpless.
I was just hearing on the news
this morning that
Some of the people who are
losing their homes in the
California fire are the same
ones who lost them in the
Paradise Fire.
So oh my God, I just can't
imagine going through that two
times.
Can someone on this committee
remind me, I think I was at the
Capitol when we had the CCBHC
CCBHC presentation from
Missouri, and it was online or
was that in CCJ?
It was in CCJ.
Oh, OK. And, um, did you hear
that presentation when courts,
corrections and Justice.
I was figuring out from
reviewing the notes afterwards
that
Based on the numbers the
gentlemen gave their 39 states
that are somewhat involved.
We were not aware New Mexico
was.
Because the whip had um a bill
proposed for the special session
to, um, at least put it into
statute. So are we working with
SASA and um CMS on CCDHC.
Uh, Mr. Chair, and, uh, Madam
Representative, so, uh, just
about a month and a half ago,
uh, the state of New Mexico was
one of 10 states that received
demonstration status for CCBHC,
which is the next level for us.
So currently we have 6
provisionally certified CCBHCs
throughout the state, um, you
heard from one of them, uh,
earlier this morning, um, in, in
Carl's bed.
Um.
And those folks are going to be
um fully certified to start as
official CCBHC's effective
January 1, and we are now, um,
vetting and working with the
next wave of CCBHCs which were
anticipated to be 6 to 8
additional sites, um, across the
state so that we can move up to
somewhere between 12 and, uh, 15
would be my hope.
Um, I, I tend to be a little bit
more conservative, so I'm going
12, um, and we are working hand
in hand, uh, not only with
Samsa, but we have been in touch
with the National Council as
well as other states for just
basically learning um what has
worked, what has not worked,
what are some of the pitfalls
and this is a big project for us
and, and I think that, uh, where
we are currently, uh, with
CCBHCs, um, New Mexico.
Has really moved forward and uh
when I talked to my counterparts
in other states, um, you know,
it's, uh, heartening to hear.
The the folks that are hopping
on and wanting to be part of
that next wave. So, um, Mr.
Chairman, and, and committee. I
I was so sure it was this
committee to which that
presentation had been made, but
I was looking at my calendar and
I just couldn't couldn't make it
compute because I knew it was
not at the beginning of July and
I wasn't even, I was watching
the beginning of July meeting
online.
Um, but I, I have to say the uh
whip, majority whip, uh,
represented Saansky had told me
about
This, um, program she wanted to
have funded and it and it was
this, and she described it in
this way, which is that there's
no wrong door.
So that when somebody makes a
call.
That person, either the person
who needs the help or someone
looking for help for a family
member isn't there, we don't
lose track of them.
So that, and, and gosh, we had
testimony, um, at, at that
committee now that I'm thinking
about it from the public too
about
They frustration with all of the
barriers. There was a woman with
um
A young man I know who, who
worked with us for years on our
Voting Rights Act, and, um, and
he had served prison time and
was a former felon and the woman
he was
Helping her testify for her
first time in front of
legislators and what she said is
she'd been a pretty good
student. She had great respect
for all of us, and she wanted to
be like us. She wanted to not be
ashamed of herself and she, she
started relaying her journey to
us, and it was just one closed
door after another after another
after another, and I told the
chair and vice chair that they
needed to have our LFC staff
members.
Interview her because it was,
we, I mean, I can't even
comprehend the barriers she was
encountering. But one of the
barriers
was that
She really is eligible for
Medicaid, but it's, there was a
fee for service and somebody who
wanted to help her get that she
couldn't have it because she was
on Medicaid. And, and I don't
know if there's ever any way.
To overcome that. I mean, if
you're desperate,
why can't you get whatever you
can get. I mean, you know, and I
understand people don't want to
lose their eligibility for
certain
Status benefits because they're
they're life saving and um I, I
just don't know if there's ever
going to be a way to figure that
out. And I figured some of our,
our experts on the LFC staff
could help us figure out if, if
it's navigable.
Ever.
Did you want to say something
about that before I go on, no
worries, um, Mr. Chair,
Representative Chasey, so part
of what we're working on not
only with 988 is what we call a
closed loop referral system.
And so the idea is as we're
connecting these uh programs
altogether. Someone calls,
there's going to be someone
who's gonna be able to navigate
them through that system.
I think part of the issue is,
uh, you know, and, and, uh,
forgive me, I I know I, I have
probably have said this at this
committee before if I move into
this state and I need behavioral
health services for my two
children and let's just say that
one is 12 and one is 19.
And I don't know where to start.
Good luck to me. And, and heaven
forbid I have an elderly parent
that needs services as well, uh,
and then I probably am gonna
need services that are trying to
work out the system, right? So,
um, part of this closed loop
referral system is when someone
calls whether they call 988 or
through that closed loop
referral system or whether they
call their managed care
organization and get a a care
coordinator that they're going
to.
Yet consistent, consistent is
the the real underlying, please.
I, I need to underline that and
bold it.
Consistent direction as to what
those services are and where to
get them and that's a program
that we're working on right now.
Um, for our closed loop referral
system.
And we hope to have uh a
contract signed on that, um,
relatively soon, um, but, um,
you know, and it'll take us, uh,
you know, a good year to build
it out because there's a lot of
resources across the state, but
that's where we wanna go and we
want to make sure that folks,
whether they need help with
housing assistance. There's a
lot of programs that we have
available that folks don't know
either exist or how to access
it.
And even for our providers, I
travel the state all the time.
Uh, and they don't know that we
offer provider support where
they can call us and we can help
explain to them what the billing
issue is before they have to
call the MCO and get frustrated
that's we have people, um,
there's a whole team over at the
medication um medication,
forgive me, Medicaid Assistance
Division.
Um,
As well as at BHSD that's their
job is to help navigate that,
um, and so we want to, you know,
continue to make those resources
available not only for New
Mexicans but for the providers
as well.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I,
I, I didn't ever get to the
point of asking you if we need
perhaps to put the CCBHC into
statute. We don't want to have
another administration come
along and say, well, we don't
need that.
So please think about whether it
should, um, and, and the reason
I ask this, you know, the whip
had prepared this bill and we
were in our good faith
negotiations with the
administration.
About the um the special
session. I have raised this
topic and said that the um
representative Saansky had been
working on it, and then the
governor came back with, well,
we're doing this already. Well,
that was news to us. It was news
to leadership, I think it's
probably news to this committee.
and this committee is pretty,
um, faithful about trying to be
thorough.
So I, I, I, I don't want to see
something be the whim of one
administration. So please let us
know about putting that into
statute, and I want to be
counted as one of the states. So
are we the 40th state then, or
we, you know, where are we in
the number of states given the
um you might need to look and
you you said you saw the
presentation, right? And so the
handouts are online. I had just
gone over them later and figured
out from what he had said.
There were 39 states that were
doing it, so
Mr. Chair, and, uh,
Representative Chasey, um, I'll
just give you my standing
answer. New Mexico is always
number one.
Uh-huh, yeah.
I wanted to be number one in
good things, um.
So, um, we just an aside, Mr.
Chairman, with regard to our um
engaging with the special
session. I want to say there's
absolutely nothing political in
my mind that occurred.
um, in negotiations before or
during the session, um,
There isn't a single Democrat or
Republican in our 112-member
legislature who doesn't care
about community safety and who
doesn't care about people
receiving the services they
need, and we, we heard a lot of
wonderful things, just the 988
information today is, is really
valuable and I appreciate it and
uh anybody who thinks this is
easy, getting this done, um,
really.
Doesn't understand how complex
it is, and especially when
you're um volunteers and you
actually are only in session 30
days one year and 60 the next
and then.
The rest of the time is is
interim committees where we
don't do substantive voting or
anything like that, so, um, it
is, it is very difficult. I, I
saw that we have the, um, on our
program for tomorrow we have
something about
medication-assisted treatment in
the correctional facilities, but
I was, um,
You, you talked about the um
somewhere in here. Oh, I was
really impressed because I don't
think you can talk about
community safety without talking
about the effectiveness of your
prisons and your re-entry system
and I was really happy to see
this um.
Re-entry, um.
Support the
the I don't know if it's a.
A real person or just a collage
of a, of an example of the
people who received, um,
re-entry support and housing and
employment assistance. But
That's the kind of thing you
want to do.
After they've had it, um, a
healthy
Period of incarceration as
punishment while they're getting
medication assisted treatments
so they don't come out addicted.
Well they're getting job
training, so they come out, um,
possibly able to work because
98% of people are coming out.
They are coming out and who do
you want standing next to you in
the grocery store line? You want
somebody who's who feels a part
of the community and who can
work and who can contribute and
who doesn't, who's not a threat
to you.
The answer, which a lot of
people who are
Understandably hurt beyond
repair. Don't ever want them to
get out, but really we're not
set up to keep building enough
prisons to just keep people in.
And most of the red states of
which I am aware, including
Texas and North Dakota and North
Carolina, and others have
stopped building prisons. And so
they've changed what they're
doing and they stop. They are
not sentencing people to they're
not continuing to do um
sentencing and
Announcements as punishment.
We've got to focus more on
prevention and um.
What we have done is fund
behavioral health and early
childhood and housing programs
and increased support for law
enforcement so that we can
prevent them, prevent the crime.
And um, so those are, those are
things we're really trying to
work, work on, but, um, oh, I
know it was the rise, the county
facility. Are you guys, are is
that program
Are you doing um rigorous
evaluation of that because
That's what we have to do.
Everybody wants the science of,
all right, how's this working?
Is it paying for itself? Is this
effective? I know if you spend
money on um early child at home
visiting, you save a lot of
money over the years, but you
don't really see the benefit for
quite a while. You start at, you
know, 6 months of age and at 22,
they're not.
They're not out robbing and, and
causing violence in the
community. You've waited a long
time for that investment to pay
off.
But, um, some things can pay off
quicker. So on the rise, do you
know what kind of evaluation is
occurring.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Representative
Chasey, we are doing a
evaluation on it. I do not have
an ROI number for you at this
time, um, but we can include
that as part of the evaluation
we are seeing though that as
people are coming out, um,
self-reporting that they found
the tools useful and uh as I
mentioned in the presentation
that some of them have actually
asked about, you know, when can
they become CPSWs, when can they
um enter into the system.
so that they can be part of the
rise program as a mentor, um,
but at this point, I do not have
an ROI number for you, ma'am.
Um, I, I, I wouldn't necessarily
expect that, but I, I hope you
should I think you should aim
for that because that's what the
LFC gives us.
And, and they try to help us
make better decisions with ROI,
uh, data.
And um,
I was
Anyway, I, I, I guess we had
found out last year and the
chairman was really aghast at
how few people in the prisons
were receiving the mat
program, one person.
We passed the law, but they were
not complying with all of the
um.
Really the recommended practices
and the availability of variety
of drugs and so forth and, as
again, I'll say, I don't think
you can talk about community
safety without making sure that
you are using the very best
practices in prison, and one of
which is you don't want to
remove good time as part of a
sentence.
Because what does good time do?
It protects the prison.
It keeps other people safe,
keeps the guards safe. It keeps
the other prisoners safe, and it
gives people hope.
So you want to make removing
good time, which was in one of
the penalty bills that was being
proposed as a um part of
punishment because what you've
done is you've um made the
prison more dangerous, and
you've given people
Nothing to hope for.
So
I guess that's it for my soapbox
this afternoon, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, thank you, Reverend
Chasey and Amen.
And we're going now to
Representative Chavez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I do
have a couple of questions,
although.
One of the questions that that I
wanted to ask has kind of been
um asked a couple of times and
addressed and that has to do
with beds, um, for, um.
For behavioral health, but my
question was more specific to
DOH beds. Um, I know that there
are several facilities.
Turquoise Lodge is one of them.
There's one in Roswell, uh,
which name I can't remember
right now.
Um, and then there's probably
one or two others that I'm, I'm
forgetting about. So my question
was around in terms of the
number of beds, but beds that
are actually able to be used,
um, because you have sufficient
staff, so I don't know if you
have that information, um, off
the top of your head.
Um, Mr. Chair and, and
Representative Chavez, um, I do
not, I, I would have to defer to
DOH as to what their staffing
levels are in bed availability,
OK.
All right. Um, so then my other
question is, um, and I, I guess
I just want to say I'm assuming
that somehow, um, the DOH
treatment centers also fit into
the behavioral health continuum
of care that you mentioned in
slide number 8.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Representative
Chavez, that is correct, um, we
have included, uh, the public
health officers now that they're
offering those match services uh
as that joint program, um, but
we also do count um the
Behavioral Health Institute in
Las Vegas and San Miguel County
as that facility.
Thank you.
Um, my next questions have to do
with workforce, um, in your
presentation you talked about
peer support workers and then
also um.
The um.
CHWs
I don't remember if those two
classifications were mentioned
in any of the workforce reports
that we've been given at this
committee, does anybody know?
No? OK. Do you know, uh, Mr.
Chair, um, if, if, um,
Or, or what actually what kinds
of demand there is for for those
two classifications. Are we, are
we meeting the need, uh, is
there more that we can do to
sort of support, uh, people
being interested in those two,
Uh, job areas, those two,
Workforce areas. Certainly, Mr.
Chair and Representative Chavez,
I'll speak to the CPSW portion
and I'll defer to Alano or Dana
on the uh CHW's, um, as I
mentioned, we did put a pause
on, um, the CPSW for a period of
about 6 to 8 months and started
those up again. I want to say in
April, um, and we are going
through that list, so there's
very little backlog for
CPSW's one of the things that we
are working on is an awareness
campaign so that we can recruit
more folks that might not know
that they could be eligible for
this and what the opportunities
are.
Conversely, the other thing that
we are working on is working
with providers, um, because
there are some providers that
don't know, um, how to best use
CPSWs. What role can they play?
And so we wanna have them
realize that this is not an
employment opportunity to hire
folks within and from their
communities, um, that can
provide that valuable service.
So I, I don't have an exact
number, but I can tell you.
Um, that as of April it was less
than 150 that were on the wait
list and we just finished two
classes of around 60, so we are
plugging through that and I
believe we have another class
scheduled for the beginning of
September right after Labor Day,
um, we generally do classes of
around 30, um, so I think we're
making good progress on that.
And Mr. Chair, where do those
classes take place? So we've
been doing them.
And regional locations and what
we're looking at doing right now
is a hybrid model, so that
people can take certain portions
of those classes online and then
just have to do uh.
A smaller component of that in
the classroom.
Um, so we're trying to make it a
little bit more convenient for
people to travel and take those
classes. OK, thank you, Mr.
Chair. That's all I have.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you for your presentations. I
have a lot of questions, so I'm
gonna ask you to keep your
answers brief and so our 988 and
911 talking to each other. I
mean if you make a call to 911,
what is the process to get you
to 988 or do you have to make a
second call?
So, um,
Mr. Chair Representative
Thompson, at this point they are
not talking to each other. We
continue to try to work with
counties, as you know, 911 is
controlled by the county and 988
is by the state, and we have,
uh, offered, um, many solutions
to try and bring them to the
table. We continue to do so. Mr.
Chair, I, I, I'm saying right
now, we need to do it, period.
And you know if you need our,
our strongly worded letters
behind you.
Or whatever it is that we can
do, I mean, I heard about this
at a national conference last
spring and um it seems there's
no pro and just since, uh,
Representative Chasey had her
soapbox, it seems like a lot of
things we do, um, we, we passed
legislation and they just don't
happen. I mean, and, and not
that we've done that on this,
but I'm saying we are noticing
that and we are not happy.
Um,
so from a form of previous
presenter, um, he talked about
that carf is not adequate, that
there's a second hoop that they
have to jump through and when
we're so desperate for, I mean
carp is the gold standard. Why
add another layer of bureaucracy
on that's going to slow things
down. It's going to discourage.
Certainly, uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative Thompson, uh, one
of the things, uh, that we've
And for background, I've been in
this position now for one year
and one week, um, I will note
that when I started it, I had a
lot more hair. Um, however, um,
one of the things that we are
looking at and part of our
strategic plan is to reduce
administrative burden and what
does it take for folks to not
only um certify and how do we
streamline that which we are
currently undergoing, um, but
also for things like site
visits, are there ways that we
can partner with CYFDD.
OH,
um, so that.
You don't get a site visit once
a week every week for a month.
We want people to see patients
and not see charts and, and, uh,
those items. Um, I will just
also add that, um, starting in
October, um, we will be going
out and doing listening sessions
with providers in different
parts of the state.
Um, and we will, I'm happy to,
uh, share those dates and
locations with Xander if if any
of you want to um pop in if it's
in your district and hear from
providers firsthand. Thank you.
And then we, we passed a bill,
what year, Mr. Chair, this year,
I guess, for startup costs for 2
years ago just for startup costs
for behavioral health and we
hear from a previous presenter
that their agency is $500,000.
debt because they had to pay all
what again, what happened to
what we did as a legislature.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Thompson, I believe you're
referring to the $2000 that was
allocated, um.
The previous legislative session
and, uh, the wording in that was
for uh for pediatric behavioral
health services, which is under
um CYFD we did at HCA received
$2 million of that for tribal
initiatives and those are
undergoing right now, one with
uh Zuni and one also with the
Albuquerque area, um, research,
they're abbreviated Aztec and
and.
Uh, forgive me for not knowing
the exact acronym, um, for the
evaluation of traditional
programs for children and ZUNY
is doing uh a program for
children as well and behavioral
health, um, and that was $200
and we are on course for a 100%
spend down on that by the end of
the fiscal year. For the $10
million that was allocated this
past.
Session there was $20 million
that was done in this past
session 10 for HCA for adult
services and 10 for CYFD.
The $10 million is for
evidence-based programs and we
plan to have that RFP out by the
end of the summer.
Thank you. And then, um, just,
just.
Some of this has been brought
up, but on slide 17.
Um,
Oh
Anyway, I, I can't remember
which slide it was, but giving
you the one with the brown
colors, giving us numbers.
I mean
It just num numbers that don't
say anything. I mean it looks
like, oh, Burnley County has a
ton of providers. Well, yeah,
but we also have a ton of
people, so just, just raw data
doesn't tell us anything. It's
like, oh my God, you know,
Katrin County only has 2
providers. Well, they only have,
you know, 600 people or whatever
it is, so, so I'm asking, and we
have gotten a lot of this from
folks where they just, you know,
they say, oh they.
What numbers, so they give us
numbers, but they're
meaningless, so please try and
and I'm sending this out to the
world when you provide us
numbers, provide us numbers that
have some, some meaning just, I
mean, it's great that you've
increased the number of folks,
uh, but that does that include
folks who have
Retired. I mean, is is so is
that a net increase or is that a
gross increase or I'm just
asking for data that we can
really use, um.
And then in terms of uh some of
this is not necessarily to you,
but I've got the mic and we're
behind schedule anyway and I'm
not keeping time so.
So
this is not really for you, but
I'm putting it out there.
I'm wondering why we use
Medicare rates to set some ser,
I mean, like autism services,
there's not a lot of Medicare
rates for autism services
because Medicare is set up for
people over 65 and generally if
you're 65 and have autism, you,
you know, you've probably.
Gotten what you, what you can
get out of things. So I'm really
disappointed that I keep
hearing, well, we can't do that
because it's a Medicare rate
because there's not a Medicare
rate for that, so that's just
another of my soapbox things,
um.
And then in terms of Mr. Chair,
in terms of self-reporting on
beds, obviously that's not
working. There needs to be a
form or something, you know, how
many beds do you have? How many
beds are you staffed for? How
many beds, you know, do you,
what do you need to have, have
the beds that you have empty,
what.
Because when it's self-report.
You can just say whatever you
want, you know, and, and that
doesn't tell us anything. So
more specific data than just
self-reporting, um.
And then there was talk about,
about, um, CHRs and, um,
Some of the other folks being
contractors. I will tell you I'm
a physical therapist. I was a
contractor with Fit when I did
my taxes at the end of the year,
I realized I lost money by
working.
Because there's no mileage,
there's no driving time, there's
no money for no shows, there's
no money for report writing and
for all kinds of things, so it
sounds like, oh, they can, they
can contract.
By the time you pay
self-employment tax and Social
Security tax and mileage and
where on your car and, and all
of the gross receipts, you could
actually be losing money, and I
will guarantee that I did. And
so I stopped doing it, um.
And then, um, the Madam
Secretary Armijo told us
of couple of meetings ago that
it takes 10 calls to get an
appointment for a Medicaid
patient.
I mean, when you're for
behavioral health, 7 for
physical health, 104 if you are
in a behavioral health.
No, even not even a crisis, but
you're, you know, thinking about
suicide, your, you're depressed,
you're, you know.
I'm not gonna make 10 calls.
If I'm in a worse state than I
already am, which, um, you know,
that's just, that's
unacceptable. We cannot that
that should be a red flag that
says, oh my God, we are so
broken, we got to do something
now immediately not, you know,
not study, not, um, well, we're
gonna put this, you know, this
little 1% increase in this in
place and see what happens. It's
our house is on fire, literally,
um.
And then on slide 24, the, the,
um, BHSD Justice Initiatives.
It it's striking to me how how
few are placed in housing. I
mean, we're almost begging for
recidivism when you gotta go
back to the same streets where
you got.
In trouble, that's where you're
gonna have to couch surf with
those people and, and I'm not
saying you have the answer or
it's not gonna, it's gonna be
free, but I mean, we, we are, we
are doing things over and over
and expecting the same, a
different result and we need to
stop doing that, um.
And then just, just one more
thing in general, um, this as a
committee has has has really
come into its own. Uh, we have
staff now. We're going to push
for more. We're gonna, we've got
more meetings and so again this
is out to the world, not, not
directed at you, but don't come
to us with, you know, with
non-data data or as one
secretary came to us without a
sheet of paper, not a single
piece of data. We're not going
to accept it.
Anymore, we've got staff, not as
many as we need, and they're
already working hard, but I will
say I will be chair of this
committee if all goes well next
year and we are not going to
accept, oh, you know, things are
better. Oh yay, you know,
cheerleader, we had a party, you
know, we did this community
event in 600 people showed up.
That doesn't mean anything. So
from now on I'm putting it out
there that uh I think my chair
agrees with me that we're tired
of fluff and
Blowing smoke and we're going to
look for real data. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Um, Mr. Chair, if I may, um, Mr.
Chair of Representative
Thompson, um, thank you for the
remarks. Let me just, um, we, I
completely recognize, you know,
when we talk about, uh, the 10
calls for uh an appointment, we
need to do a better job of
promoting 988 because that's
where people should be calling
during that crisis time. I'll,
I'll just note that we just
passed the 60th anniversary of
the enactment of 9
11, there's still certain parts
of our our country that still
use a 10 digit number to access
emergency services, but overall
people have started to move
towards if you have a physical
health problem. If you need
police, if you need fire, if you
need EMS, call 911. It's gonna
take us a while to get there.
We've been doing this for 2
years now. I think the numbers
are pretty good, but I am.
Really going to be working hard
on how do we promote this and
how do we make it known that
that resource is available.
People shouldn't be thinking
that if I'm suicidal, I have to
make 10 calls. That is
completely unacceptable and we
are going to continue to work on
that and I'll, I'll just also
say that um I am always happy um
to accept any phone call from
any member of the committee or
the public and go over any of
the data, so please use us as a
resource.
Yeah, and I wasn't implying that
that it was instead of a 988
call. I'm saying, OK, you,
you've had that moment and, and
I mean we don't have data on the
follow up, but I guarantee lots
of people get dropped and so
once they're in a slightly
better place, they start calling
to find a counselor, and we're
not taking new patients, we
don't take Medicaid, the waiting
list is 8 months long, we can't
have that, that's.
That as Representative Casey
said, we are building our own.
Great, essentially by not
dealing with things early and
then people end up in prison and
then they become better
criminal, they become criminals
when they were just poor before
just had a behavioral health
issue, uh, it's just really
frustrating and especially with
the special session, you know,
all these things are going to
fix it. There's nothing we can
do that's gonna fix it
overnight, but if we don't do
anything, it'll never be fixed,
and that's where I'm at, and,
and I'm angry and I'm
frustrated, but I'm stubborn.
Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Thompson and Senator Hickey
wanted to make one quick
comment.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. A
clarification, and, and this is
for all the health plans in the
room and everybody, um.
And, and, and for the governor,
um, and her, uh, stance that,
that we share and her goals, but
What's going to make it really
difficult for you all and is
that particularly the folks who,
uh,
Our uh
Competency, um,
What, maybe 80% plus have mental
illness, and they have an
addiction and that parallels
with the data that they're, uh,
that mental health and
addictions go like this 8070 to
80% of the time.
Mental health.
And, and, uh, again, some, some,
uh, RTCs just only have
addiction personnel.
They have to have a licensed
psychiatrist, psychologist,
sometimes a uh uh.
Social worker, uh, psychiatric
social worker or a licensed
counselor will suffice, but, uh,
there has to be a, a clear
diagnosis, which is someone
who's gotten a significant uh
degree uh professional degree
and attracting them to this
state.
Oh my God.
Um,
I, you know, I can't even.
Begin to think. So
You know, and I, I keep harping
on this and, and this is the
only lever we have to pull
rapidly and, and this is, this
is I'm talking to the
legislature too because we're
gonna have to provide you the
funding so that the funding is
there to be able to attract
people from other states. The
shortage of mental health
personnel, mental health in the
country is profound. So we're
competing against other states,
the ones around us and across
the country, so we have to get
over ourselves and
Our fear of scarcity if we're
ever going to crack this problem
and we have to pay more than the
national average. More, I know
this is heresy for the past for
me to say this, but we have to
pay more. This is America. It's
not Russia, you know, or China
where they can tell you where to
go, you know, people have
choices and they're not choosing
New Mexico, but I really want to
emphasize this point. We won't
We won't get the problems
resolved with just
addictionology alone, you must
include mental health
professionals, and that's why I
say, I mean the challenge so I'm
giving you a huge challenge and
the same goes as we work it out
with the governor in this next
session. We're going to have to
realize this is the legislature.
If you want this help, you have
to pay for it.
It isn't. I know the Department
of Health, God bless him, but
good luck. I advertising in
Florida and Texas, come to New
Mexico, it's better here. Well,
in abortion laws, yes, but
everything else, not a chance.
So it's, you know, come to New
Mexico and we'll supplement your
salary times 3 and maybe you'll
get me out of Florida or Texas
because that's what you're,
that's the kind of compensation
you're competing.
So thank you just wanted to
nail that one and health plans,
hear that too.
You gotta pay. You just got to
pay. And I, I will end with
Senate bill 270273 from 23, uh,
page 4 lines 1819, uh,
C4C parentheses one, you must
have demonstrated as a health
plan.
That I'm sorry, I get into this
stuff, um, that you must
demonstrate as a health plan
that you've done a survey of
compensation in surrounding
states and prove that we're
paying more. That's the law.
Also, there's comments there in
terms of payments, uh, around
Medicare and non-mental health
versus organic, but this is the
law. We have to do this and, and
we will start monitoring this
and enforcing it, so.
My message is probably more to
the MCOs than do you all, but
you got to enforce it. Thank
you.
Um, I had a couple of quick
questions for you. Uh, one is on
a slide 21.
Which I think is the, uh, oh
yeah, it's the crisis line, the
988. Are each of those separate
numbers? Do you, do you call the
crisis and access line that's a
separate number, isn't it?
And then is that the healthcare
worker and first responder line
a separate number and the peer
to peer warm line a separate
number.
So Mr. Chair, at this time they
are, um, so as background during
the pandemic when we were seeing
high stress levels amongst
health care workers and first
responders, we set up separate
lines for them and we are
working to consolidate them now,
but we still continue to report
on them because what we found
is, for example, if a police
officer uh knew that number and
had it programmed in the phone.
We didn't want it to just be,
sorry, your phone has been
disconnected, so we can.
continue to have that, but it
does transfer over to the 988
line. It flips over. Yes, sir.
Oh, OK, so, um, so these data
are really
From wherever the color region
is the number before it flipped
over.
You're OK.
Uh, because we used to get, and
I guess we still do every Monday
a report from the crisis and
access line.
Uh, is that still generated
separately or maybe now it's all
plowed into 9.
Yes, Mr. Chair, yes, we, uh,
since the pandemic has waned,
we've done it now, we do get it
monthly.
Um, and it does break it down as
to how folks are calling.
Who, who actually trains the
Peer support workers, I know the
UNM medical Health Sciences
Center does the training for the
community health workers, who
does the peer support worker
training.
Uh, Mr. Chair, we do have a
couple of contractors that are
able to do that. One of them is
NMSU. We also have uh Life Link,
um, uh.
There's 2 or 3 other contractors
whose names escape me right now
and I apologize for that, but
all of your contractors
essentially use the same uh
curriculum, Mr. Chair, yes, that
is a requirement.
And Project Echo used to train
peer counselors in the prison?
Are they, is that factored into
your, is that a separate system
altogether?
Uh, Mr. Chair, that, um, module
is currently being reworked um
by NMSU and will be put into the
CPSW training so that it's all
inclusive, um, so that people
don't have to go back for
another training. So all peers
will get that training for
justice involved.
So Project Echo is not involved
any longer. They will be a
component of that, but as
Moore's continuing education as
opposed to doing the initial
training.
Um, and then on slide 12, I had
one other question that's on
slide 12, and there's a
Um
An interesting statement there
that I that brings up another
whole issue that I, I was trying
to save for the next
presentation,
but
Since the opportunity presents
itself.
Um,
If you look on to bill Medicaid,
a community health worker must
enroll with New Mexico Medicaid
as a provider.
And complete a provider
participation agreement.
Verify a member's Medicaid
eligibility using the Medicaid
portal.
Where, where is, where does it
say about the uh about the MCO
MCOs.
Oh,
do they have to, do they have to
be certified by every MCO.
Mr. Chair, uh, so.
If uh
If a CHW it works for an
organization. So let's say that
they work for, you know, uh, an
FQHC. They are, they need to be
certified by Department of
Health, and they need to be
enrolled in Medicaid, but the
credentialing, the the group
that's billing is going to be
that FQHC. But if they're an
independent, then they would be
kind of like an independent
business person who then they
would have to enroll in each
individual MCO.
Didn't you promise us that that
wasn't going to be happening
anymore.
Single potentially that we would
have a single credential. It's
actually on page 13, slide 13,
the the line that I was looking
for structure.
Credential with each MCO. So
that's, that's what I'm getting
at. And I was going to bring
that up in the other connection,
but it was too good an
opportunity to pass up. So I
thought you had promised us that
these new contracts would not
require.
A provider who wanted to
participate in it whether it's a
Community health worker or
clinic or a doctor or social
worker in private practice that
they wouldn't have to get
credentialed 4 separate times
with 4 separate organizations
and until they got each of those
four, anybody that was enrolled
in one of those, they couldn't
get paid for.
I thought you were going to do
it all and it was going to be if
you're in New Mexico and you're
part of our system, all the MCOs
will pay you.
Mr. Chair, if I can clarify,
please, sorry, I'll get a
little.
So what we had put as part of
the turquoise care contract was
evolution of single
credentialing and we are aiming
for before January to have all 4
MCOs do a single credentialing
process just to clarify, there's
provider registration, right? So
that's registering as a Medicaid
provider that allows us to draw
down the enhanced F map and have
them as a registered provider to
bill Medicaid.
Then there's the credentialing
process, which again,
credentialing does provide some
protections, right? So keep in
mind not all providers are
created equal. There have been
some safety concerns. There have
been all of that. So
credentialing really does have a
function. And so that process
would be a single credentialing
by January is where we're
aiming. Just one, yeah, yeah.
And then contracting though, is
is that choice. So just wanted
to clarify contracting separate
from credentialing.
OK, although this says
credential with each. That's
correct. So for credentialing,
we are moving as promised in the
turquoise care contract to
single credentialing from all
four MCOs, and they are making
steadfast progress, but yeah,
I'm just confused. Why would
they need a separate contract
with each MCO if the MCOs have
to pay them if they're
credentials, yeah, so each MCO
can pay differently above the
fee schedule, right? So that fee
schedule is a minimum fee
schedule, but let's say one MCO
is having a difficulty.
And having a provider in a
certain rural area or a provider
that can deal with certain
specialty issues for kiddos in
state custody. They may want to
pay well above that fee schedule
differently and they have the
right to contract and
incentivize that provider. That
is what they do often for Roland
frontier areas for specialty
care, and so those contracts
also allow these providers to
negotiate higher rates, uh,
depending on the population
they're serving, the acuity
they're serving, so.
OK. That's part of that process.
You're Vice Vice Chairman was
the Chair, so
credentialing has to do with
pay.
No.
no.
OK, OK, but.
My question I mean this has been
an issue for many years if not
decades. Why was it not part of
the contract with Truro Care to
say this is how we're doing it.
You've got to do it as opposed
to, well, we'll give you some
time. That's what, that's what
my whole rant was about was
like, oh, tomorrow, I mean, we
are the land of Manyana, but we
keep being manana 10 year in 10
in 10 years, well, as, as the,
as the chair talked about the
one patient in jail who was
Getting, um, medication assisted
treatment. We can't wait, so
I'm, I'm, I'm not really happy
with how some of the MCOs are
doing things and it
we are hiring them. So the fact
that they get to say or they get
to decide, oh, you know, we'll
do that when we get around to
it. I want us to be saying
you're contracting with us.
We're paying you money. You will
do what we say, not what.
You get to decide what you'll do
and then we'll put it in the
contra and again it's not
necessarily for you all, but
it's, it's just the frustration
of we are letting the MCOs run
things essentially, um, we, we,
there's nothing, I mean, in in,
OK, I'm just gonna go off, um,
in the, in the leg in the LFC
reports, the report cards, you
know, sometimes the, the, the
green goal is 50%. What would
you hire an employee whose goal
was to only be 50% effective. We
are hiring them and allowing
them to to negotiate what the
markers are on how we're going
to evaluate them. That's not how
it works in the real world when
you're an employer, you get to
tell your employee what they're
gonna do and if they say I can't
do it, then you get someone else
and I'm kind of feeling that way
with MCOs. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I think we're both glad we got
that off our chest and uh so now
we'll move to the next half of
your presentation and, and
consider that one of my big
questions you've already
answered by Christmas, we will
have a nice new package that
Very good. So go ahead, uh, uh,
uh, who's going to start? Ilana,
you starting? I'm starting, Mr.
Chair. Thank you. Uh, so you all
know me. I'm, I'm a lot of
dances. I'm the chief medical
officer with Medicaid. I'm going
to do the first part and then
I'll turn it over to the
director, Dana Flannery, of
Medicaid, she'll be talking
about children in state custody.
I'm going to start with talking
about the 11:15 waivers, so I
have a a real fun part which is
the kind of dreaming about the
future and the things that we're
going to do with these new
authorities.
So, um, just to kind of level
set, 11:15 waiver is an
authority that we have to pay
for certain Medicaid services,
uh, usually allows us to do
things a little bit outside of
the box. We submitted the 11:15
waiver application uh January
2023, more or less, we've been
in negotiations for over 18
months. Some of the services
were approved this January.
January 2024 and the rest of the
package, more or less, I'll get
to that, was approved last
Thursday, so we're real excited
about that.
Um, was anything turned down?
Yes, yes, a few.
A few things
OK, it's hard.
All right, so, um,
Yeah, I'll go through all, I'm
going to go through all of them
and where we are with them. So
there were 19 services.
12 were approved.
4 of those were approved in this
round, which were some of the
ones that were really a little
bit more complex. 3 were
approved with other kinds of
authorities. We said we want to
do it with the 11:15 waiver and
they said, actually we think you
can do this with a state plan
amendment, for example, and 3,
they said not now and we're
we're looking at other ways to
do them in the future, but not
pursuing them at the moment. Uh,
so, kind of going through them,
the ones that
We're already approved. We're at
the kind of the beginning of
this list, ones we've talked
about before, but just to kind
of touch on some of them, the
continuous eligibility for
children until age 6 and the
home visiting models, the
alternative home visiting
models, um, we had some expanded
slots for some existing
programs. We extended that
legally responsible individual,
which was part of, happened
during COVID and we were
to extend it permanently.
Environmental modification so
that if someone needs like grab
bars in their house or
something, we, we, uh, increase
the allotment of funding and
transition services if, if
someone lives in a facility,
it's moving to a home setting
that funding was also increased.
So those things happened in
January.
That the new pieces are the
justice involved, re-entry
waiver, which is allowing us to
turn on Medicaid compensable
services before someone is
leaving a carceral setting. The
medical respite for people who
are unhoused. So that is a
program where people are
discharged from
a hospital to a facility rather
than to a shelter or the street,
um, home delivery.
Meals for two different
populations, pregnant people who
have comorbidities and also
people who have long term
service needs, disabled people.
So those are the new, the new
models.
The things that were approved in
other other places, other
mechanisms was the closed loop
referral. We did not need 1115
waiver authority to do that.
Chiropractic services, which can
be done through a state plan
amendment and the work we're
doing to support rural
hospitals, which was done
through that uh legislative
action last session or the
session at the beginning of this
year.
The ones that they said that
there's no path forward at this
point and we have to kind of
revise them are the ones to pay
for assisted living facility
room and board, and the one to
provide some capital investment
for long term settings and the
graduate medical education. So
those ones are the ones we kind
of have to take back to the
drawing board.
Uh, OK, so moving forward,
I wanted to talk a little bit
more about the new ones,
so I'm gonna 2 slide decks go in
here. OK, so justice involved
individuals. So this one we
already have a justice program.
This one adds quite a bunch of
new things. So I'm going to kind
of be going through slide 28 and
29.
So, you know, we know that that
these periods of transition for
people who are incarcerated are
are very vulnerable times. The
people who are incarcerated have
much higher rates of substance
use disorder, and estimated 80%
of people have either a
substance use disorder or a
psychiatric or a medical
condition that they are, they
are more likely to have
tuberculosis. They're 10 times
more likely to have hepatitis C
and 8 to 9 times more likely to
have HIV. So these are.
If you think about these disease
processes, they're ones that
are, you need pharmacology. So
if you're starting in a cartral
setting, you're being
discharged, making sure there's
a transition there is very
important. Also expensive
medications, so making sure that
the uh pharmacology benefit is
turned on right away as
important.
So, um, so what this, so what we
currently do, there's a program
called Just Health is that
people who are incarcral
settings have suspended benefits
after 30 days, as soon as they
are released from prison, the
benefits are turned back on, and
they have some care coordination
like administrative assistance
before they're discharged and
transportation to a pharmacy. So
that exists currently. Justice
involved.
Gives us much wider authority
that will allow us to actually
turn on Medicaid compensable
services, the authority allows
us to do it 90 days before
release. that is pending budget
approval, that wasn't originally
the way that the waiver was
written.
Uh, it allows case management,
provider visits. It allows
filling of medications. So if
you're thinking, you know,
hepatitis C medication, which is
It is an expensive medication is
2 months. If you don't finish
the medication, the treat when
if it comes back, it is much
harder to treat. So this is
something that someone could be
discharged with the medications.
Um,
Same with, uh, you know, sub
suboxone substance use disorder
treatment someone could leave
holding those medications in
their hand and also allows for
some coordination of services
upon release before release,
food assistance, housing
assistance, transportation, etc.
So, so that is, that's justice
involved. Uh, the other two,
I'll talk a little bit about.
How medical respite, that's the
one I've been most involved in.
There's gonna be a pilot
program, although we have
authority to expand it as much
as we want pending budget
approval and sites willing to do
it. Right now we have one
hospital and one site. And what
will happen is uh members of the
hospital who are have a physical
health condition, you know,
cellulitis, they were in a
trauma. There was a broken bone,
etc. they will, um, they
wouldn't and they're not rehab
eligible.
wouldn't have gone to a rehab.
They would have gone to a
shelter before are going to go
to one specific site for medical
respite. And so that site will
have nurses, it will have, it
will be a place for maybe a home
physical therapist to come. It's
gonna have food. Most shelters
make people leave in the middle
of the day. People don't have to
leave. They can stay there all
day. They dispense their own
medications cause it's not a,
like a medical facility, but
there's a locked place for them.
And then lots of case management
services, care coordination, and
the goal is exit to housing. So
that um
It is on average the way when
there's been medical respites in
other cities. It's usually about
2 months, but we have federal
authority to do it up to 6
months as needed for with prior
authorization, as we set it up.
Is that is that the Gateway
Center? Yes, yes, it is, yep.
Uh, so, um, and then there are
two programs that we're kind of
working out the details, which
is these two home delivered meal
programs for pregnant people and
for people with long-term
services. We had originally done
the pregnant one for um people
with gestational diabetes,
pregnancy with gestational
diabetes, but the data is that's
not the only comorbidity that we
really need to be looking at.
There's a lot of behavioral
health comorbidities, substance
use disorder, and pregnancy.
There's other populations that
probably will need that support.
So the authority allows us to do
it for people with pregnancy and
comorbidities. And then also
adding meal services for people
who have the community benefit
and have and are in long-term
services and support needs.
So those are kind of the, the,
that's the the structure of it.
And then
The next slide, so this is 20,
I'm gonna look here because I
think our slide numbers got off.
This is 30 and 31.
I just wanted to talk a little
bit about our next steps,
because for us, this is a
marathon, we're kind of, I don't
know, we're about mile marker,
maybe 10. I ran a marathon
recently. You're not near the
end. You're far away from the
end, but you've done a lot of
work already. So, um, we we it's
we're done with step one.
The waiver was approved. Oh, you
know what, I'm going to back up
one second. There is one pending
service still in the waiver, and
that's traditional healing. So
we had
asked for some fund for an
allowance for traditional
healing for Native Americans and
CMS has created a very different
structure. They did not our
structure was to give kind of a
funding, a stipend, and they
want, you know, providers
enrolled, providers billing,
etc. So we've been working,
we've been talking to the
tribes, we talk, we had a
meeting yesterday and that's
still in process. So that one's
still kind of
That's the asterisk of we're not
quite done with step number one
yet.
So the next step is
implementation, and that is
where we implementation plan,
and that is where we really get
into the nitty gritty details of
what we're actually going to be
doing with these. The the waiver
language is still fairly high
level. There are deliverables
for us from CMS, but we can say
these provider types, this
criteria, this population phased
approach, not phased approach.
And that's what we're going to
be working on now. Um, the
They're, it can take minimum 90
days, these waiver approvals in
other states have been probably
about a year of implementation
plan. Uh, so, so we're we're
kind of getting started on that
piece of creating implementation
plans and then submitting them
to CMS.
The next steps are really about
what we do.
In any benefit, which is many,
many steps. So I'm going to
actually move on to the next
slide and talk about um just
kind of like all of the steps
that are between us and
implementing something when we
want to do them. And then I'm
going to come back to this slide
because there's one more thing
to say on this one.
So
If there's a new benefit, in
general, I'm gonna use doulas as
an example because I'm working
on it currently and I'm right in
the middle. So you have a new
benefit, you know, we're saying,
OK, we'd like to cover doulas.
So first thing we have to do is
we have to develop some codes.
There's not a code necessarily.
Sometimes there is, sometimes
there isn't. Look at other
states, come up with how much we
want to pay them, get
stakeholder involvement,
reimbursement rates, work with
our actuaries, etc. research,
you know, how many visits
Per year? How can you do groups
or not? Lots of technical
details that are needed to make
a budget ask of the legislature,
which has to then be approved
and then we have to seek that
authority. So these ones we're
talking about 1115 waiver
authority, but if we don't have
that and we're seeking a
different authority, we probably
don't start until we have
funding for the new benefit.
Then we have to ensure that the
MCOs are paying for that, so we
need to address that with the
MCO's twice a year, which we
might adjust cappitation to them
based on benefits.
Uh, then we have to get approval
internally throughout, you know,
through the multiple layers of
government, then we have to
maybe make a new provider type.
So for Doulas, there isn't a
provider type existing. There's
not a way for them to build
currently, so we have to create
a new provider type, uh, and
then, um, oh, I kind of got out
of order here. We also have to
do public comment for the state
planning authority. And then,
um,
So we have the provider type, we
have the cappitation, we have
the rates, systems changes
internally, then we have to
issue guidance to the MCOs. They
give us feedback, say what works
in their system. We go back and
forth a few times, also with
stakeholders and provider
groups, does this work for you?
Are you going to be able to
build this way? And then
finally, we issue a letter of
direction to the MCOs and a
supplement to the providers. And
then we start to socialize it,
uh, and say this is possible,
this is
We're here for technical
assistance. So that's kind of
where we are with CHW's just
been issued, now providing
technical assistance to actually
on board people.
So that's kind of the big
picture of why all the steps to
get a new benefit going and now
going back to this uh last
slide, there's one more very
important step within 11:15,
which is to make sure that these
new benefits help people.
They're kind of pilots in a way,
and so we have a very involved
third party evaluator who is
creating a hypothesis and
creating outcomes and measures
and requiring us to show
improvement.
For members. And we also have to
prove budget neutrality for CMS,
meaning that we have to prove
that we are costing basically
the federal government in this
case, less money because we did
these pilots than if we had it.
So those are some things that
are kind of ongoing in
evaluating us um as we move
forward with this. And I think
that is my last slide, and I'm
going to turn it over to Dana
now. Thank you.
Mr. Sher, we're not gonna do
questions after each section?
Good afternoon Mr. Chair,
community members. I'm going to
turn this over to talking about
turquoise care for children in
state custody.
And just a tough act to follow
after Alana and Nick and all of
the passion for behavioral
health and the waiver services
for justice, but I think this is
equally exciting for how we can
change the children's lives here
in New Mexico. So first we'll
start out talking about care
coordination, as I mentioned in
my presentation last time, lots
of evolving uh parts on the care
coordination requirements and
the turquoise care contract as
compared to previous contracts
with Centennial Care, 1.0 and
2.0. So really looking at what
Health plans are doing to help
this navigation. So as Nick
mentioned earlier, sometimes
this can be a really tough time
to navigate. If you are a person
that has been removed from your
home and you are placed with
maybe a temporary family, a
placement, etc. that can be ever
more challenging. And so really
looking at what we can do to
enhance so with the single state
managed care organization for
the children in state custody
Presbyterian, and we've been
working very, very tightly,
closely knit together on this
process. I do.
Just want to give a shout out to
the managed care organizations,
Presbyterian and others that did
all of the transitions. We met
every single week for months to
make sure that those warm
handoffs occurred across the
other MCOs to Presbyterian for
turquoise care, and then we're
continuing to meet on the
regular to ensure that those
transitions have gone smoothly.
So I appreciate all the
cooperation and just really the
creative way of addressing these
kiddos and and improving their
outcomes.
So again, just to keep in mind
here, the care coordination that
I'm referring to at the health
plan is an administrative duty
that they do. It's not a service
that they're billing for. So
this is the administrative part,
not necessarily what you would
see from a provider on the care
coordination as a reimbursable
service.
So again, this kind of goes, if
you're thinking about the
medical loss ratio, right? So
this administrative function,
uh, really looking at.
How little they can spend on
administration, right? So some
care coordination activities.
Sometimes it can be enhanced
medication monitoring, value
added services. We did a table
that compares all the
value-added services across all
MCOs, and there are very focused
value-added services specific to
the children in state custody.
Looking at population health,
quality management. When looking
at the children in state custody
specific contract requirements,
you would see the the dedicated
care coordination.
team led by the registered nurse
with the knowledge or experience
for individuals that have
complex needs as well as being a
child in state custody. So this
would be that specialty of
understanding the behavioral
health conditions, multi-system
involvement, the trauma, and
then they have to also submit to
us as the healthcare authority
and Medicaid, their care
coordination staffing plan as
part of that. So just an
example, at a minimum that
staffing plan has to have the
number of
Care coordinators, supervisors,
the other teams, all the
credentials, the proposed ratio,
uh, that determines that they're
going to be able to fulfill the
requirements to these families.
And then just going back to
something that was mentioned
earlier about the difficulty in
engaging appointments.
Right? So as we're really
looking to continue to develop
providers, for example,
therapeutic foster care.
That cannot be a barrier that
they experience. It has to be an
easy process. And so they've
done a lot of creative solutions
for what that looks like of
having the care coordinator do
those warm handoffs and make
those appointments. They can
actually even do some direct
scheduling within their own
network and so really trying to
eliminate that barrier of having
access to care and just the ease
of it.
So if we go to the next slide,
can I have your big one?
Sorry,
we had one slide missing from
the uh.
Other one, so I gotta follow
along here.
If you'll follow me on slide 34.
Looking at the administrative
contractor requirements, so
there's some key personnel. This
is in addition to all the key
personnel that are required for
every turquoise care contract.
So as Alanna mentioned earlier,
we're doing a lot of evolution
with the justice involved. They
have a justice liaison, all of
that. So this is in addition to
all of that. So they have to
have a full-time children in
state custody program director
that's responsible for the
implementation and
administration of that full
program requirement.
They have to have a program
director that has to serve as
that primary contact for us.
For the SIS program and children
serving agencies and
stakeholders to help develop and
continue the program.
And then the associate medical
director dedicated at least
halftime. They also have to have
a member, caregiver, and
stakeholder engagement
coordinator dedicated to this.
And so, as, uh, someone that got
to oversee programs like that
earlier in my career, this
stakeholder group is incredibly
important to the evolution of
what we can do for the children
in state custody and making sure
that they are heard as to what
the barriers are to either
provide care, access care and
really helping them feel
supported in this. They are
really
amazing work and they have an
amazingly tough job. And so what
can we do to help support them
and having that dedicated,
engaging coordinator is helpful
there. And then, of course, the
transition coordinator with at
least 2 years experience to help
the transition needs in and out
as they may occur.
So, some stuff that's not on the
side that I think is noteworthy,
especially given the
conversation today would be the
network evaluation. So really
thinking about these contracts
in addition to the contract
language, we do a lot of things
to monitor the MCOs, and that
can include, uh, some people
call them reports, some people
call them deliverables, but
really how are they doing? Who
are they seeing, when are they
seeing? What is their network
look like? So we've made a lot
of evolution with the network
itself, the reporting, to look
at children's
Separate
Right? So sometimes and, and
you'll hear me talk about CCBHCs
in just one minute, but really,
we didn't have a good pulse on
what providers were able to
serve adults and what providers
were able to serve children. And
especially when you're looking
at specialty care, knowing if a
provider is capable or willing
to serve a child is very
important when you're assessing
that specific network.
So, in addition to that, as
we're evolving with CCBHCs, keep
in mind that also serves the
lifespan. So I will always say
that uh that transition age
youth period is so difficult,
regardless of if you've ever
been a child in state custody or
not. And so really having the
CCBHCs, especially for those
that are navigating behavioral
health conditions to be seeing
them before they're turning of
age, and then thereafter is
going to be especially
Helpful. And to answer the
question earlier about the
number of CCBHCs. There were 8
original demonstration states,
10 more states added recently.
And I think there's just a
handful, 4 to 5 under a state
plan. So we are in the second
group for the demonstration,
which does bring that enhanced
federal match for us. So very
exciting times.
And we'll have that third party
evaluation as Alanna mentioned.
So if we look at slide 36.
I won't spend too much time here
for the sake of your time
because I'm presented a little
bit on this last time, but also
really looking at what have we
done to evolve the service array
for these children. And so as
you may think about what type of
children and what behavioral
health conditions that
population may have.
Having advanced therapies,
having more robust therapies and
special specialties is very
important. So there's an example
on the right hand side of what
DBT dialectical behavior
therapy, looks like. And as you
can imagine, if you think about,
if you just imagine yourself for
a second, as a child that has
been removed from your home.
No matter what condition caused
that, there is definitely some
trauma that you have endured and
it may be very hard to regulate.
It may be very hard to
understand what's going on,
especially if you think about
depending on what age that
happened. And so really looking
at this mindfulness, distress
tolerance, emotional regulation,
interpersonal effectiveness. So
having us pursue the ability to
have people have this advanced
training and be reimbursed for
it. So if they take the extra
mile to
be able to serve individuals
with DBT. Now they have a
separate reimbursement or an
additional reimbursement rather
for that. So they're also
compensated for the training
that they had to go through in
order to do that. Similar to
multi multi-systemic therapy,
trauma informed cognitive
behavior therapy, functional
family training, um, and last
time I spoke with you all, I
went into a little bit about eye
movement desensitation, and
reprocessing therapy. So again,
these evidence-based practices
are proven to help kids and
adults manage.
Different symptoms, for example,
stress, anxiety, and, and some
other conditions. We did put a
resource on that slide for you
should you want to purview it.
And then HCA and CYFD are also
developing community mobile
crisis, as Nick mentioned
earlier, to provide that rapid
response and assessment, which
brings us to the next slide
about the 30 day wellness
visits.
So I just want to take a pause
here on the 30 day wellness
visits and do a tiny bit of a
disclaimer on wellness visits.
When we typically talk about
wellness visits, we're talking
about like a national measure of
how many kiddos are getting in
in a preventative manner to
check on their wellness, get
their immunizations, etc. This
while we call it a wellness
visit, uh, it's not necessarily
what I would call a wellness
visit, right? It's a
post-removal visit to check on
how the child's doing post a
traumatic event. And so just to
give that clarification, the
requirement is that that visit
would occur within 30 days.
After entering the state
custody. So we sent that letter
of direction to the MCOs and we
are working very closely with
Presbyterians specifically on
different efforts that we can do
to increase the capacity to
ensure that 30 day mark.
So again, they're offering
communication, education, and
training, and they've
implemented claims processes to
really ensure that's just one of
those little things, right? So
if you had that wellness visit,
and then you removed shortly
after that would have kicked
back. They already had it this
year, right? But again, it's not
a wellness visit, so we were
able to do some fixes in the
system to make sure that they
could be billed whenever they
occurred. And then also really
looking at some of the outer
circumstances that may limit
Someone from a wellness visit.
What could that be? Could it be
transportation? Could it be, I
took this child in, but I have
two others, and I need childcare
in order to take them and pay
attention and be present for
them. So they've really worked
to help look at some options for
childcare, transportation, all
of that assistance to be able to
help these wellness visits occur
and also looking at different
provider resources such as the
PCP school-based health centers.
Federally qualified health
centers.
Uh, and even tribal providers.
So, another method is
appointment prioritization, um,
and I believe that one of you
all actually mentioned this uh
Representative Chavez as a
priority is why can't these
appointments be prioritized? Why
can't we have slots available?
Why can't we have and that is
exactly what they have done. So
they've enhanced some rates for
the children to be seen within
the 30 days, again, really
paying for that performance,
paying for the providers to be
flexible to make sure that they
get in timely.
And so looking at uh reducing
the wait times, ensuring that
they get the care within the
critical time frames, and that
aligns with the financial
rewards where we're trying to
have value-based care.
All right. Slide 39.
So speaking of value-based care,
it's also how well are these
visits going?
There can be a check box of has
it occurred within 30 days, but
there also should be further
look into as you mentioned
earlier, what is the quality of
what's occurring and is it
changing anything? We don't want
a checkbox with these visits.
They're very important visits to
occur amongst all the other
visits that probably take place,
especially in the behavioral
health realm. So
They have the enhanced rates,
but also, what else can they do?
Can they go in the home if
that's necessary. So if you've
ever been around someone that's
been taken into custody,
sometimes they don't even want
to leave the house for a while.
Sometimes they're uncomfortable
with doctors due to something
that happened to them. There's
lots of different factors that
can be at play. And so really
making the system more nimble to
where the child's at and what is
gonna work for them. So
instituting those in-home
visits.
So, and obviously that has to
have reimbursement as well,
because as you can imagine, that
takes travel, etc. and that
would take a provider, uh,
they'd be able to see less
children in the same day,
obviously when doing that, so
you have to reimburse them
accordingly. They're also
working on some co-location.
For the care coordination in the
actual county CYFD offices. So
again, being there firsthand as
the child's taken into custody
and what that looks like and
getting this the history right
out of the gate.
So just to talk a little bit
about an example, um.
In a county for their engagement
pilot looking at the inclusion
of those care coordinations
right in there so they meet the
care coordinator, the child, the
PPW, and here all of the history
they give lots of contact
information for resources for
families because we're here
today talking about behavioral
health, medical care, etc. but a
lot of needs are well beyond
that.
And so what it, what can that
look like? What other community
resources and as Nick mentioned
earlier we're working towards a
closed loop referral system that
can also help to address the
social needs that are beyond
what can be served by the
Medicaid program.
And they also can schedule their
assessments. They're looking at
uh electronic Medicaid ID cards,
so just making sure that we're
easing that access to what their
insurance looks like, right, as
soon as they're transitioned.
So
And then scheduling
improvements. So recently they
have leveraged their unique
connection with the delivery
system and increase the
availability of the
appointments. So their access to
schedules for providers within
the delivery system gives
internal resources, so that can
focus and they're starting this
in Bernalio, Sandoval, Valencia
and Santa Fe counties. And then
as I mentioned earlier, uh, all
those other assistance options
that they can have for childcare
rather issues.
I want to speak a little bit
about some of the collaborative
work group I um we have CYFD
with us here today, and we've
had a lot of very close
collaboration between HCA and
CYFD as well as the Presbyterian
Health Plan to collaborate on
what the system needs and the
design. That has even included
grand rounds where we identify
some of the children that have
had the most difficulties so far
in their life and the service
needs that they have whether in
state or out of state throughout
that work, we have
Brought many children home and
have decreased the number of the
children that are in out of
state placements and then really
evaluating our network needs
based on those that remain out
of state as to what we do not
have in the state. So a great
example of that would be a child
with pretty severe sexual
maladaptive behavior, right?
Having a safe provider that is
able and equipped to treat that
individual child.
So we're having our biweekly
meetings discussing our
strategies and interventions. We
have a contact list to to
facilitate the direct
communication between the care
coordination and the PPWs
because again when you're
navigating multiple systems for
one child, making sure that you
ease all points of access and
communication, so people are on
the same page.
And then doing the quarterly
care coordination 101 training.
So really working on that
bi-directional training. So that
CYFD understands HCA and the
managed care role and we
understand theirs and can work
more collaboratively together.
And then we've also had a
distribution of roles and
responsibility one page document
to really help us all understand
our lane and really take
responsibility for what is in
our lane. And then
implementation of the care
coordination member satisfaction
survey and then partnering in a
biweekly effort with the
treatment foster care agencies
to discuss new processes, um,
and develop streamlining
approaches to review barriers.
And Presbyterian has already met
directly with some of the TFC
providers to better understand
some of the limitations that
they perceive.
All right.
To move us on the side.
42, and some of you have already
mentioned this, but really just
to note that we are
collaborating a lot in addition
to children in state custody on
all efforts in becoming a part
of a lot of national work.
So with NashP, we have the
justice re-entry Learning
collaborative. So as Alanna
mentioned, all of those waiver
efforts, we're able to work in
conjunction with all of the
states as they're planning and
learn from each other. So again,
we were one of only 7 states
selected to participate, so
shout out to the team for, uh,
that achievement and really it's
gonna be 18 months of technical
assistance. In addition to that
learning learning collaborative
we're looking at other
opportunities for different
stakeholder.
surrounding the justice efforts,
uh, especially involving peers
that have experienced
incarceration and how we design
that program because I don't
think we should design it
without them completely at the
table in the driver's seat.
And then for NashP we also have
the Behavioral Health Workforce
Policy Academy. So we were one
of 5 states selected to
participate uh in that and so
very excited to look at
different efforts for New
Mexico.
For workforce.
So on.
Slide 45 closing us out with the
pool family that you heard
earlier today.
So the re-entry supports Lindsay
received that helped her find a
part-time job and begin snapping
Medicaid coverage?
They moved into housing with
rent restrictions. They received
a grant for moving assistance.
She remained sober with the
support of her health care team
and medication, and Danielle,
Lindsay, CPSW
that suggested that she use her
life experience to help others.
And so she could become a peer
herself and have a full-time job
with steady income. And so she
signed up for that CPSW training
and is hopeful for more
opportunities so she can help
others.
I would say, uh, as
Representative Kate's mentioned
earlier, what would that be like
transitioning and if she had had
those services and from my own
experience of watching my own
loved ones go through that,
having services before you
release will highly increase
your likelihood of what that
will look like on the other end
of continuing those services.
There's a lot of trust that can
be damaged, whether it's just
from behavioral health or
incarceration or both. And so
these providers will have a huge
opportunity.
Whether it's motivational
interviewing or just being there
and being consistent to be there
with these individuals and help
them, uh, have a chance like
Lindsay or even better, right?
And so for people that wouldn't
have engaged at all post
release. This can truly change
their life.
On slide 44, we talked a little
bit about today about managing
the performance and what does
that look like? There are quite
a few metrics that we use to
manage performance, performance
measures, and then we have this
really fun acronym called EDIT,
which is a delivery system, you
know, so with that, there are
financial penalties should they
not make these metrics and so
this is just an example of a
dissip that was in 2023 to
monitor how they were doing.
And again, uh, we change these
dissips over time. We changed
the metrics that we're
monitoring and often when the
percentages are arrived at the
percentages.
are from national measures in
New Mexico for a very long time,
the regional measures were what
were used and often the national
can be a little bit higher and
harder to reach. So again, the
national measures, so moving
those towards national.
And then
We put together a different kind
of slide closing us out today on
slide 45 talking about what is
on our horizon and some of the
priorities we have in front of
us. And so do you want to do it
too? OK.
So these are just kind of our
landscape and some of the things
that we're working with in
addition to some of the things
we talked about today and some
of them are included. So in
managed care, what does that
look like for us? We're in that
post-TC implementation
monitoring. So we are at day 31
of a new contract. Most
deliverables come in quarterly,
so we really monitor closely and
give a lot of technical
assistance in those 1st 90 days.
This is also making sure all the
vendors that we have in our
contracts are working with the
MCOs as they should, example
could be electro.
Electronic visit verification,
etc. Then we assess for how
we're going to pull all the data
out of the first quarter new
deliverables. I don't know if
anyone's read all of the new
rules that the feds have dropped
as far as managed care roles,
access rules, uh, a lot in
alignment with what you're
looking for is monitoring
timeliness, surveys, etc. So
making sure what does that look
like as it stacks up against the
state of New Mexico today. What
is already being accomplished
and what do we need to transform
in the system to become in
compliance and then we have.
Kind of a ramped on on those
requirements and then also
developing a quality-driven auto
assignment, as I've mentioned
before, we have an auto
assignment for when individuals
don't select their managed care
organization.
And what we want to do is
transition that towards who is
best performing. So the best
performing plan would have the
most members assigned to them on
that automatic and so we're
developing that now. We're
working on mental health parity
or working on Medicaid forward,
uh, waiver implementation. So
again, all of those that Alana
mentioned in conjunction with
CMS to develop that protocol as
well as continuing very intense
negotiations on traditional
healing and so moving that
For and value-based care. I
won't mention all those
acronyms, but you know that
there's a lot of value-based
care that goes on, um, which is,
is a lot of engagement and
getting that federal approval
and then working on rate
adjustments, as you mentioned
earlier, why do we use Medicare
as the equivalent? Why, why
would we use Medicare? That's a
national requirement sometimes
and actually interestingly with
our health related social needs,
waiver approval. It's a
requirement to
Have 80% of Medicare. So some
states were struggling with
taking those health-related
social needs waivers because of
that 80% of Medicare. Well, as
you know, New Mexico is well
ahead of 80% of Medicare. And so
that was not a struggle or a
pain point for us in
negotiations. We said we are
already there. Thank you so
much. Let's keep going in our
negotiations.
That being said, we do have a
rate study underway right now to
look at the non- Medicare
equivalent, so we will be
working on that as well because
I absolutely concur that
Medicaid is not necessarily
equivalent with Medicare,
especially for children.
And so looking at those rate
studies as to what we can do for
the rates that don't have a
Medicare equivalent in system
improvement we mentioned earlier
today, single credentialing on
on schedule, um, for the
turquoise care contract and
closed loop referral system.
And then, as you may have seen,
we just did reinstatements for
children from 0 to 19. So if you
remember back when we got our
continuous eligibility for
children 0 to 6, we thought,
hmm, be really a great idea to
ask for them to reinstate anyone
that came off in the unwinding
in 0 to 6 because they would
have had continuous eligibility.
Those negoti negotiations took
quite a bit of time.
And they came back with the
agreement to reinstate 0 to 19,
which was a very unexpected turn
of events. And so that just
occurred this past weekend and
it was nearly 20,000 children
reinstated. Now these children
were not necessarily found
ineligible because of something
they turned in. This was that
they did not turn in, so it was
the procedural uh denial. And
then, uh, going through lots of
different audits, uh, so Perm,
Mac, single state, unwinding
audits, HCBS setting roles, and
then we also have our federal
partners at CMS coming.
For 2 on-site visits here in the
near future. One for our
long-term services and support.
And then the other one to see
how turquoise care readiness
went and to learn lessons that
we've learned and to see what
our process was like, which I
would say was extremely robust.
I think the MCOs in the room
would agree, um, and so really
to learn from us on how we did
that.
And lastly, on 47.
As a result of a lot of the work
that we have done with you all,
thank you for your questions and
thank you for telling us what's
confusing about our system and
thank you for always
illustrating what we could do
better. And I'm happy to say
that we have started a page that
is Medicaid Explained.
On our website. And so these are
one pagers that whether
providers or families or members
can look at to understand what
they care about. I don't know
that anyone wants to go learn
all the things there are to know
about Medicaid in any given day
unless you're really having
trouble sleeping, but if you
have a vested interest in a
certain thing such as on here,
the home visiting program,
primary care payment reform or
I have a child who is in state
custody. What does that look
like for coverage? All of that
we're developing those as we
hear from you all on topics that
maybe aren't that well
explained. Uh, I already have a
note from the team that they
would love to develop one on the
single credentialing efforts so
that we can help be accountable
and transparent on that process.
And so we also have a lot of uh
about Medicaid on that page as
well. So that is there on our
MAD resources. And then lastly,
our Facebook and.
etc. highlighting some of the
accomplishments of the team
recently on 48, again, the
children's reinstatement as well
as that waiver approval, which
was uh quite a feat and so very,
very excited for the state for
what this will bring.
And with that, we and, and
congratulations actually on
getting the CMS approval and.
Uh, and of moving ahead with
some of the others and
continuing that chart you had of
the steps involved in getting a
new, a new service approved as
part of the Medicaid program,
uh mind boggling, uh, but thank
you for your persistence and
your, what do we say, dogged
determination that's great.
Uh, let's go to the committee.
There may be a few questions.
The representative Casey, do you
have any questions?
Representative Chavez, and we're
going back to 3 minutes.
Oh no
representatives, Representative
Chasey's giving you her 3. Thank
you, thank you. Um, thank you,
Mr. Chair. Yeah, I do have
questions, um, and let's look at
page 40 to start with.
Um.
So
So in terms of the meetings, you
know, the first bullet that you
have there, um.
Can you tell me who's involved
in those meetings?
Hm
Mr. Chair Representative Chavez,
uh, the weekly meetings for
discussing the strategies
currently right now we're
working with HCA MAD sometimes
BHSD attend, CYFD attends,
Presbyterian often attends, and
so it's interstate health plan,
and then we're also having the
health plans work with providers
directly as well as CYFD works
proprietors directly. OK, so
those meetings have already
begun. All right.
um, uh, and, and then your
second bullet, um, has that
list.
Already been developed.
I believe so. I'm going to look
to CYFD just to double check
that they have it on their end.
Yes, I confirm.
OK, and, and if we could have a
date when those started as well.
And then um I think I remember a
conversation about the um care
coronation training, uh, with
CYFD staff, um, but I don't
recall when, when those meetings
when or when those trainings
started.
Mr. Chair Representative Chavez
being 31 days into the contract,
I believe they started shortly
after, but I'd like to confirm
and I can get that to you. OK,
that would be great.
The last bullet you have here,
um.
I was in a meeting a couple of
weeks ago with treatment care
with the treatment foster care
agencies, I believe all the
treatment foster care agencies
from around the state were at
that meeting. CYFD was at that
meeting. Is that the meeting
that you all are talking about
and I initiated the meeting. Is
that the meeting that you're
talking about in here and your
last bullet, Mr. Chair
Representative Chavez, no, that
is not the meeting I'm talking
about. Oh, so which meeting are
you talking about and what, what
have the conversations been
about?
So, Mr. Chair Representative
Chavez, I was answering to the
first bullet on the last bullet,
Presbyterian has started with
the treatment foster care
agencies having regular meetings
as well as CYFD, but I can defer
to CYFD to confirm. Yeah,
because I'm Mr. Chair, I'm not
so sure that that's taken place,
um, the meeting that I just
referred to that I was in, there
had not been any kind of a
meeting between the treatment
foster care agencies, CYFD or
the MCOs to
Does the new um the new process
whereby the MCOs are required to
remove, uh, to review the
placement packet.
Um, before any decision can be
made on where children are
placed.
And and let me just say that the
treatment foster care agencies
were very upset about that new
process because of the fact that
they weren't included in it.
It's been very disruptive to
them and it's also been
disruptive to placing children
in care.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Chavez, I can confer with the
MCO to confirm any dates of
meetings that they've had with
the TFCs and get you those
dates. That would be great
because I don't.
At that meeting, there was no
mention of any uh meetings that
had been had with the providers
and again they were um.
Not happy that their input had
not been considered before that
process of reviewing placement
packets was put into place and
as a matter of fact at that
meeting, um,
CYFD basically said that it was
the Kevin S settlement folks who
had insisted on um that process.
When I spoke with one of the
Kevin S um attorneys who's
involved uh with Kevin S. He
told me that, um, that wasn't
the case.
So I, there's lack of
communication going on here, um,
and I think that that was one of
the issues that was also raised
at that meeting, communication
between the treatment foster
care agencies and CYFD and the
MCOs is practically
non-existent. So I think that we
need to figure out what biweekly
meetings, uh, we're talking
about and exactly who's involved
and what the conversation is
about.
The other questions that I have
are with regard to um the um
some of the initiatives that
you've talked about, um, have
all of them already begun in
terms of uh, you know, the plan
for improving, um.
Care, coordination and actually
um care for the kids who are in
in state custody.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Chavez, which, which, well,
let's let's talk about, let's
talk about the um, uh, the
appointments, um,
they, they, they had been
referred to as a wellness check
appointments, um, you had, you
gave them a different name that
I don't remember right now, um,
you know, has that process
already been started to have
those appointment slots already
been filled up, um, or, or
reserved, I guess, and you know,
have children.
already begun to be seen, Mister
Chair Representative Chavez,
since we're in the 1st 31 days
of the contract. This is what
Presbyterians submitted as their
plan to instate and they have
started this.
Do we know if any kids have been
seen? For wellness? Yes, yes.
OK. um, can we get a copy of
that plan? I would love to see
it.
Of the plan that Presbyterians
submitted for the OK, thank you.
Um.
The other question that I have
is in terms of the, um, it's on
page 34, um, have the, has the
um transition, transition
coordinator been hired already.
The full-time CISC transition
coordinator.
Been hired.
Mr. Chair Representative Chavez,
I do review like every single
position filled and so I don't
want to misspeak today. I am
very certain it has been, but
I'd like to confirm and get you
that in writing. OK, that would
be great.
Just to follow up on that, that,
is that position.
The care is that at at
Presbyterian or at, at your
department?
That's at Presbyterians at
Presbyterian, OK. Yes, Mr.
Chair, just as a point of
clarification though, we do have
a cis contract manager that is
at Medicaid as well.
and population health.
But that when you've already
filled.
Yes.
All right.
Um, Mr. Chair, I don't think I
have any other questions, but I
do, I would like you to get back
to me on the on that other um
point that I raised in terms of
the meeting between.
CYFD and the MCOs. I'm really
very concerned that that
information is in here and I
don't think that it's taking
place, Mr. Chair,
Representative, of course we
will get you confirmation of any
and all meetings that have taken
place to that effect, as well as
confer with you to get some
clarification on some of the
issues that you raised. OK,
thank you. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Hickey, you have any
questions?
Uh, no, thank you.
A representative Kates, thank
you, Chair, and thank you for
your presentation. Um, I just a
bunch of clarifications of you
say here that um you have
approval for environmental
modification benefits. What is
the uh.
What is the increase?
Mr. Chair, Representative, the
increase was from 5000 to 6000
every five years. OK, so that,
that's what it was back to the
COVID, um, amounts, um, all
right. And when is the next
official, um, is it every 3
years, every 2 years where you
submit to CMS for the 115,
11:15. Mr. Chair Representative,
the 11:15 demonstration is
typically a 5-year cycle.
However,
You can submit amendments ahead
of time. Um, if there are other
options that had to, you know,
on the table, so as the state's
needs evolve, you can always
evaluate that, just knowing also
that you have all the other
deliverables in play. Once you
start that 11:15 demonstration
waiver, you are subject to that
timeframe also for that third
party evaluation. So there's
advantages to having as much
alignment as possible in the
evaluation.
Thank you, thank you very much
for that information. Um, on
slide 29, coordination of
wraparound services which
include transportation, uh, what
kind of transportation for
medical appointments for school,
for recreational. Mr. Chair,
Representative Kates, it's for
what the transportation barriers
that they're experiencing, so
beyond necessarily just to the
appointment itself.
OK
Uh, uh, thank you. I have a, a
quick clarification for, um, or
a couple. So, uh, here, uh,
your, your uh
Your Medicaid receives federal
approved for innovative health
programs. So, um, one is housing
is healthcare, uh, one is
individuals leaving
incarceration, housing for
health care, I, I understand
that this is not directly
related, but is it a
possibility? We are looking at,
um, Medicaid, uh, payments for
air conditioning.
For those uh residents who are
in uh homes that were reaching
over 100 degrees and also uh
those who are vulnerable and air
filtration systems as a
representative, uh, Vinson is
clearly explained, you know,
it's not just the individuals
who have been directly impacted.
I mean, everybody's been
directly impacted in one way or
another, and the pollution from
these wildfires that are
occurring.
And I've been told in natural
resources and water, they will
occur every single year.
Um, the particles that are being
breathed in, um, it can be
greatly reduced just by some
basic like.
And what a K95 masks and um and
basic air filtration, portable
systems that would be put in the
homes of people with respiratory
disorders or the elderly or
infants, um, do, do you have
such a program, and if not, um,
Is it where would a program like
that fit in?
Thanks, Mr. Chair Representative
Cates, I think that there's an
evolving national landscape
right now of health related
social needs. That's the
verbiage used by CMS. We used to
say social determinants of
health. There's an evolving
landscape and people are
recognizing that our healthcare
is really influenced by a lot
more than physical and
behavioral health, including
environment. And so you may have
seen some states, I believe it
was Oregon, but I need to double
check, uh, that did do a
modification for uh air
conditioning and.
And that. And so really, once
you submit that waiver to CMS,
you go through the negotiation
process to get approval, but
then also you have the
health-related social needs
requirements that were
delineated in the waiver that we
got for, for example, food is
medicine. So that's just another
uh different option for the
state to pursue via that
vehicle.
And, and thank you, Mr. Chair.
I'm so sorry I said one last
question, but this is really the
one last question, um, uh.
Help me. We talked about
technical assistance and I very
much appreciate that and I
appreciate that your front
loading it in the 1st 90 days,
although we are a state of.
Small providers.
Whether it's our health clinics
or individual families who are
in foster, but we are, we are a
small operation with high
turnover. So obviously, we need
technical assistance always, not
just the 1st 90 days. We don't
maintain that employee forever
and we need technical assistance
for it. Tell tell me what sort
For technical assistance,
whether they're foster families
so they can get adequate
payments quickly. Um, it
identifying that, you know, if,
if they're submitting it wrong,
if the code is wrong, so that
they can make sure that they are
being inadequately reimbursed in
a timely manner. I have gotten
enormous amount of phone calls
from constituents, um.
MCOs they're showing me the
emails that say, oh, it'll just,
it'll be a double payment in,
in, you know, 3 months from now,
we'll give you a triple payment
like, well, you know, your
landlord doesn't take it through
triple payment 3 months from
now. And so I, I want to know
how I I like being able to talk
about the services that we're
providing obviously the funding
is about services, but, um, if
we're not providing the support,
the technical support, if we're
not making billing.
And being able to get the
funding, um, adequately, uh that
is what's going to encourage
investment like we heard this
morning from behavioral health
and for substance abuse
treatment or foster care
families to step up or any other
uh types of services is they're
gonna want support in making
sure that they do not have to
front load.
Um, services. So can you tell me
what we're doing to be able to
address that?
Sure, Mr. Chair, Representative
Cates, there's requirements in
the contract for them to have
provider liaisons. I do think
that that's something that needs
to be closely monitored in this
first year and really improved
as far as technical assistance,
you are absolutely right. It is
not an easy system to navigate
as a former provider myself, um,
it's not always fun and it takes
someone that's quite business
savvy. And so really making sure
That we provide that technical
assistance is what we are here
to do. We are only as good as a
program as the providers that
can do the services that we
build. And so, in addition to
the MCOs having their liaisons,
us, of course, at Medicaid as
well as BHSD having them. And I
think that there's opportunities
ahead of us to do some proactive
technical assistance versus when
people are calling and
struggling.
Sorry,
um, thank you, Mr. Chair. So
just to, to follow up with what
Representative Kate's um is
talking about. I'm not sure that
it's about technical assistance,
I think, you know, some of the
things that I've been hearing
from, especially the treatment
foster care agencies is that
they've been submitting um uh
request for payments. I, I don't
know what you call it, um, the
same way, um, and they've been
getting some denials. They've
had to resubmit.
The other issue is that.
They didn't get paid on time.
Uh, then they received the
electronic checks, then received
a phone call that the electronic
checks were incorrect. They'll
be getting paper checks until
the end of September. So it's
really absolutely frustrating,
so I think really the
responsibility lies on the other
end in terms of press being able
to do what they need to do
correctly, um, you know, the
first time around, um, and then
the other question that I have
is, um, do you know how many
kids are in out of state
placement and
And how many denials have there
been to place kids in out of
state placement.
Mr. Chair Representative, I
believe currently we have 19
children out of state. I would
have to check on a number for
denials for out of state
placements as I haven't.
Uh, I don't recall any, but I
can double check.
OK, yeah, that would, that would
be appreciated. I think that the
new process, it feels like the
new process that's been
instituted whereby the by press
because they're the only MCO for
kids in custody, right? Um, is
really meant to um.
prevent kids from going out of
state because that's very
expensive, so, um.
That would be great if you could
give us that information.
Of course, Mr. Chair
Representative Chavez, we can
get you that information, but
there's also efforts underway to
build here so that kids don't
have to go out of state if we
are able to serve them
adequately in state.
Simultaneously. Yes, Mr. Chair,
but the fact is that we don't
have that in place yet, so until
we do, we may need to send kids
out of state if they need that.
That kind of care.
Thank you, Mr.
Thanks and I had just a few
questions, clarifications more
than anything. On slide 34,
where you're talking about the
requirement, the administrative
requirements for the contractor
you you talk about the
Uh, higher, they would have to
hire a stakeholder engagement
coordinator, dedicated full time
to this agreement, who would be
working with the
The caregivers, the member
serving systems and other
stakeholders and support the
desire to inform and support the
design implementation and
ongoing improvement of the
children in state custody
program.
and I'm just, I'm just trying to
envision who were these
stakeholders in that.
Who are the other stakeholders
are you talking about there?
Mr. Chair, I think we use
stakeholders broadly just to
catch any interested party as
well, right? So if there are
loved ones impacted if there are
individuals that are interested
in becoming providers and maybe
haven't started in that. It's a
pretty robust, uh, landscape,
right? And so anyone that would
have any interest in.
This care for these children to
make sure that they're available
for that. So I mean, at least in
theory it could be um the foster
parent, it could be the
biological parent or relative.
Grandmother or whatever, or it
could even be a casa, the court
appointed, so any of those you,
you really very broadly Mr.
Chair, that's correct, advocacy
groups as well, or even an
advocacy group, can you really
anticipate above that you talk
about an associate medical
director.
Halftime, are you really going
to be able to get a doctor to
work with us or have they
already gotten a doctor?
Mr. Chair, I think we can
definitely provide you their
staffing for this, uh, entire
contract so you can see what's
been fulfilled and by whom.
Good
In on slide 40. I had something
on like 40 if I can find it.
Yeah.
Oh, good, same thing member
satisfaction survey, who's who's
going to fill out the members
satisfaction survey? I mean, as
a kid, I mean, is that who we're
after or?
We we, who's satisfaction are
we, are we surveying.
Excellent point, Mr. Chair. Um,
I think in those situations
there are a variety of members,
right? So the TFC is going to
have to have some level of
satisfaction survey as to how
the process went for them. A
guardian would have to have a
level of satisfaction, but you
can typically survey kids as
well as how they feel, their
level of answering that and
willingness and may be
different, but there have been
lots of surveys done in states
as to how the children have felt
about the process.
OK. And then the last question
is not really a question, just a
hopeful.
Hopeful insight that you're
providing.
In the Poole family.
Uh, whatever that is, page 43.
You got them money for housing.
How did you do that and why
can't we do that for the Cara
families?
Uh, Mr. Chair, I can, where did
you just make this up? You're
really just made this up, right?
This is fantasy. Or did you
really get the money for
housing?
Uh, Mr. Chair, yes, we did, and
it's actually from an
appropriation using the uh
substance, uh, I'm sorry, the
opioid settlement dollars that
you appropriated to us. So
actually you got them the money
and we thank you for that. Did,
did it, did it well, the
pharmaceutical company that
ripped off all the they created
all the the addicts got us the
money, but uh did you, did you,
um, did that money come directly
just to your division or could
CYFD access that money.
For housing payment, I mean,
what, what, what we're getting
are these stories of the car and
that's a whole other, I know.
Bag of worms. What am I talking?
can of worms, a whole other can
of worms, um.
To talk about Kara, but.
The, the, here's this family and
they had this kid and the kid is
exposed in in utero to alcohol
or drugs of some kind, and then
the
By the time they find the
family, the family's been
evicted and they're gone. And,
and if they could have just
gotten.
Held them in place long enough
to start providing services they
might have been able to really
get somewhere and the lack of
housing was the big thing. Is
there some way to utilize those,
I wanna ask, how did $11,000 go
for moving assistance deposit
and first month's rent. You
can't find a rent for $1000
especially with 3 kids, so it
seems like that might be a help,
but if it's not the entire
thing, it's probably not enough
help.
uh, Mr. Chair.
And Representative uh Thompson.
So we have a number of um
supportive housing programs. And
so, uh, for $1000 that might be
under one program, but there are
a number of programs. One is for
folks that are suffering from
substance use disorders we do
have one that is uh eviction
prevention, um, or for folks
that are of uh uh low income to
kind of keep them in their home.
Um, and so, uh, we partner with
the MFA as well as some other
agencies and communities, uh,
for example, in Clovis, um, one
of our most active providers is
mental health resources or MHR.
And they um are able to get
vouchers out and work with
landlords to participate in that
program. So, when we have
someone that comes in, the folks
at MHR, um, they will assess
them and say which uh um voucher
programs, um, they're eligible
for, so that $1000 might be that
starter, but knowing that
there's other programs that are
in process. Um, I cannot speak
to the CYFD component of what
their budget.
It is, um, but I can say for
BHSD and and the programs that
we're working with, um, in
particular with MFA, the, the
mortgage Finance Administration,
um, part of that is that we're
looking at some of those folks
that are at risk for losing
housing or stable housing, and
if they fit into other
categories such as substance
use, they can fit into that
program.
Well, thank you, Nick, and
thanks for finding that family
that assistance because
sometimes it's those tangible.
Hard
Assets that is what's keeping
them from being able to hold the
family together or from going
off the deep end or whatever, so
it's really valuable to be able
to do that. Thanks for using the
money that way. Um, well, and
Mr. Chair, if I can just, uh, as
a point of clarification, um,
you know, I, I get to sit up
here and tell you what we're
doing, but we have a wonderful
team at BHSD as well as at MAD
that really, you know, they get
those landlords together, they
get all of these providers.
Talking and, and so I'm just
happy to be part of that team
and to kind of represent the the
work that they're doing. So we
really have a great group over
at the EHCA, but thank you
though. And speaking of your
team, have we found a
Behavioral health services
collaborative coordinator yet.
Um, Mr. Chair, um, the
collaborative director position
is still posted. I know that
there have been some interviews,
they haven't been able to um um.
To my knowledge, uh, move
forward with the director yet.
Senator Hickey, you had a
question or comment?
If I may, Mr. Chair, just a
comment on that, um.
I think we we've talked about
this, but we might even look at
the whole collaborative concept
because it really hasn't worked.
And uh the uh
We probably need to have a
different framework of how the
different agencies come together
and are held accountable for
that then pursuing the
traditional, uh.
Whatever it's been, but it, it
hasn't really worked.
Thank you.
I want to thank you all for
giving us lots and lots of
information. Congratulations on
the waiver approval. I had
missed that PR. I didn't realize
it until you presented it that
it was a federal complain,
that's great, and Nick, thank
you for all the work you're
doing too. Keep up the good
work, spend that money, spend
them services.
And we'll, we'll see everybody
else back here tomorrow morning
at 9.
I think we still have one more.
Kevin. No, no, no, that's it.
230.
No, that was it. That was it.
Oh, that was it. Oh, OK, OK.
Um, so tomorrow morning we have
the Center for Excellence in
Social Work at Highlands, making
a report, and then we get into
Matt and the correctional
facilities.
Busy day tomorrow, so thank you
all.
Uh, are you staying over or you
have to drive back, you're going
to drive back right away? Hit
the road, be careful.
Have a great trip back and
everybody, we'll see you
tomorrow morning. The session is
adjourned.
Mm.
Really good to listen to.
Oh.
I.
Right.
I
Yeah, that's.
yeah.
Thank you.
Yeah,
I don't know.
Oh, you bet.
Oh yes sorry
I don't know. I think there
