meeting to order.
Good morning. Um, welcome to
Gallup. We're all good on tech.
OK, um, and for those of you who
are listening, it did say
Veterans and Military Affairs on
the webcast, but I think that's
fixed. I'm, I'm getting texts
about, OK, it's fixed.
So we will start with
introductions and we'll start
with Representative Jones.
Good morning, everybody. I'm
Representative Jennifer Jones,
and I represent District 32,
which is Donana, Hidalgo, and
Luna Counties.
Good to be here this morning.
Good morning, Madam Chair, uh,
John Blockhouse District 51
State Representative from
beautiful Alamo Gordo in Otero
County. Great to be here.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
everybody. My name's Nicole
Chavis. I represent District 31,
which is the far northeast
heights of Albuquerque.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Uh,
Alan Martinez, uh,
representative for District 23,
Sandoval County.
The northern part of Rio Rancho
in the western edge of the town
of Bernolio.
Representative Lindstrom
and welcome
Well, thank you, Madam Chair,
and I'd like to welcome all of
you to House District 9. This is
my district. Uh, I represent the
West side of Gallup and uh 9
Navajo chapters here in McKinley
County.
So I've always tried to, when we
have our interim meetings in
Gallup. I try to, to attend
because there's always something
new you can learn, and I
appreciate having that
opportunity. Thank you.
All right. Good morning, Madam
Chair, committee members, and
everybody out there. Um, good
morning. I'm, uh, Representative
Mariana Anaya, House District
18. That is the middle of
Albuquerque. I've got Knob Hill,
uh, UNM, CNM area. Thanks so
much.
Good morning, everybody. Eleanor
Chavez, I represent House
District 26 in Albuquerque, um,
my district is on the west side
and also includes the Pario Mesa
and the South Valley.
Good morning. I'm Representative
Joanne Ferrari from House
District 37 in Las Cruces, and
I'm kind of in, in the
east side of Las Cruces and the
far north, so the far northeast
heights of Albuquerque, I'm in
Las Cruces.
I've been in Albuquerque too
much lately.
Representative Gonzalez, can you
introduce yourself, please?
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, my
name is Anita Gonzalez. I'm a
state representative for House
District 70. I live in Las
Vegas, but my districts cover
Sam Gill and Torrance Counties.
Thank you.
Sander, can you, um, introduce
the
the team
Thanks, Madam Chair. So I'm
Xander Dawson, uh, lead staff
for the committee, uh, and I
work for the Legislative council
Service also joining us from the
Legislative council Service is
Andrea Lazarov, who just stepped
out and Grace Balderramos. We
also have Robert Chavez. He's
the guy making sure everybody
can see us online. And then we
have Ruby and Esquibel from um
the LFC.
Thank you. And I'm
Representative Liz Thompson. I
am
House District 24, which is the
Northeast heights of
Albuquerque. I have Windrock in
Uptown, but Gallup is kind of a
second home. I grew up in Crown
Point, did one of my clinical
rotations at Gallop Indian
Medical Center and when I hit
the red rocks, I just got this
feeling of
I'm home. So it's wonderful to
be here. I want to thank you and
E. You and M always treats us so
well, Linnea, and your staff,
um, we can always count on you
and it's a beautiful view and so
with that we will start with um
Sabrina Eel and Jonathan
Lumaba.
Thank you. So when, go ahead.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. I'm
Sabrina Esel. I'm the chancellor
here at the branch, and with me
today is Mr. Jonathan Lummabaum
and we're happy to have you on
our campus this week.
We appreciate the opportunity to
share how we are serving the
needs of health in our
community.
In addition to our nursing and
human services programs, our
allied health programs are doing
well.
Our dental assisting and medical
laboratory technician programs
are both nationally accredited
with advisory committees made up
of representatives from local
hospitals and dental clinics.
They help us stay current on our
curriculum
and that also helps to support
employment upon graduation.
Our human services program,
which has concentrations in
family studies and substance
abuse has a new director
starting this fall.
We're very happy to have Mr.
Bernie Montano joining us. I
wish he could be here with us
today, but as you probably
noticed, it's getting kind of
crowded out in the parking lot
because today is the first day
of class. So he has hit the
ground running.
Um, he's from Gallup. He has
worked in the community as a
substance abuse counselor for
several years, and so he has a
very clear understanding
of local behavioral health
needs.
and is already thinking of new
ways to partner with local
agencies.
He's committed to growing the
human services program and
meeting the needs of our
community.
We are also addressing growth of
our health and human services
programs through our
collaboration with the school
district.
These efforts include the Health
pathways program.
Our Center for Career and
Technical Education program,
also called CCTE.
and the start of our LPN program
for high school students.
We're in our 2nd year of health
pathways. This year there are 57
seniors enrolled in dual credit
courses that exposed them to
options in health careers and
health-related content.
The CCTE program starts the
junior year and includes up to 4
college-level courses that
prepare students for the
healthcare sciences. There are
160 CCTE students this fall.
Before Mr. Lummaba provides an
update on a nursing program. I'd
like to thank all of you as
legislators for your financial
support over the years with the
nursing expansion funds and the
nursing faculty endowment.
Our program would not be what it
is today without your financial
support.
When we initially received the
endowment money in FY 23, we had
unanticipated faculty vacancies
in our RN program that took us 2
years to fill.
We are finally in a place where
we could hire the new LPN
program instructor who is
starting this semester.
The endowment is funding this
position and will lead to
expansion of the nursing program
as the endowment was intended.
So again, thank you very much
for your support.
Uh, Madam Chair, I'm happy to
take questions before we move to
Mr. Lummaba or we can go ahead.
We usually wait till the end.
OK, thank you.
Now, Mr. Lumbaugh.
Good morning, uh, Madam Chair,
uh, members of the committee. My
name is Jonathan Lummba, and I
am the uh per uh director for
the UNM Gallop nursing program.
And I'm here to share some uh
program updates with you.
Uh,
the UNM Nursing Gallup, uh,
nursing program continues to
achieve a strong student success
outcomes, uh, while helping to
strengthen, uh, New Mexico's
nursing workforce pipeline. Uh,
currently, the, the program
demonstrates um sustained soon
success, and it's supported by
study enrollment and
comprehensive wrapround
services, including our IBES
instructional support and uh
on-campus childcare. Uh, the
nursing expansion funds have
been crucial in enhancing the
program's mission and capacity
and uh addressing these uh key
needs, uh these uh funds have
ensured that our students,
faculty, and our staff, uh, are
well equipped to meet uh their
goals and succeed in their
endeavors.
Uh, so far in the past academic
year, uh, we've been admitting
24 students um each spring and
24 in fall, so we've been
admitting at least 48 per year.
And that's uh ensuring
consistent pipeline of uh entry
level nursing, uh, uh,
entry-level nurses for our
regional employers.
Uh, we've had the uh the highest
consistent number of nursing
students in the history of the
program and um currently we have
86 in uh students in the
pipeline.
Uh, our overall retention from
last academic year, we've, we've
had 80s, um, 85.6% retention
rate, so which is good.
Um, our NClex RN uh pass rate
performance has also been um
pretty great.
And we've been preparing
students for the professional
licensure. Um, currently we are,
uh, last year, uh, we're
currently uh 92.31%, um, pass
rates for our NClicks RN.
and that reflects uh all of uh
the effectiveness of our
curriculum, faculty dedication,
and also student support
systems.
Uh, we've been uh trying to do a
lot of a comprehensive student
support such as iBest uh
integrated, uh, instruction. So
this is actually a co-teaching
and embedded support within the
foundational nursing courses.
Uh, it's also helping to, to do
a targeted uh tutoring for uh
specific nursing things such as
uh dosage calculations, uh,
pharmacology course and also
clinical reasoning. It's also
helping with uh uh study skills
coaching and early alerts.
Uh, we've been trying to, um,
grow our, uh, simulation, uh,
skills lab, and uh the
scenario-based learning, uh,
pre-beef and debrief and
cyroidize patient encounters um
in simulations have been uh
really great in uh
uh preparing our students, uh,
for clinical readiness and also
NClex competencies.
Um, we've been doing, uh, pretty
good with, uh, advising and
mentorship. We've been, um,
having proactive advising
through uh degree maps and
progression planning, uh, along
with student workshops with
on-time management, note-taking,
and also test taking skills as
well as uh nursing resource
guides, uh, promoting
persistence, uh, student
persistence from turn to term.
Um,
academic support such as um
office hours for faculty. He
structured review sessions, uh,
writing in math labs and and
collect style preparations have
also been key in our success
lately and um our wrapparound
services such as uh financial
aid navigation referrals, uh,
scholarship opportunities and
the UNM Gal, uh, daycare uh
daycare have been uh helping
parenting students overcome
non-academic uh barriers. Uh,
some of our newest, uh,
initiatives is
our high school LPN program.
and we plan to launch uh an LPN
uh program for the high school
students in the fall 2026. Uh,
this initiative will create an
entry uh entry level or early
entry pathway into nursing for a
lot of the students, uh, helping
to address uh workforce
shortages and offering uh career
opportunities for local youth,
and we also anticipate that this
program will also help increase
enrollment in our RN program
when students return to our
program to pursue their art and
credentials uh down the line.
Um,
with, uh, with the uh
significant successes that we've
had, we've also still continue
to face um challenges that uh
really need our attention. One
of them is uh still faculty
recruitment.
Uh, we've uh had some recent
successes, however, it's still
been challenging to feel uh
full-time faculty positions due
to a limited pool of qualified
candidates, um, we've been
always having one person per
pool, um, for every job posting
that we have, so
it's been
quite uh challenging on that
part, um, it's also quite
challenging to get part-time
faculty, uh, due to uh nursing
shortages, uh, trying to
recruit, um, qualified temporary
faculty, um.
has been a challenge. Um, a lot
of the, uh, nurses out, um, in
the community hold an
associate's degree in nursing,
which do not meet our teaching
requirements, um, a lot of the
students or a lot of the nurses
that have a bachelor of Science
in nursing or a Masters of
Science and nursing, um, have
been quite limited, um, in
availability just because of
staffing shortages in their
primary, um, healthcare roles.
and with these, uh, faculty
surages, uh, it limits or it
kind of restricts our enrollment
growth and limit clinical
placement supervision, uh,
directly impacting the number of
students, uh, that we can
graduate, um, every year to
serve uh New Mexico's workforce.
Uh, however, looking forward
we're dedicated to attracting
and retaining qualified
educators, uh, we're still
looking forward to launch our
LPN, um, high school in, um
fall 2026 and still um continue
to enhance our soon support
services um for high retention
and graduate rates.
So with these um support so we
can address these challenges and
ensure uh strong uh nursing
workforce in uh New Mexico.
So with that, um, I'm able to um
entertain any questions if you
guys have anything. Great, thank
you. Who has questions?
OK, we'll start with
Representative Jones then, um,
minority whip Martinez, and then
we'll just go down the line over
here. So go ahead,
Representative Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, uh,
thank you all very much for
hosting us and for your
presentation.
Um
so I'm real, I'm interested in
your LPN program, um,
absolutely, and you're, um,
initiative on the high school
level.
to help them
um, I, I'm assuming that you're
you're wanting to help them
enter into
further LPN to further their LPN
or would they graduate with
their LPN?
from high school
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, so, um, we're
actually planning to have this
in and complete their LPN
program while in their high
school, and that means they
would be able to sit for the LPN
boards uh after the um complete
the program. So this is after
high school.
So they would leave high school,
Madam Chair, they would leave
high school with their LPN
correct? And they could move
right into a bachelor's program
here. Uh, with the certificate,
yes, and then they would be able
to cycle back into our program,
um, to get their RN um associate
level.
So, Madam Chair and um
presenters, would you, would you
say that the main barrier for
enrollment growth is faculty is
not being able to get faculty
that could teach these students.
Correct? Uh, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, um,
uh, this is correct, um,
clinical, uh, faculty have been
one of our limiting factors, uh,
to get more students into the
program.
I, I, I need a little bit more,
um, background on that. I, I
understood you said that you
couldn't find qualified
candidates, so you're not,
you're not able to even get
people to interview. Is that
correct?
Madam Chair, members committee,
um, so it's very limited, yes,
so we, we would only have for a
lot of our full-time positions,
so we would only have one,
person in the pool.
to kind of interview and, and
hire. Thank you. I know
historically, uh, in nursing,
um, the pay for being faculty is
so much less than the clinical
world that that usually prevents
people from wanting to teach.
And so, um, I think that's
probably
I, I, I've always, I mean, for
many years, I thought that was a
barrier to graduating more
nurses, and it seems like that's
still true.
So how can we help with that?
Uh, Madam Chair, um, members of
the committee, I, um, I think
that's a good question. Um, that
right now I, I don't have, um,
all the answers, top of my head,
um, a lot of it is
uh multifactorial, um.
concerns or issues
um
is, is what I can kind of say.
Thank you and thank you, Madam
Chair. Um, just one more
question. So if we were able to
double your faculty, for
instance, could you double your
graduation rate?
And how, how soon would that
happen? Madam Chair, members of
the committee, um, I, from my
calculations, I think we would
be able to kind of do that. Um,
with double faculty.
Interesting when you can't get
the faculty, you need to think
about doubling, but it, it
should be a goal of ours, I
think. So I appreciate that
information. Thank you. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Just a reminder,
especially for, um, it hasn't
happened yet, but if we have two
mics on, we frequently get
feedback. So if you're not
speaking, please turn your mic
off and minority Whip Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
you said earlier that uh you
have 48
nurse, uh, students per cycle.
Are they staying in the area or
they go to Albuquerque or you do
you track that?
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, yes, um, we do
track all of our students, um,
that graduate in our program,
and I would definitely say
990, 95% of them do stay in the
area.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh,
Representative Lindstrom
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for allowing me to
participate. I'm just, uh, I
guess, a visitor for this
committee. We welcome guests.
I had a couple questions though,
uh, Madam Chair, I'd like to
understand what credentials do
you need to run a nursing
program.
And I'm curious, are you a nurse
yourself as, OK, so do you,
what, what kind of credentials
do you have to have to run a
nursing program?
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, so, um,
uh, is it, um, I, I would like
to clarify, um, which, uh, what
could, um, credentials, uh,
well, basically what we wanted
to
for faculty to teach, um, at the
very, the very entry level is a
bachelor's level of nursing. I'm
trying to get at, Madam Chair,
is it, is it a practitioner
person, or is it somebody that
is a, uh, faculty type and what
I mean by that is someone that
can actually teach the material
over provide oversight for
clinical work, that kind of
thing. I, to me, they're
different. You know, it's just
like, um, the kind of work that
I do
It's one thing to learn it from
the textbook. And it's another
thing to be out there.
So I'm, I'm just curious.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, uh, ma'am, that's
a really good question and um
what we would like, uh,
preferably is uh for uh for a
faculty to have uh a master's in
nursing with a nursing education
um background. Um, but
currently, because um it's
really hard to get, um, a nurse
that's um master's prepared with
a nursing education, um, we
would be happy to take um,
anyone with a master's degree,
we would just have to train
them, um, in, in nursing
education while they're in the
program.
because Madam Chair, what I, I,
I think I, I'm hearing is I
don't know that.
adding more faculty resolves the
problem. If you don't have a
clinical space for them. If you
don't have a place for them to
actually go out and do their
work.
which I, I'm not sure if we do
in rural New Mexico. I mean, we,
we do have a hospital. We've got
clinics, we've got, uh, schools
that have school nurses, that
kind of thing, but I'm just
wondering if it's, if, if that's
really the issue. I know we're,
we're tied on, uh, on, on
teachers and on faculty, but
isn't it just as important to
have someplace to put them so
they can learn their trade.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, so, um, ma'am, this
is also true. Um, however, I
believe from my perspective this
is both um and
a limitation for clinical
instructor and also faculty
because if we couldn't get uh
faculty even if we have enough
um clinical sites, uh, we, we
still won't be able to graduate
as much and if we even have more
faculty but less clinical sites
would still limit us. So, Madam
Chair, if you had the clinical
sites with a licensed nurse
that's providing oversight to
one of your students, can that
person be designated as, uh,
staff.
for, for faculty
Madam Chair, oh yes.
So why aren't we doing that? I
guess my, my question, and, and
it's because I don't know
anything about healthcare, so I
come across like a a dummy and I
am, but here's the thing is that
if you are placing, we'll use
RMCH, a nurse
um, nursing student at RMCH and
you have a licensed, uh, doctor
or nurse or physical therapist
or whatever, that's providing
oversight because you can't just
send them out there.
Can that person be considered or
designated as part of
I guess a licensing process. I
know they're not certified
faculty, but they know what to
do on the ground.
You know, for me personally, I'd
rather be
working side by side with an
emergency doctor who can teach
me versus reading it out of a
book. So I'm I'm just going to
jump in here. So clinical
instructors are, are volunteers
essentially. Um, they, they
don't become staff. I was a
clinical instructor, um, and,
and so you don't, you don't need
anything
specific to be a clinical
instructor except to be a nurse,
correct?
Yeah, so, so, and there are
many, I mean, there are things
like home health care. You
mentioned a few things, clinics,
um, public health, all those so
they, there, there is more than
just the hospitals. Although
having these two hospitals, I
don't do you place students at
GIMC? OK. So having two
hospitals in the town this size
is pretty unusual. Um, but yeah,
so, so just, just the
practitioner in the field can be
a clinical instructor without
any, without being staffed,
without, without getting paid,
uh, so let me ask you then,
Madam Chair, are they?
calculated as um.
some way where they're
calculated that this student has
received this many clinical
hours under this practitioner.
so we're ready to roll them out
on, you know, as a, as an
employee someplace, but I'm
trying to get at is that are we,
are we making sure that we're
calculating every touchpoint for
these students where they're
actually learning something.
I believe there's a graduation
requirement for a number of,
certain number of clinical hours
in a real-life setting. Is that
correct, Madam Chair, members
committee, uh, so yes, this is
uh correct. We do track each
student's um clinical hours, um,
while they're in, um, in the
different, uh, facilities and,
and just to uh give uh
additional information, um, we
can only pair a student with a
registered nurse. Uh, we
couldn't, uh, use any doctors.
um, or, or, or physical
therapists uh for them to
complete those hours, it has to
be a nurse, but we do, uh, track
them, uh, to make sure that they
have the, uh, enough clinical
hours uh for them to complete
the program.
Not even Madam Chair, not even
for basic stuff. You have to
have a registered
licensed nurse. Uh, Madam Chair,
members Committee, yes is
correct, um, and because we have
to follow the border on New
Mexico border nursing, um, rules
on who can
uh teach the nurses or teach our
nursing students.
That's interesting. Thank you.
Representative Anaya. Excuse me,
Madam Chair, just real quick for
tho those of us that are not
from here, what's RHMC and GIMC
Hospital and Gallop Indian
Medical Center. Sorry.
Speaking in uh
lingo, yeah
Go ahead,
Representative Renaya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
thanks to the presenters.
Actually, I'm gonna build off
of, uh, what Representative
Lumstrom was talking about, um,
my understanding is that these,
these preceptors are also
volunteer. I know when it comes
to other medical professions,
we're having a really hard time
getting people to say, Sure,
I'll take on an extra student
that kind of takes up a lot of
time. And so, as, uh, Rep
Lumstrom was talking about, um,
preceptors generally one
um
I know this is not necessarily
built into the budgets, which I
think is a really important
piece. Um, I know, um,
Representative Gonzalez carried
a bill to pay our preceptors.
Um, so I just wanted to bring
that up as
perhaps a priority for the
committee as we're moving
forward.
But,
um, I had a question about UNM's
expansion. I know UNM is getting
a big expansion to the School of
Medicine. And I'm imagining that
doesn't translate to the
satellites, and I just want to
ask about that. Is that correct?
Madam Chair, Representative
Anaya, um, actually, the dean of
the College of Medicine is
coming out to Gallup on
September 16th, I believe, and I
think, and she's also going to
Zuni and Farmington, and I can't
remember, there was one more
spot that she was going to make
a visit.
And I think that something that
I'm going to suggest,
um, to her and as a request, is
to have you and him gallop, be
part of the BAMD option
so that students from here could
get their undergraduate, they,
um
lower division courses completed
before they move to Albuquerque.
to, and also give them clinical
opportunities here before they
leave. That way they will come
back here and work.
So anyway, that's just my little
pitch.
I love it.
Thank you. Thank you. And I have
one last question, Madam Chair.
Um, I know we hear a lot about
what's going wrong in
healthcare, but I know one of
the things that is going right
here is we're really outpacing
the number of nurses that we
expected. And I just want to
know from your perspective, I
know you listed a bunch of
initiatives that y'all have
here, but I'm wondering if there
are any that stick out as kind
of game changers either for
keeping or retaining students
here, um, or for the program
itself. Like, was there anything
pivotal that y'all did that you
can kind of say like, I think
this attributed to our ability
to graduate more students.
Um, Madam Chair and members
committee, um, Representative
Naya, and um I probably say it's
um.
combination of uh of the uh
success and and things that
we've had done in the past.
or some of the pivotal stuff um
that allowed us to retain and
graduate students.
Um, I couldn't pick up any, any
one thing that was successful,
but it's more of the combination
of the different things that
we've done.
so far
Madam Chair, if I could just add
on to that, um, so just so
you're aware, I was the director
of nursing here for 3 years, um,
starting back in 2015, and John,
Mr. Lummabaum and I have worked
together for about 12 years in
our nursing capacity.
So, um
one thing that was implemented
was the I best instructor in the
classroom, and that's the
integrated basic education and
skills training instructor. That
person helps support basic
English and math in the
classroom. Well, supporting the
expert instructor. So you now we
have this combined support for
students. They have their expert
instructor in the classroom, and
they have the IBE instructor who
supports the expert. And then
they help tutor. They're sitting
in the classroom listening to
what the
expert instructor is sharing
with the students, then they can
help support the student even
further when they're tutoring
them outside of the classroom
and supporting math and English,
and helping them with their math
skills and their writing skills.
So we did see an increase in
retention, um, adding that extra
support in the classroom. We
also have um additional tutoring
support, um, for, for the
nursing students. So, to me,
that is something that I saw as
an improvement. Was there,
there was something else that I
thought recently.
Uh, Madam Chair and members of
the committee, um,
uh, yes, um, that is uh one of
the things that, um, added to,
to our retention rate as well.
Um
but, um, for me looking at the
whole, um, I'm I'm just looking
at the whole picture that um
added to it uh was also.
um
having, having a lot of this,
uh, the other support systems
that we've had, um, I best them,
uh, IES was one of the, um
key things I believe, but the
other um items also played a
role, uh, with, with the whole
retention of the students.
Madam Chair, if I could add one
more thing, sorry. Um, I also,
what I think is increasing the
number of qualified applicants
to the nursing program is
strengthening the science
courses that the students take
before they apply to the nursing
program. So they have to take an
admittance test called the
tease, what does that stand for?
Madam Chair, members Committee,
it's called the um test for um
essential academic skills uh
exam.
So the nursing students have to
score a certain number on that
test, or they can't get into the
nursing program. And I think
that we're seeing an increase in
the number of applicants because
of the stronger biology and
chemistry instructors that we've
hired here at the at the branch
and the extra student support
that they have received. So I
just wanted to give a good shout
out to our uh science
instructors.
Thank you
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
appreciate that.
Representative E Chavis. I'll
have to get back in the, in the
swing of the E and the N. Thank
you, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
and so I have a couple of
questions. A lot of my questions
have already been asked, but you
said that you um track where um
people go to work after they're
done with the RN program.
Do you do that for the other
healthcare-related programs,
behavioral health programs.
Do you have that information as
well?
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, members of
committee and Representative
Chavez, um.
since I'm the nursing, um,
nursing program director, I, I
can only track the nursing
students. I couldn't track the
other ones. Um, I'm, I'm.
I'm uncertain if uh they would
be tracking them. I'm assuming
they would be, um, uh, as
required for their
accreditation, but
for me, I'm, I'm, I'm only
tracking the nursing students.
OK, thank you. Um, so then my
next question is, do you also
track um demographics of the
students and one of the things
I'm particularly interested in
is how many of them are
bilingual because as we all know
in healthcare, it's better to
have somebody who speaks the
language of the patient as
opposed to, you know, calling on
the phone to get an interpreter
or calling an interpreter in. So
do you also, um, track that?
Uh, Madam Chair and members
Committee and Representative
Chavez, um,
we do track the, the student
demographics, however, um, we
don't track, um, bilingualism,
um, as, as part of them, we do
track uh their uh racist and
ethnicity.
However,
um, I'm, I'm unsure about their
linguistic um capabilities.
Um, and Madam Chair, I'm, I'm
wondering if you would be able
to give us that information. I'd
be particularly interested in
those two pieces where where the
students go to work after
they've graduated and then the
demographics of the students. So
if you have that information, it
would be great if you could, um,
Madam Chair, give it to the
committee.
Uh, Madam Chair and members
committee, um, yes, I would be
happy to share that information
with you all, um.
and please send it to Xander.
And then my other question has
to do, it sounds like you're
doing a really good job in terms
of, um, attracting high school
students, for example, into the
LPN program.
Do you have, are you thinking
about doing any work in the
middle schools or even the
elementary schools to get
students early on interested in
um
interested in um becoming nurses
or even becoming doctors, um,
those kinds of, um.
professional occupations.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, members
committee and Representative
Chavez, um, we haven't thought
of it, um, that way, ma'am, um,
but I think that's a good idea
and currently we are um working
with um.
with some of the high school
students, uh, we, because, um,
McKinley Academy has uh some
sort of a
they have some sort of a mini
clinic, um, in their, in their
schools that we do send our
clinical instructor and all of
our students, uh, and they teach
the students on how to perform,
um, basic, uh, vital skills, um,
signs, so in a way it also
helps, um, some of those
students get interested in the
program and um it also helps her
since um interact with, um, the
population that they'll be
working with.
And then, and then Madam Chair,
just one last question. Um, so
your program here is a two-year
program for the RN. Is that
correct?
Uh, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Chavez, so, um,
we do have a two-year program
for the associates, uh, but we
also have, um, a bachelor's, uh,
dual degree program that we um
have partnered with uh College
of Nursing, so our students are
also able to get their
bachelor's in nursing while,
while in the uh well in this um
area.
OK, great. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Representative Ferrari, thank
you, Madam Chair, and thank you
for the great information, um,
my colleagues have covered the
questions, but I just wanted to
mention that I do, um, support,
um.
the commensurate pay for faculty
as if they were out, you know,
um, practicing on their own and
then also um if we can find out,
you know, the information about
how many, um, graduates stay in
the area. That would be really
interesting. So thank you, Madam
Chair.
Representative Gonzalez, and
while you have the mic,
introduce yourself, and then
I'll ask my questions and then
we'll come back to the other
folks who came in.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I, I
think I got here a little later,
but I did introduce Anitta
Gonzalez with, yes.
It's OK. I'll say it again.
Uh, um, District 70, Las Vegas,
but, um, I know you've alluded
to it and you've talked, um, a
little bit about your high
school graduates and your, your
students that are coming out of
your program, um, in my day job,
I do work with the STEM, uh,
program and in particular, we
have programs here all
throughout Gallup McKinley
County Schools. um, and maybe
elaborate a little bit more. I
think just to highlight um here
within GMCS, um, you guys have a
great CTE medical careers
pathway, um, that I do believe
many schools across the state
have come here to model, as
evidenced by the, the numbers
that you're talking about
graduating, being able to
graduate high school with, you
know, a near, near completed
nursing certification. Um, also
with the location of Middle
College here on your campus. So
maybe elaborate a little bit
onto the partnership between UN
M Gallup and these high schools,
which has allowed that program
to grow, um, as, as good as it
has, um, just I think that
integration when you're talking
about instructors and
you know, really, for lack of a
better words, you know, pumping
out these health professionals
in these rural communities.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
OK, so I just had, I had, do
have a few questions. Um, along
the lines of let's pay our, um,
faculty so that they want to be
faculty. I mean, I know there's
people who want to do it, but
when you can make twice as much
working as a nurse as you can
working as an educator.
makes it a tough choice. So, um,
so
no promises, but we, we will
work on that, uh, things are
up in the air right now in terms
of New Mexico, well, the whole
country, but New Mexico in terms
of Medicaid and all that, so the
timing may be off, but I think
that's something that we really
need to um.
need to
research and do at some point.
Um, just, just curious, and you
may not know this. You, you said
you only have basically one
qualified applicant per
position. Do you, do you know or
do you get the sense that it is
a pay thing or are there other
are there other issues that get
in the way?
Madam Chair, yes, Madam Chair, I
believe Representative Gonzalez
asked about, um, me, uh, were
you asking me to go into a
little more detail about the
high school programs.
Um, well, maybe, yeah, excuse
me, like the partnership between
the university and CTE, but
maybe that kind of lays into to
that about just the way that you
guys have been successful with
integrating your, your college
into your high school
programming to be able to do
that work and, and create those
numbers. But that also, I guess
leads into uh into Char
Thompson's, um, statement also.
So yes, if you're able to
elaborate also, but also please
don'thompson not answer your
your question my fault. So just
go ahead. OK. So
we have 3 high school programs
on our campus. We have the
Middle College Early Early
College program. We have the
Minley McKinley Academy Early
College High School, and we have
our CCTE high school program.
So middle college is a charter
school.
The McKinley Academy is run by
the school district and the CCTE
program is a mill levy funded
program.
and it has been in existence for
about 2025 to 30 years, really
long time.
Um, the early college programs
really support college
preparedness as, you know, as
the name implies, those students
graduate from high school with
an associate's degree, um, quite
often. I'm not sure what the
percentage is, but it's very
high when if you come to one of
our graduations in the spring,
you will see many high school
students graduating with their
high school diploma and an
associate's degree and sometimes
more than one. So
they really, um, excel in the
classroom, and they are more
than prepared to move on to a
four-year degree if they so
choose.
Um, would you like more
information?
Um
No, thank you for that. Just,
um, I've had the pri privilege
of seeing some of the
transcripts of some of your
students graduating from these
medical pathways and it's just
phenomenal, the number of
sciences as you were mentioning.
the number of health career
options, and I think that's just
really key if you're trying to
create these health
professionals as to where you're
starting them and the courses
that you're able to offer. Just
wanted to share that with others
that may not be privy to.
good high school transcripts.
But thank you for that and, and
thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you
So in um
in terms of who can attend the,
the, the high schools. Do you
have bussing programs like from
the Crown Points and the
Tohatches and or is it, are they
pretty much on their own if they
want to come in from one of the
more rural, um,
from the earliest for Madam
Chair, for the early college
programs.
I, I'm not sure about the
bussing
and for the CCTE program, they
are, they are bussed here from
the, from the entire area for
the school district.
Great. OK, that's good news. Um,
and then, um, which, which
school do you have
LPN programs in the existing
high schools or are they just,
it's on this campus.
Uh, Madam Chair, um, I'm not
aware of any other, um, LPN
programs in the other schools,
um, with us. Thank you. And
then, um, IBest is really
intriguing. Who, which students
can qualify for that.
Uh, Madam Chair, so it's all of
our nursing students, um, that
can qualify for it, that do need
the support. Are there in other
areas of major, uh, is it
available to other students or
is this a specific nursing
program. Um, currently it's
available in the EMS program and
in the nursing program because
uh we were able to um uh request
for a grant to support the IDES
instructors. Oh, that's great
and so who is the grant through?
Um, it's um WK Kellogg. OK.
So, the state is not, is not
invested in the iBES program
here.
Um, not currently, I would say.
OK. And how long is your, how
long does your grant run?
Um, we still have a good year
and then, um, the grant will be.
um.
done. And do you have plans for
continuation?
Um, Madam Chair, so we were,
we're hoping that we would be
able to hopefully continue.
So it would that be through the
same grant? Can you apply
reapply for the grant or would
you have to go elsewhere? Um, we
can, uh, right now we can, um,
have a conversation with them
and see if they would be uh
willing to uh do another uh beer
or two. OK, and I, I think I
could speak for the committee
that we would be happy to write
a letter of support for that,
um, and so again that talk to
Xander.
OK, thank you so much for your
presentation. And now I will go
to the folks who, who have
arrived. I'll start with uh my
sister, Representative Johnson.
Good morning, Madam Chair.
I couldn't tell if this was on.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
colleagues, and audience. I'm
Representative Wanda Johnson and
I represent House District 5,
which includes East Gallop.
in McKinley County, and 15
Navajo chapters in McKinley and
San Juan Counties. I'm glad to
be here. Thank you.
Senator Pope
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
Senator Harold Pope Jr. District
23, Northwest Albuquerque,
Bernalo County. Happy to be
here.
Senator Charlie
Thank you, Madam Chair. Good
morning. I'm Senator Charlie
Angel. Um, I represent Senate
District 30, which spans from
Burnley all the way down here. I
have a piece of McKinley County
that's in, um, ZUU Pueblo. So
glad to be here.
OK, thank you so much for your
presentation and for your
hospitality, as always.
And next,
yes.
sorry, I just said thank you.
Oh, I thought I was like, oh,
did I miss someone? I'm like,
oh, it's Monday morning. I could
have missed the whole group. Uh,
so thank you. We will next go to
a medication assisted treatment
program evaluation. John Valdez
and Maggie Clugg. I, um, from
the LFC.
And we also have, um, Secretary
Gina De Blasi from Department of
Health who will, um
answer questions, etc. maybe
make a few statements after the
presentation by LFC.
Good morning
Uh, my name is Doctor John
Valdez, and I am a program
evaluator at LFC. Today, my
colleague Maggie Klugan and I
will present our evaluation on
the Department of Health's
provision of medication-assisted
treatment, or mat in public
health offices.
You, uh, you can find it, uh,
looks like this.
This evaluation builds on years
of LFC research into substance
use, including work on public
health offices and most
recently, a 2023 progress report
on addressing substance use
disorders.
This evaluation is the first on
the subject since the Department
of Health, uh, began offering uh
Matt to address both opioid and
alcohol use disorder in most
public health offices across the
state in the spring of 2024.
Before we discuss our research
findings and recommendations. I
want to thank our colleagues at
the Department of Health for
their cooperation throughout
this evaluation. They
facilitated visits to 7 public
health offices around the state,
as well as two inpatient
recovery facilities.
They were also patient and
professional in responding to
our numerous questions and data
requests. To begin with, Miss
Klug will discuss the
background, including the scale
of the problem of substance use,
the basics of map, and the
state's investment. She will
also discuss our first finding
regarding the low number of MAP
patients so far treated in
public health offices, as well
as some of the barriers
encountered since
implementation. Next, I will
discuss inconsistent outreach
and marketing of Matt and public
health
offices, as well as avenues to
reach more New Mexicans in need
of Matt, including potential
low-cost coordination
strategies, and providing math
through public health, uh,
mobile health units.
We will also conclude with a
summary of our key
recommendations. And with that,
I will turn it over to Miss Klug
for our background and first
finding.
Good morning.
Thank you, Doctor Valdez, Chair
and members, if you could turn
with me to page 4 of the report.
I'll start with some background
information on the state of
substance use in New Mexico to
speak to the scale of the
problem.
Looking to table one on page 4,
as you can see, New Mexico has a
higher rate of substance use
disorder than the national
average, with 23.6% of New
Mexicans estimated to have a
substance use disorder,
according to the most recent
data from 2022.
This report will focus
specifically on opioid use
disorder and alcohol use
disorder. Are these, as these
are treatable with medication
assisted treatment or MAP, which
I'll discuss momentarily.
Again, in table one, as you can
see, alcohol use disorder is
more prevalent in New Mexico
than opioid use disorder, with
12.2% suffering from alcohol use
disorder in 2022 compared to
2.5% with opioid use disorder.
While New Mexico has a higher
rate of individuals with a
substance use disorder receiving
treatment than the national
rate. Only 6% of people with a
substance use disorder in New
Mexico are estimated tourists to
have received treatment. And as
we'll discuss in depth in the
first chapter, approximately
9000 people in New Mexico need
Matt but are not receiving it
according to the healthcare
authority's estimates.
Moving to page 5, looking to
chart 2.
Well, you may have seen in the
news that opioid overdose deaths
have gone down in recent years,
both nationally and in New
Mexico. This is likely due to
successful harm reduction
efforts such as the wide
availability and distribution of
naloxone, also known as Narcan,
a medication that can reverse an
opioid overdose, as well as test
strips.
But while fewer people may be
dying from opioid use, this does
not mean that opioid usage is
going down and could in fact
mean that there are more people
needing treatment.
Turning to page 6, Figures 1 and
2 highlight the regionality of
opioid overdose deaths and
alcohol-related deaths in New
Mexico, with rural counties like
Rio Riba, Socorro, and McKinley
hit the hardest.
So what do we do about this? How
are we helping people? Turning
to page 71 of the most effective
means to treat substance use
disorder is medication assisted
treatment or math.
This is the use of medications
that relieve physical symptoms
and withdrawal. Normalize one's
brain chemistry and block the
euphoric effects of illicit
opioids or alcohol to treat
either opioid or alcohol use
disorder.
Now I want to spend just a brief
moment on the terminology
because you may have heard this
treatment referenced in
different ways.
The name medication assisted
treatment, originally stems from
the use of medications in
conjunction with psychosocial
therapy like cognitive
behavioral therapy. However,
research has increasingly shown
that medications are effective
in treating substance use
disorder on their own.
Therefore, some organizations
and practitioners have begun to
use the term medications for
opioid use disorder, MOUD, or
medications for alcohol use
disorder, MAUD to center the
effectiveness of the medications
on their own without suggesting
that those treated with only
medications are receiving
ineffective or incomplete
treatment.
In practice, however, Matt, MOUD
and M A M A UD are often used
interchangeably and will use
matt in this report as an
umbrella term referencing
treatment with medications for
both opioid and alcohol use
disorder with or without therapy
or counseling.
Now looking to figure 4 on page
8.
You can see the list of
medications used for opioid and
alcohol use dis sort of
treatment. Public health offices
in New Mexico primarily
prescribe the pill form of
buprenorphine, the main
ingredient in Suboxone, the
works by diminishing the effects
of physical dependency to
opioids, such as withdrawal
symptoms and cravings without
getting the patient high.
Matt has been offered in the Las
Cruces Public Health office
since 2007, but in May of last
year, the New Mexico Department
of Health, or DOH, expanded this
offering to more than 30% of its
54 public health offices
highlighted in red and 5 on page
9.
In general, public health
offices offer family planning
services, immunizations, harm
reduction
and more. Because of their
disbursement across the state,
expanding the provision of Matt
and public health offices was a
strategic way to leverage DOH's
existing infrastructure to try
and reach more people needing
substance use disorder treatment
and provide a safety net for
people who may not have
providers in their, in their
area they could turn to.
As you can see in figure 6 on
page 9, DOH divides the state
into 4 public health regions.
This helps balance state
administration and oversight
with the need for tailored
health public health responses
for the diverse communities
across the state.
To support the provision of M
Matt, as seen as shown in table
4 on page 10.
DOH has received 7.28 million
each year since fiscal year 24,
a mixture of both general fund
and opioid settlement revenues.
While not the focus of this
evaluation, I do want to note
that this is not the only
mechanism through which the
state provides MAP, as you can
see on page 11, 7.
It's important to add, however,
that most people receiving MAT
in New Mexico do so through
private providers, but the
state's efforts are key in
expanding access to treatment
and reaching the most vulnerable
populations.
To this end, DOH also operates
two inpatient facilities, the
Turquoise Lodge Hospital in
Albuquerque, and the New Mexico
rehabilitation Center in Roswell
that offered detox services and
medication assisted treatment.
The healthcare authority also
certified 7 community behavioral
health clinics earlier this year
as part of a four-year federal
Medicaid demonstration that aims
to expand mental health and
substance use disorder
treatment, including Matt, and
the state's correctional
facilities have also begun
offering Matt, though the
program is still yet to be fully
implemented.
This takes us to our first major
finding on page 13.
that while the healthcare
authority or HDA estimates that
over 9000 individuals need MA in
New Mexico. DUH has treated just
324 individuals in public health
offices.
If I could draw your attention
to figure 8 on page 13. As you
can see, the HCA estimates that
9130 individuals in New Mexico
needAtt but are not receiving
treatment, with the highest need
found in Bernalilo, Santa Fe,
Ria Riba, and Sandoval County.
While Matt and public health
offices has the potential to
treat many of those in need.
DOH, HCA, and private providers
will all need to work together
to get care to those not
currently receiving it.
Further, if you turn to page 14,
looking to figure 9.
you can see that while not only
do a large number of people need
mat. Many are traveling to other
counties to receive services.
This highlights the need that
public health offices are trying
to meet as local providers of
Matt and communities across the
state, while also indicating
that people may not be aware of
the treatment available on their
local public health office,
contributing to the low
utilization.
In the first year of expanded
implementation beginning in May
of 2024, Public health offices
treated just 324 people, 321 of
which were for opioid use
disorder, and only 3 of which
were for alcohol use disorder.
In 2024, around 105,000 people
submitted a claim through
Medicaid for Matt, meaning
public health offices are
estimated to only be treating
around 2 to 3% of this
population.
As you can see in figure 11 on
page 15.
treatment has been concentrated
in two offices in the southern
region of the state, with the
Las Cruces and Otero County
Public health offices, treating
75% of the total number of
people treated in public health
offices, likely in part due to
the long-standing MAP program
operating at the Las Cruces
office since 2007.
The remaining 25% of people
treated were seen in public
health offices across the state,
with most offices treating less
than 10 people, and some offices
did not treat any patients.
Most of most of the people
receiving Matt and public health
offices are covered by Medicaid,
with around 60% of visits billed
to Medicaid, with the remainder
primarily covered by private
insurance.
For those who are uninsured and
cannot afford treatment, DOH
covers the cost of their
treatment and medications with
their uninsured MOUD access
program that has helped 27
people since the program began
in October of last year.
If you can now turn with me to
page 16
I want to now discuss the
staffing and oversight of the of
medication assisted treatment
and public health offices to
speak to how it actually works.
In most cases, the staff
supporting the provision of MAP
includes only an existing clerk
and nurse who were trained on
the provision of Matt. The Las
Cruces Publicov office is the
only office with dedicated nurse
and clerk for providing that.
Telemedicine is also crucial to
the state's offering of Matt and
public health offices, with more
than half of public health
office offices that have
provided Matt doing so
exclusively through
telemedicine.
This is what in which clerks and
nurses complete the intake and
urinalysis and then can set up
patients in a room to meet
virtually with a physician.
Overall, almost a quarter of
Matt visits in public health
offices were telehealth visits
with clinicians.
Currently, only a few public
health offices have someone
in-house who can provide therapy
to MA patients, but those that
don't generally try to refer at
patients to a therapist in the
community.
Medications are effective on
their own, however, therapy can
have an additive effect and help
engage individuals with
long-term treatment by focusing
treatment on the individual's
particular needs and barriers to
success.
Therefore, we recommend that DOH
work with HCA to develop
provider lists of substance use
disorder therapists to whom
public office, public health
offices can refer at patients.
Looking now to the bottom of
page 17. In terms of the
leadership of the provision of
map and public health offices.
There's currently no central
state coordinator providing
oversight.
The oversight responsibilities
are divided among multiple
positions under both the Center
for Access and Linkage to
Healthcare and the Center for
Healthy and Safe Communities
within the public health
division of DUH.
Given this fragmented oversight
and separation from the director
of marketing, who works under
the separate policy and
communications division, DOH
should centralize the management
of the program to increase
coordination.
LFC analysis suggests that DOH
has funded but unfilled
positions that would give the
department the capacity to
create a new coordinator
position to specifically focus
on leading and coordinating MAT
implementation.
Turning now to page 18.
centralized leadership and
coordination could also help
with the fact that DOH is not
currently collecting any outcome
data on providing mat and public
health offices, preventing the
evaluation of the success of the
program.
As it stands, DOHS performance
measures around MAT provided on
an inpatient basis at the
Turquoise Lodge Hospital, the
education of MAT for patients
already receiving detox services
and measures of harm reduction.
However, at the time of this
report, DH did not have any
measures addressing the
provision of Matt and public
health offices and only was
collecting output data on the
number of unique visits for Matt
and number of unique patients,
uh, after this evaluation, DOH
has since worked with LFC and
DFA to develop performance
measures for fiscal year 27
for the provision of MA public
health offices.
Dewi does also collect data on
outcomes for patients treated at
turquoise lodge hospitals
inpatient programs, and surveys
patients a few months after
their treatment on metrics such
as the effectiveness of the
discharge plan, emotional
well-being, physical health, and
more.
This effort, as well as the
academic literature, can inform
the collection of outcome data
on MAP patients treated in
public health offices.
To this end, looking now to page
20 to ensure that the funding is
having the intended outcomes and
that public health offices are
reaching as many people as
possible. We recommend that DOH
work with LFC and the Department
of Finance Administration to set
specific performance targets for
fiscal year 27 and develop and
submit an implementation plan as
part of their fiscal year 27
budget submission.
And I'll turn it back over to
Doctor Valdez to present our
next major finding.
Thank you, Miss Klug. Uh, if you
turn with me to page 21, I will
discuss our last major finding.
The provision of Matt in public
health offices lacks dedicated,
coordinated outreach efforts.
The Department of Health's
marketing of Matt and public
health offices is limited, with
neither local public health
offices, northern New Mexico
pathways website effectively
reaching the communities in need
of treatment.
This is due in part to the
regional administrative
structure, which has benefits in
terms of tailoring public health
responses to different regions
of the state, but fragments
leadership and may undermine
accountability, uh, in the case
of providing matt in public
health offices. That said, some
local practices around the state
have the potential to improve
outreach. If you turn with me to
page 22.
I will discuss DOH's golden
opportunity, a coalition of
public health and safety
organizations across the
Albuquerque metro area.
Golden Opportunity connects
first responders with local
service providers so that when
they encounter and revive people
with substance use disorders who
have overdosed, they can
seamlessly connect them with mat
services and provide
transportation to treatment
facilities. Officials note that
immediately following an
overdose, people with substance
use disorders are often most
receptive to treatment.
Table 8 on page 22 lists the
community partners involved with
Golden Opportunity.
This is a new collaboration as
of October 2024, so only a few
people have been treated, and
program officials noted that the
need for housing support in
addition to Matt, uh, is, is
necessary to be able to treat
more patients.
On page 23, we discuss a Las
Cruces area group of providers,
nonprofits, as well as city,
county and state officials that
meet monthly in a group called
Opioid + 360. This group brings
together local stakeholders from
prevention, harm reduction,
treatment, including Matt, and
recovery sectors to coordinate
opioid response efforts.
Such a forum includes officials
from the Department of Health's
Health promotion teams and helps
local groups optimize their
collective resources by reducing
duplicative efforts and
promoting ongoing and deep
collaboration across entities.
Opioid plus 360 provides an
excellent example of a low-cost
method of improving the delivery
of matt through careful
coordination of the existing
resources of a community.
In addition to providing Matt in
public health offices, the
public health division of DOH
can also explore providing matt
through its newly purchased
mobile health units, which we
discuss on pages 24 and 25.
Public health has outfitted the
specialized vehicles for
vaccinations, STD testing, harm
reduction, and other services,
but not for Matt.
It is worth noting that most
public health offices do not
stock MAtt medications. When
they initiate treatment, they
write a prescription for the
patient, which can then be
filled at a typical pharmacy.
This process can be a barrier
for vulnerable patients and for
those in rural areas. Carrying
mat drugs such as Suboxone on
these mobile health units could
help reach patients in need of
Matt in rural and remote areas
of the states, state, which may
be far from any public health
office.
However, to do so, public health
would need to require to acquire
a class E clinic license from
the New Mexico Board of Pharmacy
and register with the National
Drug Enforcement Agency, or DEA
as a narcotic treatment program.
In addition, the vehicles would
need to offload all of the
controlled substances such as
Suboxone, every night at a home
brick and mortar office which
itself would need to stock the
medications at a level such that
the vehicle would carry no more
than 5% of the total stock.
Some security measured was
measures would also be required
to mitigate the risks associated
with stalking opiates on a medic
on a mobile unit, though Mat
drugs tend to carry a lower risk
of theft.
If you look with me at the
bottom and sidebar of page 25,
we discussed the new season
mobile health unit providing
Matt in Oregon with plans to add
units in North Carolina and
Maine in the coming months.
Notably, new season, a private
provider collaborated with the
DEA to license and equip their
mobile unit, which now
physically deliversAt drugs to
patients, thus eliminating the
barrier presented by having to
obtain a prescription and then
take it to a third party
pharmacy.
Another pathway to connect
patients in need of Matt to
public health offices is through
effective screening.
The state collects data on
Medicaid funded screening brief
intervention and referral to
treatment or Spert. Espert
typically takes place in primary
care settings, emergency
departments, and potentially
public health settings. However,
if you refer to chart 5 on page
26, you will see that this type
of screening is at its lowest
level since 2020. This means
that even as the state has
invested in mat and expanded the
number of entities providing mat
and locations where patients can
be served, referrals from
expertpert, some of which could
be served by public health
offices have declined
The 2024 2024 GAA appropriated
$15 million to the healthcare
authority for fiscals, fiscal
year 2025 through 2027 for
evidence-based behavioral health
services, which include Sper.
These investments should
increase Sper, which should
provide more referrals into
public health offices, as well
as referrals to private
providers across the state.
Next, if you will turn back with
me to page 2, I will go over our
key recommendations.
First, the legislature should
consider reevaluating the
effectiveness of map provided in
public health offices after
Department of Health, LFC and
the Department of Finance and
Administration established
specific performance targets for
FY 27. If targets are not met,
the legislature should consider
diverting the funding toward
other effective MATT treatment
options.
The Department of Health should
centralize the management of
outreach and marketing efforts
of the provision of Matt in
public health offices to help
focus the department's efforts
and clearly define the
relationships with and the roles
of regional staff.
The DOH should also work with
LFC and DFA to set specific
performance targets for FY 27
through the Accountability and
Government Act to evaluate the
volume, efficacy, and impact of
map provided in public health
offices. The DOH should also
develop and submit to the LFC an
implementation plan that
includes performance targets and
plans for marketing, outreach
and program leadership,
including filling a state
coordinator position with
vacancy savings as part of the
department's
FY 27 budget submission.
Lastly, the DOH should expand
outreach and marketing efforts
of the provision of Matt and
Public health offices targeting
New Mexicans with substance use
disorders with direct marketing
and advertising to vulnerable
populations.
Uh, and thank you. I will now
turn it over to uh the Secretary
of DOH for a brief response.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, I'm Gina De
Blasi, Cabinet Secretary for the
New Mexico Department of Health.
Um, I have a brief presentation
that I'll go over quickly. It
won't take too much time on
this, but very high level, uh,
we coordinated, uh, very closely
with the staff and, uh, we agree
with the recommendations. So
there's really no pushback here,
but I'll, however, I do want to
say that I think it's important
to note
that the Department of Health is
really the safety net, uh,
provider within its communities,
um, if you look at MOUD and
service delivery across the
state. Many are coming through
other community providers and a
lot of the federally qualified
health centers as well. Um, what
we're looking at is that um
we've got 40 of our 42 offices
that provide clinical services,
uh, now provide MOUD that create
that critical safety net that I
just spoke about.
Um, one of the things that I
think is really important as
I've come into the Department of
Health is, I don't believe that
communities really understand
what services are provided in
public health offices. So one of
the things that we're working on
within the agency is really
trying to get the word out.
Here's your public health
office. Here are the services
that are provided, um, because
there's a lot of great work
that's being done there and
it's, and um I just don't
believe the community truly
understands what's all can be
provided within our public
health
offices. So we're working on
that as well. Um, what we've
done is we've expanded
telehealth capacity to allow for
MOUD services at each and every
of our, um, clinicals, uh, uh,
public health offices. Uh, we've
created the uninsured Access
Program to broaden the access to
MOUD.
Um, we're working with
corrections, um, probation and
parole, and we've trained them,
uh, on the, uh, Department of
Health Referral System. This
program is in its infancy, so
we're the, the teams are
continuing to meet to refine,
uh, those referrals and how
many, um, people that, that will
come into the public health
offices for treatment. Um, we're
utilizing the Department of
Health hotline, um, as an access
point, um, where a lot of calls
come in for individuals looking
for service
s uh, for any type of healthcare
services, and we did see an
increase in, um, requesting
services for medication assisted
treatment. So we've been
staffing our Department of
Health, uh, hotline with, with
those individuals to help
support that.
Um, we're working on a pilot
project to actually dispense and
deliver MOUD, um, through our
public health offices, uh, that
would be in, uh, let's see, it's
Donana County, uh, Ria Riba
County, and I believe Curry.
Um, and we hosted a statewide
training for nurses, providers,
and other support staff. Um, uh,
to, uh,
just educate on the referral
system for MOUD.
Our response to LFC
recommendations that you can
find on, uh, page 4,
the centralizing the program
management and marketing. We
agree. We're looking at hiring
and expansion coordinator, but I
would just notified last week
and it was identified in the
report that, um, we received
some opioid, uh, settlement
dollars to help support our MOUD
program and, um, for this fiscal
year, for fiscal year 206, we're
usually getting
about 3.5 million. It's just
under $900,000. So we're really
trying to figure out how we're
going to, um, help support this,
but we'll make it happen.
Um, but we're gonna need, where
we're really gonna rely on those
dollars was to purchase the, um,
injectables, uh, for, uh
buprenorphine. Uh, we're working
on strengthening our
collaboration with New Mexico
Corrections Department, as I
mentioned earlier, um, and we
actually just completed the
training, uh, for our health
promotions teams that are in the
communities should be out
working in uh rural New Mexico
or even in the urban areas
informing people of the service
availability and supports, uh,
through
public health.
And we're working on developing
a more comprehensive marketing
plan, um, that I think will be
very, uh, community-based, um,
on what the needs are versus
just as big, huge. We could do
an overarching marketing plan. I
think on public health as, as a
whole and touch on MOUD, but I
think it's really the roots in
the on the ground working with
communities, working with
community providers using our
health promotion teams, getting
out to our local providers,
letting them know that we're
there as the safety net.
Um, we're developing an
evaluation plan, um, in the
Southwest region, we had
surveys, uh, designed to measure
clinical outcomes. Those are
currently underway. Um, and
we're including additional
performance targets as
suggested, um, within the
report.
Um, looking at expanding alcohol
use disorder, um, through public
health. We're gonna build on our
current MOUD infrastructure to
integrate.
um, alcohol use disorder
treatment, uh, we'll assess the
protocols, training needs, and
public awareness strategies to
support alcohol use disorder
treatment expansion.
And then, as I stated earlier,
we'll develop and submit an
implementation plan, uh, looking
through community engagement,
the mobile health unit plan,
strengthening counseling service
options, uh, through our
offices, uh, the dispense the
dispensing medication pilot, um,
enhanced expert training and
also maximizing the revenue.
For the mobile health units, we
have 5 of those. It's really not
the DEA licensure that's the
problem. It's really more, uh,
the state board of pharmacies
who we're working with them on
what that looks like. And we're
thinking that it could
potentially be um
the unit would be a clinic
expansion license, uh, like a
satellite, uh, through the,
through the public health
office. So we're, we're looking
at, at, at that and having
those, uh, levels of
conversations.
Um, we're looking at the
feasibility of providing the
long-active, long-acting
injectables via the mobile
units, however, it did say that,
you know, we're probably a
little challenged as it relates
to the, uh, funding for that,
uh, currently.
And with that, uh, Madam Chair,
I will stand for questions.
Thank you, Madam Secretary. Um,
I'm, I'm gonna just call on
everybody. So we'll at this
time, we'll start at this end.
Representative Johnson, and, um,
I'll give you
4 min. Well, let me look at the
agenda.
Um, 4 minutes.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for your presentation.
I'm, I understand we have an
office here in Gallup.
So with that being said,
do you know if we work with the
surrounding chapters, we have
many local Navajo
government chapters surrounding
the Gallup area within reach,
and I think, uh, a great place
for presentation, information
sharing, even spending the day
providing um
a booth and whatnot. Thank you.
Madam Chair, Representative
Johnson, we agree, as a matter
of fact, uh, we just hired a
tribal opioid response
coordinator and we're working on
contracts.
um, specifically for that, and
we've got 4 deliverables, uh,
specifically within those
contracts, and it's to deliver
mat to tribal members, uh, who
are most are already in the
development of their programs,
uh, we're providing overdose
prevention education, including
a naloxone distribution. Uh,
we're conducting community
events, um, to help support
that, and, uh, we're looking at
developing some community
workshops as well.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you. Please keep me
in the loop. Thank you.
Thank you, uh, Senator Pope.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I'm
going to go ahead and pass.
Representative Lunstrom.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Can I
have his time?
OK,
I, uh, I got to say, Madam
Chair, I'm shocked. I'm blown
away and, and trying to keep my
blood pressure down. When I
think about what I just heard
from this LFC, uh, evaluation.
When I think about that these
people that have major alcohol,
uh, disorder in my community
have not had access to this MAP
treatment in a public office
that's right across the street.
That's completely unacceptable
to me. And I'm chairing the
committee that is supposed to be
defending now why we don't want
to lose Medicaid.
And if this is Medicaid money, I
want to know why this stuff
isn't out there in the
communities where we need it.
The public health offices
literally right across the
street.
and when I hear that we only had
3 mat patients for alcohol
assistance, that's ridiculous.
I can find you 3 in this
building.
I just need to tell you, Madam
Chair, this is alarming. It's
nonsense and it's a damn good
thing I'm not a voting member on
this committee. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Lindstrom. Representative Anaya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um
I was looking at the Sper
utilization in particular, and I
had a couple of questions about
this, um,
if we knew that this was, um, if
we knew that they utilization
was a problem. I'm just
wondering why we didn't get some
of the training to use this
screening tool into place a
little bit earlier. That's the
first piece, but the second
piece, if I'm recalling
some conversations that I had, I
can't remember if it was you,
Madam Secretary, or if it was
within this committee, but
there was the idea to have the
public health offices
essentially become primary care
sites. And I'm wondering what
those plans look like now, um,
especially in relation to me.
So if you could just speak to
those two things, that would be
great.
Sure, um, Madam Chair,
Representative Anaya.
um, I'll start on the latter
first. Yes, we're looking at
expansion of, uh, primary care
out of our public health
offices. It's really the
availability of the providers
and our ability to attract
providers within our public
health office. Most of them are,
um, nurse practitioners doing a
great job, um, and so that isn't
its works. We did a, uh, we're
working with the um Mscalero and
Ruidoso, um, because there were
some challenges with access
there. So we enter
into agreement. We're staffing
with the nurse practitioner.
We're pulling, um, uh, the
community and in providing, uh,
primary care services. We're
doing that at our midtown in
Bernna Leo County and a few of
our other public health offices
in this state, but that is the
goal to expand primary care out
of public health office. So
absolutely
Um, as it relates to Esper
training. The expertper training
is typically, uh, provided
through a contractor out of the
healthcare authority and the
behavioral Health Service
division.
Um, so it's, I just think it
really needs been working with
the healthcare authority on, um,
really reinvigorating what needs
to be done there with getting
more of those, of those
trainings and those screenings
completed.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I would
ask about juvenile mat, but I am
imagining that my colleague will
be asking about that. So thank
you.
Representative Chavez, thank
you, Madam Chair, and yes, I was
going to ask about juvenile mat
because I don't see Madam Chair,
any reference to what kinds of
services are provided to
juveniles, especially, um, those
juveniles who are in, um,
correctional facilities,
juvenile correction facilities
and juveniles who might be in
CYF custody, CYFD custody. Madam
Chair Representative Chavez, so,
um, after the
um LFC committee here and he did
a little bit of research on that
and what I'm finding is that
it's mixed.
So,
um, depending on where those
referrals are going. For
example, I met with the Adobe
program in Bertollio County last
week.
and they're receiving those
first uh referrals from, um, the
juvenile detention center and
providing the provision of MOUD,
uh, for youth, um
our own sequoia is currently
not, and that will be changing.
Um, so we will, well, we were,
um, I'm working with, uh, Doctor
Miranda Durham, who is our
deputy cabinet secretary and
also our chief medical officer
to look at working with that
medical director within that
facility to start providing, um,
that level of service. So it's
mixed on whether they're
receiving those services or not
it's depending on where those
youth are being referred.
Madam Chair, yeah, I, I, and I
don't think that that's
necessarily how we should be
approaching it, because
basically what I think is
happening is that we are
allowing the facility or the
provider to really make the
decision and the decision needs
to be made by the kids who are
experiencing, um, substance
abuse disorder or alcohol abuse
disorder. Um, so I think we need
to change that, um.
these kids need to have the
services available to them.
Um, we have the money available
and I think that we need to make
it a requirement of, um, the
facilities that we are, um,
referring kids to so that they
are um able to receive, um
Matt
The other questions that I have
are related to um community
partners, um, on page 22 of the
LFC report. It talks about the
Albuquerque Community Partners,
um, and, and there's one that I
have in mind and, and, you know,
I don't know where they're, why
they're not on the list, Madam
Chair, um, Albuquerque
Healthcare for the Homeless.
They do a lot of street
outreach, and they do, they're
probably one of the biggest
providers of healthcare to
unhoused, um, so why
are they on this list
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Chavez, uh, these were the
partners that signed up
initially, and I would add that
this program has only been in
place since October, and so
they're still recruiting, uh,
community partners. I think the
idea was to bring together as
many partners who are already
working in this space as
possible, to make it so that
they could provide as many
services, wraparound services to
these vulnerable populations at
the, at the time right after
they overdosed when they're most
likely to be, uh, receptive to
those kinds of services.
Um, and so I think that uh
golden opportunity would welcome
additional partners that could
provide the services that they
are looking to provide to those
folks. And I think in the
limited, uh, in the limited time
that they've been operating,
their main gripe is that they
don't have enough partners, like
that they are able to connect
people with services that they
need, um, but they, they, they
did note that being able to
provide more wraparound services
would make it possible for them
to serve more people. Uh, and
so, uh, getting those, uh,
getting
golden opportunity in touch with
additional organi organizations,
uh, would enable them to provide
more services to more people.
And Madam Chair, just going back
to um services being provided to
juveniles, I would think that,
um,
crap. Can I finish? Thank you.
That, that places like Amistad
in Albuquerque, New Day, and I'm
sure there's other facilities
around the state that provide,
um, services to unhoused youth
might also be good places, um,
for outreach because I don't
think that necessarily locating
um mass services inside of the
public health office where you
expect people to go is
necessarily the only approach
that we should have. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Representative
Ferrari, thank you, Madam Chair
and thank
you. This is great information.
Um, and I'm glad to see how, um,
Department of Health, you are
responding to a lot of these
things already. Uh, it's just a
matter of um how quickly we can
get the support and the funding.
I, um
I'm not sure where to start. Um,
I'm appreciative of the um, uh,
youth, um, treatment that we
need in our detention centers,
um, they, I believe, are getting
some of the telehealth, but if
they need more than, um, just
telehealth and more in person is
that available?
Madam Chair Representative
Ferrari, um, so for additionally
counseling and supports. I'm,
I'm without knowing all the
details here. I'm going to say
for the most part, yes. Um,
however, it's gonna be dependent
again on where those referrals
are going. So, uh, what,
whichever community provider is
receiving those youth, um, and
with the, the service provisions
are, um, I know that the, uh,
Presbyterian Health Plan have
is, is the single
MCO for um children in state
custody, and it's definitely
something that, that they've got
a robust network to provide
those, uh, uh, services for, for
individuals or for youth that
are in the children that state
custody.
Madam Chair, Representative for
mayor, I'd also like to
highlight that one of our
analysts at the LFC will also be
doing a follow-up report
specifically on MAT for
juveniles involved in the
justice system as well. So
you'll hear that later this
fall.
Great, I, I appreciate that.
Just to
be reassured there's more than
just, you know, what can be done
by telehealth. Um, also, um,
Madam Secretary, as you
mentioned, opioid money is going
down, um, to like 900,000, I
believe, um, are, um, things
like, um, and other Medicaid
cuts going to impact, you know,
what, uh, is available through
the Department of Health.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Ferrari, so the, uh
opioid settlement money and the
distribution of those opioid
settle settlement dollars, um,
the legislature, um, in past
years has appropriated dis
additional, uh, funding through
a distribution through to other,
uh, agencies, um, however, this
last session that didn't happen,
so right now it's just that 5%
distribution that's in statute.
It's what I understand
And is it relates to the
Medicaid dollars. I know that
that's a lot of uh
it's a, it's a big topic, uh, a
lot of conversation that's
really sits with the healthcare
authority. Um, we do get some,
uh, supports and funding, but if
you think about the provision of
individuals that will no longer
be, uh, Medicaid eligible, um,
in the future, um, you know, and
what we do within our public
health office and, and we bill
for, for Medicaid, what's gonna
happen is more of the uninsured
will probably come in and, um,
you know, that will probably
increase the funding necessary
to provide those, those
supports.
Representative, I'm gonna pause
your time. So was there a
request for more funding that
the legislature didn't pass or
was there no request?
Madam Chair, there was, there
was no request. I think it was
just
without being in the details of
it previously. I think there was
an assumption that that
distribution, um, there would be
money within that distribution,
but that didn't happen this last
session, and my assumption may
be because of Senate Bill 3 and
all the work that's being done
there as well.
Not, not to be on you, but we
can't find you if you don't ask.
Go ahead
Thank you. And, um, also I'd
just like to um note that, um,
as you're working uh Department
of Health and HCA with
communities for some of these
different programs to be
expanded, um, that the, um,
alcohol harms alleviation
funding, um, could be used for a
lot of these different programs
and also for the prevention, but
also, um, we need to get the
word out to people because I
didn't realize
um Las Cruces, so don't, uh,
Donana County was, uh, using the
MOUD so, um, well, I guess
because of long term, but there
isn't much advertisement, and I
know social media
and TikTok that kids would be
able to see, um, a lot of
different things, but we also
need to include the El Paso, um
uh media for helping to get more
of that outward in.
So thank you. Thank you,
Representative Jones.
Surprise
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you all for your presentation. A
lot of information. Um, I'm
just to follow up on what, uh,
Representative Chavez said about
street outreach in Albuquerque.
I know that that is staffed, uh,
maybe led medically led by UNM
nurse practitioners, seems like
that connection would be easy.
They do really great work, um,
my concern is with the mobile
units. I think mobile units,
especially in our rural areas,
are so important for all sorts
of healthcare access, but you
know, Matt is a combination of
necessary drug
s and, um, counseling. And so
how are we making sure that
we're treating people as
individuals with goals and, and,
and hopefully, uh, a goal and
then assessment along the way
that, that allows wherever
possible for people to become
drug-free rather than drug
dependent for life on a mobile
unit that just brings them
drugs.
That's my question
Madam Chair, Representative
Jones, yes, that's, that's one
of our, um, we'll be working
with that within our plan to
look at how we improve those
counseling and supports, uh,
whether it's through the public
health office or through our
mobile outreach.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. So it seems like it
would, it would, uh, be really
important to work with the, the
local DOH then uh with a mobile
unit, they have that connection
to really treat people as
individuals. Like I said, rather
than just buy a plan that says
give this drug.
Um, a lot of times I just
the conversation about
juveniles, especially, they
don't always know what they
need. They might need help, but,
um, even adults don't know
necessarily until they've had
counseling.
how to get better. So I think
that's very important. Thank you
very much.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Block. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you all, Doctor, Doctor
Valdez, Miss Klug, Secretary de
Blasi. So just making sure I'm
understanding, uh, I'm in Otero
County, so we have the Otero
County Health, uh, Center. And
so we have had a lot of visits
according to your data on your
little cool pie chart. By the
way, thank you for that. It's
very easy to read. So I'm just
wondering, why is it that we
have such a high concentration
in Otero County when places like
Berlio County, where I believe
there's 3,000+ people in need
are not getting that. Why is it
that we're doing such a, I
wouldn't say great job. We don't
want more people to visit these
clinics, but I just want to make
sure that I understand why we
are kind of in that target zone,
Madam Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Block, uh, the reason is, uh,
that historically Donana County
has been a leader in providing
mat through public health
offices and has been doing it
since 2007, I believe. And as a
result, they've, uh, there's
been more targeted outreach. Uh,
they've worked with more
community organizations and they
have more community partners and
have been able to kind of more
effectively leverage those
relationships to bring awareness
to the communities that are most
vulnerable and most likely to
need those services, and
that has been, uh, kind of true
regionally. So if you see, you
know, the, the utilization rates
across the southern part of the
state, uh, reflect that kind of
longer time frame, uh, and those
are the kinds of goals that we
have for the rest of the state
to bring that those same kind of
awareness and partnerships to
bring more of those vulnerable
populations in need of the
services, uh, to know that they
can go down the street to their
local public health office and
get those services. Um, and so
the answer to your question is
that they've just had more time
to implement these kinds of
uh, uh, awareness strategies and
have been effective at that at
that end.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you for that, Doctor
Valdez. So I'm just wondering
when it comes to the Otero
County facility.
Can you just tell me what we're
doing when it comes to getting
information out. You may not
know specifically every single
county, and I, I understand
that, but I'm just kind of
wondering what it is maybe with
the department, uh, is doing or
what we're doing in, in our
community to get these services
to people. And 105 people is
actually not very high, but if
you look at the state, which is
what, 300
70 something, it's a big portion
of that, and I'm just kind of
wondering how it is that we are
the ones that are kind of the
center of that. And I know it's
kind of a rehashing of that
question, but maybe this is a, a
question for the secretary. Yes,
Madam Chair, Representative
Block, um, absolutely, and
that's one of the things that
I've been looking at and working
with a team, um, in, uh, Donana
County and Otero County is, how
can we utilize what's been done
there, understanding that that's
been in place since 2007, so
it's been
a long time. So there are a lot
of relationships in community
connections within that
community that helps drive that
volume. Um, and what are those,
what are those, um,
relationships look like and how
can we build upon that and take
that to the other regions in the
state.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for that. And I know I'm
running out of time, but I, real
quick question about, I believe
you said the pharmacies we're
sending folks to pharmacies to
get these prescriptions filled.
I know we have a lot of
pharmacies in my area. So I'm
just wondering what that
utilization looks like because I
know places like, like Las
Cruces, and even where I am in
Alamogorda, we have a lot of
pharmacies. So is that something
that's driving these people? Is
that something that
you consider a factor versus a
very, a different county, let's
just say that's extremely rural,
that only has one pharmacy,
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative
Block, we do see that, uh,
places where there's very few
pharmacies that does prevent
present a major barrier for some
people to get the medications
they need. If there's only a
single pharmacy, we heard
stories about people might not
be allowed at that pharmacy or
it might be difficult for them
to get to the one pharmacy. Some
of our counties in New Mexico
are very large and and having
one pharmacy might be, you know,
might be an hour or 2 hours away
from them, which for somebody
who is in
a vulnerable position and has a
substance use disorder, that can
be prohibitive, which is part of
what drives our recommendation
to have mobile health units to,
to kind of bridge the gap in
some of those places. And then
just to raise awareness so that
people can plan and realize that
they can drive an hour and and
get the medications that they
need and they need to plan for
these kinds of things. And I
think with better outreach and
better education, those
communities will be more aware
of, of what's available to them
and, and kind of the barriers
that are out there, and we can
also work with the Department
of Health to knock down some of
those barriers and enhance
accessibility. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I hope we get all those,
uh, informative stuff out to
people because that's how we
know how we can get these people
in these programs. I hate to see
millions of dollars just sitting
there and not being utilized. So
thank you all. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and I, I think that that
would be something that would be
a low-cost thing to do, but also
a very high reward thing. So
thank you. Thank you. And
Representative Jones had a
follow-up and she did have time
left. Yes, thank you so much,
Madam Chair. Yeah, I, I just
wanted to point
out that, um, the access to
detox drugs and, you know, matt
treatment drugs has been an
issue, um, just this last
session, um, Chair Thompson and
I passed a bill, HB 171, that,
uh, well, let me back up and
just say what the problem was at
some of the rehab facilities
that were, um, considered
custodial care facilities. Um,
they were unable to admit
patients during certain times of
the day because they were
dependent on local pharmacies.
And as, um
kind of a side note, but this is
so important, even in Santa Fe,
I don't believe you have a 24
hour pharmacy. And even if you
do, they may not have those
drugs available. So when you're
looking at, um, having pharmacy
changes, pharmacy Act changes
that apply to mobile units. You,
you can look back at what we've
done. They're in the process of
changing, uh, the custodial care
rules so that they can actually
have, um, they can keep on site
the, the detox drugs
that they need so they can admit
patients at any time of day,
which I think was a huge, uh,
victory for us in treatment
across the state. We were really
in the dark ages, but, um,
they're, they're changing
pharmacy rules already to have
those drugs available. So
somehow maybe that will make it
easier for us to make mobile
units available, drugs and
mobile units available. Thank
you. Thank you, Madam
Representative Jones.
Representative Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
thank you for that presentation.
I think a lot of my colleagues
have asked a lot of the
questions, but I can't help but
echo what Representative
Lundstrom stated, I mean, we are
an ultimate crisis, and it
frustrates me that we have had
funds available that are going
unspent, and I really can't
believe that we're going to wait
2 more years to evaluate and
move forward. So that to me
says, I think we need to do
something
as a committee. Um, I would like
to hear
strategies in the upcoming
session for your outreach,
because if we're not going to
change anything for two years,
we need to know what your
strategy is and how you're going
to move forward and do outreach
to these community partners, um,
as Representative Chavez said,
I, I was just at healthcare for
the homeless visiting with them
last week, and they do so much,
and it is wraparound services.
People come in and so my
question for you is, um,
especially with the DOH
facilities
um, and the small facilities
that we have available, how does
that work? Because you said
there's a clerk and then there's
a nurse, and then they set them
up from telemed. So does that
mean that walk-ins are
unavailable, they can't just
walk in because that is a
majority of the time
with the crisis we're seeing
what those individuals need.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Chavez, uh, the one thing that
public health offices all will
do is if you walk in, they will
treat anybody uh anybody that
comes in. They'll, whether they
have private insurance,
Medicaid, uh, or they're not
sure. Uh, the pub public health
office is one of their baselines
that we heard around the state
was that anybody who walks in,
they will treat. And that's part
of their mission as like a
safety net, like safety net
organizations. You heard the
secretary talk about that they
are like kind of the the the
backstop
that anybody can be treated
there. So with regard to Matt,
if somebody walks in without an
appointment, without, uh,
without any reservation or, or
anything else, they will be
treated.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair, and
thank you for those answers. Um,
how does it work regarding
somebody say that goes into um
for my county, UNM, because this
is what happens a lot of times.
They go in, they go out. They go
in detox, they get out because
they don't have anybody
available to help them with
these addiction issues. So, do
you work well with UNM and do
they know that they can go to
DOH for assistance for treatment
instead of waiting weeks on end,
and then they get back
into this vicious cycle instead.
of addiction
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Chavez, we've got a, a very
close relationship with, with
UNM as a matter of fact, um,
over the last two weeks, uh,
last week I met with the Adobe
program, uh, 2 weeks prior to
that, we met with Malaro and the
Focus clinic. Um, you know, you
and him has a pretty robust, uh,
delivery system as it relates
to, um, addiction services and
supports, um
the one thing that I asked, uh,
of the university is that we
need to have improved
communication and collaboration.
Um, and I think we can always
build upon that, and that's,
that's definitely the goal
between the Department of Health
and the university. Um, there's
some things that, um, we may not
know about that might be
happening, um, that we could
probably do some better
follow-up on, but if we only
knew, so we're trying to figure
out what those, you know,
potentially maybe data sharing
agreements or,
or, um, you know, establishing a
cadence of case reviews, um,
amongst the Department of Health
and, and the university clinics
in order to improve them.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
thank you for that. I think, I
mean, data sharing, we need to
do that. If you need to set that
up, absolutely is a need, um,
because we need this
information. So I'll just close.
I had many other questions, but
I'm sure maybe he'll ask, but I,
I'll just close with I hope in
this coming session that we ask
for your outreach strategy and
we see what that is instead of
waiting 2 years to see if it
works out. Thank you. Minority
whip Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you presenters, um, just a
couple of quick questions. Um,
did I understand correctly that
you're just now working on
performance standards for this.
Um, Madam Chair, Representative
Martinez, additional enhanced
performance standards. We are
currently as uh Doctor Valdez
said, just tracking really the
number of individuals that, uh,
we were providing services to.
So we really want to look at
more outcomes-based data, um, in
order to provide that level of,
of understanding, um, of the
program and whether or not um
we're uh
having impact
Thank you for that. On page 13
of the LFC presentation, it
struck me that
the healthcare authority
estimates 9130 individuals need
met.
DOH is only treated 324. Is this
because there's no outreach
program and you're just waiting
for them to come to you?
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
uh, Martinez, again, we're the
safety net, so I don't, I don't
see Department of Health
treating 9000 individuals who
need those services. I do see
Department of Health working
with community providers to
provide that level of referral
and support so the community
providers are, um, receiving
those referrals whether it's
through us or other community
organizations.
Um, the other thing that I will,
that I will state in, uh, not an
excuse because highly
accountable here. This is a new
program for the expansion of
MOUD at the Department of Health
outside of what, uh, the
department had been doing for a
long time in southern New
Mexico. So this program really,
I would say, got off the ground.
Well, it may have started last,
um, spring, it really didn't
start, um, pushing things
through until late
summer, early fall of last year.
So it's relatively new.
So,
um,
it sounds like DOH is not res
you're saying DOH is not
responsible for treating these
people.
Is that correct
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative Martinez, DOH is
a responsible to ensuring that
anyone who needs services, um,
and we have that level of
outreach and supports and
referrals if they can't get it
within the community, we should
be providing that within our
public health office. So I
wouldn't want to say that I'm
saying that we're not
responsible, we are highly
responsible.
So Madam Chair, Secretary, who
is ultimately responsible for
this.
Is it DOH? is is HCA.
AOC who, who is ultimately
responsible for this.
Madam Chair and Representative
Martinez, I think um
it's everyone
It's the healthcare authority
ensuring that the, uh, whether
they've got Medicaid, that the
provision of the behavioral
health Service Network. Um,
there, we have enough providers
in order to provide that level
of of service, uh, healthcare
restority just is expanding
their uh community, a
certifiedun Bayor Health
Clinics, which is wonderful. Uh,
we're starting to see those
starting to open up across the
state. It's with the MCO
providers and ensuring that the
MCO care coordin
ator s are, are making those
connections for the individuals
who need those services, and
it's with Department of Health.
um, when we recognize a need
within the community that we are
addressing that need to the
point of, of representative
Lindstrom, um, related to
alcohol use disorder. Uh, what
are we doing? How are we
providing those supports and
ensuring that people are
receiving those services, and
it's on the community providers
as well through their outreach.
So it's all of us involved.
That's why those stakeholder
and community, um,
regional meetings are so
important because it takes
everybody to ensure that we're
trying to figure out this
fragmented system of, of
healthcare delivery.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Just one
quick last comment. I think
that's the problem.
Everybody's everybody's
responsible. We need one agency
to take the lead.
Um, if one agency steps up and
says, we're ultimately
responsible. We're going to work
with all the other agencies. I
think we see that number rise
and
the money that we're budgeting
for this program, I think we, we
then see real returns on that
investment. Uh, so I would
suggest we find one agency, make
them ultimately responsible and
work with the other agencies.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Excuse me,
Representative Gonzalez. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Um, I just had
a question looking at the dots
and the maps. Um, what
determines what health offices
provide the
MOUD or the MAT services, in
particular, I'm in San Miguel
County, um, looking at Torrance
County, where they don't have
any services, yet in that
county, 71% of the population,
you know, relatively receive
Medicaid services as a
percentage of the county
population. And I know Torrance
County it's notorious for them,
expecting them to come into
Albuquerque, coming into
Bernalillo County for services,
um, and Mora they're not in my
physical district, you know,
still one of those underserved,
underpopulated areas. What
determines whether you do offer
any mat service
s or MOUD services through a
public health office.
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative Gonzalez really
as it relates to Torrance Coing
or what that determination is,
it's the availability of a
provider within that community.
So our ability to attract a
provider at the Department of
Health to work out in that
public health office in order to
deliver those, those services.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you for that. And along
with that, um, like, is there a
listing um somewhere in
existence, again, new, new to
this committee, um, that does
list other entities that do
offer, say these mat services
outside of the, you know, the
public health offices. Um, you
know, that that is there, is
there just a general listing of
who does provide these services
in these counties, if not
getting it from the public
health office. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair and Representative
Gonzalez, we can, we can get
that, uh, delivered to, to the
committee, um, if needed, and
typically what you'll see within
the rural communities, it's
mainly a lot of the federally
qualified health centers that
are providing that service.
Um, thank you for that. Um, I
guess as a follow up to that is,
um, you know, the semi-Gi
Treatment Center is upcoming and
and I'm assuming that will take
some of the brunt of the slow,
particularly from some of these
nearby counties. So that is, um,
hopefully, you know, future
services to be able to be
offered. Um, and I, I also want
to echo, um, I'm a big proponent
of mobile units. Um I've long
thought, um, dealing with
transportation, school
transportation, but just
transportation is such an issue
in the counties that I serve in
counties that I work with on
other
areas, and this mobile unit
model, um, I've thought for
veteran services, you know,
possibly for this, that it could
be utilized in a lot of these
smaller areas, but I do also
want to um
echo um Representative Jones'
sentiment about the wraparound
services that that do come with
this, not being like a one stop,
you know, versus providing a
checkup versus you're now
providing treatment services
that do need that follow-up, but
we can find a way to make that
happen, hopefully for some of
these counties, you know, that
would be a way to utilize some
of those services. Um, so thank
you, thank you, madam.
Sure
Thank you, uh, Senator Charlie,
and excuse me, rep senators, if
I say representative, it's,
that's, that's my norm, so I
just excuse me
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I am
gonna ask all of my questions
because I want them all on the
record. So if you just want to
keep up with me and then we can
answer. I like making rules work
for myself. So I'm gonna do it
this way. Um, when it comes to
outcomes and accountability.
from what I can tell in the
report, it shows that we're only
counting visits, not outcomes.
And so I'm curious when DOH is
going to start reporting on
patient outcomes like retention,
relapse, recovery milestones,
and overdose reductions. In
terms of equity and community
partnerships, Madam Chair, how
is DOH ensuring that Matt
delivery in public health
offices is culturally relevant.
I do appreciate the answer to
Representative Johnson's, uh,
question, but I'm thinking about
tribal and rural
communities, Hispanic
communities where there's so
much stigma about going in and
engaging with these systems, and
that remains a barrier to
treatment.
Um, my third question is around
jails and corrections, given the
high rates of substance use
disorders for incarcerated
populations. What steps are
being taken to expand and ensure
that MAtt is being implemented
within the, the incarceration
sys, uh, detention centers.
Um, and then
I really am interested in how
DOH is coordinating with
corrections, jails, sheriffs,
um, to ensure that when a person
is released, that there's a
continuum of care.
And then finally, I am Madam
Chair, concerned about alignment
and duplication of services with
this, uh, behavioral health
package that was passed. How is
the rollout of MAT and public
health offices aligning with
this behavioral health package,
um, that was just passed in
2025. Our outcome measures
aligned with those within, uh,
SB1 in particular and what cross
cross agency structures are in
place to ensure that
health, um, offices under Matt
Services are not being
duplicated and that we're not
recreating silos. I worry about
the, um, I worry about parallel
systems without coordination,
Madam Chair. Thank you.
Excuse me just a moment
Madam Chair and Senator Charlie,
thank you for that. So out comes
an accountability. Um, so the,
we are doing exactly that.
We've, we're working with
Department of Finance and
Administration, and we're
establishing some new measures
for the level of accountability
and outcome, uh, that we will be
reporting on. Um, we're not
gonna wait till fiscal year 27,
not even for the strategy and
plan that, um, Representative,
uh, uh, Chavez spoke about
earlier. We're working on that
current
ly now
So absolutely we're gonna look
at how many people maintain, um,
within their, um,
within their treatment, where
were they referred, um, there's,
there's a lot of different
provisions that we are working
on, and that's gonna, that's
gonna build upon our plan. So
happy to get those to you once
they're finally developed, and
that should be actually pretty
shortly. Um, so happy to do
that. Um, yeah, we're doing a
lot with the tribes. Um, also
working a lot with communities
and uh utilizing health councils
and our health promotion team to
help provide that level of
support to ensure that we
are appropriately and culturally
engaging within our communities
in order to provide education
and supports and other services,
uh, within those communities, so
that's that, that will be part
of the plan as well.
Um, jails and corrections, um,
it is my understanding, and this
would have to go to, um
the corrections department to
completely answer the question.
However, the Department of
Health is, um
currently working, um, with the,
uh, corrections department, uh,
corrections is still building
their program. Um, so we're
going to anticipate more
referrals as the program moves
along.
Um,
we at the August 8th meeting,
um, corrections reported they
have 121 patients maintained on
Suboxone.
Um,
within NMCD and then that pilot
department started in January of
this year.
Uh, they don't have, they don't
do new starts, but what they do
is they'll maintain people on
Suboxone, so that's something
that we're talking, uh, to the
corrections department about,
uh, during this time, only 2
individuals have been referred
to us that have been released to
the community, as I stated, we,
this is new for them, so we
anticipate that that number is
going to increase, um, over
time. And, uh, we've built a
centralized referral system for
probation and parole.
Um, so we're gonna start to see
those numbers increase, and
then, um
all they have to do is just call
the Department of Health and
we're ready to receive and
provide those services and
supports.
Um,
let's see.
Department of Health and um
the coordination with, uh, the,
and the continuity and the
continuum of care, that's
exactly the reason for our, uh,
relationship with the
corrections department.
Um, so as individuals get
released, we want to make sure
that those services don't drop
and we're able to provide that
level of continuity and whether
or not those individuals want to
maintain that service within the
public health office, or they'd
rather to go to a community
provider. We can be the bridge
in that support to do it.
Um, alignment and duplication of
services, um, and so we work
very closely with the sister
agencies that provide these
levels of the healthcare
authority and Department of
Health, uh, work extremely
close, as do, uh, Children,
Youth and Families for the youth
who are needing services, uh,
corrections, and also now that
the, uh, housing, um, offices
over at the Department of
Worksforce Solutions. So the
duplication of services is
something that we don't want to
see either. As I stated, the
Department of Health is the
safety net, uh, for the
provision of services. There are
community providers that don't
want us to be their competition,
and we get that.
right? And so they're doing the
billing for those services. We
are the safety net. We will be
that bridge and if individuals
want to have their services
provided at Department of
Health, we will do that. Um,
it's, it's, it's a little more
challenging in some of the
smaller communities when you
have an FQHC that's providing
most of those services there. We
want them, we wanna make sure
that we are coordinating and
communicating and making those
appropriate levels of referrals,
uh, to the FQ
H C if it makes sense and if
that's what the patient wants.
And just a reminder, it's 4
minutes for questions and
answers.
And
but you're new, so
and you got your questions and
so I have, I have a bit. So for
LFC on chart 3,
like
we, many of us are older. These
colors are next to impossible,
to discriminate. I'd like red,
yellow, green, and blue or
orange something because it's
like, oh, which is this, which
is that? And I have good eyes
compared to some folks I hear.
Um
and table 5
I don't know what page that is,
but um.
are those individual patients or
visits, the numbers that are
there.
Page 15
Yeah, the, the second part of
table 5, are those, those are
unique patients, Madam Chair,
with regard to table 5 on page
15, uh, the bottom are the
number of individual enrolled
patients. The top are just
number of claims. So an
individual patient could make
multiple claims.
OK, so, so we are, we have 20 at
this point, we have 27 enrolled
patients and 17 that are
actively using the program for
meds. When you did your
evaluation, I don't mean
currently per se. Yes, at the
time of evaluation, that's,
that's, that's accurate. OK. And
Madam Secretary, I know you're
new and I'm not happy about this
at all. And, and I, it's not
personal by any stretch of the
imagination, but, um, and then
just another question on table 8
Um, I should have written the
pages down. It says, um
one of the partners is
Berna Leo Fire and Rescue. Is
that Berlio County or Bernal Leo
Town?
Uh, as far as I recall, Madam
Chair, that is Bernallio, the
town. OK. OK. Thank you for
that. Um, just a hint that
Burnleyoke County Fire and
Rescue should also be involved
because they cover a lot of
Albuquerque, um.
let's see
And, and just in terms of, of
the partners for that program,
um, the, the, the list is
disappointing. Um, there, the
healthcare for the homeless just
jumps out. That should obviously
be there. And so I'm wondering
if, if there has been exclusion
or if it has just been a lack
of, um, awareness from, from the
providers that, that, um, DOH
has not yet done the outreach to
those. I, I know
one phone call and they would be
interested. So I'm wondering why
that list isn't longer.
Madam Chair, we don't have
information on how that, how
those groups were put together.
Uh, all I can say is that they
have only been working together
since October, uh, and that uh
there was a lot of enthusiasm
among the groups that were
working together. And so I think
that if they were able to
connect with more agencies that
wanted to help, uh, that they
would be eager to do so. And and
that's my point. Thank you. Um,
so what is, Madam Secretary,
what is your budget for outreach
for this program? What is it
current
ly and what do you anticipate
and what will you ask for?
Um, Madam Chair, um, we
currently don't have a budget
for the program for outreach.
Other than utilizing our health
promotion team. What I will be
asking for is probably in the
nature of close to a million
dollars in order to do that
outreach, I've seen that with,
um, we're doing that currently
now if, if, hopefully you've
seen it with our Safe Sleep
campaign, uh, seems to be pretty
effective. We're getting a lot
of response to that. But in
addition to
that, it's really going to take
more, um, in my opinion, uh,
boots on the ground community,
um
involvement, uh, pushing with
our health promotion teams,
working with the Health
councils, working with the local
community providers, in addition
to an overall marketing plan.
Thank you for that and, and
again going back to table 8 on
page 22, um, how did DOH reach,
how did, how did you get the
partners you've got? What was
the outreach, um, or what, uh,
just tell me how you, how these
partners were recruited, chosen,
um,
Madam Chair,
as you stated, I
I don't, I, I'm not gonna sit
here and pretend to know I don't
know. Um, I'm new to, to the
department, but I will
definitely get a response to
that. And sitting here and
listening about uh healthcare
for the homeless and how they're
not involved. That's actually,
in my opinion, pretty
surprising. And I'm gonna sit
here and say that I must
thinking that they are involved.
So I will, I will do that
follow-up and get back to the,
to the committee, uh, no later
than tomorrow. Thank you for
that. Um, and then just, just a
few, a few, um,
statements. So handing someone
who someone gets to the point
where they're ready for help and
they go and you hand them a
prescription.
You may as well not in probably
90% of the cases. Things are
going to change on the way to
the pharmacy. It's really
disappointing that we don't
offer immediate treatment, and I
know there's restrictions, and I
hope that the department is
working their butts off to try
and get with the Department of
Pharmacy, whatever, with the LFC
whoever needs to do that because
it's um
we, we, we, everything we hear
on the news can be directly or
indirectly brought back to this
crime problems with CYFD,
healthcare costs, domestic
violence, all those things
have a substance abuse plays
plays a large role and we're
saying here, well, you know,
we'll get around to it and, you
know, it's, I'm really
disappointed that Burley that
Donana County has had this for
18 years, and DOH has never
attempted to
to replicate it. It's and again,
Madam Secretary, none of this is
is directed at you. It's just
frustration and I texted the
former chair, Senator Ortizi
Pino, to find out when we passed
medication assisted treatment in
the prisons. It's been at least
5 or 6 years. The pyramids were
built
in less time than it's taken our
corrections department to get
Matt up and running. Two
patients, we were thrilled with
one last year because it had
been years of zero. I'm throwing
it out there
This is unacceptable, and we
will have the Department of
Corrections Secretary here
today, um, and
this is ridiculous. Overdose
death when people get out of
prison, are incredibly high. We
have so many ways that we could
interrupt the cycle, and we
haven't bothered to do it, and
I'm very frustrated and I'm very
angry and I'm cranky. Um, so
with that, I think that's,
that's the end of my rant for,
for the moment, and then I will
allow our vice chair to
introduce herself.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Linda Lopez, Senator District
11, the Southwest quadrant of
Bernalo County, and I wasn't
here for the most of the
presentation, but I say ditto
for many of the questions that
were asked today as I've read
through the presentation. Thank
you. Thank you so much for your
presentations. OK, we will move
to, um, juvenile justice
overview from Carly Malone
Malone, um, from LFC.
Whenever you're ready, as I'm
sorry, but I could be a
waitress. Get your mouth full
and say how is everything?
There we go
Good morning, Madam Madam Chair
and members of the committee.
Um, my name is Carly Malone, and
as of a couple of weeks ago, I
am the new analyst for CYFD and
Workforce at the Legislative
Finance Committee.
Um,
I was with the Legislative
Finance Committee about 10 years
ago and just returned to the
state and returned to
legislative Finance Committee.
So I just wanted to introduce
myself since I'm a new face.
Um, I'm going to provide kind of
a broad overview of juvenile
justice this morning and provide
kind of some of the histories,
some of the process, some of the
trends that we're seeing, um,
and then discuss some of the
best practices, recommendations
that the LFC has made in the
past. Um, I will note at the
start that the LFC is working on
a new, um
evaluation of juvenile justice,
both secure facilities and
informal kind of community
services that is slated for this
fall. So there will be some
additional information kind of
coming on the trends and
recommendations front.
Um
so just kind of the overarching
purpose of the New Mexico
Delinquency Act, and to quote
kind of the, the primary
language is that consistent with
the protection of the public
interest, to remove from
children committing delinquent
acts, the adult consequences of
criminal behavior, but to still
hold children committing
delinquent acts accountable for
their actions to the extent of
the child's age, education,
mental and physical condition.
Background and all other
relevant factors and to
provide a program of
supervision, care, and
rehabilitation, including
rehabilitation, rehabilitative
restitution by the child to the
victims of the child's
delinquent act, to the extent
that the child is reasonably
able to do so.
And so the overarching purpose
of the system is to, um,
recognize children and youths
diminished culpability and
capacity, but also to hold them
responsible and then to
recognize their greater capacity
for rehabilitation and try to
ensure that they do not become
repeat offenders or end up in
contact with the adult criminal
justice system.
In New Mexico in the early
2000s, we broadly expanded the
statutory purpose of the New
Mexico uh delinquency Act.
and we included a number of
additional purposes such as
strengthening families
successfully reintegrating
children into homes, encouraging
collaboration across government
agencies and communities, uh,
developing juvenile justice
policies and procedures that are
supported by data
encouraging efficient processing
of cases.
uh, reducing disparities based
on gender and race.
improving conditions of
confinement for those youth that
are committed.
Um, and in achieving a reduction
in juvenile justice.
uh referrals and warrants.
So the process kind of generally
plays out such that
a juvenile, um, is referred to
juvenile justice services,
either for a delinquent act or a
non-delinquent act.
and a juvenile probation officer
is assigned, um
that
uh, referral, and reviews the
allegations, gathers relevant
information, um, in discussion
with the individual and family
and others involved during a
preliminary inquiry, and then
the JPO makes the decision about
whether or not to, um, refer
that case to the system for
formal adjudication or refer the
youth out for informal, um,
services or dismiss entirely.
Looking a little bit more
closely at the ways that those
referrals come into the system,
there are both delinquent and
non-delinquent referrals, the
overwhelming majority of
referrals are delinquent
referrals, which are acts based
on acts committed by a child
that would be designated a crime
if committed by an adult.
There are relatively few
non-delinquent referrals or
status offenses, which are
specific to, um, children and
would not be a crime if an adult
had the same action, largely um
truancy or runaways.
And then the other large chunk
of referrals are somewhat
meaningful chunk of referrals
come through uh probation
violations. So a youth who is on
probation, um, violates a term
of the, the conditions of
supervised release.
After those referrals come in,
as I mentioned, there's a
preliminary inquiry conducted by
the JPO.
where the youth and the family
members discussed the, um, case
and the allegation and the JPO
decides whether to refer for
formal, um
proceedings or for informal
services, uh, most
referrals result in informal
services, um, but if it were
results in informal service, the
uh, JPO refers the case to a
children's court attorney.
and that attorney determines
whether or not to file a
petition in court and proceed
with adjudicating.
the offense.
The Children's Court attorney,
there's another kind of
diversion point here, has the
option to, um, refer the youth
for informal services rather
than proceeding with, uh,
adjudication.
When a case is
uh, the two waste cases are
handled, as I mentioned,
informal, informal. In an
informal, which is the majority
of
referrals, um, in an informal
circumstance. The youth is
referred to supervision or
services, um, and in the formal
uh, proceeding, the youth will
proceed in children's court,
much like a trial in adult
court.
though with different um kind of
rights and responsibilities.
The informal processes that are
kind of referred out to include
diversion programs, counseling,
community service, victim
restitution or informal
supervision.
um, and that keeps a youth in
the community.
and in a formal process, the
youth appears, enters a plea, a
detention decision, um, or
conditions of release are
determined, the proceeding, um,
is adjudicated in the trial
phase, and then the disposition
can either be conditions for
probation, um, or commitment in
a secured facility, and the
terms of commitment are one
year, 2-year, or up until 2
1
Now, in the 2000s I mentioned
New Mexico had um kind of a
broader purpose in the statute.
And we're seeing, uh, high
levels of referrals and youth,
um, offenses. And
took a, was a national leader in
using data, um, beginning in
2008, working with the Annie E.
Casey Foundation, um, to kind of
reform the justice system. and
saw really impactful results.
And the big ways in which that
reform, uh,
manifested was on the one hand,
uh, trying to reduce commitment
and the use of secured
facilities for juveniles. Uh,
leaning into community services,
uh, as an alternative
And the other part of that, and
they worked with Annie Casey on
the juvenile JDAI alternatives
juvenile detention alternatives
initiative, and the second part
of that, um, kind of evolution
in the beginning in 2008 and in
the system.
was to, um, change the types of
conditions of confinement
towards a much more
rehabilitative model. And that
was the cambiar model, looking
into, um, following the Missouri
model and reducing, um, kind of
the ways in which juvenile
commitment looks much like
um, adult detention and making
it much more, um,
com
facilitative towards
rehabilitation. So going to
school, having more kind of
comfortable spaces, and you can
see that in the remaining
detention centers in New Mexico.
Now turning to some of the, the
trends that we've been seeing. I
will note that, um
in the last year or so, some of
CYFD's public facing, um,
reporting has declined, so some
of these trends aren't through
2025, um, as I mentioned, we
will have those
um
updated in the evaluation that
LFC is conducting at the moment.
But
looking first to referrals, um
there's been a marked decrease
in the number of referrals since
the kind of
009 period and there were about
20,000 referrals, um, to the
juvenile justice system that
declined in kind of bottomed out
around 2021, um, kind of in the
COVID era, and then has slightly
upticked since then.
when it was at its lowest point,
it was kind of in the range of,
um, 5000 referrals. And
as of
24, there were about 7000
referrals, and it would appear
that, um, for fiscal year 25,
there will be a similar kind of
number of referrals. So there's
been an uptick, but not nearly
to the kind of pre
- s y s te m reform, um,
period
Notably, um, the delinquent
referrals that have declined
most dramatically, are
misdemeanor referrals. Uh, the
number of felony referrals has
been rather consistent over
time.
Uh, you will see that there's
been, um, again, that uptick in
felony referrals, but a much
larger increase in misdemeanor
referrals, since 2020.
And just as a kind of overview,
the, the top charges for
juvenile delinquent referrals
for misdemeanors, are battery
use or possession of drugs, uh,
shoplifting, battery of a
household member, and uh kind of
public new public fighting and
creating violence in public.
and for the felony charges, the
top 5 are aggravated assault
with a deadly weapon, unlawful
carrying of a deadly weapon, and
criminal damage to property,
burglary, and battery on a peace
officer.
So, kind of all in all, we are
seeing this uptick in referrals,
but it's not nearly, uh, back to
kind of pre-juvenile justice
system reform.
levels
Similarly, since the kind of
2008 reforms, we've seen a
significant reduction in the
secured
uh, youth population at secured
facilities in the state.
Uh, in kind of the
0809 era, there were, uh,
greater capacity, but also, um,
more juveniles in committed, uh,
insecured facilities.
There were kind of 200+ on
average in a given year it
leading up to kind of 2016. And
then we've seen that number come
down. Um, several of the secured
facilities in the state have
closed. There are now only 21 in
Donana and one in Bernalilo.
um, and the capacity of those
facilities is about 150. Total
and the average, um, population
in fiscal year 25 was 114. So
there is still capacity in the
system, um, despite the
reduction, and that's a really
success. That's a success story
for the state that we've reduced
our reliance on that type of
secured facility.
um, and kind of shifted towards
more community alternatives.
Um, looking at recidivism, we
have also seen, um,
those numbers kind of stay
relatively low and actually
decline in recent years.
Um
the CYFD reports both recidivism
within 2 years after commitment
and recidivism within 2 years
after field supervision and
between
2023 and 2025, we've seen the
number of recidivist, the
percent of recidivism decline,
um, in particular for
individuals after commitment.
Um,
one thing I want to point out is
that we have been very
successfully as a state using
risk assessments and making
risk-informed decisions, both
for detention decisions, and
for, um,
individuals during commitment
and after commitment
and, uh, those validated risk
instruments. There's both a risk
assessment instrument and a
secured, uh, structured
decision-making instrument.
And both are validated and
perform very well. So when an
when a youth is, uh, identified
as low risk and not detained,
they only, uh, commit
another offense, about 8% of the
time
And we've very successfully
relied on that tool to just
decrease disparities in the
system and make data-informed
decisions about detention.
Our understanding at LFC is that
CYFD has made some changes to
that risk assessment tool, um,
and
that may be resulting in
more overrides, um, and more
detention in a pre-adjudication
capacity.
Um
that tool was last revalidated
in 2022. Um, so we know that the
tool was working well and we
don't quite understand why those
changes may be, um, have been
made.
Um, the last kind of trend data
that I wanted to mention is
pretty dated, but also very
important, which is, uh, duly
involved youth.
and from national research, we
know that between 7 and 29% of
youth with a history in the
child welfare system, also have,
um, contact with the juvenile
justice system. And remarkably,
nationally, we know that 45 to
83% of youth who are involved in
the juvenile justice system,
also have a history with the
child welfare systems. There's a
significant cross
o ver between individuals who
are touching the protective
services side of CYFD and the
juvenile justices side of CYFD.
Uh, in New Mexico specifically,
a 2015 study found that 23% of
juvenile justice, uh, service
clients in New Mexico also had
involvement, um, with protective
services and 34% had some
interaction with protective
services. So we know that this
population exists and we
would love to know what that
type of crossover is currently
an updated number. Um, our
understanding is that CYFD has
the ability to track that and to
observe that in the data, and we
would love to see that type of
information updated.
Um, now just to go into some of
the previous LFC recommendations
and a couple of specific
recommendations. Uh, the last
time that LFC reviewed the
juvenile justice system was in
2023.
where, um, but it was a kind of
more limited look at juvenile
justice facilities and the
recommendations that came out of
that were to continue to
evaluate the juvenile justices
Service's budget to identify
opportunities to achieve
staffing efficiencies, and
that's largely driven by the
decreasing caseloads. Over the
period of time where referrals
and uh, committed youth have
declined, um, the CYFD, uh, the
juvenile
justices budget has continued to
grow and the cost per individual
involved has gone up. So
identifying efficiencies there.
um
we've also recommended that CYFD
update its facilities' master
plan to account for the reduced
juvenile justice populations
committed, uh,
and kind of similarly, in, in
line with that recommended that
juvenile justice funding be
moved upstream toward services.
So whether those are the
informal services or other
behavioral health services for
at-risk youth.
um
we kind of shuffling that
funding to, um, account for the
reduced population.
Another recommendation is to,
uh, continue steps to improve
monitoring and service outcomes
amongst external providers who
receive funding, um, and one of
the things that the evaluation
plans to look at is kind of what
the array of service providers
are around the state that are
receiving funding, um,
but we also want to make sure
that they're providing, uh,
high-value services.
And then lastly, CYFDA itself
could provide some direct
services, particularly in the
behavioral health space, and
particularly in geographic areas
where those services aren't
available. And two of those
services that have that are
evidence-based and have strong
returns on investment. One is
multi-systemic therapy, which is
an intensive therapy treatment,
focusing on youth with very
serious anti-social behavior
s um, and it involves
stakeholders, family, peers,
school, um, it's been shown this
evidence-based treatment has
been shown to reduce youth's
criminal behavior.
um, out of home placements and
behavioral health issues and to
also improve family functioning.
Currently, um
our understanding is that, uh,
multi-systemic therapy is only
available in the Bernallio area
and increasing provision out
outside of that area could be
something that CYFD does
directly through direct service
provision. Uh, similarly,
functional family therapy, um,
is another evidence-based
program that's based on the
family system as a whole.
and views youth behavioral
issues as, um, and substance use
issues within the context of the
family unit, and it's
particularly effective in
treating conduct or behavior
problems such as oppositional
defiant disorder and substance
use disorder again has a strong
return on investment, but is
also only available currently in
kind of the, the center central
part of the state. So another
opportunity to use an
evidence-based, um
alternative to commitment or
confinement for youth.
Um
so that was just kind of a broad
overview. Um, I'm happy to take
questions. Uh, I am quite, quite
new to this position. So
anything that I'm not prepared
to answer. I'm happy to get back
to you all with.
Thank you so much. So we will
start with Senator Charlie. Go
to that end, and then come
around.
just so you don't get used to
any pattern. I'll full of
surprises. Go ahead, Senator
Charlie, and um
let's say 3 minutes this time.
OK, uh, Representative Gonzalez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um,
thank you for the presentation.
And again, um, I, I've been um
attending a few presentations,
specifically on, you know,
juvenile justice over and, and I
just maybe have a question. I
was trying to find data, um,
kind of correlating the 21 of
the concerns and some other, um,
presentations, workshop I've
gone to is the capacity of the
juvenile facilities, um, to be
able to hold whether um there
was somebody um that maybe has
been charged with a serious
crime, you know, waiting or, you
know, uh, the capacity and
particularly the question came
up myself as a rural legislator
is
you know, for those that do not
have, um, juvenile facilities
like where would, you know,
what's the process or where
would they go? But according to
your stats here, um, we are
under capacity, that we are not
quite reaching and making sure
I'm reading that chart right.
You're trend is showing that um
you actually actually have a
much higher capacity than where
we are at with with
individuals that are in those
facilities. Can you maybe
elaborate on that a little bit?
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, Representative
Gonzalez, um, I should clarify
between two different types of,
um, detention. What this chart
that you're looking at is
showing is, um, secure detention
for individuals who are
committed after adjudication.
And that is run by the state and
CYFD. So there are two
facilities, um, YDDC and
Albuquerque and J. Paul Taylor
in Donana. And
those two facilities have a
capacity, combined capacity of
156 beds.
The pre-adjudication of of uh
youth is a separate
uh, system of facilities that
are actually run by counties.
And it sounds like maybe that's
what you are, um, referencing
capacity concerns about.
um, there are a couple in the
state, several have closed
because of
um, insufficient kind of not
capacity for youth, but there
were not very many youth in the
detention pre-adjudication de
county detention centers.
Um
I don't know off the top of my
head, the total capacity of the
existing county detention
centers, but I do know that, um
counties have inter, uh,
governmental agreements to, uh,
house youth who need to be
detained, pre-adjudication, um,
with, for example, YSC in
Albuquerque. Uh, and the
capacity of that facility, I
believe, is uh
I believe is 76 with 1212 beds
for girls and the remainder for
boys.
Some
sometimes you'll see that
they're under capacity, but they
may be at capacity for a given
gender. Um, but that is
something that the LFC
evaluation is looking into.
Thank you, thank you for that,
uh, clarification on some of the
data. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And just a reminder to members
that you can always reach out to
LFC staff if you don't get your
question or if something pops
up, um, on your drive home. Oh,
I should have asked. Uh,
Representative Chavis.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for this presentation. Um,
it is very interesting looking
at your data and what you're
presenting versus
what we see in the community.
Um, my first is, I know, and we
talked about the Missouri model
again in uh CCJ last month, so
it's interesting and we did note
that we are using some of those
tools that
apparently we're looking at to
use, but we're already using
currently. Um, so my question
is, one, I know you stated that
we are looking at, um, really
some of the juveniles here being
reintegrated into the homes. Is
that our goal? And if it is our
goal, are we looking at, um,
maybe
the family and are they learning
generational crime in some of
those families is that still the
goal to reintegrate into those
homes if that is the case. Um,
that's one question. And then my
second question is, informal
services, um, what is the
definition for informal, um,
versus formal.
other than
being
facilitated post capacity, um,
and then
my last question is, um,
regarding recidivism. It shows
that you're following them for 2
years, but are you following
them through once they're
adults, or you only following
this through and is the data
only showing until they're 18
years old.
Madam Chair, Representative
Chavez, um, I'll take those in
order first, on the question of
reintegration, I think
that's probably a question
better directed towards the
agency, but I will note that the
statutory purpose emphasizes
reintegration, um, and one of
the ways that that could be
facilitated is through provision
of wraparound services to the
family, perhaps.
Um, on the second, the
distinction between informal
services and formal, is actually
more about the processing of the
case. So whether a case is
referred to a children's court
attorney.
takes it into kind of the formal
process. Um, some of the
services that are youth are
referred to both in the informal
process and
perhaps because the uh
children's court attorney.
refers them to them or because
after adjudication, the court
refers them to the services
would be similar. So community
service, counseling, um,
behavioral health. So those
types of services have a lot of
overlap. Um, and then on the
recidivism question, I am not
aware of data that's following
the youth into adulthood. Um,
but I'm happy to look into that
further and, and get back to
you. Thank you so much. And then
one last question, um, I know
why DDC is.
at capacity a majority of the
time, pre-adjudication, but
you're saying that usually we
are not at capacity and there is
still capacity. So is that post
adjudication is what you're
looking at?
Madam Chair, Representative
Chavez. So there are two
facilities in, um, the
Albuquerque area. One, why did
you see, as you mentioned, that
is for um
youth after adjudication when
they're secure commitment, and
then YSC, which is run by the
county, which is the
pre-adjudication facility.
The
pre-adjudication facility run by
the county, I think has been,
um,
the one that has been
discussed recently as um having
a capacity issue.
Um, YDVCA will one additional
note, um, just finished some
renovations to increase
capacity, um, as well.
And just, just a clarification,
YSC Youth Services Center? OK,
just making sure. Yes, Madam
Chair, I apologize. OK, no,
that's OK. We all speak in
acronyms and I'm trying to
make sure folks know what we're
talking about.
Senator Representative Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I do not
have any questions. Hey,
Representative Jones
thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
going to pass, but thank you for
the presentation.
I could get used to this. Uh,
Representative Johnson
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for your presentation.
I just have a really quick
question on page 5, you have
fostering and encouraging
collaboration between government
agencies and communities
regarding juvenile justice
policies and procedures.
That sounds really um.
beautiful and nice and simple,
but what is that? Can you
provide an example and can you
define communities for this
purpose, and then, um,
specifically what government
agencies other than public
safety and, and the judicial.
Thank you
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Johnson. So what's
on that bullet point there is
the statutory language of the
purpose. Um, I don't know how
community is defined in statute
or if it is, um
but I do think one of the ways
in which there is collaboration
between the state and local
governments is through continuum
funding, um, for local
governments to provide services
for, um, youth that are justice
involved.
OK, thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. That, that's all I have.
Senator Pope
and I'm going to pass him out of
the chair and you don't, don't
have to worry. I'm not
accumulating all the minutes for
later.
Yeah, um, Representative Torres
Velasquez, and if you could
introduce yourself with your
district, um,
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um
I'm Diane Torres Velasquez,
representative for House
District 30 in Bern Leo County.
And that's the area in the
Northeast heights that surrounds
the Aurora, the Losso golf
course. Um
my, my question and um I also am
new to this committee and so I
do have lots of questions, but
on this particular presentation,
um, and I was listening in on
the way, great information this
morning. Thank you all. Um, on
this particular presentation,
I'm, I'm curious about, uh, the
connection between the
delinquency Act, which um the
dates, I think, um,
well, the dates on the expanded,
uh, statutory purpose was 2003
and 2007 when we were in a
different space, uh, data-wise
and um with the internet and I'm
wondering if that is the reason
for the lack or the um not yet
happening connection between the
data for, um, the duly involved
youth, or if there are other
reasons in
what would it take to make those
connections.
Madam Chair, Representative
Torres Velasquez, um, I believe
that the existing data systems
that CYFD has um
have the ability to
track the duly involved youth
currently.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, so,
so I'm seeing that it has the
ability to track and examine,
but it seemed like as you were
presenting that maybe there was
additional information or maybe
I just made that assumption that
there is additional information
that y'all might think would be
helpful, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, Representative, uh,
the last time that we have seen
that information studied was
2015 and did see that there was
a high percentage of duly
involved youth. We at LFC think
that that would be an important
and informative metric, um, and
we'd like to see it updated,
but, um, CYFD has not, to the
best of our knowledge, done
that. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, Representative Lindstrom.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I do
have a couple of questions, um,
welcome back. I'm looking on
page 14 regarding referrals,
referrals to the juvenile
justice system.
by referral type
And I see FY 21, 22, and so
forth. Have you all done some
correlation, uh, regarding
that low participation level.
to felony crime stats.
Madam Chair Representative
Lindstrom, uh, I am not aware of
that, but that is um a very
interesting idea. Yeah, I think
we would need to see that, um,
Madam Chair, doesn't make sense
to me that we wouldn't have um
higher participation in 21 and
22, 23.
also wanted to ask, is there
anybody from CYFD here that
are they here
Can I, may I, do you want me to
hold off or, um, you're here for
a presentation later, correct?
No, I'm the deputy director for
juvenile Justice Field Services.
OK, so go ahead.
Go ahead and ask. Yeah. OK, I, I
want to ask you that question.
Um, I'm sorry, sir, I don't know
your name.
My name is Corey Adams. I'm the
deputy director for juvenile
Justice Field Services for CYFD.
So I oversee probation,
transition services statewide.
OK. So Madam Chair, were you on
TV on Sunday?
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
yes, I was. I watched that, um,
series, I learned a lot in that,
but Madam Chair, I'm looking at
this and why we have
on that first chart on page 14
why you have such a major drop
for FY 21, 22, and 23.
When it comes to delinquent
referrals and status referrals.
Give him a minute to think about
that.
Excuse me
and 1414, the first chart on
page 14.
The other uh
question that I have is when
we're looking at these progress
reports, Madam Chair. This is
the last, the last year that I
was chair of LFC, I would be
very disappointed if this thing,
if this hadn't been done, if
they hadn't followed up on these
things, so give you a chance to
look at that also on page 19.
um
you know, I, I, I just, I'm
I'm, I'm just surprised, uh, I
mean.
we
the New Mexico legislature has
been trying to get their arms
around a lot of this stuff for a
couple of years now, and
we get a LFC presentation that
gives, gives us a general
overview, Madam Chair, and
presenters, but at the end of
the day,
it just seems to me that
once this is presented, this,
this young man and his colleague
should be responding.
Thank you. I, uh, thank you,
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Longstrom, I, to speak to the
decline in the referrals that
happened during that time. It's
very important that that you
recognize that during that time,
and I know everybody doesn't
like to talk about COVID, but
that was a tremendous impact on
the state. And you have to
realize that for JJS, the
referrals that we receive,
probably anywhere between 60 and
80% of our referrals come from
incidents that take place at the
schools.
So you have a two-year period
where kids were not in school,
so you had law enforcement not
making contact with, you know,
uh, people weren't out. They
weren't out and about. So, um,
that is the that is why we had
such a dramatic dip, um, there,
there's other factors that went
into the, the, the trending
decline over a period of time.
Um, that, that we could get
into, but, but such a drastic
drop, um, you have to factor in
what COVID did to everything
with that. So, um,
and then speaking to the
recommendations, um, if I can
find him here. Um,
again, my, I'm the deputy
director for facility for
fields, so I can't speak to uh
facilities master plan. I know
they're, they have a new deputy
director for facilities. Uh,
they are working on a tremendous
amount of stuff they've just
done some remodel there, um, but
when we talk capacity, it's
important to understand there
there's capacity in what you
have space available for beds,
but there's also capacity that
you have availability with
staff,
there are very strict federal
guidelines in regards to
uh, staffing facilities and, and
watching over these youth. And
so to meet those uh staffing
standards sometimes is
difficult. We, we struggle, uh,
with the same issues that the
detention centers, adults and
juveniles have statewide in
finding uh staff willing to, to,
to do this work on a regular
basis.
One last question, Madam Chair,
and that's on page 6, where we
look at streamline your
overtime, so I'm asked for a
brief question and a brief
answer. OK, it's case referral
to DAs. We don't have a
functional DA office. What's the
plan for McKinley County?
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Lonestrom, uh,
that's a great question for the
attorney's office here, the
administrative Office of the
courts on how they navigate it.
Um, our process does not change.
We have, we have, we received
the referrals if it's
inappropriate to send to the
district attorney's office. We
send it that way. I know there
is the district attorney from
Farmington is stepping in and
doing some things we've been in
very close contact over uh
referrals coming and so I'm,
I'm, I'm certain that that that
uh will resolve itself from our
end and making sure that our
referrals are processed, but,
um, probably need to get more in
depth with the courts and Ds
officer. Thank you.
Representative Anaya.
Pass, Madam Chair.
Representative Chavis.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
there's a couple of things that
I, um, wanted, well, let me ask
the, the first question that I
have. In terms of the data that
we haven't received in since
2015, Madam Chair, can you tell
me why CYFD hasn't updated that
data?
Thank you, Chair, uh,
Representative Chavez, uh, and
again, when we talk data, I, I,
I spend the majority of my day
mining through data. So I, I'm
not sure what exactly data that
we're referring to, um, as far
as not receiving, um, I can tell
you, and it was touched on
briefly, the computer system
that my staff has to operate
with on a daily basis is, uh,
decades old. And so we get data
requests at times, um
for information that uh it's not
charted the way that, the way
that it gets asked. And so to
come up with some of that data,
I, I literally have to have
staff go through every
individual case and read case
notes to determine whether that
fits into that category or not.
And when we start talking
numbers and, you know, when
you're getting 1500 active
cases, um, it, it can be, it can
be quite a task. Um, now, I'm
very confident I've seen
renderings of our new
computer system. Uh, we've
worked very closely with them
on, on some of the data that's
going to be able to be pulled
from that. I think this will be
a very different experience
moving forward once that, once
that comes up and running, but
right now it's very difficult to
pull that up. So let me just,
it's the data on duly involved
youth. That's the data that,
that I'm talking about. Then the
other piece is in terms of the
risk assessment um tool. I'm
very interested in that. And
basically the presentation, um,
Madam
Chair, talked about that it may
be resulting in more detentions.
So how can we, I would be very
interested in in looking, the
comparing the two, the, the, uh,
risk assessment tool that was
used before and the one that's
currently used, and getting some
rationale in terms of why it
changed. Um
so, you know, that's probably a
question unless you know the
answer now, that's probably a
question for, I mean an answer
for later, and I would
appreciate having that
information.
And then, Madam Chair, the other
piece is, I think there was a
comment, you made a comment, um,
during your presentation, Carly,
um, about reducing disparities.
Can you talk about that a little
bit more?
Sure. Madam Chair,
Representative Chavez, um, one
of the big benefits of using
data informed processes and
things like validated, um, risk
assessment instruments is that
they can help reduce any type of
biases, um, and so that's one of
the, the goals of the, uh, New
Mexico delinquency Act is to
reduce and eliminate
gen der and race disparities and
one of the ways to do that
successfully is using um
risk validated risk assessment
tools.
Can I just ask a follow-up
question, Madam Chair, please?
Um, is there a way to get the,
um, the data that you've got
that sort of has that
information. Maybe you can send
it to the committee.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Chavez, absolutely. Thank you.
Madam Chair Representative
Chavez, uh, to, to, uh, answer
the, the other two comments that
you had. Uh, we do track, um,
dual involved cases. It's, it's
a report that comes through to
me on a weekly basis. Uh, it's,
it's a very huge part of um
coming out of Kevin S stuff and
everything else with that. The
department needed to make some
changes to better communicate
amongst themselves. And so it's
one of the things that my staff
does when they we receive a
referral, the first thing we do
is, uh, look it up, look the
case up in Protective Services,
and if there's a protective
services, uh, involvement, if
there's an open case, we reach
out to that worker. And so that
worker then is a part of our
pre-I process. They're a part of
our teaming process and triage
process and when we've got a
dual involved youth like that,
uh, they're, they're weekly
meetings that are taking place
at the associate deputy level uh
just to, to ensure that the
cases are moving the way that
they should be moving. So, so
that is, that is taking place.
I'm sorry, the second question
you know, I know I could answer
it.
It was about disparities.
thinking about uh Representative
Chavez, uh, was in relation to
the um changes in the ray, uh,
changes in the ray, uh, prior to
the change that we made was to
add that any youth in possession
of a firearm during the
commission of the delinquent Act
would automatically score to
detain. That's an automatic 12.
Uh, the other change that was
made was that any uh battery um
against a CYFD worker, uh, would
result in an automa
tic change. Those changes were
made, um, as we were looking at,
we had an increase with, as
everybody knows, office day
youth and things like that. We
had some serious incidents
taking place, um, while an
officer responding might only
see that as a battery, uh,
there's much more involved with
that case and so while a battery
might not typically score to
detain given the other
circumstances around it, it
would be in that youth's best
interest to be placed in
detention. So that's why please.
and
and I, well
I have the mic, uh, I am
concerned that we were, we've
moved from a validated version
with fidelity to a non, I mean,
even if it's a better thing on
paper, it looks like we went
from something that, you know
that is validated to something
that is not, and that's just a
red flag as far as I'm
concerned. Representative
Ferrari, thank you, Madam Chair,
and thank you, um, Carlene, um,
Corey, um, we have kind of a
subgroup of, um, both Senate and
House members who are looking
into the Missouri model, and I
think that's what was referred
to that we started out in 2007.
and we deviated from that as
different administrations came
on board and, you know,
behavioral health became
decimated and other things
happen too, but as we look at
what's going on in New Mexico
and people having to send their
kids out of state for treatment.
Um, maybe to avoid going into
incarceration, um, but then also
what we're doing in New Mexico,
um, I visited our
J. Paul Taylor in Donana County,
and one of the things that came
up was not enough judges, uh,
know about referring, you know,
um, young people, uh, for this
type of incarceration and
treatment where they get
education and a homelike um uh
situation like the Missouri
model and uh coming back from
NCSL, I was able to visit one of
the Missouri, um, facilities and
it was um
encouraging to know that their
evaluation was done right away,
and they also had a very full
evaluation that um was
validated, and I think that's
something we need to, and they
said they would assist New
Mexico like they did back then
to follow their model and um.
I think the staffing is
important to keep the group
small, because if you get too
many students, then they kind of
take over the, you know, um,
essence of the pod or the group
and um so there's a lot of
things we need to look at,
especially our county, um, uh,
facilities so that the counties
can work with a more secure
facilities where some people
might need to go and um
another um thing that uh J. Paul
Taylor's staff was recommending
was that judges not be to have a
better understanding of what's
available. Um, so that they
don't refer people for just one
year, and that limits, you know,
the type of um enhancement or
continuation that a young person
might need, but if they do go
directly to the two-year, then
that can be shortened if needed,
but they, um, rely on
the evaluation and what's
happening with that student
within that period of time of
getting the treatment and being
in the um facility that's
available, but they also we are
seeing an increase in uh female
juvenile, um, needs and their
um.
excuse me, uh, their facilities.
So I think our state needs to
take seriously how many
treatment centers, you know,
that we are supporting in our
counties so that students can be
by their families.
and their families can also be
um uh within reach of getting
the same kinds of services, um,
and understanding and changes
that are needed for that young
person to be reintegrated into
the communities. So I look
forward to working with you both
more if you would be willing to.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Vice Chair Lopez.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
I appreciate the presentation
today. This is just one piece of
the puzzle, as we talk about um
what happens with our juveniles,
our children, um, it, it's a
name, but if you're under the
age of 18, you're still a child.
And Madam Madam Chair, you know,
there's, there's all a whole
bunch of other
factors that, that go into this.
And of course it is the family
or what other influences they
have.
um brain development
and trauma and all of the other
factors. Also, Madam Chair, and
I know this committee knows it
very well.
Um,
I've been around a while and we
did try back in the day.
under Governor Richardson to do
the implementation of a, a
factor of um the Missouri model.
And I think we dropped the ball
as a state.
And that was another
administration that came in and
nixed quite a bit of what we
were moving forward with. We did
have a lot of detention centers
across the state where children
were placed, but we closed them,
and that was part of the, the
initiative and the drive was to
make sure that we had services
for the children and their
families, which we don't have
much of anymore, Madam Chair.
and you cannot
try and work with the child,
brain development, and any
family member, um, or guardian
if it may be, unless we have
services to provide.
So when a previous
administration cut anything, and
we had um
entities around the state.
in Albuquerque, it was Holgades,
and a few other entities that
were actually providing
services, um, it, it dropped.
We dropped the ball as a state.
Um,
So Madam Chair, when we talk
about, when we, you mentioned,
uh, Madam Chair, about fidelity
on information. It sounds good
because it's an emotional issue
Um, and I understand that
But when we're working with
children, I still believe and
have hope in our children that
we can't give up on them.
Um, I was recently, uh, gave a
statement in court.
for two who shot up my home.
And the father, Demetrio
Trujillo is 42.
Um, he was, you know, you can
subtract the numbers of how old
he was, um, about 1314 years old
when I first came in office, and
the charges, you know, the
changes that we were trying to
make while he was engaged within
the system.
Well, the ball dropped and look
what happened
No services and no background.
His son, who's was 19 when the
shooting happened at Mahon.
Again, we still don't have
services to offer.
right? Um, he has an
intellectual disability. I don't
see any information in here to
talk about anything with regards
to learning disabilities on a
lot of these young people. And
if you go back and talk to the
Madam Chair, you'll see the
numbers that shows that they
have a learning disability.
That's another part of the
system that ain't working.
So Madam Chair, it's not just
about throwing him in jail
in prison, it's about what we do
as a commitment because I still
believe that many, maybe not
100%, but many of our children
just need support and tools
because these two men, when I
sat and listened to their story
and their involvement with CYFD
back in the day.
Um
it's that
and that's upon me because I've
been around so damn long, right?
The the state didn't do our job
and we're still not doing the
job manager.
Thank you. Thank you. uh,
Senator Charlie, thank you,
Madam Chair. I feel like I'm
going to pick up right where
Senator Lopez set that down, um,
I appreciate the report and
thank you for this. I think in
New Mexico, our news outlets
focus on the most violent cases,
and we have to take those
seriously, but within this data,
what I want to focus in on and
I'm really curious about are the
silent success stories that are
in here, right? Um, I believe
very strongly in storytelling. I
believe a narrative change. I
believe that politics is
downstream from culture and we
have lost our ability to tell
those stories of what's what's
happening and and well in our
agencies, particularly in CYFD,
um, and if we don't own those
stories being told, we are also
complicit in the perception of
CYFD, um, and it's, it's
failures, especially in the news
and those of um
in about a juvenile crime. So
anyhow, I am curious how we're
socializing the success stories,
Madam Chair, of what's working.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
Senator Charlie, um
I, I can't tell you how much I
appreciate you making that
comment, and it's something that
is, uh, incredibly difficult,
um, to work with these youth
every day and, and again, it's
not always going to turn out the
way that we want it to.
Uh, but there are tremendous
success stories. I told one of
the last committee meeting of
staff that I had that drove from
Las Cruces to Farmington to be
with the kid who was graduating
from a program up there in the
tears in that young man's eyes,
just that we were there to
support him. It means
everything.
Um
we are doing our best to
publicize it. We're getting, we,
we've got a new, um,
communications department, uh,
trying to do things to publicize
some of the good stories and the
and the good work that's being
done, but, uh, as you stated,
that doesn't always make the
front page, and so, um, we just
continue. I, I know me myself as
a leader within the department,
I just continue to keep pushing
my staff and do what's in the
best interests of that youth and
family sitting in front of you.
And then, you know, tell me
about it when we've got the
success
es so we can figure out what
worked, so that we can repeat it
and those that don't work, I
need to know those too, so that
we don't repeat that. I mean,
that's, that's what we're doing
on a daily basis. So I
appreciate you, I appreciate you
making those comments, and we're
making attempts
to publicize the positives.
Senator Lopez and Madam Chair, I
apologize on my list. I should
write these things down. My
brain doesn't remember, you
know, on a linear way
Um, are, uh
the county detention centers for
youth. I know there's not, not
every county has one.
But CYFD still has oversight of
approval.
of what I believe
um, they're supposed to be
following, is that correct?
Thank you, Chair. Uh, Senator
Lopez, we, um, we have oversight
of the, so we, uh, federal
guidelines in regards to
juvenile detention facilities.
So we oversee making sure that
the federal guidelines are met
within those facilities. Uh, we,
uh, those examples, those
guidelines would be like pre uh
prison rape Elimination Act,
things that go along with that
and we're making sure that
those, those are met staffing,
um, numbers, uh, that the
training amongst the staff and
that those things that they're
doing those logs, that they're
document
ing the cases appropriately as
far as the day to day
interactions and the stuff that
goes on there, that's primarily
up to the county.
as far as how they run it
And Madam Chair, I asked this
question because I think what is
being done, what interventions
are being provided at the county
level, namely Bernna Leo is one
of them, um, J. Paul Taylor, and
I do believe Farmington has a
facility also because I think
that's another area that we need
to look at. It's not just CYFD,
it's also the counties and the
oversight and who they hire,
because in Bernallio County,
they used to have cameras in the
showers.
right?
And who would watch those, those
movies, right? Males, excuse me,
there are girls who are in those
facilities also.
So I think there's some things
that we really need to figure
out, Madam Chair, what we do
because that, you know, and when
we talk about um really doing a,
a, a strip search on the
children.
We're adding more trauma to
these children. I mean, for me
to be strip searched, oh my God,
right? And you ask these
children to be strip searched.
And when you go back and look at
the data, there hasn't been
anything that's been found.
that would cause, um, you know,
uh, uh
you know, a stabbing or
something, let's put it,
speaking very plainly. So I
think that's another area, Madam
Chair, that we also have to look
at.
because that was happening. They
say it hasn't, has stopped, but
when you have that until my eyes
saw what was happening.
talk about our children being
subjugated to more trauma. Thank
you.
And I have a few questions. So,
on page 14, um, it would be
great if we, if
um,
repeat individuals could somehow
be be expressed in that. I mean,
particularly the, the one on the
far left, the referrals, if we
could have the numbers of how
many of those are repeat, um,
involvement. And then on page
19, talking about the federal
program on that sidebar, um.
what is happening federally.
Do we have a sense if it's gonna
affect this.
Madam Chair, uh, I do not know
that off the top of my head, but
I'm happy to do some, that'd be
great. And then, and then as
Representative Ferrari said, um,
we, this committee met at YDDC 3
years ago maybe, sometime. And
um I, we met, we got a tour and
I asked how many of the
juveniles who were there had
IEPs, and it was upwards of 60%.
Um, I believe it was around 80,
but I'm not 100%. So I think
that's really important as a
piece of data that we need to
see
how many of these kids have IEPs
and just more proof that we're
dropping the ball on our kids
with disabilities. They're
vulnerable. They may not have
the best judgment. They, you
know, the social pressures, all
those kind of things. So I, I
would really request that, that
IP um be part of, be part of the
data that we get. And with that,
thank you so much for your
presentations and we will take a
lunch break until
um
1:15 and we will start at 1:15,
um, and I want to thank you and
them and our, our own former
Linnea Montoya, who's done a lot
of good work getting things
arranged there they provided our
breakfast. They will provide our
lunch. So thank you, Linnea,
thank you, you and them. OK, we
will be on break.
