Look ahead at that. So we are
going to do that today, um.
Uh, with that, we're gonna go
right into, uh, Miss Cerna and,
uh, we're gonna have a capital
outlay spotlight for, uh, higher
education projects.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Ria Serna, and I'm a
capital outlay analyst with the
Legislative Finance Committee.
Today, I will be presenting a
capital outlay policy brief on
containing construction costs in
higher education, which should
be in your binders under tab E.
This report examines systemic
factors contributing to ongoing
cost increases for higher
education projects. It provides
an analysis on cost drivers
specific of specific high-cost
projects and identifies
strategies to control costs and
reduce uncertainty through
better project management cost
estimating and stronger
oversight.
First, I would like to thank and
acknowledge the leadership of
the state's higher education
department, Eastern New Mexico
University, Western Western New
Mexico University and New Mexico
Junior College for providing
information for this report, and
they will be available after
this presentation for our
question and answer session.
And now, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee, I will provide
a brief overview of the report's
background starting on page one.
On this page, the report
describes data illustrating how
continuing record public and
private investment and
construction in New Mexico has
intensified demand for
contractors, architects, skilled
labor and materials driving
costs higher.
Furthermore, despite this strong
demand, regional shortage
shortages persist, particularly
in rural areas.
As you can see from chart one on
the bottom of page one, public
school construction costs have
stabilized.
Or decrease by 2% between 2023
to 2024 while higher education
construction costs have
increased 26% during the same
time period.
Now if you would turn to page 2,
I'm gonna go through the
takeaways from our research.
Number one, educational
institutions could benefit from
hiring independent cost
estimators who could represent
them and verify bids, identify
pricing issues, recommend value
engineering opportunities and
help institutions challenge high
quotes from contractors,
subcontractors, and vendors.
Number 2, the lack of mandatory
design documents in standardized
cost estimation methods
contributes to inaccurate
preliminary project budgets.
Project revisions and
supplemental funding requests.
And number 3, institutions are
increasingly relying on
supplemental funding to complete
projects as evidenced by
Supplemental funding requests
representing 29% of HED's total
capital outlay recommendations
of 201.8 million for FY 26.
Also on page 2, the report
highlights that prior to
COVID-19,
construction costs were
predictable and stable enough
that institutions were generally
able to complete projects, so it
frequently took them many years
in some cases, and they had to
do the project in phases.
Now, if you would please turn to
page 3 and look at table one.
This demonstrates the growth
rates and in construction
employment between 2024 and
2025.
However, despite these
employment gains, particularly
in our metropolitan areas,
projects outside urban centers
continue to report importing
skilled labor from Albuquerque
at premium rates that include
travel and accommodation costs.
Perhaps this may explain why
construction costs in the
northwest part of the state has
have higher costs for both
public school and higher
education projects. As you can
see on table 2.
Also on page 3, the report
highlights how even some urban
projects are exceeding $1100 per
square foot in costs like UNM
Center for Collaborative Arts
and Technology. The original
cost estimate of 65 million in
2022, rose to 80 million, um, or
$1,389 per square foot in June
of 2024.
Now if you would turn to page 4.
Um, that building, the CCAT
building from UNM, you could see
the design rendering of it and
the project's high cost likely
reflects the building's
architectural complexity.
And specialized features such as
a concert hall.
on page 4, you can see table 3
illustrates the rise in
institutions supplemental
funding.
And HED began accepting
applications for supplemental
funding in the summer of 2022
for the 2023 session, and that
was to facilitate project
completion, um, HED noted when
we were doing the report that
you, you have to be eligible to
receive a supplemental funding
request from HED and that
eligibility is dependent on a
projects escalating costs
resulting from an increase in
materials and labor.
With LFC and HED prioritizing
supplemental funding above new
project requests, institutions,
contractors, and architects may
be inadvertently deterred from
implementing rigorous cost
control measures during project
planning and construction phases
potentially contributing to a
cycle of budget overruns.
Now if you would please turn to
page 5.
Table 4 illustrates how some
projects capital requests for
supplemental funding in 2025
have significant increases in
their cost per square footage
and now exceed the state's
average of $1,312 per square
foot.
Also on page 5, the report
begins its next section covering
how architectural design, site
complexity, project delivery
methods and fee structures are
contributing to some of the
state's highest cost projects.
To better understand these cost
drivers, LFC contracted with two
independent construction cost
estimation firms to analyze
construction documents and
estimates. We selected two
projects for the analysis, one
being Western New Mexico
university's early childhood
education facility, and the
second being Eastern New Mexico
Universities, student academic
services building.
And these independent cost
analysis can be found at the
back of the report listed as
Appendix A and Appendix B.
LFC also conducted site visits
to New Mexico Junior College in
Hobbs to learn more about the
college's proactive cost control
strategies.
Starting on the bottom of page
5, we're gonna start the first
case study on Western's early
childhood facility.
And if you turn to page 6.
Table 5 shows how the project's
estimated costs rose from 15.7
million in 2023 to 22 million in
2025.
For the project's 1st 2 rounds
of appropriations in 2023 and
2024. Western provided a
schematic design with a series
of preliminary drawings.
At the bottom of page 6, the
report includes how Western
attempt had did some cost
reduction, um, efforts in order
to reduce the project costs, and
that included modifying the
project's scope from a 12,000
from a 21,000 to a 12,000 square
foot facility and eliminating a
planned 60 person outdoor
amphitheater.
However, the project did
maintain many of its showcase
designs and atypical features
which contribute to, which has
contributed to its escalating
costs.
Now, if you would please turn to
page 7 table 6 on the right hand
side lists out the various cost
drivers for the project as
identified by LFC's independent
cost.
Independent construction cost
estimating firm, um, they're
called construction cost
management or CCM and they found
that there was roughly a $22,020
per square foot difference
between the cost of similar
facilities in its market
analysis in Western's early
childhood facility.
CCM's analysis highlights the
high roof and high ceiling is
atypical features for an early
childhood facility, which are
more similar to constructing a
two-story rather than a one
story building.
The 19 ft ceiling height of the
infant and toddler classroom
averages more than twice the
height of comparable facilities.
And if you just peek on page 8,
you can see the design rendering
of what that high ceiling looks
like in that classroom.
According to CCM, the exterior
high roof element while adding
shade to the playground could be
achieved with more standard,
lower profile shading structures
that are more practical and
readily available. And you could
see on page, going back to page
7, the design rendering showing
that shaped structure.
When combined, the high roof and
high ceiling add more than
$300,000 to the project's costs.
Page 7 also discusses how other
design elements and specialized
architectural features
contribute to the project's
elevated costs.
CM specifically called out the
faculty exterior patio with a
curved radial design as an odd
element for this type of
facility, noting that quote, the
more complex the structure, the
greater need for customized
fabrication, specialized labor,
equipment, engineering and
materials.
Another major cost driver for
the project is noted on the
bottom of page 7 is the site
selection's challenging
topography on the side of a
hill. The site selection
requires specialized engineering
solutions due to the need for
elevated stairs, walkways,
roadways, erosion control
systems and ADA access, adding
approximately 919,000 to the
project's construction costs.
And then if you go back quickly
to page 6, the first design
rendering kind of gives you a
sense of the building and it's
challenging, built on the
challenging topography.
The total amount of all of these
cost drivers adds approximately
1.4 million to the project's
construction costs.
Now, if you would please turn to
page 8.
Western's architectural design
team responded to CM's analysis
concurring that the site
selection was a major cost
driver and stated the site
presents substantial challenges
not typical for most campus
projects.
The design team further noted
that the design approach was
quote rooted in Western's clear
request to preserve the site's
natural character and to
emphasize its value as an
outdoor haven for children,
families, and educators.
According to Western, the
university is not to date
considered alternate sites and
the westerns, um, design team
analysis is part of your report
and listed as Appendix D.
If you would now turn to page 9.
Table 7 lists out the 5 levels,
the 55 class levels of cost
estimates organized by the
Association of the Advancement
of costs Engineering. The
variants of potential values,
especially for Class 4 and Class
5 estimates demonstrates the
limitations of estimates based
on preliminary design, market
analysis, and historical data.
And while it is common practice
in New Mexico for
institutions to request
construction fund funding when
projects are still in early
design or before design has even
begun. This approach limits
transparency to the legislature
and the executive on the project
scope, design elements, and cost
drivers on this same page at the
bottom table 8 lists out
preliminary cost estimates for
higher education construction
projects, requesting funds in
2025.
Several higher cost projects
have relied on Class 4 or Class
5 estimates indicating they lack
design and construction
documentation and further
suggesting the allocated funds
may be insufficient as projects
advance through more detailed
design phases.
And now, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, if you would
please turn to page 10, starting
on the lower half of the page.
We will now review the report's
2nd case study, the new
construction of eastern New
Mexico universities, student
academic services building.
Table 9 on this same page
illustrates the project's
estimated cost rising from 16.2
million to 31.3 million from
2022 to 2025, along with the
university's funding requests
and appropriations. Once the
construction manager at risk
became involved in the project,
the architect's initial cost
estimate, the 16.2, was
reassessed revealing that costs
would run about 50%.
higher
Now, if you would please turn to
page 11.
If you want to read um later
about the construction
management at risk process
that's mentioned in the callout
box and then chart 2 on page 11
examines again eastern's rising
project costs.
The university reported to LFC
that the rising costs were not
just the result of the
underestimate by the architect,
but also due to the building's
proposed facade, brick facade,
and stone venenier panels. These
design choices were made to
ensure the new building was
stylistically consistent with
existing campus architecture.
And now if you would please turn
to page 12.
The report highlights LFC's
second independent cost
estimated estimating firm called
Core Services and it's finding
that several building trades
increased between the
contractors 2023 design
development budget and the 2024
construction document budget all
the cost drivers identified by
Corres totaled 3.3 million and
are listed in table 11 on page
12.
Now if you would please turn to
3 page 13.
Some of these cost drivers are
bulleted and listed on the top
of the page.
And according to COR, the most
expensive of the cost drivers
was the project's mechanical
equipment design, which included
plumbing and HVAC.
Core question why the system
appears to be oversized for the
existing building. This system
design exceeds reasonable
estimates by 1.3 million.
The project's 2nd highest cost
driver is its electrical system
also noted as being
overdesigned, adding another
$400,000 to the project budget.
In the middle of page 13, you'll
find one of the report's key
takeaways, higher education
institutions may lack sufficient
construction expertise to
identify elevated costs and
could benefit from hiring
independent cost estimators who
could serve as the project's
owners owner representative by
identifying value engineering
opportunities and other cost
issues.
At the bottom of page 13, the
report reviews Eastern's rising
architectural and engineering
fees. These costs rose from
799,000 to 3.6 million due to
construction cost escalations
and design amendments as
Eastern's base construction
costs increased, so did the
project's architectural and
engineering services, budget at
6% of base construction costs.
These fees now represent 13.5%
of the project's maximum
allowable construction costs.
Now if you would please turn to
page 14.
The report points out the need
for stronger oversight of
professional expenses at higher
education construction projects.
Examples of how other states do
it include the state of
Washington. They provide uh
recommended fees, and these are
outlined in table 12. These fees
cover projects that are up to
250 million, and they're based
on a percentage and percentages
that vary according to project
delivery method and the type of
building.
Now if you would turn to page
15, we will review the report's
final case study.
New Mexico Junior College in
Hobbs employs a variety of
construction costs, containment
strategies, including direct
material purchases, vendor
negotiation and management and
contract oversight.
Its efforts appeared to result
in projects being completed
within budget and in a timely
manner.
The college's vice president of
operation holds multiple
construction-related licenses
and certifications, allowing him
to closely scrutinize
construction bids, negotiate
directly with design and trades
professionals and ensure high
quality project delivery.
Using strategic bid verification
and local contractor engagement,
the college reduced demolition
costs for their Heidel Hall
renovation project by 72%.
If you would now turn to page
16, the report reviews how the
college's director of operations
identified a local contractor
for interior demolition whose
bid generated $205,000 in
project savings for the uni for
the college.
New Mexico Junior College also
avoids change orders to control
costs. This practice allowed the
new construction of its 25,000
square foot industrial training
center valued at 20 $21 million
to reach approximately 90%
completion as of March 2025
without approval of a single
change order. NMJC implements
the system through weekly
alternating video and in-person
meetings with the general
contractor.
and requiring any potential cost
increases to be offset by scope
reductions elsewhere in the
project.
Now, if you would please turn to
page 17. The report reviews how
HED and the legislative
oversight and appropriations
processes could be improved to
enhance project planning and
cost controls.
The graphic on the right side of
the page outlines the the
capital outlay process
illustrating that the completion
of design and construction
documents comes after HED
recommends funding after the
appropriation of funds by the
legislature and then after the
capital outlay Committee's
approval to proceed.
This process guided by New
Mexico administrative code 5.3.9
and 5.310 does not address
budget feasibility or include
any requirements for how much
design work must be completed
prior to approval.
Now moving on to page 18, the
last page of the report.
LFC suggests that institutions
be required to budget for owner
representation during project
development and design or
demonstrate adequate internal
capacity to rigorously review
design and quotes for budget
feasibility.
The report also suggests the
creation of design standards and
cost guidelines that would
improve project budgeting and
promote responsible use of
public funds. Guidelines created
for New Mexico could help
prevent the construction of
unnecessarily expensive showcase
buildings or establish a
baseline for the level of
architectural complexity, the
state will participate in
financially and established
parameters for consistent
facility.
development across institutions.
And with your permission, Mr.
Chair and members of the
committee, uh, we being myself,
Cali, uh, representatives from
NMJC and HED and Western is
online, um, we'll now stand for
questions.
Great. Uh, thank you very much,
uh, we'll have folks come on up
to the table. Thank you for the
very informative report, um,
members again, just a reminder,
uh, representative from Western
or online, they'll only sort of
chime in if we have specific
questions from them. With that,
we'll go straight to questions,
starting with Representative
Chatfield, going to
Representative de la Cruz and
then going on from there.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh,
So on page one, you have a graph
that shows that the uh
construction of public schools
is down to 2%, but a great
increase in the uh secretariat
secondary institutions. Uh, we
recently built several schools
or are building them in
northeastern New Mexico and uh
in a process of about 1 to 2
years, the cost per square foot
of building a high school
doubled. Uh,
So I have, my question is
twofold.
Uh, how would this look if we
look, if we were looking at a
five-year average.
Of both the high schools and
the, do you have any thoughts or
information because it wasn't 2%
on the high schools just a short
time ago. It was 100%. It was
doubled and then uh
Second part of that question, or
first part, how would they
compare if it was over a little
longer term, which incorporated
the time in which those uh
schools like high schools.
Do in cost. The second question
is,
What is the difference between
the construction of a high
school.
And a college
That makes one of them go up
while the other one doesn't, and
then all of a sudden the other
one goes up. I mean, I can't.
To me, the difference in high
school and a college would be
who's in it. So, uh, help me
understand that, please.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative,
great question. So honestly,
those were the questions that
kind of prompted us to do this
analysis, so starting on the
differences in the trends that
you're seeing on chart one. So
this is kind of.
The public school trends you see
here where there is a 2%
decrease in the cost year over
year. That's essentially after
that doubling of costs we saw
for public schools over roughly
a one-year period, which is when
those schools in Des Moines and
Mescaro were coming for funding
was like right when that
doubling occurred. So we've had
a basically another year of
public school projects since
then and what we saw was with
public schools, the costs in
2024 essentially stabilized
relative to the
previous year. So they were
still at that high after that
doubling, but they weren't
increasing more, um, on average,
around, around the state for new
construction, um, and then the
discrepancy we saw with higher
ed had to do with the requests
we received in 2024 for the 2025
session where we did see another
roughly 30%. I, I would say
anticipated increase in
construction costs that sort of
seemed.
Inconsistent with what we were
seeing elsewhere, and the
question was kind of.
Why, basically, um, you know,
some of the stuff that Ria
talked about, uh, that's part of
it for sure is that those are
really just estimates when
they're um coming to request
funding because of the fact
that, um, design is often not
very far along or hasn't started
yet, um, so that there's some
significant amount of
uncertainty being baked into
those estimates, um, and then,
you know, looking at.
I
But essentially, the question is
why of why is what prompted us
to sort of take a closer look at
a couple of high-cost projects,
um, that were a bit further
along and had received previous
appropriations to try to
understand what was driving
those costs.
So, Mr. Chairman, uh,
What, what would be possibly the
value in adding a little bit of
More funding into the design
phase before we commit as a
committee to fund something. Uh,
if we keep getting, uh, doubling
of the initial appraisal or the
initial uh estimate of cost, um,
maybe we ought to put a little
more money into design and lock
that.
Contract down, lock those
materials down for, I mean,
there's a lot of ways to do it.
You can buy it ahead or you can
pre-purchase contracts. You can,
uh, is it a value to possibly
I know, I know that the New
Mexico Finance Authority, they
oftentimes, uh, they will
preliminarily fund a, uh,
Study design, whatever you wanna
call it, and then they will look
at funding the project. Is that
possibly something that we need
to think about as a committee
when we go to build these public
institutions.
Mr. Chair
answer
Um, Mr. Chair Representative,
um, I would say yes, uh, that is
something that this committee
has been emphasizing for a while
and that we've been, um, in
discussion with the higher
education institutions about
moving towards a more phased
approach to funding so that the
projects are further along, um,
and that there's an opportunity
for both um.
Our counterparts in the
executive and the higher
education department and for you
as appropriators to, um, sort of
know more about what you're
actually buying and what's
underlying the costs, um, before
you're making the purchase
essentially, um, and to reduce
that sort of universe of
uncertainty, um, it is
complicated by the fact that
general obligation bonds are the
primary dedicated source of
funding for higher education
projects.
And there is, you know, um,
roughly a year delay between
when you all appropriate those
funds and when they become
available, um, so I think there
are some things to figure out in
terms of how to make that work,
um, but overall, yes, you know,
we think it is a good direction
to try to move.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much, uh,
Representative Chatfield. Next
we have Representative David
Cruz, Representative Dow and,
and vice chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
These costs are, are astounding,
uh, I'm concerned though that we
allocate money, money is
appropriated for specific
project and that that dollar
amount is advertised.
And in doing that, what we're,
we're basically telling
everybody this is what we have,
we're gonna, they're gonna
charge every penny that we have.
And, and, and the same even with
with design or if we don't share
it with everybody, we shared
with the architects who then
shares it with somebody and that
is a problem if that's
occurring. I, Mr. uh, Chair, I
think that this needs to be
looked into and ensure that
that's not happening because if
it is they're always gonna build
exactly to that petty, if not
more.
I think it's something to
consider, thank you.
Thank you very much, uh,
Representative De Cruz,
Representative Doo, Vice
Chairman Munoz, Rob Sam Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for the presentation. I, um,
I used to represent Great County
and back in 16 when I started
going over there, there was
multiple private providers of
childcare, church-based,
private. There was Montessori.
There was 6 or some hope
providers and Western had a
demonstration site.
And their demonstration site was
is supplemented, hundreds of
thousands of dollars just to
operate.
Like the er the operations of
the facility is subsidized
thousands, hundreds of thousands
of dollars a year. And they
follow the school calendar. So
they, they're not even able to
accommodate working families. So
the childcare is not full day
year round. So I just stepped
out to call over the time that I
served and represented Grant
County, every one of those
private providers went out of
business because we continue to
increase the regulatory
environment.
And, and the Heart and the, the,
the university program.
You need, you probably need to
open at 7 and close at 6. They
were opening at 8 and closing at
4. So I don't know if that's
still the case, but I just did
confirm that they're still
following only Western's
calendar. So not only are we
overpaying for the construction,
we are competing with private
providers.
And it's not full day year round
to accommodate working families,
and I would say that Silver City
is considering themselves a
childcare desert.
The, the city is now putting
money into reopening childcare
centers. So, I mean, there's not
just the cost of the square
footage.
There's the, the cost of
operations, the cost of
maintenance. We are replacing
private jobs with university
jobs.
And in some cases, I would say
this was the case in Silver
City, although they're trying to
resolve it. We've created a
childcare desert. So there's a
further, there's a bigger impact
than just the cost of this
construction. And Western, if
you guys are online, are you
guys are you planning on
extending your hours? Will you
be full day year round?
Checking with the staff to see
if, uh, so that and that's the
question is if what the hours
will be for the Western.
And it's gonna follow the
Western campus calendar,
probably unless they've changed
something, they, uh, had not
been willing to operate
responsive to families' needs or
full day year round. So
The cost of use per square
footage will also be exorbit to
get an answer for that. Do we
have anybody from Western
Online?
Uh, OK, can you hear the
question?
What's the and and the question
is, what is the calendar for
early childhood care at Western.
And if they can't hear us or
they can't speak, maybe they can
send the.
Uh, no
Otherwise
OK.
Go ahead, please, and just if
you can answer the question.
I'm sorry, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. This is Kevin
Mathis. I'm the associate vice
president for Facilities and
operations at Western I have.
Um, our capital projects
director James Acosta with me.
Um, that's honestly a question
at my level. I, I don't know the
answer to.
Um, I'm pretty sure that the,
the current format does follow
Western New Mexico University
calendar.
Um, that would be something I
would need to take to leadership
and to the um
To the area of operations to see
if there's been any
consideration in the modifying
that. Great. All right, we'll,
we'll, uh, yeah, do that. This
is we're focused here on the
capital costs, less sort of on
the provision of sort of the
service, uh, but thank you for
that. Back to you. Thank, thank
you, Mr. Chair, and, and thank
you for the presentation. I just
think it's something for us to
consider because I actually
thought their early childhood
campus was beautiful as it was.
So I'm surprised to hear that
they're getting a brand new
campus. It's beautiful.
it was a demonstration site. It
was a model site. Um, I'm sure
the new one's gonna be pretty,
but how do we decide where we're
building as well? Thank you.
Thank you, uh, Vice Chairman
Munoz, please.
Thank you. I think it came
online but first of all, I'd
like to Mexico Junior College,
good job, right? Cause you hired
a construction manager and
someone with some oversight. So
I'm looking at the notes and I,
I, do you have a contractor's
license and plate in this arena
a little bit. So you contain
your costs for 43,000 more
square feet. Your cost was
almost $8 million less than
Eastern, uh, in that building,
you can't see this, but I'm just
telling you.
Is there you're 21, you're
24,000 square feet Eastern's
building was 21,000 square feet.
There were 31 million. I'd have
to go back at what your number
was, but the only way we're
going to contain costs.
is with oversight in the
construction process and UNM
should have it. Eastern should
have it.
Right
They should have this in, in.
In eastern's.
Engineering or architectural
fees went from 799,000 to 3.5
million.
I mean, that's a big numping
jumping fees that they
shouldn't, your architecture
shouldn't run more than 6, 7% of
your total cost of the job and
so it jumped almost 5 times what
I normally see in any any bid.
And so,
I don't know how what we're
gonna have to do. The
legislature's gonna have to do
is say, you're not bringing
this.
Any capital outlay projects
until we see design,
construction, and estimates.
And then we should probably look
at hiring a
Construction company for
construction oversight.
In order to contain those costs
because I can tell you the
Mascaro school.
if, if I was doing that job and
I had to have a concrete plant
there, right?
What's it going to cost me for
concrete, right? I can guarantee
that concrete Mascaro cost a
minimum of $600 a yard because
there's nobody there. You have
to bring in a batch plant, you
have to bring in trucks, you got
to bring in everything you need
to build that school. But then
they went ahead and instead of
just demolishing the school.
They said their cost overruns
were high because they had a lot
of change orders. Well, that's
where contractors make their
money is when real money is when
you get into change orders,
right?
And the engineers won't cover
it. The architects won't cover
it. They all just look at each
other and say, not my fault,
they changed it and so.
How you, how you handle that.
If you look at building costs in
rural.
And they're just getting so
expensive, right?
I mean, blocklay was 160 $124 an
hour for a block player. Most
schools are made out of block,
right?
But mascara wasn't, it was a
framed building.
That doesn't mean it was gonna
change the cost much, but I
mean, you just look at the total
cost and then you look at the
state and, and the prevailing
wage costs on a state project
versus a private project, those
numbers are so different when
you got to pay your prevailing
wage, right? And then if you
have to pay your your employee
and I'm gonna use mascara as a,
as, as an a deal you got to pay
them a per diem, you got to pay
him housing, you got to pay him
a bonus, right? And they wanna
be home on Fridays.
Noon to get him out of traffic
and get him back home because
they've been gone all week from
their families, you know, that,
that's an additional cost to you
and I mean, rural is just gonna
keep shooting up, but these
costs in Albuquerque, I mean,
they're, they're derived from
their own fault by not managing
their projects and not taking
control. We all want nice and
pretty buildings across the
state.
A desert.
Early childhood center in Silver
City doesn't really need to be
built on a hill when the extra
cost is an extra 10 to $15
million just to put it on top of
a hill and put a U-shaped
eyebrow on the front of the
building, I mean.
Um
Those are some of the things
that the legislature is gonna
have to look at and say, we all
want nice things, we all want
new things. I'd love to see new
dorms at NMSU right? They're so
old, they're older, probably
older than me.
And that scene a lot. And, and,
but we want all want nice things
for our students, and we all
want nice things, but there's
got to be some cost containment
and nobody's watching.
Everybody's just signing off
saying, yeah, go ahead and do
it. We'll go get the money from
the legislature because we put
them in a box.
They gave us the money in the
first place.
We told them what the cost is
gonna be.
And they'll just give us more
money and until the legislature
says to the architects, to the
engineers, and to the
contractors.
We're tapping out.
If you're going to bid this
project at
At 20 $24 million or I'm sorry
for.
Mexico Junior College I'm
flipping through the pages. If
you're gonna bid this project at
whatever dollar amount at at $16
million and that's your bid.
You have to hold the contractor
to that, but then there's
contingencies allowances I see
in some of these for 3 and 5%
and 10%.
That's not where your real cost
savings are gonna be made your
cost savings is really gonna be
made on, on the front end on
your design, architecture and
construction costs.
You're not gonna be able to.
Buy enough material to prepay
for it because you don't know if
you're gonna get the job and
when the job's gonna start, so
it's hard. There's a lot of
flexibility.
Excuse me, but, but the
legislature is really gonna have
to step up and just say,
Here's what we're going to fund
you at. I want to see a set of
prints.
That are designed and I want to
see a construction cost and
estimate and then I want to see
bids.
And once you do that, you'll be
able to gauge what that
building's really going to cost
you, um, and then you need to
look at the contract.
Because they can change the
contract, they can change the
scope of work, they can change
whatever they want, uh, and not
allow those change orders to go
through unless they're
structural or or some other
cost. But if you really want to
contain the costs of what we're
gonna have to do.
The two construction companies
that did this, I mean, I need to
take some time and, and really
read it, but if we're really
gonna control costs and we're
really gonna fund.
Fixed buildings and fix them.
Correctly then we say, OK.
New Mexico Junior College year
fishing in your, in your job and
what you did. Here's your,
where's your next project and
let's fund you correctly to, to,
to Western or to UNM.
You're gonna have to get some
cost containment before we
continue down this path because
we're just gonna keep throwing
money and throwing money because
you can't start a building and
then just leave it there.
And so
As we talk about capital through
the interim.
Excuse me.
I hope we're really gonna start
tightening the belt.
His money starting to tight.
Time we haven't, we haven't
bonded capital in
6 years
a little less. Two.
we've done a bunch of cash, but
we did some money and, and so
money's gonna start tightening,
so, uh, it's gonna run out. And
if we don't get some control on
our costs and what we want to
do.
We're gonna keep 20 years from
now we're still somebody's gonna
be sitting here, not me.
Senator Compos is looking at me
because he's been here long
enough to know how this works.
He's a he a in the.
And, and, uh, we're just gonna
keep singing the same old song,
but the legislature has to,
because they're gonna have to
stand up for itself. We're gonna
have to stand up and say,
If it was me and my shoes and my
business, I'd say Mexico Junior
College, you did a great job.
You, your containments were
good. You, you came in on
target, you're maybe a little
longer than time frame that it
took you to build the building,
but here's what's your next
project? How can I help you fund
it, but then you go to, to
Eastern and you go to, to, to,
uh, Western and you say,
Sorry
We're not gonna, we're not gonna
invest in you guys if you can't
control your costs from going
from 300, I think 354% increase
on architectural engineering.
You're shaking your head, that's
correct. That's just outrageous.
I mean, that's almost criminal.
To design a building and come
back and then change your fees,
uh, with a 354% increase. I
mean, that's.
It's crazy to go from an under
770,000 to 3.5 million for
design and engineering. It's
just, it's almost criminal that
they did that. They shouldn't be
allowed to do that.
They bid that project to design
to design in a certain price,
they should have stayed to that
price, unless they made a lot of
changes, so the legislature is
the one that's gonna have to, to
figure out if you have.
The wherewithal to put your foot
down and say, OK, enough is
enough.
We want nice things, but we're
not going to let you rob us.
And we're not gonna let
everybody just run wild and
design and build everything they
want, whether it's on the side
of a hill or in the flat. We're
gonna buy things that work and
things that are good for the
students and, and build rebuild
our institutions one building at
a time or 5 buildings at a time,
but we're gonna build them
within reason and so I think
this all comes down. This is one
of the better reports that I've
seen, especially in the
construction. We got a
construction estimator with it
and until you read.
Their estimates and really
divulge into where the changes
were and what happened, uh, you
don't know.
But this is one of the better
reports in order for controlled
costs, especially as we want to
rebuild higher institutions, so.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
very much. Next we have Duncan
and then representative Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. um, just,
uh,
A quick, uh,
Quick story, uh, I was a town of
a small town up in northwest New
Mexico we had a um, um, an
electrical contractor that tried
to cheat.
The town on a bid and we had an
engineer that was our.
took care of us and in that he
found that and he said, you
can't do that. He said, that's
against state protocol. Without
that,
The person that we hired to
manage our construction, we
would have been cheated on that.
So I, uh, number one, I
recommend everybody get hire
that individual that takes care
of them.
Doesn't care about the, the, uh,
guy building it that it takes
care of the university or
whoever's building that public
school, whatever, and then the
second thing I think um Mr.
Chair, if, if, uh, if we get an
architect that gets an award
after he builds a building. We
had a penalizing 15%.
When you got 19 ft ceilings for
a daycare.
Really?
That's stupid
It's absolutely stupid.
And so I know they're building
because, and I hope there's no
architects in the room. I don't
mean to hurt your feelings, but
I don't really care, um, but,
but that's putting tax taxpayer
dollars to waste.
If it was your own private money
and they wanted to do that as an
architect, great. It's not.
And so that's a bad use of our
funds. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Uh, next we have
Representative Dixon, and I have
a couple of quick questions.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um.
I was wondering two things, um,
the higher education project
fund, um,
do you remember when that was
introduced, uh, the legislation
to create that fund and when it
was vetoed, was that this past
year? When was that?
Um, Mr. Chair Representative,
yes, this past session, um.
It and it was pocket vetoed by
the governor after the signing
deadline, at the signing
deadline.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
um, Kelly, can you remind us
what was like how that would
have helped in this situation.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative,
yes, so, um, that bill, um,
House Bill 449, um, sponsored by
Representative Lente and Senator
Campos. Um, it would have
created, uh,
a new major projects fund for
higher education capital and the
fund was essentially aimed at
solving a few different
problems, um, one was kind of
providing an alternative source
of revenue for higher education
capital process, uh, projects
outside of GO bonds, um, you
know, because of the big
increase in costs, you're
seeing, um, there's a lot of
pressure on those GeO funds
right now which are tied to
property taxes and have
increased only incrementally.
Um, whereas construction costs
have kind of increased
exponentially, um, so that was
one solution to kind of provide
an alter an alternative source
of funding for like the really
big projects that as
construction costs stand now can
eat up, you know, half or more
of geocapacity. If you were to
try to fund them all in one go.
Um, it also tried to address
some of the more kind of like
policy problems that this report
focused on, um, so it would
have, uh, required, um,
specifically, uh,
A certain level of design prior
to construction funding, and so
it provided a more kind of
formal mechanism for phasing
design and construction funding
and, uh, a clear expectation for
sort of what level of design had
to be reached before major
construction dollars would be
appropriated, um.
You know, if I could sort of
just make a couple quick
comments on that relative to
some of the discussion, um, you
know, to Senator Munoz's point
of kind of level of
architectural complexity and
design and like.
You know, I, I think our point
is not that like the state
shouldn't have nice things and
we shouldn't have nice
buildings, um, but the level of
design and kind of architectural
complexity we build to is a
choice, um, that I think the way
things work right now, um, you
all as appropriators sort of
don't have a lot of window into.
Where we're making those choices
and not.
Um, and so, you know, one
opportunity that phasing design
and construction.
Funding provides in addition to
just sort of reducing
uncertainty in terms of the
ultimate cost of the project
when you're ready to appropriate
to it is, um, you know, I think
giving both the executive and
the legislature in our
appropriation and oversight
roles, um, kind of more window
into how projects are developing
and what exactly the state is
building and creating a little
bit more of like a feedback
process, um, between the
executive, the legislature, and
the institution.
on that front.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. um, thank
you for that. Um, I would just
like to flag, um, for, um, our
running list of LFC proposed
legislation to come back to, um,
that perhaps that be
reintroduced in any, um,
additional changes sort of based
on this report and other
information that we learned this
interim be included in that, uh,
because I certainly think that
was a, a great step and
appreciate the committee and,
uh, our colleagues, uh.
Support on that. Thank you.
Excellent. Thank you very much.
We'll go next to represent
Verrera.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, thank
you, panel, and I did read all
your report last night and all
the appendixes, and I was a huge
lift and uh I appreciate all the
work that you did on that. Thank
you and um.
Years ago and again I'm dating
myself, uh, I was at Northern
and I sat on one of those
bidding processes for a new
building, uh, but we had an
architect at our school who was
also in charge of facilities
management and it was, I had
never sat on a committee that,
you know, chose that $10 million
building at the time and I was,
uh, but I kind of had to laugh
because I remember Drew, uh, who
is our administrator really
holding these bidders to the
fire and kind of laughing
some of their things and some of
their proposals, but we, you
know, we got out the bed. It was
made quickly at that meeting,
uh, we chose, uh, the best
design. It was delivered on time
and on budget, uh, a year later
and uh but we again had a good
person that knew how to hold
people to the fire and, uh, and
when they would come in with the
project, you know, so again it's
all about personnel and
leadership really at the local.
level, so, uh, I, I would agree
with all the comments that have
been made here if um if you
don't have some kind of set up
where we can control this from
the beginning, it's not going to
happen and that's all I have to
say.
Right. Uh, thank you very much,
Representative Verrera. uh,
great, uh, thanks, members, uh,
really quick, Mr. Carroll, um,
The so you seem to sort of hold,
uh, you, a lot of qualifications
and, uh, in addition to your
other roles, really serve in
this sort of, um, oversight
role, uh, any thoughts about how
other institutions could, do
they, do they need to, to bring
in, uh, someone with those
qualifications, uh, on the other
hand, should it be higher
education's job to have, um,
Some of the construction
management resources, you know,
quite, I think we clearly see
that we need more oversight and
more technical oversight, uh,
really interested to hear sort
of from the junior college and
then, uh, maybe from LFC if
there's any, uh, suggestions or,
or possible routes that you
might suggest.
Thank you. OK. I've heard a lot
of great comments from you guys
and and everything you're saying
is true. The cost of
construction has escalated
beyond imagination.
Um, myself, um, I'm there at New
Mexico Junior College, been
there for 25 years on.
Multiple licensed GB98 MM 98 and
the list goes on.
But as I deal with projects and
as I look at the architects and
the design, um, we tell them
what we want, we pull a group
meeting together.
Uh, we tell them what we need
and then they begin the design
work.
And as we approached toward the
end of the design work I want to
see a 3D model. I want to see
what you've done. I wanna see
what.
Doesn't make sense. I use a lot
of common sense in these
decisions and it's not just
about the wow factor. I want it
nice, I want it professional,
but I want it well built and
engineered and make sure that
it's within our budget.
And so once I looked at the 3D
and if I'm seeing something that
really doesn't make sense I'll
call him out on it.
And then we move from the design
phase whether we use a Seymour
and I've used Seymour's and I've
used just gone out to bid for
general contractors.
But that Seymour is supposed to
represent the owner and and look
out for your best interests and
make sure those costs are coming
in. I have a challenge that many
times. I don't see that. I don't
see that that C bar is really of
great value to me, uh, if I see
an issue come up, I call them
out on it, uh, I think that, uh,
and I could give you many
examples, but you know the Hadle
Hall is mentioned in the report
is one.
Uh, little things like, uh, uh,
if if I'm needing to buy and
well a transformer for the same
huddle Hall project they brought
it to me and said we need to
order this because there's a
long lead time on this
transformer, and he said right
now the cost of this transformer
is $150,000.
But the good news is if you're
willing to pay an extra 25,000 I
can bring it down from 100 week
delivery to a 52 week delivery.
And he said, Are you ready to
approve that and I said, oh no,
no, you just take that
transformer and put it over on
my plate.
Because as a general contractor,
I can get the discount they're
getting.
And then I can beat that price
instead of 175,000.
I found a transformer within an
hour, uh, same specs for about
75,000.
And when I told them that.
The next day they came back with
a lower price than that at 69.
So it went from 69 and it was
gonna be 175 and it just takes a
little bit of negotiating and
sharing there's so many
opportunities there, uh, we had
uh a, a parking lot where the
Seymour has said Mister Carroll,
we're ready to put this parking
lot in.
And it was a carry out the yo,
put in the new circular drop off
zone.
And I said, what is the cost of
that?
And she said we've budgeted
188,000 for the entire project.
And said we can start it next
week and I said, wait a minute.
And I called a local person that
I can use through the CES
contract, and I got that beard
and he done the job for $47,000
so another $140,000 there are
just so many opportunities and I
think the key to all of this is
greater education if every
institution knew and would get
involved and look at the scope
of work in detail.
And understand there's so much
opportunity for savings there.
That's my philosophy.
Great, uh thank you very much.
Thank you for those examples,
and it really, um, incredible
insight, uh, echo what the vice
chair said, this report is
really, really top-notch, and I
think the ability to sort of not
just pointed challenges, but to
really hold up folks who are
doing excellent work and share
that is, is exciting. Um, any
additional pieces to add, uh,
from the LFC side.
Uh, we have the report here, I
guess there
went through any additional
recommendations or areas of
follow up as we go through the
summer. Representative Dixon's,
uh,
Request is well noted, bringing
back the successful legislation
that Chair Lite and Senator
Campos passed.
Uh, any additional items before
we wrap this up.
Um, Mr. Chair, a couple of quick
things, um, you know, one thing
the committee could consider is
sort of beefing up certain parts
of our budget guidelines, um,
for state agency and higher
education projects, um, with
respect to, you know, things
like what level of design, um,
what class cost estimates the
committee is looking for before
funding construction, uh, is one
thing to consider, um, I do
believe both the higher
education department and many of
the institutions, um.
have an interest in continuing
to work on, um, the legislation
from last year, um, so your
direction, we'll definitely
continue working with them on
that front.
Um, and then just to kind of
resurface a couple of things
that um Rhea covered, you know,
uh, and, and sort of building on
Doctor Carroll's points as well,
um, you know, I wanna say that I
think there's variability within
the institutions in terms of
like the level of kind of
internal construction management
expertise they have and then
many of the institutions rely on
their A&E firms or their CMAs to
kind of identify the value.
engineering opportunities, stuff
like that, you know, there's a
1000 different decisions that go
into these projects and the
analysis that the firms that we
hired did, I think, raise as
many questions as they answer
and kind of point out to Doctor
Carroll's points that there's
like.
There's a lot of little and big
things going on in these
projects that kind of add up to
the overall cost, um, what those
analyses suggested to us that is
that there might be value in
institutions considering hiring
firms like that to just act as
owners' representatives, um,
particularly if they have maybe
a lower level of internal
construction management
expertise, you know, New Mexico
Junior College has Doctor
Carroll, so they probably don't
really need.
to do that, but some others, um,
might wanna consider doing that,
um, continuing to, uh, hire this
kind of expert outside expertise
to analyze projects you're being
asked to fund is something the
committee could do also, um,
either kind of in the interim or
even during the budget cycle,
um, they were actually pretty
quick at doing this level of
analysis like it only took a
couple weeks, uh, so it is
probably something.
saying that if we have internal
budget for we could kind of
build into budget development.
um, if you all would like to do
that, and that applies to the
state agency side of things as
well as uh higher education.
Great, thank you very much. uh,
thank you again from uh.
To New Mexico Junior College and
thanks to LFC, uh, you've given
us a lot to think about here and
I think we'll, uh, come out of
this summer with additional
legislation and probably a
beefed up sense of perhaps
committee investment and
certainly uh guidance about how
to approach this.
Thank you very much.
OK, uh, now we're going to
Uh, ask the, um,
Our 2:15 presentation.
Um
See, Miss Russell here.
Uh, we'll ask, uh,
Mr. Morris.
And um to come on up.
OK, uh, members, this is gonna
be a presentation on um.
The pipeline project and also
other water trust board
projects. Uh, maybe, uh, Ms.
Russell, we might start with
sort of the overall water trust
board projects and then uh we'll
see where Mr. Morris is and go
from there.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you members. Um, I'm happy
to walk through some of the
water trust board activities.
Um, I, we had a lot of briefings
during the um during the
legislative session, but I'd
love to catch you up on where we
are relative to a number of
activities, so I'll be speaking
from a uh presentation.
Well, they all kind of look
alike to me, but I think it's
the one that has our name on it.
Um, just to, um, make certain
that several of you know what
the Water Trust board is and
what it's responsibilities are
and how the finance Authority
interacts with the Water Trust
Board. So the water trusts board
was created back in 2001. It's
now a 16 member uh board that
whose job it is to vet, uh,
applications for now 6 types of
water projects and I'm gonna uh
we're gonna, in
In addition to the presentation
you handed to us, I believe
members on TAF, we have
additional information in the
binders.
The job is to make
recommendations on applications,
uh, for now 6 types of water
projects. Uh, we expanded into
wastewater with last year's, uh,
passage and enactment of House
Bill 211, so wastewater is now
an eligible, um, type of water
project and that will start
accepting those applications
this summer. Um, you'll see on
page 2, who the Water Trust
board currently is comprised of.
It's currently chaired by our
state engineer Elizabeth
Anderson, and has both um ex
officio members as
as well as members that are
appointed by the governor and um
confirmed by the Senate and they
represent a broad group of water
users.
There are 2 different funds that
the finance that the uh that
fund uh projects, the primary
fund is the water project fund.
It's held within the finance
Authority, and then there is a
water trust fund that's managed
as a trust fund by the State
Investment council and currently
$4 million comes off of that
fund, uh, to then contribute to
the dollars that are available
through severance tax, uh,
proceeds. So this year, in the
last several years, we've had
high, high levels.
of funding, particularly
relative to other, uh, years.
We'll go through some of that.
Um, also House Bill 211, again,
last year's House Bill 211, uh,
provided that the water project
fund may be used to help, uh,
pay for technical assistance and
capacity development. So it
allows explicitly for the
finance authority to hire
contractors to help your
communities, and we'll talk
about what, uh, the water
trustsport's currently doing
with that.
So on page 3, House Bill 211
made those changes which
required us to update our rules.
We have finalized those rules
and are working on policies that
are necessary for the evaluation
of those wastewater projects. uh
Water Trust Board has a very
explicit set of policies about
what kinds of readiness you have
to have and relative to each
type of water project, it has
the evaluation criteria. So when
you go to the appendix of uh the
Water Trust board policies,
you'll see.
exactly how projects are going
to be gauged and they're going
to be gauged against other
projects in that very same, uh,
type, so water conveyance
projects are not um evaluated
against watersheds. It's, uh,
they're all evaluated against
others in their same category.
Um, so it's a comprehensive
list. There's no black box.
People should be able to read
the um the water transport
policies in particular, the
appendices and understand
exactly how their project is
going to be viewed.
So we're working on currently um
incorporating into those
comprehensive policies, uh, the
elements necessary for
wastewater. Uh, that's expected
to happen this summer. Again, we
open the application in, I think
it'll be early August this year.
Um, so it's a very long process
and we need to get those
policies out into the public as
quickly as possible.
As I mentioned earlier, House
Bill 211 also provided that
technical assistance program,
the Water Trust Board has
authorized the Finance Authority
to use those dollars in two very
specific ways. One is to
facilitate regionalization, so
we'll hire a team of contractors
to help communities that already
want to, uh, to, uh, regionalize
and make certain that they have
the attorneys necessary to draw
the documentation, to have
accountants that are willing to
put those, uh, they're large.
Combine all their books and to
make certain their debt works
the way they're supposed to, uh,
community facilitators, anything
that's necessary other than
engineering to get a regional
plan put together and to help
them get to the finish line.
It also provides for small
system planning. So we're
providing, uh, we've hired
engineers, we just are in the
process of finalizing those
contracts and we'll, um, uh,
send out engineers to actually
do the planning on behalf of
small communities. And the
reason that's important is many
communities currently don't
often, it takes too long to get
through a regular application
process when you're a volunteer
board. You cannot get enough
energy together to complete a
preliminary engineering.
report. So that could take
upwards of 3 years with a
volunteer board when it should
take 4 to 6 months to get one
done. So we're gonna pay for
those contractors. We know we
can keep the cost down, we can
allow the small systems boards
to concentrate on other elements
that are important to getting a
project completed and we'll get
the design, uh, document or the
planning document in front of
them so that they can apply for
water trustsport dollars,
federal dollars, any other, um,
element that they'll need. So
those were important, um,
Elements from the House Bill
211, uh, all of that will be in
play by, I'd say June and July,
you'll see all that activity
available to you.
Um,
the other thing that happened in
the last couple of years is that
the legislature provided last
year $18 million for us to help,
um, with the shortfalls of
construction funds, as I
mentioned earlier, projects
start in August to apply for
these dollars. They get awarded
in June, roughly, and they meet
some additional readiness to
proceed and then our, then in a
contract by about the end of the
year. So we're talking sometimes
between 12 to 18 months before
they apply for a project and
when
they're actually in a contract
and able to start spending those
dollars. Um, as you know, in the
last several years, those 18
months can add significant cost
to a project, um, just because
it becomes much more difficult
to complete it with, um, uh,
competition for labor, uh,
actual, uh, cost of supplies
going up. Um, so at $18 million
is very helpful. It was for
projects that were authorized uh
before 2024. Many of those are
still, um, not yet in.
construction phase. So on page
4, you'll see that the water
Trust board started putting
aside dollars in 2021 to do cost
overruns. Um, so we put aside
just a little over 2 point,
almost $2.3 million in 2021.
We've spent down um the majority
of that we have 184,000 left in
that fund. We did, uh, cost
overruns for La Cueva, Rodarte,
Rio Lucio, and Union Delano for
Little mutual.
Domestics that could not
complete the project because the
cost had risen so high.
In 2022, we still have 13 open
awards, 12 of which contain
construction, so we don't
honestly know how much those
will still have and cost
overruns. Only 4 of those 12,
um, are actually in
construction. So 8 of them have
not started the construction. We
expect to go through our entire
$5.1 million at the Water Trust
board set aside, as well as use
a significant portion of the 18
million you all provided last
year.
2023, I'd note that we have 44
open awards, largely because it
takes, again, a while for those
uh contracts to get entered
into. 33 of those 44, um, our
construction projects and the
vast majority, 19 of them have
still not started construction.
So again, we anticipate not only
running through the $6 million
at the Water Trust Board set
aside, but also using portions
of that 18 million. Um, in 2024,
uh, I would just note that we,
um, are.
Most of them are uh 38 awards
include construction, virtually
none of them have started
construction and our cost
overrun, uh,
balance just from the Water
Trust board set aside of 6.7 is
still intact and will be fully
utilized.
Um, the 2018 million to date,
the one project that we have
funded for sure is um uh settle
regional mutual domestic. They
had a $1.2 million need, which
was twice.
Um, what they anticipated
spending, um, they could not
complete the project without the
additional funds. So we've
started to dip into it, but most
of the projects have not yet
really reached the point where
we'll know whether they need
additional funding.
On page 5 I go through the
evaluation process. I think many
of you have heard that before,
so I really won't spend your
time today talking about this,
but I'm happy to answer
questions. Um, but the process
is a thorough vetting process.
We use technical, uh, staff from
the agencies that sit on the
water trust board to actually
review the applications, score
them, and make recommendations.
And then the water trusts board
ultimately makes those decisions
and sends them to the finance
authority.
Um, and then, uh, from the 2025
funding on page six, we have,
uh, this actually next week, the
water the finance authority will
approve the 60 projects we'll
consider the 60 projects that
the Water Trust board sent
forward for this year. That's
not all that we'll end up
funding. There will be a second
award cycle, probably in August
because 18 of the applicants
from this year don't meet the
executive order and
14 of them are, uh,
municipalities and are have
large requests. So there's about
$68 million that's pending and
14 of those projects would be
larger, uh, city projects. We
have 4 small mutual domestics
that are also in consideration.
So we expect about another, I'd
say 10 to 15 projects, um, that
will get funded in August,
probably in the 30 $35 million
range, um, but 60 million.
60 applications, that's the most
we've ever funded in any one
year, 146 million is the amount
that's been recommended and
moving forward this year. Um, of
the projects that were
authorized, only 2 projects have
been scaled back. Uh, they
applied for design and
construction and we had not yet,
that we're not going to be in a
position to um actually use the
construction dollars timely. So
we've asked them to complete the
design first. They can come back
after that design is over and
then ask for construction so
that we know exactly
what they're trying to construct
and what the expected costs are
going to be. It's one way to
keep your cost overruns down is
to actually have your designs
done first and closer to when
you're and apply for them closer
to when you're gonna need them.
So Bussque Gardens, which is a
mutual domestic requested 3.225,
we're, we're authorizing just
over half a million dollars for
that and story water Users
Association requested 18
million, and we are, uh, we were
recommended uh 2.35 for just the
design.
moment
Um, so a lot's happening with
the projects that, uh, from
2025, we will use all of the
severance tax bonds that have
been made available and we'll
dip into the $200 million that
was also made available this
past session, 200 million in
general fund was added to the
pot for this year's projects and
next year's projects. I, we
expect that the vast majority of
that will happen with next
year's projects when people can,
they now know about it, they'll
apply again, hopefully the
executive order issues will have
been clear.
up by then.
Um, the next several sides are
just snapshots of what we have
funded to date, um, pages 7 and
8, really got to this last 10
years, you'll see from left to
right, um,
You know, how many notices of
interest people file, uh, how
many applications we actually
receive, how many were
recommended and authorized by
the legislature and then what
are award funding is, and then
on the right hand side, you'll
see the percentage of notices of
intent that were actually
funded. Um, you'll see over the
last several years that we have
had high levels of funding and
high levels of awards, um, both
on page 7, which is the dollars.
And page 8, which are the
projects, um, so a lot of the
funding has because so much
money has been available from
severance tax bonds has been
taken care of. We've have
authorized virtually everyone
that has qualified over these
last couple of years, so you'll
see if they've applied, they've
largely, um, been off
recommended for the legislature.
I'm gonna touch a little more on
page 9, which are the uh Water
Trust Board awards by applicant
type, um, because so many types
of entities are eligible for the
water trusts board, and this is
from 2002 to date. So this is
all almost a billion dollars
that has been awarded to date
will be captured in these next
several slides. Um, you'll see
the municipalities make up about
3 of the uh uh applicants or the
awardees and they have received
about 1/3 of
the awards, but about 45% of the
funding to date. Mutual
domestics similarly make up
about 1/3 of the applicants
about 25% of the awards and only
15% of the money that's been
made to date, so you'll see that
the city projects, the municipal
projects are far larger than
most of the mutual domestics.
Um, and then I note that, um,
regional, um entities like the
Eastern New Mexico, uh, regional
water project.
Um, they represent 2% of our
entities, 7% of the awards and
almost 20% of the funding that's
been made to date.
Uh, if you can stand all the
color on page 10, uh, it's the
same information except it then
goes through by type, what kinds
of, um, what kinds of
applications they were awarded,
um, I won't belabor that, but
there is uh.
To be clear, um, storage,
conveyance and delivery, as we
saw earlier is the, is the
largest amount of dollars that
gets awarded, and most of those
go to municipalities of the
authorities and mutual
domestics.
Um, page 11.
Simple bar chart that shows you
that 70% of our dollars to date
have gone to the storage, uh,
water storage conveyance and
delivery projects, um, we've
made, uh,
Yes, almost $700 million has
gone to those projects, um, 102
or about sixth of the funding
has gone to watersheds, um, but
only 55%, 6% of the dollar, so
it's a big difference in terms
of watersheds. They're very
small projects relative to other
things that we do.
Um, we have done 6, endangered
Species Act projects to date.
Count them 6, less than 1% of
our money.
You'll see that same information
on page 12 and I don't want to
belabor it, but I think it does
get to be interesting when you
start to look at the different
sizes, so you could see anything
from a $400,000 or $200,000
reward to a $20 million reward,
um, and the same amount of
vetting goes into that, the same
amount of oversight goes into
that. We review the applications
and the requisitions the exact
same way. So on a cost basis,
they are, uh, they are obviously
much more costly for us to, um,
oversee.
And then 13, um, the Water Trust
Board awards by county?
Um, there are about 50 projects
that cover multiple counties,
particularly those watershed
projects because they'll go
through 2 or 3 counties. Um,
I've, we've, um, aligned them to
be kind of largely where most of
the money is being spent, so
that you'll get an uh an
opportunity to see where the
dollars are being invested, um.
The largest amount of money thus
far has been awarded to Curry
County for the project you're
about to hear.
And uh the next several pages
are just the awards that have
been made to date. So you can
look up um by entity name, the
number of awards they've
received in the total funding
since 2002, um, only 9 of these
projects have received more than
10 awards, um, and only 9 of
them have received more than $20
million. So generally speaking,
they're um they're just a couple
of projects that receive lots of
money, otherwise there's been a
fair distribution of those
dollars.
Um, and then lastly, which we've
never shared before, just, we
thought it might be interesting
on the last page, uh, you'll see
the number of awards that have
been returned to date. So it
doesn't capture those 638
projects that we've awarded to
date do not include the 36 that
are on that last page on the
right-hand side, um, but, you
know, there are projects that
apply they are unable to use the
money and they turn it back, but
it's very rare and it has become
rarer as we've required the
planning documents.
since 2015, they had to have a
planning document when they
apply for Water Trust board
money. We've had very few
projects returned and when they
have, it's because they largely
received capital outlay instead.
So, um, just a
The, the planning document
requirement, again, very
rigorous, uh, upfront.
Documentation, but it has saved
us a, a lot of time because the
applications that we're vetting
actually uh
Go to completion.
So with that, I think I'd be
happy to answer questions. It
may be better after, uh, eastern
New Mexico, that's great. Thank
you very much, Ms. Russell.
We'll go, uh, straight to
discussion of the pipeline and
um
Uh, then go with questions.
Great. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Uh, I'm Mike Morris. I'm mayor
of Clovis, and I chair the board
for the Eastern Mexico Water
Utility Authority with me is our
administrator, Mr. Orlando
Ortega, and we're privileged to
be here with you and took care
of you today and, and give you a
good update on, on our project,
which you've, you've been so
supportive of over the, over the
years, uh the uh you pipeline as
we casually refer to it is, is
actually by its federal
authorization title of the
Eastern New Mexico Rural Water
System.
And the um eastern New Mexico
rural water system is, uh, is
being constructed in order to
address water scarcity and um.
And, and
And provide for the, the
shortfalls for municipal and
industrial water needs in our
member communities of Clovis,
Cannon Air Force Base, Texaco,
Portales, and Elia.
The uh the water authority,
which was enacted in house in
with House Bill 10 in 2010, uh,
enacted the Eastern New Mexico
Water Utility Authority, the
entity that, that we are here
today and the entity that's
constructing the pipeline will
deliver a maximum of 16,415 acre
feet of water from Ute Reservoir
to our member communities, uh,
once complete.
The federal authorization for
our project came in 2009 as part
of the omnibus Land Act, a land
Management Act in, in, in 2009,
and then as I say, uh, the New
Mexico legislature enacted our
authority in 2010 and, and I'll
mention that.
And with the enacting of, of our
authority uh in 2010, the, the
legislature um but targeted cost
shares in and the state of New
Mexico committed 15% of the
capital construction costs, and
of course, has primarily in
fact, more than met that and
stayed ahead of pace through
Water Trust board awards over
time. Looking at this slide
next, this is our why, uh, in
Clovis, uh, Portalis, Texaco
Elia, Air Force Base, and on the
high.
planes, we rely on a sole source
for our drinking water. And of
course, that sole source is the
Ogallala Aquifer and it's well
documented that that aquifer is
in steep decline. This leaves us
in quite a vulnerable situation
with lots of questions about the
future, if, if we would not have
water security, um, the
illustration of the cups and the
straws, you know, back many
decades ago, there were fewer
straws, uh, if you will, or
wells, uh, which uh accessed the
aquifer. Today, there's less
remaining of that resource in
the aquifer and many, many more
straws, many, many more wells
drilled in order to extract the
water necessary to meet demand
in our communities and our water
situation has reached a, a, a
critical stage with it, with one
of our members uh having to
remain in water restrictions,
um, the, the page with the
portfolio, this is what uh we
envision the future to be in, in
our communities, our, our water
needs will be met through.
a portfolio, including the
remaining groundwater reuse
water, and of course,
importantly, the surface water,
which will be delivered to our
communities.
Forgive me this project where
you have the windy path. Uh,
this is the history of, of, of
our project, which really began
with the signing of the Canadian
River Compact in 1950. And as
you know, the Canadian River
Compact.
Made clear that the state of New
Mexico could store an additional
200,000 acre feet of surface
water between the conscious dam
and the state line, and that
gave birth to the idea that
there would be another eastern
New Mexico reservoir that being
uked. Uh, it was in the late
1950s that the appropriations
came through in the state of New
Mexico did something it hadn't
done before. The state
appropriated the funds.
Constructed an earthen dam and
was now the owner and operator
of a reservoir and, and, and,
uh, New Mexico's Interstate
stream commission owns and
operates the reservoir today.
The initial feasibility studies,
um, for, um, the, the
communities that thought they,
they might make use of the
water, beneficial use of the
water started immediately, but
it wasn't really until the 1980s
and 1987, there was a joint
powers agreement entered into.
By many counties and
municipalities that, that all uh
began to pay for reservations of
U water and with the plans of
eventually developing a system
in order to bring that water
into their communities and make
beneficial use of it. It was in
the early 2000s that the um the
group that would become our
water authority really got
serious about planning and made
a run at the federal
authorization and uh a
preliminary engineering report
was completed.
In 2006, and, and that did lead
to success in 2009, getting that
federal authorization that I
mentioned before. There was the
2010 milestone with the state
enacting our authority. 2011, we
started in and, and worked
through the Nipah and uh finding
of no significant impact, uh,
studies for our, our project in
2016, we began constructing
infrastructure. The, the intake
structure was constructed at the
reservoir and um.
In 2018, we began pipeline
construction and haven't stopped
since. We've remained in, in
construction and in a few pages
we'll show you exactly where
we're at with construction, but
really, uh, making a lot of
progress. Another important, uh,
very, very significant milestone
in my opinion was in 2022.
Uh, 2022 was the first year that
we received large amounts of
funding from the federal
government. We received a total
of 177,400,000 in in FY 22. And
that was because of the
injection of the, the funds that
were in the IIJA which, which,
which put an additional billion
into the federally authorized
projects. It was at that time
that the US Bureau of
Reclamation approached us and
said,
We want to propose providing you
with one last grant agreement.
Uh, then we will title the
completion agreement. So we
already had the, the
authorization, the commitment on
the part of the United States to
go the distance with us at the
75% cost share. But in, in 2022,
I thought that was a significant
milestone when, when we signed a
completion agreement that um
there would be one last
agreement that when funds are
appropriated, it's dropped into
that basket and then we expend
those funds and, and we've been
doing that since then.
When I show you, I've already
referenced it, but the, the cost
share and uh the financing of,
of our projects right now we're
in the construction phase,
although we are providing for uh
through our member
contributions, the
administrative costs and
operation and maintenance, uh,
costs in the future, but
currently, we think about
capital construction, and that's
being done with 75% funds from
the Fed, 15 from the state of
New Mexico and then 10% is
supplied by our member
communities.
Looking at this page, we show
you how much money we have
received to this point and from
which uh parties you see the
federal amount, and of course,
you see two lines for the state
amount. Again, thank you. Uh,
the state of New Mexico has been
amazing. You, you have stayed
ahead on that, that cost share
target, uh, which frankly has
been leveraged at times with the
federal government when we
talked to them about, you know,
we, the state's doing their
share, the locals are doing
their share.
And, and sometimes that results
in a, in a bigger number. Um.
We will, um, you know, actually,
I want to tell you about a
conversation I had last Friday
along these lines. Uh, Mr.
Ortega and I traveled out to
Salt Lake City and met with the
regional director for the Bureau
of Reclamation, um, Wayne Pole.
And when we sat down in the
first few moments, he, he asked
us the question. He says, do you
have any idea why we're, we're
sending so much money your way.
And, and, you know, why is that,
sir? And he says, because you're
ready. Other federally
authorized projects haven't been
ready and I had to get their
Ducks in a row, but you guys are
shovel ready. You remain shovel
ready and so you are in our, our
budget, we're gonna keep you in
our budget and your first, and
this is, this is an amazing
thing to hear from them. Uh,
eastern New Mexico is first for
over target surplus funds that
the Bureau of Reclamation may
get for uh for our region. Very
encouraging, looking at a slide
next that's the, the pie chart.
This shows the, uh, I mentioned
16,415 acre feet is the.
amount of water that our system
will deliver to our member
communities. Uh, this is how it
breaks down. Uh, and I'll point
out that in the, the, the
largest share there, Clovis's
share, 12,0532 ft, uh, within
that is the allocation for
Cannon Air Force Base, which is
2150 acre feet. We never forget
that this project is for water
security and, in, in our
communities. But when we think
about what it means to support
an Air Force special operations
base. We can really think about
water security.
through the lens of national
security and military readiness.
This is a critical project for
national security and military
readiness as well. The picture
up in the top left we just
added. I told you, Mr. Ortega
and I went to Salt Lake to meet
with the regional director of
USBR. Well, on the way home from
the right side of the airplane,
we were able to take pictures of
the reservoir, uh, as we
approached Clovis. So, uh, we'll
flip next to these pages, and
they're gonna get very busy,
I'll just warn you, but it's
because our authority is very
busy. There's a lot of activity
going on with construction. So
we'll take just a moment and
orient orientate ourselves with
this first slide which says 130
130 miles of pipeline ranging
from 4 inch to 42 inch in
diameter. On the left is north,
uh, the, the, the circle there
with the blue, uh, the white
circle with the blue is is
really right on top of the
reservoir and our intake
structure on the far right of
your page as far as the furthest
south member of our, our
authority, which is AIDA. And
you can see everything in
between and we have the, the
segments of the pipeline uh
system or color coded and so as
we flip pages here,
Please look at the uh
Well, this, this next page also
describes that there are, there
are facilities, the intake
structure to pump stations and,
uh, two very small, um, uh, pump
stations, and then when we get
to the page where you have a lot
of colors, a lot of boxes, a lot
of circles. Uh, the thing to
know and I'm sensitive to, to
the fact that I may have limited
time, but the thing to know is
that this slide communicates,
there's a lot of activity going
on, including every phase of the
project we're completely
finished in 3 major segments of
the project.
And if we turn the page,
We show you that we are
currently under construction in
5 major segments of the project.
And when I say a major segment,
I'm, I'm thinking like a layman,
Mr. Ortega says, no, no, it's
actually more than that because
we're in a, in a phase of the
project, there may be several
budgeted projects individual, a
vault, a valve. These all wind
up being budgeted projects and
we're currently spending money
on how many budgeted projects.
We have 26 budgeted projects
within these 5 major segments,
uh, that we're currently
spending money and making
progress on
The next page shows you that we
are nearing the, the, the point
where we'll go to bed, um, on,
on the most recent, uh, phase,
which is completely funded and
ready to bid, it's raw water 1A.
This begins at the intake
structure, the intake pump
station and makes its way toward
the cap rock.
The
Um
The next page explains that
really everything that isn't
under construction or already
complete is either at or nearing
100% design again, our
readiness, we're shovel ready
for the next rounds of funding
to be put to work.
Gonna go ahead and flip to um
this slide, uh.
This slide, uh, which kind of
illustrates our progress uh in
uh thanks to your support and,
and others uh in, in other ways
in terms of the amount of money
that we've spent on construction
or our spending on construction.
We also show you the progress
with fieldwork on the top right,
which, as you can see is nearly
complete, uh, land acquisition
and design as you can see
nearing completion and then of
course the um the percent of
infrastructure in construction
or complete.
And as you can see making
progress and uh the FY 25
budget, which we're, we're about
to finish up, uh, was $368
million. I'd like to tell you
that we spent every bit of that,
but we didn't. So we're gonna be
able to carry quite a bit of
that over into the FY 26 budget
and pair that with new funding
coming our way and, and really
make a lot of progress. We have
a slide that we give this
presentation in the community to
civic groups.
And, and, and so on. And we
always highlight the
partnerships, and this is a list
that keeps growing.
And it certainly includes you,
and by the way, I wanna thank uh
Mr. Sali and Ms. Carswell, the
LFC staff is incredible to work
with. We, we're grateful for,
uh, for the partnership that we
have there and likewise, you
legislators, we, we're grateful
for the partnership that we have
with you, and I wouldn't take
you through each of the, the
bullets here, but as you can
see, we have a lot of partners.
We find them everywhere we look,
uh, because, uh, this project.
Tells the story of, of a great
need for a, a, a big region of
our, our state. And so we're,
we're grateful to the
partnerships and this is, uh,
has been and always will be a, a
project that is um
is one of of partnerships. I
show you the, the, the timeline.
And if you think about where
we've been and the fact that it
really started back in 1950 with
the, with the Canadian River
Compact, uh, this, this timeline
isn't quite large enough, but uh
we began on the left there in,
in 2003, and I won't take you
all the way back there, but you
can see where we're at now at
this point.
Nearing completion with the
pipeline construction, we're
well into the water treatment
design and um in fact, very
soon, uh, the construction of a
pilot water treatment plant is
taking place so that we can
refine, finish refining the
water treatment design and get
that dialed in for maximum
efficiency.
And of course, we're about
midway through with our pump
stations design and
construction. I want to point
out that the far right 2031.
That is our target date for
completion. That's our goal.
And, and, and for several
reasons. The, the water scarcity
issue is intensifying, and as we
look at the remaining
groundwater supplies that we're
able to access. We, we really
see a, a collision course in
around 2031. The other thing
that's going on is that the 10%
member share.
So Clovis Portalis Texaco Elia
have, have leveraged.
debt in the form of a state
revolving
drinking water loan funds, as
well as our loan portion of
these water trust board awards,
uh, and, and our, our debt
service is something that we see
coming and, and we're gonna need
to be delivering water in order
to, to, to get the sale of that
water and, and service our debt,
pay for our O&M, and then, of
course, we need the water in our
communities. And so that's our,
our timeline, and I don't know,
speaking of time, how I did or
if we
We have time to talk about the
economic impact, but I'll just
point out we have a slide here,
uh, which illustrates and talks
about the economic impact. We
have
As I said, 5 major segments
under construction right now.
What that means is, with each of
those phases, there's around
40 on-site construction jobs, 15
off-site construction jobs, and
then on and on, and then there's
even the ripple effect into our
communities because we have
phases that take 24 months to
construct. So these crews come
and live in our community and on
our economy, shop in our grocery
stores and buy vehicles in our
community and all of that. Uh,
and so the economic impact from,
from this project is real and so
we, we never want to discount
that. And then the rest of our
presentation are a lot of
Really great pictures, uh, that,
that show the, the, the really
fantastic dirt toys and, and,
and the, and the pipe going into
the ground.
But I'll pause there and and see
if there are questions. Uh,
thank you very much, Mr. Mayor.
Thank you, Mr. Russell. We'll go
to questions now and uh we'll go
from there. We're gonna start
with Representative Chatfield
and then uh go to Senator
Trujillo and go from there.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, my
question is for Marquita.
I'm, I'm looking at
Page 6.
of your presentation.
I see 157, 845.
329 $157,845,329 plus 200
million from the, from the
legislature.
And then, uh,
I look down and I see uh awarded
$146603 384.
Whatever.
I see considerably less awarded
than than what was appropriated.
I see some a couple of
additional awards down here, 35
to 45 million proposed uh
expected, but it still leaves
us, uh, a little short. It was
there not enough applications,
uh, just so, am I missing it a
little bit or.
What's that? Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Um, so there are 4
communities Espanola, Demming,
Almogordo, and Portalis that
have multiple applications
pending. So Espanola had 3
projects in the, in this year's
round. Deming had 4, Almo Gordo
had 2, and Portalis had 2. And
so if any one of those projects
doesn't meet if any one of those
communities doesn't end up
meeting their executive order
compliance by our July time
frame, they would not be
eligible for the award cycle in.
Um, August, so we are doing a
little bit of um haircutting
there because we want to show
you what we think is the
expectation, but, you know, the,
there's about $68 million of
applications still pending from
those 18 applicants that had not
met the uh the 18 applications
when the applicants did not meet
the readiness. So it's hard to
tell exactly how much we're
gonna do, but, um, our
expectation is at least another
2. We'll use all the severance
tax bonds and we'll use.
A portion of the um the, the,
the 200 million, but how much
will use of that 200 million is
largely dependent on whether or
not those four communities are
able to meet their executive
order.
Thank you, Marquita. Also, I
know that from year to year,
from time to time, there's
reversions, has there, what,
what was that like say last
year, what was the number on it?
So, Mr. Chairman, that's one of
the reasons I did on that last,
on the last page, um, there are
very few reversions that are
happening maybe one every year
to 2 years, um, not very often,
uh, because again, the planning
document has been so
comprehensive and it means that
they're ready to actually do
their project, so we don't.
see as many reversions as we
used to see, um, and because we
fully fund projects, uh, that
are ready to go. So when early
on, we would only they would
apply for a, a chunk of money
and we would tell them, well,
we'll just do a part of that and
that wasn't so successful. It
took a long time for those
projects to close. Many of them
had to turn back their awards
because they could not meet the
additional um funding
requirement. So when the water
trust board changed that
process, we started getting
Um, more of those applications,
most more of those awards were,
were, um, seen through to
completion.
So I, that is great that that
it's tightened up.
And you actually stole my first
question that I was gonna ask
when I raised my hand, because
we're sitting here talking about
the problems that we've had
estimating costs on schools and
higher uh institutions of higher
education and uh I just look at
your projects and I know that
that doesn't happen with you all
very much and, and I think we
need to look to you and to your
process, uh, not only the
planning process, but the
readiness to proceed process.
Uh, before we commit funding. I
mean, you have to commit to
planning dollars and, and, uh,
but then going through that
readiness to proceed phase and
all that stuff, I think is what
has insulated.
Your agency from dealing with
some of the problems we have
dealt with with these school
construction. So thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you very much,
Representative Chatfield. Next,
we have Senator Trujillo, then
Representative Dow, and
Representative Herrera.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you for the presentation.
This is like a 22 or 22 years
into this project of almost a 27
year.
Project, that's pretty long.
Um, uh, it's a long attention
span.
Uh, to keep moving on, and I, I
think it's amazing. But, but I
say that because I, I see that
like the planning started back
in 2003, technology has changed
significantly in that time. Are
there sensors on each of the
tubes or are there, you know,
every.
You tubes, how are you, because
it's underground.
Um, and it seems as though that
that was a pretty expense, but
there must be a reason for it,
and I don't need to know.
But are there sensors so we know
if there's leaks.
There are, Mr. Ortega, can you
wanna speak to that? Sure, I
can.
Chairman Small and and Senator
Trujillo, uh, good to see you,
by the way, um, uh, we do value
engineering throughout this time
frame, so what we did in 2003 is
not what we're doing today. So
the technology kind of changes
as we go forward. So every
project that we designed to the
100% completion is to today's
technology and standards. Yes,
ma'am.
So that, that um Mr. Chairman,
um, I'm assuming that means yes,
there are sensors so that we
know if there's a leak before,
absolutely,
absolutely. In fact, uh, the
water treatment plant will have
will be the control center for
for all of the system and we
will have monitors. We'll, we
will actually be able to control
valves from the control center
so we can slow flow. We can, we
can uh open valves, we can
detect leaks.
All of that, yes, ma'am.
Great, thank you. That was my
only question. Thank you very
much, Senator Nick Herrera, then
Representative, or excuse me,
Representative Dow then
Represented.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for the, the presentations.
My first question is for
Marquita, and I'm, there's two
school districts and I'm
thinking that they're
I know of one of the school
districts for sure is putting in
their own local water, um.
Water systems. Like, can you
talk a little bit about those
projects because there's lacking
infrastructure in the community
overall. And does the school
applying for those dollars, does
it fix the community problem or
are they just fixing the school
problem?
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman.
It's, it's just fixing the
school problem. There are
several schools that are uh
actually qualify as public water
systems because of the number of
people they uh they regularly
serve and so several of those
are in more remote areas and
they're not in a position to
link up to any other kind of
major source of water.
OK, thank you, thank you, Mr.
Chairman and thank you,
Marquita. So they're not
duplicating an effort that we're
now going to have to pay for
twice.
Um, Mr. Chairman, that's
correct. OK, thank you. Um, I
just, I think that the
Department of Finance Authority
does such a good job and, and,
uh, you guys are so
intentionally your team with
making sure that we're being
efficient with funds and I want
to say thank you for that. And
Mr. Chairman, then my next
question is for the mayor. So we
were just handed a letter from
the village of Logan. Have you
guys seen it?
I'm not sure I've seen the
specific letter. Well, Mr. Chair
and Mayor, it's talking just
about concerns about the minimum
pool at Ute Lake and the amount
of water, um, can, can you
maintain the minimum pool with
the current obligation of the
16,500 acre feet, what happens
to Ute Lake over time?
Yeah, uh, Mr. Chairman and
Representative, great question.
Thank you for that.
I know you don't have time to
read it.
Thanks.
Thanks. I'll, I'll skim that
real quick, senator. Thank you.
Um, Mr. Chair and uh
Representative Dao, the, um,
The conversation about the
minimum pool is something that
has been discussed, you know,
over time, uh, the fact is, is
that the ute reservoir.
First and foremost was
established for water security
for New Mexicans, not as a
recreational playground.
And
The good news is though, is that
it'll do both. Uh, for example,
I was looking at the levels, um,
yesterday and since May 1st,
because we had a little rain,
uh, but since May, from May 1st
to May 14th, there were 3000
acre feet added at the
reservoir.
And, and I just, I just point
that out to, to say, you know,
the, the reservoir has a, a
renewable nature.
Representative Chatfield will
tell you that that watershed is
fantastic. That dam is in
exactly the right place and it
catches water when there are
storms anywhere between the
reservoir and up to Mascaro and
even north of there. So 3000
acre feet that flowed in in the
first few days of of May amounts
to about 20% of the total that
our authority will remove from
the reservoir on an annual
basis.
Year in and year out, the
inflows are
North of what we would take out.
Uh, the, the, the reservoir is
absolutely sustainable.
At the the allocation that we
take. In fact, New Mexico
Interstate Stream Commission
owns and operates the reservoir.
They evaluate and reassess the,
the firm yield, and they have
the firm yield that.
24,000 acre feet.
And, and there, there are other
entities outside of our
authority that have reserved
the, the difference between what
we have and the, the max 24,000.
So
If ISC believes that it'll do
24,000 acre feet per year. We're
only gonna do 16,415 at a
maximum.
And the, the reservoir will
absolutely handle it. Our
friends and neighbors in Logan
understandably want to continue
to grind this ax, but the fact
is, is that the Canadian River
Compact.
Set out that we could store this
200,000 acre feet for the
benefit of New Mexicans.
Beneficial use for drinking
water and
It
It's going to function well in
that primary purpose and the
secondary benefits are still
gonna be there as well.
OK, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much. Uh, next we
have representative, uh,
Herrera, then represent her.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Mr. uh, thank you, panel.
Uh, great job as usual. I'm, I'm
very curious about something you
didn't talk about, you talked
about reuse and groundwater, uh,
Mr. Morris, but I'm very curious
about what these communities are
doing around conservation, and I
think it's a, it's something
that we don't talk about as a
state, and I think I really
think that's the low hanging
fruit that we're not really
looking at or or giving money
to, frankly, and I, and I wanna
know what.
community to as far as
conservation efforts and, and
has that changed over the course
of the years.
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Herrera, uh, thank you.
Excellent question. Uh.
Residents of Clovis, New Mexico
are absolutely conservationists
and um so to answer your
question, I can tie all of these
things together. One, the city
of Clovis has developed a
affluent reuse system. And so
we're, we're very uh cognizant
of the um the amount of inflows
that our wastewater treatment
plant and they've gone down over
the years because our residents
are using less and less, uh,
similarly, our water utility
provider Epcore Water.
Reports delivering less water
than they were delivering, say,
10 years ago, our peak demands
have come down in the city of
Clovis from 12 million gallons a
day on 4th of July to
9 million gallons a day.
The advent of low, low flow
appliances, eroscape
landscaping, all of that has
contributed to us across our
community using on average 160
gallons a day and in Clovis
households, which is way below
what what you see in other
places. So we're absolutely
conserving.
The, the situation that we face
with our groundwater and it
being the sole source for
drinking, for industrial, and
for irrigated ag production.
Is that the irrigated ag
production or the mining of that
aquifer is 95% for, for
irrigated ag production and 5%
for municipal use. So while we
must be conservationists as
residents of our communities and
we are, and we have the, the
data to show that we're, we're
using less and less. The fact
is, is that the residents of the
city cannot conserve enough on
the municipal side if something
isn't done about the, the, the
mining that's taking place for
A.
And, and so what we've done, and
not us, not Eastern New Mexico
Water Utility Authority, but as
a community, we have partnered
with the Department of Defense
and gotten after this, this,
this challenge, and we're now
banking groundwater in the areas
of the county where there's
still remaining saturated
thickness worth trying to save,
and we anticipate that banked
groundwater being part of that
portfolio that I talked about
earlier, which I think
precipitated your
Question. And so we're, we're
saving what we can of the
remaining groundwater resources
for, for the future because we
will need to supplement the
surface water, uh, once the
system is operational.
The, the surface water will be
the base load, but there will be
those 2 or 3 days a year or
Maybe worse, right? If we have a
tough drought cycle, levels of
the reservoir are such that
Interstate stream commission
back to Representative Dall's
question, maybe Interstate
stream commission as the owner
and operator of that reservoir
says we need to scale back the
amount that we're going to take
in a given year. Well, we'll
need the groundwater in the
future to, to supplement.
But then
The reuse piece is, is, is
important as well. And we can't
take anything off of the table.
Right now our, uh, I think our
class A is fluent that we use to
water the golf course and parks
and ball fields with. I think it
It may meet drinking water
standards. We're not drinking
it, but the point is, is that we
may, we need to think about
that. That's how desperate our
situation is, and that's how
critical the U pipeline is to
our communities is that we need
to think about toilet to tap.
Uh, we need to be conserving the
remaining groundwater and we're
undertaking efforts to do that.
We're
We're conserving and we're
open-minded about how to
conserve even more. Does that
get at your question? Yes, thank
you. Thank you.
Then you, uh, next
representative Herndon and
Senator Lanier, then
Representative Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and my
question goes to Marquita, and I
want to direct your attention to
page 4 of your report, and I, I
don't know if this follows up on
Representative Chatfield's
question or not, but I'm looking
at the projects, particularly
looking at um 22, 23, and 24,
and you're talking about the
projects looking at the year of
2022, 8 of which have not even
been started for construction 23
in 2023, we have um 19
that have not started
construction. And so I asked you
this question as we listen, we
listened to the mayor of Clovis
talk about how they were shovel
ready when they began each one
of their projects. Were these
projects not shovel ready or why
is it here we are two years
later or 3 years later, and they
have not started.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chairman. So
I would just note that when we
make the awards, um, let's say
next week, the Finance Authority
will consider those 60 awards
that were recommended by the
Water Trust board, we require
readiness to proceed. So if
they're asking for construction
dollars, we need to see by
September the design that will
support that construction. So we
want to see that they've
completed their designs before
we'll allow them to access their
construction dollars. Uh, we
need to see their easements. We
need to see the things that
would
get in the way of construction.
So that takes about 3 months and
then from that point forward,
they'll be um some time needed
to, you know, secure the actual
agreement. So projects are
actually able to start tapping
their awards by typically
November of each year, so they
start in the preceding year in
about August.
And they go until about
November, uh, before they're
able to access the funds, and
that's just the process that,
that we go through with the
Water Trust board because of the
different authorizations that
are required. Um, and so for
several,
particularly the smaller
systems, it's hard to get a
project just to get the
contractor out in that time
period. So the smaller projects
take longer for them to start
construction and certainly
during the pandemic, we saw all
of those construction projects
seize up. We had very little
construction.
going on during the pandemic. So
2022 was really part of that
process, 2023 was still frankly
part of that process. Um, we
don't yet know about 2024
because again, those dollars
were largely maybe they're 6
months into their agreements at
this point, so we, I, I don't
have enough data to tell you
about that. Um, but it's not
unusual for the smaller projects
to take longer to get going and,
you know, the, the eastern New
Mexico project, they're really
in a great place to start
spending money, but they didn't.
really start construction for
I don't know, 15 years, 14
years.
When, when we started
construction,
right, so, uh, continuously
under your pipeline construction
since 2018, the intake structure
was constructed, no doubt with
your support, uh, in 2016.
So, and they started receiving
awards in 2002. So, um, it just,
it, it just takes, you know,
takes some time for easements to
get in place and um so they're,
uh, they are generally ready,
but that doesn't mean that the
contractors will be ready to, to
show up and start work.
Thank you, uh, and Mr. Chair
and, and uh Marquita, just one
other clarification. When we
look at the money for each one
of the years that is set aside
for cost overruns. This cost
overruns because of increase in
materials because they're so
long in getting started.
Um
Mr. Chairman, is, yes, I think
relative to where they start
their applications. So again,
they start by submitting a
notice of intent to file an
application with the finance
Authority generally in late July
or early August. They get
awarded.
The following May and then
they're able to access their
funding.
Project funds through an uh an
executed agreement by about
November. So just the
application process because
again of the authorizations that
we go through, that takes, you
know, it's about 15 to 16 months
generally speaking, and
construction costs in any, um,
you know, any uh condition will
increase a little bit in that
time, in particularly over the
last several years, you know,
the cost increases were
significant.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Marquita.
Thank you very much,
Representative Herndon. Uh,
next, Senator Lanier, then
Repent Vincent, then Senator
Woods.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um, Ms.
Russell, can you just kind of
walk us through the process. So
let's say I'm a mutual domestic.
What is the process?
How do I find out?
That I need to apply with you.
Let's start there and just
quickly kind of go through. I, I
don't want to drag it out too
far, but
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So I
would turn to page 5, the annual
application process, as I said,
starts in about, um, July. We do
outreach through the rural Water
Association, mutual domestics in
particular, I think are an
interesting challenge for us
because there are, you know,
there's about 1000 small water
systems, um, and so, and we've
only funded a very small portion
of those. So they're typically
um if they're looking for
funding if they're attending the
infrastructure conferences if
they're got
an engineer or, you know, a very
active board member, they'll
know about this and and frankly
they're legislators will often
direct them to us. So we have
trainings in the summer about
how to apply for these funds,
but it is an annual process that
we go through the, the law
requires that the water trust
board recommend to the
legislature projects to be
authorized and the legislature
then has to, um, frankly bless
that list before the uh uh
recommendations can be.
made to the finance authority
for funding. So because of the
session time frame, we start, we
thoroughly vet those projects
and by November, early November
of each year, we have a vetted
list. We can tell you how ready
they are to proceed. We will
have um evaluated them against
the criteria that's in these
policies that I talked about
earlier, and when I come to the
legislature to you all with a
list of projects that have been
recommended by the Water Trust
Board. I can
you the project, I can tell you
how much money they've secured.
I can tell you where they are
and they're permitting, um, but
I can't fund it till we get
through the session and then we
go through one last, um, cycle
of reviews and that's for
regulatory compliance. So before
we'll authorize a project to
proceed if it's a construction
project, as I said earlier, we
need to see the designs. If it's
a water storage project, we need
to see that they've, they've got
the water rights in place. If
they are, um, they got to show
their easements.
Uh, they've got to be able to
tell us and demonstrate that
they're in compliance with
regulator state regulations
regarding water quality. So all
of that has to happen and we
look obviously at their
executive order and typically
that's the one that has been
slowing folks up because it's
been so difficult to get
auditors, um, so the executive
order requirement has been the
thing not water rights, not
those others, but the executive
took action in April. They had 2
meetings in April to review the
lists, and they approved it at
the end of April, made the
recommendation to the Finance
Authority and we take it through
our process. So it is, it's a,
it's a lot of work. There's a
lot of upfront work which
obviously saves time on the back
end.
Right. And Mr. Chair, um,
How do you prioritize
The projects cause I, I
understand the process.
And
But, but how does one project
get put in place before the next
After you check to make sure
that they're updated on all of
their.
Requirements. Thank you. That's
an excellent question. If you
look at our
Um, really large set of
policies, um, it tells you, you
know, how we'll go through the
process and how much money will
typically get allocated to what
kind of project, but in the
appendices is the requirement
for funding, um, you'll see
by-project type, what kind of
documentation is needed, what
kind of planning document is
needed in order to apply, and
then you'll see the criteria
that you'll be evaluated against
on health and safety, um, uh,
readiness, uh, regionalization
elements that every, every set
of policies, there's about 6
elements that they're reviewed
against, and those are in the
policy document as an
appendices. So if you're water
conservation, you're only really
competing against other water
conservation projects, so
they're prioritized in the fall.
So Mr. Chair, my, so
municipalities aren't
necessarily at the top.
And then you're gonna prioritize
from there. It is actually by
the application and the way that
it's presented.
To you.
Mr. Chairman, that's correct,
and they have to have a planning
document, so they can't just say
it. We go into the document and
actually look to see that they
have identified all the permits
necessary and then we asked them
to show us their permits. So it
is, uh, there's a lot of work
that's involved in them. They're
not, uh, for the faint of heart.
Thank you. And Mr. Chair, um,
and I visited with you before
about the audits, um, because in
our area, it's, it's very hard
to get our ditch companies and
everybody else to get the
audits, where are you with that?
Are we, are we gonna have more
auditors, are we gonna?
Reduce the amount in, I think
it's 50,000 right now. If you're
under 50,000.
Your audit is different than if
you're over 50,000, is that
correct?
Mr. Chairman, I wish I could
answer that quickly. I don't
know the answer specifically for
you, that's obviously subject to
this, the state auditor. I can
tell you the finance Authority
just went out for an RFP for an
auditor and had a very difficult
time finding somebody qualified
to handle our audit and, and
it's a big ticket, it's a big,
it's a big engagement and we had
a very difficult time.
And thank you, uh, Mr. Chair.
That was kind of a loaded
question because I'm, I'm trying
to get help with the state
auditor, obviously, and, and
that's, that's really where that
comes from, um.
Because we do, we have.
Several ditch companies and
they're retiring.
Older people.
That
It's hard to get volunteers in
anything that we do right now.
And a ditch company is is the
worst, I think, because
Um, the younger generation is
taking their kids to basketball
games or whatever it is, and so
they're their interest in what
as long as there's water in the
ditch, they're, they're good.
They don't want to help shovel
it, they don't care as long as
they're getting water, but they
don't understand the backside of
that, so the older generation
that is actually taking care of
all of this stuff and sitting on
these boards are starting to
retire and so we're having an
issue, um.
Keeping them up to date so that
we can help them get projects
done.
So, so thank you and I know
you're working on that and I
appreciate all that you're doing
for us, so thank you, Mr.
Chairman, relative to that, we
see this a lot with mutual
domestics. Those are all
volunteer boards the same way as
your, those ditch companies
you're talking about and our
goal here is to hopefully get as
many regionalized or in a
cooperative agreement as
possible so that there are fewer
boards that are required. You
think about the number of water
systems that there are in the
state. There's more than 1000
and only, you know, fewer than
10
or municipal systems. So you
know that there's just a large
number of volunteer boards or
smaller boards out there that
need that they're, they're gonna
run out of members and so our
hope is that our regionalization
process can help spur some of
those conversations, make it
much easier for these systems to
either interconnect or become
part of a more cooperative
regional cooperative agreement.
And Mr. Chair, thank you. um.
And San Juan Water Commission,
which I sat on that board.
We're starting an education
program where we're gonna try to
bring those folks in and, and
show them.
You know, that as basic as this
is how you run a meeting. This
is how you get people on your
board. This is how you apply,
this is how you get your audits,
um.
And it, and hopefully next year
I'll get to report back to you
that that it's successful, um,
I, I think it's gonna be because
they're just starving for
information and they just really
don't know.
You know, so, so I thank you for
your work. I do have a question
for the mayor. Good to see you
again. And I'm sorry I didn't
catch your name. Orlando,
Orlando, thank you, um.
So in the reservoir.
Where would that water go if
If you don't have that
reservoir, where, where does the
water go?
Mr. Chairman and Senator, great
seeing you again as well. Uh,
the
If I understand your question,
uh, you know, the dam being
positioned where it is on the
Canadian, if, if, if it were not
there, then the water would go
to, it would end up at Meredith
over in Amarillo, over in Texas,
to Texas. Yeah, yeah, the the
reservoir was established to
exercise the rights that New
Mexico gained with the Canadian
River Compact, which said they
could store 200,000 acre feet of
surface water and at the time,
it was stated, you know, between
or from the conscious dam.
Which is on the Canadian and the
state line, and so that, you
know, gave birth to the idea
that there would need to be
another reservoir in order to to
capture that and exercise those
rights. So that's what the
reservoir is doing on our
behalf, on the behalf of New
Mexicans and the Interstate
Stream Commission owns and
operates that it's a storage
compact, so the state of New
Mexico can store up to 2000 acre
feet. Uh, there is no, um, um,
you know, obligation to release
a certain amount.
It's just over that that
storage, right, it goes
downstream, continues in the
Canadian channel and would end
up at Lake Meredith.
OK, thank you. And Mr. Chair, I,
if I've already asked you this,
Mayor, I'm sorry.
Um
The pipeline wasn't.
Set yet and, and you already had
put, how much money did you
spend for the outlet of where a
pipeline could go.
Before we even knew if there was
gonna be a pipeline, is that?
Kind of makes sense. So, so you
have that big concrete, I think
it's, I believe it's on the
south end, is that right?
No
What was the foresight you had
to go ahead and build that and
spend the extra money to
concrete that in and have it
ready.
Appreciate the question, um, Mr.
Chairman and Senator, the, the,
the fact is, is that the vision,
the plan has always been to
build a complete system and uh
at the point in time that the
federal authorization came, we
had a 30% design for the entire
system. And so, um, the, you had
to start somewhere and, and we
had enough funding to design and
construct the intake structure,
uh, and, and in fact, I believe,
and Mr. Ortega will correct me
if, if I don't have this quite
right. But I think the
Interstate Stream Commission
actually encouraged us to do
that first and at that time
because they were interested in
there being one straw in the
reservoir, if you will, and
since we were prepared and and
ready to construct that they
wanted us to get that
constructed so that the other
entities, counties and
municipalities that, by the way,
includes the village of Logan
Tucum Carry, Quay County, San
Juan, um, if, should they ever
want to make beneficial use of
of their uh of their
allocations, which.
They're paying for and holding,
uh, they're gonna do so through
that same intake structure and
same pump station.
And last question, Mr. Chair.
So, so those counties you just
listed.
If the ISC changes hands.
So let's say the new governor
comes in, the ISC completely
changes.
Do they have the capability of
shutting off Logan.
And quay and some of those
counties.
Or
In the compact, is it set where
those individual, those other
counties are going to get their
water if so need.
Mr. Chairman and Senator, great
question. And, and just so, just
to be super clear, the Canadian
River Compact is in agreement
between the three states and
does not speak to the individual
municipalities or counties
allocations. Uh, that's handled
through really, I mean,
officially on an individual
entity basis, so Quy County has
and pays for their reservation.
They pay that annual allocation
to maintain that reservation,
uh, but back in 1987, all of
those
entities, counties and
municipalities that, that had
intention to pay for and hold
reservations did come together
in a JPA joint powers of
Agreement, which, uh, to be a
member of the JPA and again,
Our friends in Logan to can
carry quay Sandholm Grady, all,
all of them are members of that
JPA. Everyone who holds
reservations is a member of that
JPA and we all agree to support
one another in making beneficial
use of our allocations, uh, and
then separate of that we have a
contract that we all come
together in that contract is
with the Interstate stream
Commission. Your question is an
interesting one. what I would
say though is, you know, since
1987, uh, the, the interstate
stream commission under the
leadership of various
administrations has not
seen a reason to uh tell us that
we can't.
Have that agreement honored.
And, and I, and I can't imagine,
maybe, maybe you give me a
little more about what you're
asking there I can
it's another one of those little
questions, so you did, you did
great you did fine.
And if that
I mean, Mr. Chairman and
senator, so along those lines, I
mean, if you, if you want to
like sort of think about
scenarios where maybe those
holding reservations let them go
either. I mean, I think you're
sort of saying not voluntarily,
but let's say they voluntarily
let them go. New Mexico
Interstate stream Commission
owns and operates the reservoir
with the purpose and the intent
of New Mexico's into, you know,
New Mexicans taking and making
beneficial use of that water.
And, and so presumably, if, if
some of the members, some of
those
holding reservations want to
stop paying for them because
they never intend to take them.
I have a feeling members of our
authority would be more than
happy to take those res
reservations up to that 24,000
acre feet firm yield.
And Mr. Chairman, I appreciate
that because that is the full
circle, if those reservations go
away, where does the water go?
To Texas.
Correct. And so, you know,
that's my issue and I want to
make sure that our our ISC is
taken care of and and make sure
that they understand the
responsibility of those other
counties, it's not just.
you, it's not just Clovis, and
so.
That that's the point of my.
My question and, and Mr.
Chairman and Senator, I would, I
would tell you from, from my
experience and my observation
in, in being involved with this
and, and, and interacting with
Interstate stream commission and
interacting with the Canadian
River Compact Commission, uh,
intended their annual meeting,
uh, the last couple of years,
most recently in March in
Oklahoma City. Uh, there, there
is a lot of care and
consideration given to the state
getting only what it is allowed.
to, uh, in the storage, uh, uh,
rights, and then the Interstate
stream commission is, is, is
very good about respecting all
of the members regardless of
whether or not they're actively
looking to uh take delivery if
that helps at all.
And thank you and Mr. Chair, I
just want to add Hannah, you're,
if she, if she's online, she's
doing a great job. I see. I
don't have any problem with. I
just know how things can change
over time. I think they're doing
a great job and and it's a, a
very large responsibility and uh
It's very important that us as a
uh legislatures.
Keep in mind that the ISC.
Keeps moving forward, it's our
responsibility to make sure that
they're, they're doing their job
and uh and we shouldn't take
that lightly, so thank, thank
both of you or all three of you,
thank you Mr. Cha. that's all.
Excellent. Thank you, Senator.
We have Vincent, Senator Woods,
and then Vice Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My first question is for
Marquita and on the water trust
are those loans, grants, or can
it be a combination thereof.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. That's
an excellent question. I
typically start with that and
didn't this time. Um, so if the
underlying applicant and project
has a ratepaying constituency,
then we require a 10% loan. Um,
so regardless of, uh, you know,
We at least a 10% loan. It can
go up to 40% based on their
historic capacity to repay a
loan. And so some loans are
greater than others depending
again on the community that was
our the water trust board's
attempt to kind of balance out
that some communities have
greater uh means available and
can, you know, frankly hire
grant writers and things and
have a better shot at it. So at
least 10% if you were um a
tribal entity or or not
supported by a rate paying
constituent.
see, you can um substitute an
additional match in lieu of the
loan. So instead of a 10% match,
you might have a 20% match, um,
and you could then take on just
100% grant. Uh, we don't do 100%
loan. So it's maximum that
you'll get is 40%, um, and many
about 15% of the funds are go
out in the form of loans.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and those
loans, did you say 10% match,
not 10% interest. It's 0%
interest. 0% interest and 10% of
the project amount. So if
they're asking us for $100,000
we'd ask them to take out a
$10,000 loan with 0% interest
over 20 years. Thank you. Thank
you, Mr. Chair, and um also
I noticed that there was 11
projects in my county.
And
I kind of like a bird dog a
little bit to make sure things
are getting done.
Is there a, is there a place on
the website where I can see
what's being done and what the
progress is of the of the job.
Mr. Chairman, no, not at this
point. That's an excellent, that
we've never been asked to do
that. Um, we are in the process
organizationally of um uh
developing an integrated uh
system, uh, that'll actually
allow us to tie everything
together, so I think that's
something that could be possible
in the next year. We don't
currently have the technology
to, um, push that through. We
rely still on a lot of manual
processes overseeing these
projects, but we are headed
toward complete automation in
the next year, so we'll take
that to heart and I think that's
a great.
Idea.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and also,
so there's 11 projects I know of
4 of them for sure.
And I might be forgetting one.
or 2
But there's still some on the
table. How would I go to see
where those are at. Do you have
that online? Um, Mr. Chairman,
no, we, we, um, report online
the awards that have been made
to date, that's, that's what we
report on, um, we're happy to,
and we provide to LFC updates
quarterly on where our projects
are, um, but and we're happy to
get you that information, but we
don't have a regular reporting
mechanism on the progress of the
underlying projects. I will tell
you once they get into
you in a, in an agreement,
there's like we've talked about
earlier, there's readiness to
proceed, and then we go into
the, the grant loan agreement.
They have 2 years to construct
the project under that
agreement. Um, and so our goal
here is to get that project done
in 18 to 24 months after they've
secured the award and most of
them will are able to do that in
that time frame, unless, of
course, they have problems
actually getting started with
the construction.
Thank you Mr. Chair and thank
you for your answers. Uh, I've
got some questions for the
mayor. Good to see you, Mayor.
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Benson, great to see you.
Uh, we, you've taught me a
little bit about insurance and
now hopefully you can educate me
on this pipeline. And was a
rough session
that was a rough one,
how long, how long is this
pipeline been going on?
Since 18, is that what I heard
you say?
So the, the intake structure was
completed in 2016, so
construction on that actually
began in 2014, I believe it was.
So, so officially construction
on our project again in 2014,
2015, the pipeline construction
started in 2018 and hasn't
stopped since, and we're nearing
nearing completion. OK, thank
you, Mr. Chair, and you know, as
a, as a legislator, let's just
say as an elected official, you
can't make everybody happy.
but we try and, you know, I, I,
I'm reading this letter from the
mayor.
Of Logan.
And
Mm
Do you have a relationship with
the mayor of Logan and to you as
a stakeholder since they are
stakeholders, do y'all have,
y'all talk, y'all visit?
Mr. Chairman and Representative,
um, do we have a relationship?
Yes. And have we talked? Yes.
Um, as I mentioned before, we're
all members of the same joint
powers agreement.
And it's through that agreement
that we all agree to support one
another in making beneficial use
in constructing a distribution
system and making beneficial use
of our allocations. Nowhere in
the JPA does it provide for
other members of the JPA to
undermine the efforts of, of
those members to make beneficial
use of those uh of those
allocations, which, by the way,
we've paid for and held
reservations for for 38 years
now. And I talked
and, and about the need in our
community. You know, we're not
doing this.
Because it just kind of seems
like a neat idea. We need water
in our communities and, and we
need drinking water in our
communities and I've become a
student of the levels and the
inflows at Ute Reservoir, and
I've told Mayor Bass and others
in uh Quy County, Logan and
Tucin Carry, that um
I'm more than happy to think
with them about how to make
shoreline improvements, how to
lobby you and the rest of the
legislature for help to make
shoreline improvements, to make
sure that the watershed is
functioning at the maximum
capacity that it possibly can,
so that we maximize the benefits
of the renewable nature of that
reservoir. But the fact is we
can go back.
You pick the, pick the year and
I can show you a rainstorm in a,
in a 1 or 2-day event where the
inflows at that reservoir exceed
the amount that our authority
will take off.
In a year
And so I grew real tired of the
argument that says that we're
going to drain that reservoir
and
And in fact, I go back to the
purpose of that reservoir, water
security for eastern New Mexico,
well,
What, where are our priorities,
right? And um
If, and I'm not the sharpest,
I'm, I'm, you, you, you
referenced it. I'm an insurance
agent, right? So, uh, and, you
know,
Not, not the sharpest guy in any
room, and I can figure out that
it's sustainable. And the smart
people can too. And so, uh, for
our friends, and they are our
friends and our neighbors. I'm,
we're, we're in my hometown. I
went, I, I, I grew up on a ranch
out here by conscious, another
beloved reservoir that we, we
bicker about the levels in, uh.
That, that body of water isn't
going anywhere.
Is it gonna be lower on average
because it's functioning in a
primary purpose and New Mexicans
will have water security. Yeah,
it'll probably be lower, uh, on
average, but there's still gonna
be
Boating, fishing, recreation,
our friends in Logan, and if
they want me as a partner, can.
Strategize ways to maximize the
secondary benefits, the
recreational benefits and, and
it can still be an amazing.
place for tourists, for New
Mexicans alike to enjoy, but
16,415 acre feet being pulled
off of that reservoir every
year.
Doesn't kill it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I
appreciate that and you know,
So whenever I read this letter
from the mayor.
I know that he's got to have
people that's chewing on him and
that's why he's putting this
out, so I wouldn't say that it's
just him and I haven't even met
Mayor Bass.
But
Sometimes
It seems like we, we lose the
ability to sit around a table
like ladies and gentlemen had
discussed things, even though
they're painful.
Even though your face gets red,
even though, and you have to
maintain your, you got to be a
gentleman, you gotta be a lady
and you got to be a gentleman.
You can't, you know, get out of
control and have those, those
meetings to wear, everybody's
educated because
You know, I mean, Mr. Chairman,
I'm from Clovis.
I was born and raised there. I
don't know if I told you that
Mary, but I'm a Clovis guy and
I've been going to that lake
since I was a kid on a
recreation side.
Now that I'm older, I'm there on
a fishing side. And, um, you
know, I like to, I like to fish
for bass. It's, I like to even
put my money up and see if I can
meet somebody and.
You know, I, I would say that if
I was a resident there in Logan.
I would have some reservations
about, especially if I bought my
property, knowing that, you
know, that's a recreation lake
and it might drop the value of
my property.
But after talking with you, I
might feel a little bit better
about it if
You told me that we're gonna
work on some shoreline stuff
we're gonna make sure that more
water's coming down in there and
um
You give me that good feeling
that we're all gonna be working
for a good cause because
I know recreation is important,
but people have waters even more
important, and I've been
following the Ogallala for a
while because that rumor has not
rumor, that information is went
all the way to Lincoln County
because we're always, you know,
looking for, for sources of
water and how to conserve water
and all these different ideas
that we get. So I just wanted to
make sure that, first of all,
everybody's in the same room,
everybody's talking, everybody's
friends, and we still do have to
supply.
New Mexicans with water now on
the project itself.
What's the total, what's the
total tag on it? What, what's it
gonna cost to complete the whole
project.
Mr. Chairman and Representative,
thank you for the question. The,
uh,
$950 million is the, is the
estimated cost to come to, to
finish it, right? The, the total
cost. Uh, what Mr. Ortega, uh,
the administrator will tell you
is that um what we've seen as
we've ramped up activity, of
course, there was inflation on,
on materials and, and all of
that that everyone has
experienced. However, um, we've,
we've made efforts to, to hold
industry days and invite
contractors.
You're capable of, of doing this
work into the community to come
and have a look at it and look
at what the next phases are, uh,
to, to, uh, encourage more
competition.
And so what we've seen in the
last several phases is that uh
the bids are coming in well
under the engineer's estimate.
And then on top of that,
We, we've really refined our
processes and, and when I say
we, Mr. Ortega and his
administrative team have really
refined their processes to uh to
assist the contractor in staying
on schedule and under budget.
And he's, he's, we're completing
projects under budget, um.
To the tune of Thus far, 10
Million easily, OK, to the tune
now of $10 million on on
projects that we've completed
and we get to push that money
forward, you know, and, and, and
keep up the activity. And so,
um, 950 million, but Mr. Ortega,
if I give him the microphone,
will tell you that he thinks we
can get it under that because,
you know, the estimates are
going to be what they are, but
the cost to actually do the
work, he holds them to the fire
and we get it done under.
Uh
Under the budget
Thank you for that and you know,
I see right here where uh
capital funding today, you've
received 577 million.
And
Just say we have another, let's
just say 4.5 million to go.
I mean, 400 million to go and do
you feel like you're gonna be
able to secure all that funding.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and
Representative, yes, um, as I
As they took you through our
prepared presentation, I told
you about the, the federal
authorization. You know, we have
the, we have the promise of the
United States of America to, to
go 75% on this with us and to go
the distance and then the
completion agreement that we
signed in 2022 where they sort
of reaffirmed that. And then
most recently, and I don't want
to confuse any numbers that I'm
about to say with the, with the
950, but the United States
Bureau of Reclamation repriced
our project, set a new ceiling
on it.
At 1.4 billion for the total
project. And so when they
repriced it, taking data that
our engineers provided to them
and then of course, them doing
their own work. They actually
re-priced it a lot higher than,
than we estimated. To me, that
communicates again, that
commitment to go the distance
with us, right? And then we have
uh
You know, right now, um, we,
we've been spending a lot of
money because of the IIJA
funding in, in, uh, that, that
happened in 21 and 22. Well,
We, we've had a change in
administration and everyone
says, well, what about all the
federal cuts and what about, you
know, what's the outlook for,
for funding. Well, all of the
feedback we're getting and we've
been to DC and talked to folks
and, and all of the feedback
we're getting is that, is that
we're OK. I mean, we're still
looking at funding that's
available and we're spending 9
or $10 million a month on
construction right now and that
funding that has been, you know,
awarded to us is still there,
still available, and uh the
outlook is good, uh, for a
number of
reasons. Our project one, the
need, the critical need. Most
folks that look at this realize
that, that, that they see the
need and, and they want to
support it. And I think that's
why it's been supported
bipartisanly over time.
Uh, but
You know, I guess everyone might
wanna, you know, wonder, are we
gonna get dozed, right? You
know, or something like that.
But look, this project aligns
with this administration's
priorities of
American manufacturing.
Our, our, our projects and all
the materials that go into it
are made in, made in America. It
creates American jobs.
Fiscal responsibility is in the
DNA of the eastern New Mexico
Water Utility Authority as
evidence in what I just talked
to you about, you know, coming
in under budget, but on top of
that, year in, year out, we
receive clean, no finding
audits. So we're we're being
great stewards of the public's
funds. Uh, Ms. Russell will tell
you that we routinely are the
top ranked project for the water
trust board because we have our
ducks in a row and we work hard
keeping them that way. And, and
then
We, we have
Cannon Air Force Base, where
the, the 27th Special Operations
wing resides. And, and I don't
know, I didn't serve in the
military, so a lot of that
didn't mean a bunch to me 5
years ago when I became, when I
was called into public service
and became mayor of my
community, but since then, I've
gotten to know ASOC pretty well.
They're the tip of the spear.
They're the best of the best.
There is a no fail presidential
call mission that the 27th
Special Operations Wing has.
They have to be ready.
Right now to go tonight and take
care of business and they do on
a routine basis. Water security.
equals mission readiness and
lethality and therefore national
security and, and can, if, if
Cannon Air Force Base and the
27th SA mission isn't enough. 17
miles to the west of there is
Melrose Air Force Range, where
you got a 100, 100,000 acres of
training playground, and they
just received a new
certification, which means even
more training from all of the
forces special operators are
going to be taking place there.
Water security matters in
eastern New Mexico because of
the future of my community.
But it also matters right now
because of national security and
mission readiness and lethality
on the part of our, our, our
military. So, uh, I just
I think for all of those
reasons, we're, we're getting
great feedback from the United
States Bureau of Reclamation. I
related the conversation, I
think you probably heard that I
had with their regional office,
the regional director just a
week, a few days ago.
Um
Got you plugged in. Uh, we're
gonna continue your, your, you
know, don't, you're not going
anywhere in our, our list, and
on top of that, because of your
readiness, Eastern New Mexico.
You're first in line, first
priority for our over target
surplus funds. And so I, I gotta
believe for all of those reasons
and, and, and many others that,
yeah, we're, we're gonna, we're
gonna get the rest of the way.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So let's
say you do get the whole way and
you get it put in.
And we see this over and over
and over, so how long does this
pipeline last? Is it a 50-year
pipeline, is a 100-year
pipeline. When we get ready to,
when we put it in and we start
to surplus that.
Are we putting money back to
replace it or are we gonna get
that knee jerk whenever,
hopefully it won't be in our
lifetime, but you know, for the
people ahead of us, how will
they be able to do this and
replace it.
And maintenance it.
Mr. Chairman and Representative,
great, great question, relevant,
appropriate questions to ask,
especially because of the, the
cost of this and, and how
important it is. Yes, so as you
can imagine, in order for us to
operate on the federal grants
that, that we are through,
through the federal support, uh,
there are so many checks and
balances, so many hoops that,
that, that we've got to jump
through and, and things that
have to line up on our
consistent basis and so we, we
do that. Likewise, I mean, the,
the, the country
Construction projects bureau at
Ined state of New Mexico, really
makes us, you know, have to toe
the line. And so, I just say
that to say, you know, we're,
we're already trained to do
that, but, uh, we have a finance
plan that we update annually at
this point. That finance plan
Obviously is relevant now during
this construction phase, but we
flip a switch and go to the
operational phase someday. We're
going to pay for O&M through a
portion of our membership
contributions, our, our members
all contribute in order to make
the administrative and the ONM
and the debt service work. Um,
so we'll still have member
contributions that we use to
finance what you're talking
about, but then we're gonna
price the water.
to finance the operation and
maintenance of, of the pipeline.
And, and to, to answer your
question about the, the life,
uh, the expected their life
expectancy of the
infrastructure, 75 or 100 years
100 year pipeline and of course
we, we can carry it even further
than that. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, thank you.
Uh, thank you, uh, Senator
Woods, and then Vice Chairman
Munoz.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh
First
Is, is there any lawsuits?
Presently fouled.
Against the
Eastern Mexico Water Authority
of the project right now. Is
there any pending lawsuits right
now.
Mr. Chairman and Senator Woods,
yes, there, there are. The, the
village of, of Logan and Qua
County and 18 or 19 landowners
have, have come together in a
lawsuit, um, and, and, and with
that lawsuit, they're
essentially saying that we
should not, uh, do any more
construction on our project
until we have all of our
funding.
But I think you and everyone
else in this room understands
how laughable that is, right?
You don't do big things, uh,
and, and, and not start, whether
it's a stretch of highway or,
or, or, or any other big
projects.
That that have to be phased. You
don't start construction only
after you have all of the money
in the bank, uh, and, and, and
so our project is
Supported federally, it's
supported at the state level and
we funded as we go and, uh, I
think that, that, that, that
we've sort of
I discussed that already. So to
answer your question, yes, uh,
they have filed a lawsuit and
and um
I don't want us to do any
construction, um, in particular
in Quy County.
Yeah, that's good enough,
uh.
Does that present an obstacle
for the
Ongoing process of the project
right now, Mr. Chairman and
Senator Woods know, it does not
with our, our legal team has
filed a motion to dismiss and um
we've had our first hearing,
which went very well and, and uh
a second hearing is, is coming
up, but, uh, no, uh,
interestingly, the uh, the, the
lawsuit does not, um, contain a
temporary restraining order, uh,
which would prevent us from,
from making progress.
And so, uh, we anticipate the
notice to proceed on raw water
1A at any time now, and that's
funded and ready to go to bid
and we need to get it to bid.
And so as soon as we have the
notice to proceed, we're uh
we're, we're going out to bid on
that project. OK.
And uh Mr. Chair and, and
Uh, Mayor Morse.
Explain how the uh local funds.
Required for the project to, how
you raise that.
So, uh, Mr. Chair and Senator
Woods, uh,
Didn't hear you just perfectly,
but I think I heard you ask how,
OK, you got
3 funding sources, and one of
those funding sources is local
funding, sir. So tell me how the
local funding is, how you raise
that local it. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, Senator. So, uh, in the
case of, of Clovis, uh, with
the, uh, the city of Clovis long
ago enacted a 25, 25% GRT, which
is dedicated to the ute water uh
project and
Uh, additionally, we have a
small portion. I can't remember
if it's one meal, but there's,
there's a portion of property
tax in Clovis, that is, that is
being leveraged to service the
debt that we've taken on in the,
the state revolving drinking,
uh, drinking water loan fund
loans. So I can speak.
You know, you know, with, with
facts about, about Clovis, GRT
and a, and a tiny sliver of of
property taxes, how we, is how
we're, we're financing our local
uh share. Likewise, in the other
member communities that, you
know, they're each taking their
approach and, and I don't want
to get too far out of my lane
and tell you how Pritalis does
it because
I don't know for sure. I think
they do it through uh their
water sales because they own and
operate their own municipal
water system. And, and why I
bring that up is
We all like to see skin in the
game.
And so that's, you know, if
you're, you're getting a huge
amount of dollars here.
But you've got your own skin in
the game also.
So that's, that's why I bring
that up.
Um, there's this. Have you made
any policy changes?
OK.
CEO
Everybody calls you Martina. I'm
going to use your proper name,
CEO.
So
It's what I make my kids call
me, so that's.
really
OK.
What policy changes has the
water trust board implemented in
recent years to increase the
participation.
A small water systems.
To and success of those
projects.
I know we tried to do our best
to become
A more regional type system, uh,
have we had any
Policy changes have we had any
success. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Over the last several
years, we've taken a number of
steps to reduce the barriers,
uh, that the Water Trust board
policies had um had uh
provided small systems. So for
years, that 10% um match
requirement, we make them take
on both a loan and provide a
local match for that skin in the
game concept, um, that was a
barrier for many systems, small
systems early on. And so we
allowed them to either take on
additional debt. So again,
there's 0% loan, um, so they
could take on additional debt in
lieu of that match, um, if
they're supported by a
rate-paying constituency. So
that was one way and that helped
a lot of the
small mutual domestics. We then
took um steps to uh say that if
you are undertaking a
multi-phase project because you
heard earlier, we want to see
design done before we go to the
construction. If you're taking a
multi-phase project on, we now,
if you were a certain size
system, if you're a small
system, fewer than 500 users,
um, we don't require the loan
for the subsequent phases.
So we are, you know, again,
they've shown skin in the game,
they still have to make their
match, um, but they aren't
required to do the additional
loan if they meet certain
conditions and are small and one
of the conditions is that they
have to have completed their
asset management plan.
So we're happy to say you don't
have to pay us, but we want to
see that you're putting the
money to the beneficial use of
the project. So are you actually
creating those reserves? Are you
actually filling those reserves.
So if they haven't completed
those and it's a requirement of
our funding. They have a couple
of years to get them done, but
they have to complete an asset
management plan. If they haven't
done that, then they have to
take on the loan. So it's one of
those carrots that we're using,
and again, finance Authority
will give them a grant to get
that asset management plan done.
It's
just a matter of of of of
fortitude to get that asset
management pound down. And then
lastly, we have um taken on, we,
we provide small systems with
design only grants. So if
they're coming for grant money,
um, if they're coming for design
projects.
And it's less than 500,000, they
can get a full grant if they're
a small system and meet that
condition. So we've taken
incremental steps to reduce the
barriers, but still hold the
threshold pretty high, getting
that asset management plan done
is a really critical element for
us and we're trying to motivate
them in any possible way we can
to get that document done so
that they understand what it
takes to actually expand the
system and make sure that
they're um providing for its
long-term uh investment. So
those are the biggest
steps that we've taken, they've
been really successful to date.
Um, the new, the new steps we're
taking with the technical
assistance team, I think will be
that last step. So again, a lot
of these small mutual domestics
that aren't compliant with the
executive order could be working
on that.
Issue while the finance
authority hires a contractor to
get their planning done. So we
wanna make sure that we're
actually asking them to do the
things that are most important
that they can control and we can
then take on a more cost
efficient plan and control that.
They don't have to go through
the procurement, they don't have
to go through, you know, the
oversight of a contractor. If
they're a small system and are
struggling with the executive
order compliance. They're really
gonna have a hard time
overseeing a contract. So we
think that that's an additional
way to get
get them ready for either water
trusts board, colonius, Federal
dollars is getting a a a
sufficient plan done and allow
them to then take care of their
own business while we get their
engineering done, so I think
those are the largest items.
We're really trying um to make
certain that it is not.
Too difficult, but it does still
take fortitude. They have to
have leadership at the local
level or it won't work.
And you hit the nail on the
head.
I
I try my best to get these
communities to come together and
say you've got to collect enough
money to repair your system.
And when they, they keep coming
to me and they say, well, we
can't afford to charge our, our
people more, and then the next
sentence is, well, we don't have
any water meters working. So we
don't know what they're using,
so we don't know who's using the
water. And so we'll discharge
everybody the same.
And
You, you've got to run it like a
business. If you're going to run
a business, you gotta run it
like a business, and you can't
try to operate the rest of the
city, off your revenues of the
water system.
Uh
this is
I'm probably talking out of
school here, but
I have a hard time sometimes
getting my heart into something
and I, I've talked to you a lot
of times about many of these
issues and, and water is such a
critical issue and trying to get
it put together.
And then when they come to me
and just ask me for capital to
do it.
There's, there's no way.
There's no way in it, so I
encouraged.
Them to talk to you.
Because
You can put them on the guidance
as I can tell them all day that
you got to collect more money.
But when you tell them in order
to get this, you have to do it
this way.
And that helps a lot. You're,
you're a lot more authority than
I am.
And I appreciate that.
Uh
The other thing
How, when we, when we started
talking about wastewater
projects to include on the water
trust board, you know, that
expanded the scope quite a
little bit.
Did we put, we don't have
enough, I shouldn't say we don't
have enough money, but we are
now creating more uses for the
same amount of money, even
though we put in.
$200 million.
Uh
Somewhere here.
And
You know,
I mean, we, we can't undo what
we did, but I have a real wonder
about how we're going to do all
this stuff, uh.
We've got the needs for sure,
and I know wastewater's got to
be taken care of too.
Uh, if nothing else to keep from
polluting or, or freshwater.
But uh
Have you got any thoughts on
that? Have you, uh, uh, how we,
you, you're the money manager.
Tell me how you're gonna do
this.
Um, Mr. Chairman, I would just
note that over the last several
years we've had unprecedented
levels of funding and so we do
think that we're taking care of
larger water projects. Again,
early on, we were giving the
eastern New Mexico a million
dollars and $2 million for their
billion dollar project. Um, now
they're getting $20 million and
so they're, we're taking care of
some of those larger needs,
particularly at the city level,
they are getting, they're,
they're able to complete a
larger project with the amount
of money that's been available.
Um, and so I would say
that we are, you know, we are
ticking some things off the list
to start with, um, but your
point about the wastewater is a
really integral part of a water
system. If you're gonna conserve
water, you need to be able to,
if you're gonna do the reuse,
you have to be able to collect
what you're gonna reuse and so
that's a critical part. Um,
we're seeing in smaller
communities that that actual
issue of having their wastewater
poisoning their water system,
which then cost them more money
to keep up. So we think it's
the, it works hand in glove with
those.
Um, we think the 200 million
will go to water projects, and
with that the um money that's
been made available through the
severance tax bonds at this
unprecedented level, um, is
gonna be what helps take care of
those wastewater projects. We're
currently in conversations with
the Environment Department. They
operate the only subsidized
wastewater funding in the state
through their federal dollars,
um, and we're trying to make
certain that we can use them
together to incentivize full use
of their funding, um, the first
dollars that
Come down through the feds, have
some grant-like components, but
after those loans have been
repaid, they no longer have the
ability to offer grant-like
components. And so that's very
difficult for a lot of systems.
So we think if we can partner
some of these, we can actually
move a lot of other wastewater
money that's available that's
been underutilized towards um
completion of a number of large
projects.
It's a question I have, Mr.
Chair.
And I've got a real head
scratcher here.
I got appropriated. I got some
capital money for $12 million.
Everybody in here knows about
it.
For a pipeline.
And I don't have.
A water co op.
I don't have nothing.
To designate.
To build that pipeline.
And it's a real head scratcher.
The Environment Department told
me, don't worry about it.
We can do this.
But I have yet, they're, they're
scratching their head now and
saying, I don't know or I don't
think we can do that.
Earlier I have talked to the,
the water authority.
About
Running water
In a lateral out. They tell me,
no, we only deliver to
utilities, I think that's what
you told me.
Uh, you don't deliver to a, you
don't do distribution type work.
Miss, Mr. Chair and Senator, uh,
The eastern Mexico Water Utility
Authority has the responsibility
to deliver wholesale water to
its member communities.
Yeah, it's a utility. You
deliver a wholesale to a utility
type situation. You don't
deliver, you don't run water
meters, you don't exactly that
so think, think of wholesale
delivery to the member
communities versus residential
taps.
For example,
Well, you, you, on your
presentation you talked about.
On page 2.
You talked about uh
You'll deliver 1600 and
16,415 acre foot of renewable,
potable water annually to member
communities.
Clovis
Can Air Force Base for Dallas,
Texacoaida, and then it says and
areas in Roseville and Curry
County. What does that mean?
Areas in Roosevelt very good
Mr. Chair and Senator Woods, uh,
that
The, well, the example and the
reason for that language in our
presentation is the city of
Portales sells water to
Roosevelt County.
Cooperative.
So therefore you get portions of
Roosevelt County.
So that's a water co op that
you're you're saying you have,
you have that, that municipality
which happens to be a member of
our authority.
Selling water to a cooperative
that delivers water out into the
county.
So in my scenario, not saying
that you're going to deliver to
it.
But in my scenario,
You would think it would have to
be some kind of water co op to
make this, make that line work
and Mr. Chair and Senator Woods,
uh,
In the specific example that
you're, you're talking about.
Um,
I think it, it was proposed and
the the strategy that was
developed between
yourself and others and, and in
med uh was that uh EPO, the
utility provider for the city of
Clovis would extend its system
out to that area, um, or at
least that was the last time I
had a handle on what that that
effort.
was turning into.
Um, so
There you would have an example,
uh, you know, uh, I would, would
you advocate for the city of
Clovis to annex that area, for
example, and then now they're a
part of our city, our city is a
member of the water utility
Authority and therefore, you
know, has a responsibility or
EPO has the responsibility for
providing water out there, um.
I'm not sure how that could
shape up.
I have a take on what that
project was about, but I don't
know if, if you or anyone else
wants to hear what I think it
is.
We got time.
Thank you, thank you very much,
sir. Not today. I think we're,
we're running a little bit
behind.
Yeah
Uh, OK. Uh, thank you very much.
Uh, we'll go now to Vice Chair
Munoz, Senator, what do you want
me to yield my time to?
No,
um, Mayor, I'll, I'll tell you a
story and in 1968, my dad
testified in front of Congress
on the Gallup water pipeline in
50 some years later, there's no
water in the pipes. So those are
long roads to haul and Senator
Woods, you know, whiskeys for
drinking and waters for fighting
nowadays. And so it's gonna be a
long haul for you guys to really
get that water into that system.
Um, everybody's gonna want to
tap onto it, everybody wants
their share. They want you to do
all the work for them, uh, they
didn't do the foresight and the
work to get ahead of it and, and
now they're just looking and,
and saying who's getting our
water and where's it going?
Well, they have rights to it
too, and, and they can figure
out how to get out of the pump
and, and that'll be up to them,
their determination, but, uh,
it's a long road to haul, uh our
pipeline went from 600 million,
I think it's at 3 billion now.
That's like 120 miles long and
the distribution.
systems to the reservation are
just crazy and, and so you're in
for a long haul may not be in
your term, but it'll be in
somebody's term that they'll
find to finish the pipeline and
get water flowing so there
there's slum roads. Marquita
real quickly.
How much capacity can we send
you?
I mean, don't roll your eyes. I
was calculating, Mr. Chairman, I
was not rolling my eyes, trust
me, you might want to keep
calculating then.
to,
um, I, so I, I would tell you
that in the next year after we
complete our uh major system
integration project. I'll have a
better answer for you. Right
now, we still have many separate
systems that require manual
input from one to another. So if
you're a private entity, you're
coming in through one
application system, you're being
analyzed in yet another system
and loan service through a third
system before it goes to our GL,
which is a 4th system, and that
all requires manual input. In
the next
year, we're undertaking a
massive project in the next year
that will change. So I will know
more then, um, I can tell you
that, uh, depending on the kind
of project it is, um, grants are
much easier for us to do because
they're short term in nature,
um, and what you have to
establish is a very good filter
for getting the grant dollars in
and you can, um, hire help if
you need to get oversight on
those projects, loans, you're in
it for the long haul, 20 to 30
years in some instances, and
that's just a, that takes more.
personnel to handle. So what
would you say your current
capacity is right now.
Um, Mr. Chairman, we are, uh,
I would say that our water
projects are at full capacity,
the dollar amount.
Again, it would depend on loan
versus the hip.
Oh, OK. Um
do you want to know the 200?
a billion, half a billion. I, I
think we could do again, it's,
it's, it's the size of the
project. So just how much
capacity, what do you, what are
you at right now? So we
understand where you're at
today. We know it's gonna change
in the future, but what have we
funded and what are you managing
right now in current total
projects, so that's OK, that's,
that's a very different
question. So we're managing
multi-year contracts in the, in
the billions of dollars because
it takes a long time for
projects to get through. We're
talking primarily about water,
PPRF, uh.
projects. So we have PPRF which
we do about $200 million a year.
The Water Trust board, we've
been at about closing at about
100 million a year colonious,
about half of that and drinking
water is right around the same
amount. So it's, it's a 3-year
kind of life cycle for those. So
right now we're overseeing quite
a bit of funding, um, in
construction management through
our water systems alone and
doing a lot of intake and
analysis and oversight of the
private systems.
So we are, we're a couple
billion dollars, but some of
it's servicing and some of its
construction management. So
they're different, they're
different in nature. I
understand that. I just want to
understand your capacity. I
mean, because the legislature
does so well with Ke Alley and
how we appropriate it and how we
have 6. $6.2 billion sitting in
Capital Alley and and water
projects are just stalled
everywhere, right? Everybody
comes to us and Senator Woods,
this is a priority. I need
money, you know, now.
I can't figure out how to get
rid of $12 million right? And
and so the legislature's gonna
have to lean to you guys in that
process, so start stepping on
the gas, into, uh,
How we're gonna handle water
projects cause we can't score
them, I mean, I mean, I have a
little bit of construction and
then when you run utilities and
running water lines and and
pipes, and there's a lot of
variants with the ground looks
like and everything else and
management.
But the legislature cannot do
that and we're gonna have to
start relying on expertise uh
from agencies to help do that. I
know you're going to change your
processes. We give you an
additional 200 million this
year, but you could backfill
that. I was looking through your
presentation, we gave you 18
million one year and only one
person applied for for
backfilling of 1.2 million or I
can't remember what the Al Sara
or something and and so.
We got to change our process in
order to get these done.
Um
And, and the local governments
are going to have to learn that
you, you can't just run to us
and say, here's my capital
outlay form, can you help me? I
mean, you're gonna have to do
some of this work on your own
from here on now because we're
just wasting money. We're not
getting anywhere.
We're not building that and you,
you guys have developed a system
that seems to work and gets us
background in in scoring
projects and how we fund them.
Now we got to figure out how,
how much what what you can, your
capacity is, what you can manage
and, and how big we can take
that because, you know, whether
it's a small domestic water or
lateral lines for Senator Woods,
I mean, who can handle that and
how he can do that, but.
We're gonna have to move in that
direction, so I want to prepare
you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, I
appreciate that heads up
afterwards.
I'll answer it differently next
time, um.
I guess I would say this, which
is predictability would be very
helpful to us. So the one thing
that we really need to be able
to understand is how to staff
because you don't fund the
finance authority, you know, so
we fund our operations
differently in staffing up is a
fairly significant investment
for us, um, as it is for every
agency, but because we are not
funded through a, you know, a
budget, we have to be able to
figure out how to make that work
and contractors would be
necessary to support that
effort, you know, if you're, if
they're getting the 0% loan in
the mayor of Clovis wants a 0%
loan. He may have.
To pay it, uh, uh, a fee
application fee to process that
to see if it's worth while he's
shaking his eyes, but I mean,
somebody's got to pay for the
cost and, and, and cost of
operation and the increased
costs and the user has to do
that. I mean there is a Mr.
Chairman, we do charge a loan
servicing fee of 25% on those
loan payments. So there's 0%
interest, but then I guess the
net effective interest rate
would be not very much, but we
use that for loan servicing.
That's, that's how we manage
over that 20 year process and if
it's.
If it's, you know, fairly
routinized and system in, in a
good system, then that'll help
our efficiency tremendously, um,
we had been relying up to date,
up till very recently on the
services of the construction
programs Bureau, but their own
workload has not allowed them to
do the kind of work that they've
done in the past. So we've
hired, we hired ERG, which is a,
a standalone, um, for profit,
uh, engineering company that can
provide the services but in a
fairly significant cost.
Um, so, you know, it's, uh,
If you're asking us to the same
level of construction oversight
that would be, that would be a
much more difficult thing to do.
Well, get your, uh,
It's your book out and start
figuring that out, cause I mean
order us to get projects done
and to get them done
efficiently, I mean if we have
to contract outside firms for
that skill set, I mean, that's
just part of the, that's part of
the nature of the beast, uh,
because we can't build that, you
won't be able to hire engineers
with that.
Technical experience to build
pipelines or domestic water
lines and so the best thing to
do is probably contract that out
at a certain rating so you start
looking at because as we look
forward, you know, we had a lot
of money, we have a lot of
money, we still have a lot of
money and we're gonna have to
rely on you to score those
projects for us cuz you know,
Senator Woods thought he had his
12 millions spent, but he
doesn't and sitting there
stranded.
And so if you would have had to
been able to get the 12 million
and say, OK, we're gonna score
this project and can it be
really been done, he would have
had the knowledge to say, well,
it really can't do it, everybody
says they can, but they can't,
right? And you, that's what
you're gonna have to provide to
us in the legislatures is
knowledge and experience to get
projects done and completed, so
money's not stranded and so.
Get ready if you need another.
Influx, let us know.
How we're gonna handle that, but
the
We have to head that direction.
I mean, $6.3 billion in capital
LA projects, I mean.
Put that in the bank and you
make $400 million a year, we'd
be better off than just sitting
there watching it die on the
line so.
I know you're the deer in the
headlights right now, but I, I
don't know if Donnie, is Donnie
working for you now, Mr.
Chairman, he's been here a year.
He is in charge of our
construction or project
oversight we have teams of folks
that work on compliance and he's
there to, in those instances in
which we've got log jams or
difficulties, he and um team
member to be named, um, we're
currently interviewing our, our
part of that project to help
make sure the projects keep
moving. You might want to get
him a pair of work boots and and
a I was he was the wrong person
to bring with me.
Figuring out where he's gonna
head, but I mean, that's
For me, it it on my side on the
Senate side, I mean, we have to
have that vetting.
We don't have the knowledge, I
mean, we can't mutual domestic,
we just don't have that skill
set, and we're good at giving
away money, we're not good at
giving away where it works.
I would note that our early
years of the Water Trust board
oversight didn't require
planning documents and required
more of a kind of capital outlay
process and we had the same
experience that I think you all
are seeing, which is it's, it's
easy to approve something. It's
really hard to close something
and get it to completion because
you, you know, the work has got
to be done someplace. It's
either upfront before the
application or after they.
they've got the money. It's the
same amount of work, um, the one
benefit that we have is that we
require the planning document
and so we know they're serious
and we know that they understand
what needs to happen. That is
really the critical piece of
what's made us different than
our early years in the Water
Trust board. That's good. You
can be an adult in the room and
we'll fund it, so get ready.
Thank you Mr. Chairman.
Appreciate that Marquita, let us
know, we'll reach out if we need
any help doing that, but I, I
think we, you have a process
that works and it works well
and.
So now we just need to figure
out how to fund it and send
everybody that direction, so
thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
very much. Uh, OK, uh, great
questions, members, uh, mayor
and team, thank you. Um, I
think, you know, this is, uh,
yeah, I, I don't know that,
well, we've had a good
conversation. Miss Russell, I
think we very our CEO is senator
pointed out, uh, we'll be
looking closely, I think to to
make uh improvements and
adjustments. Not only in
sort of what we uh dedicate from
the legislature, but raising
that technical assistance in the
really ties into the earlier
presentation compliment to the
director for putting both of
them. We is clear we have the
funding now where we have to get
so much better at building
things and you're helping lead
the way on that. We heard about
that in another space with
higher education, but we'll,
we'll look to work together over
the interim.
Um
And, and yeah, and whether it's
another 200 million or not. Um,
we face the same, a similar
issue in housing, the
legislature is sort of, you
know, um, going between DFA one
year, mortgage finance
Authority, the next year, trying
to see who can build the most
housing, the most effectively in
different communities. Um, so
yeah, very much appreciate your
insight and may appreciate all
of the work that you all have
been going through, Mister
Chairman.
committee members, thank you
very much for the time this
afternoon and for your support.
OK, thanks very much. uh, we're
gonna go quickly to Director
Seli. We're gonna go through the
additional committee items and
then we'll uh have Mace lens,
uh, where we'll be focusing on a
tour.
So, Mr. Chairman, uh Tab I or
the January meeting minutes that
need to be adopted by the
committee.
OK. Motion to adopt.
OK, there's a motion to adopt
the committee amendments from
January.
Uh
2 from uh Senator Lanier, uh, is
there any objection to that
motion?
See no
are adapted, so tab K, Mr.
Chairman.
is the proposed, uh, calendar
for the interim, um.
June would be in Taos.
July would be in Albuquerque.
August would be Las Cruces and
September Hobbs and then
October, November and December.
Would be in Santa Fe.
Great. Uh, OK, um,
There is, uh, OK, everybody has
that, um.
They're, they're, uh, there's a
question that's been raised
offline about the timing and
December, but I think we should,
we need to go ahead and approve
this now, um, any, any other
questions? We, and we just a
flag, we may, we may look at at
that latest month, although
that's obviously a tricky month
when you have the holidays and
everything else, so we, we
probably will stick with them.
OK, is there a motion to
approve?
Motion to agree.
OK, uh,
Is there a second?
Great, OK, uh, moved by Sara
Munoz or second by Senator
Tobiasin, uh, any opposition?
Say none.
And just for clarification for
the committee, the July date on
the 21st, uh, we'll be planning,
uh, a tour of Sandia National
Lab, so that would be an
afternoon sort of optional day
before.
Uh, we get going with the
regular meetings.
OK, Mr. Chairman, just really
quickly, I'd like
For folks to take with you
before you leave the budget
adjustment report and tab in.
As well as the tax expenditures
report.
On tab are.
Not necessarily today but maybe
tomorrow, but you know, DFA
usually has a moratorium on bars
during the session. They lifted
that this year, so there was
about a billion dollars worth of
budget adjustments that were
being made as we were trying to
build the, the budget and
there's some interesting
information in there, most of
it's for implementing that
hospital rate increase in
Medicaid.
Uh, but there's other ones like
in HAFC there was SIC wanted to
reduce its contracts amount
because it said it was over
budgeting, shift it to
personnel so they could hire and
pay their people a lot more than
what the the normal races would
be at the same time, they came
out and did a bar to increase
their contracts out of fund
balance.
So, you know, I'm gonna be
watching very closely, uh, that
particular budget going forward
because they're gonna want to
increase even more spending on
staffing, um, and pay, and then
on tab.
you, this was just an
informational item on the Remi.
And then taps.
Has some correspondence uh that
I received um from DFA referring
more accounting to the uh
attorney general's office for.
Um, and further investigation of
some financial potential
malfeasance, so putting that on
your radar, um, as committee
members. With that, Mr. Cheney,
I'd be happy to answer any
questions. Great. Thank you very
much, Doctor Lee. Any questions
for the director
by Charles on the referral
that's a $40 million is that the
one? Or is it?
For Maura.
Correct. That's, that's a $40
million appropriation that they
got.
And how long can they keep that
$40 million for me it reverts,
or is there no reversion on the
40 million, and that's why we
have to send it. We have further
information we need about, uh,
which parts of appropriations
that um they're concerned about
and whether that's just their
overall budget, uh, which it
might, it could be, or if
there's some specific thing, you
know, you've appropriated money
for the courthouse, uh, upgrades
as an example, or is it part of
their regular operating budget?
There's also the first report
from AOC, uh, in Tab Hes on the
implementation of the behavioral
health reforms.
But, but yeah, I've seen that,
but the, the, the $40 million
appropriation was, was during
the fire, right?
Well, yes, they received
basically advances that are
supposed to be repaid by um
FEMA.
reimbursements. So it could be
part of, uh, those particular
expenditures, but we'll need to
follow up to make sure we're
clear.
And and so when we did that, I
think we made him have the
reimbursement forms in front
before they did that, so I, I
don't, I guess I'd want to track
that because that's 40 million
of a loan, what do we do 100
million then 100 million. So
that's 40% of that 100 million
that may not come back to us, I,
I.
Let's keep an eye on that for
me.
Yes, we will.
Uh, any other questions?
OK, uh, then we'll go, uh, we'll
invite, uh, Mesalands Community
College up for a brief
presentation. I know members are
very excited to get on the tour,
uh, as well and really we're
very grateful to be able to use
the room and then uh uh excited
to, to dive in.
Can you hear me, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, first,
I want to, uh, thank you for uh
coming to Mesalands to visiting
tour in Qua County. Uh, we're
excited that, uh, I don't know
that this meeting has ever been
held in this area before, um,
and so we're, we're, we're
grateful for, for that. I wanna
really quickly uh acknowledge
some of the uh community leaders
that have joined us in the
audience, and I'll probably miss
some, uh, miss, um, Mr. Josh.
McVeigh is my VP of student
services. Mr. Mark Martinez is
my executive director of
operations, uh, Ms. Gonza
Jessica Gonzalez is executive
director of student services,
um, Mr. Phillip Box is one of
my, uh, board of trustees
members, uh, Mr. Eddie Barns is
a member of the San Hong School
Board. Uh, Mr. Dallas Dowd is a
member of the Qua County um
commission, uh, Miss Renee Hayos
is the city
manager of Tucumcurry, and I may
have missed a few and I also
want to introduce Mr. Richard
Primrose sitting next to me who
is my chair or president of my
board of trustees, and I'll turn
it over to him just to say a
couple things real quick.
I, I do, I do believe that this
is, this is the first time the
LFC's been here and.
In this area, especially in
Tucum Kerry and I wanna thank
y'all for, for coming to, to
carry in eastern New Mexico, uh,
we're proud of, proud of this
area and uh we're really
appreciate you, you coming in
and thank you very much.
I think um we handed out a lot
of information. I am not going
to go down through that lambala
didn't have that intention to
begin with, uh, for some of you
that might be new,
Uh, to the legislature of this
committee, uh, it's kind of a
refresher on where we were at to
A little over 2 years ago, uh,
we were in, uh, a pretty bad
situation and I'm not gonna get
into all the reasons, the uh
special audit is ongoing. It's
about to wrap up, uh, by, by
next month, and they should
present a report on what they
see as the reasons, um, how to
prevent that in the future, not
just with Mesa lands, but I
assume with other agencies, uh,
colleges and, and universities
in the state.
The next part, um,
I, well, let me back up. The
first part, I wanted to give you
a description of Mesa lands, uh,
we are a two-year college. Uh,
we have a, a very diverse set of
programs, um, that are either
unique to the state or even
somewhat unique to the
Southwest.
we, our main focus deals with
wind energy, um, cowboy arts, we
have a new nursing program that
has been extremely successful
over the last 2 years.
And among other, other programs.
I really want to skip, um,
ahead, several pages.
To, um, where are we at now and
give you a quick update on where
we've come from since January,
February of 2003. Uh, at that
point, we had not completed our
21 audit. We are now in the
middle of our 24 audit. We
expect, uh, as of two weeks ago,
estimated completion on that is
June.
Probably though July of this
year, and so at that point we
will be caught up and we expect
to try to get our 25 audit done
right on time by that November
1st deadline. So we're excited
about that. We hope to complete
our 20, uh, our, uh, special
audit, like I said in June of 20
of this, of this year, 2025.
Our financial picture has, has
improved greatly, and a lot of
that is because now we have more
accurate numbers. Uh, we
finished 2023, uh, without any
supplemental funding at at that
time in February of 2023, we
weren't sure that we were going
to finish the February payroll,
but we were uh able to um get
her numbers straightened out,
um, and, and, and make it
through that year. FY 24
actually finished the year, uh,
with a
Increase or I should say a
decrease in our fundal deficit.
In other words, we finished the
year ahead.
Uh, we brought in more than we
spent, and that was based on
our, uh, regular budget, not
counting money that was uh
obtained from, from HB 2 and,
and State Board of Finance
grant. And I do want to say
thank you to you all, uh, to
HED, uh, the Office of State
Auditor, DFA, uh, back in 23, we
were awarded a grant by the, by
the state Board of Finance to
re-implement Genzibar and uh
hire some contractors to help us
get our, our finances in order.
Uh, we returned, I think the
total amount of that was around
750,000. We returned around 150
to 170,000 of that last year. I
expect we'll have an additional
amount to return at the end of
this year, um, of the HB 2
money, HB or higher ed
department has held uh control
of that money and we've only
spent that on things such as uh
the
special audit, um, catching up
on the, the previous audits and
some contractual help, otherwise
we functioned within our budget
and my expectation between state
board of Finance and the HB 2 is
that there will be somewhere in
the neighborhood of 800,000 to
12 1.2 million that will not be
used by Mesalands uh that was
appropriated before and I, I
feel very good about that.
The uh funding.
For FY 26, this upcoming year,
we expect another uh surplus and
if you go back through the steps
that we've taken over the last
two years, you'll see that uh
there were some pretty drastic
steps taken from where we were
at to uh reduce spending to get
ourselves in order, um,
And so at this point when we
look at our finances from year
to year, we're slowly adding
some positions that we need,
we're adding, uh, you know,
people in student services or
people, uh, additional
instructional support. And so
that, that's kind of what we're
doing as we, as we go along. We
were uh allocated and we're
stressed extremely appreciative
of this, uh, 250,000 recurring
for RPSP for our nursing
program, and I want to point out
Our nursing program began in the
spring of 23. Uh, our first
cohort graduated in December,
and we now have 9 RNs in our
area that we didn't have before,
and, and we're kind of like, I
know you all were at Mascaro
yesterday talking about
microdistricts. We in a sense,
are, are a similar situation as
a college. We represent a very
spread out area, um,
When you're talking about
healthcare providers that two
can carry is not the first place
that they choose to work, uh,
and so the fact that we've
trained
These people here in Tucum
carry, uh, I know the hospital,
um, before, before they even
passed their inflex employed uh
2 or 3 of those, um, and so that
means for them, they save money
that they would go toward
traveling nurses and other,
other, other personnel. So we're
hoping that this program
continues to grow. We actually
have full cohorts, uh, ready to
go for the fall of, of this year
and
The spring. And so that, that's
been a great, great program. Um,
we are also expecting some
additional funding separate and
apart from the state, uh, we, we
filed an ERC claim, uh, about a
year and a half ago. It's
finally worked its way through
the IRS system and we're hoping
to receive around 370,000 from
that. This fiscal year and uh,
and then for another quarter in,
in the next year.
Which will quickly help us
Take out that deficit in our
fund balance. In addition to
operating within our budget from
year to year. So we're, we're
excited about that as well.
Um, I want to mention real
quickly, a, a, a couple of new
programs. We are expanding our
welding program, uh, CNA we
brought back, which again is
adding to the healthcare
workforce in our area, CNA and
phlebotomy were planning on
beginning our CDL program again
this fall. We've continued
testing, uh, for the past 2 or 3
years. In fact, we're actually
testing not only in Toum carry,
but we're also helping with
testing in hobbs and Las Vegas,
uh, to
uh support their overrun of, of
people needing tested. But we're
gonna start that program back.
We are looking to start a win
program in a in the
Correctional facilities we're
hoping to start with Santa Rosa,
uh, that will.
That depends on a lot of factors
and, and they're going through
some things right now with the,
the um closure of the Lee County
facility, but we're, we're
hoping to get that started this,
this fall as well.
My view, um, and, and just real
quickly, a little bit myself,
I'm a, I'm a former high school
teacher, business, a principal
superintendent from Missouri.
Uh, my wife and I owned a, a
small farm. We gave all that up
to move out here for her health,
so that gives me a little
different perspective on higher
ed because most of my career has
been K-12. I see the future of
Mesa lands being, uh, serving
the community, especially in
workforce.
And we may always uh present,
um, you know, the gen eds, uh,
for a freshman sophomore year,
dual credit, uh, but the future
of our growth is, is in, in
workforce programs and there's a
huge need in this area, not just
for healthcare, for building
trades, plumbers, electricians,
um, wind technicians, that,
that's only growing in our area
and we've been building
partnerships with uh other
companies leeward, uh, pattern,
and then we also have a
partnership with.
impact when to do an advanced
training here on our campus, and
we're the only GWO certified uh
facility, I believe in New
Mexico and you have to travel
quite a ways beyond that to, uh,
to get that training.
We have, uh, some partnerships
ongoing, uh, we're working with
eastern New Mexico University uh
Ruidoso and um Clovis Community
College, uh, in the, in the Win
program. They send groups of
students up here to actually do
on-site training on our wind
tower. Uh, we, we also are
having talks with New Mexico
State University, um, regarding
their Ag science center here,
and we're looking at ways that
we can support each other in ag
science, uh.
Land management and, and, and
those areas. I also want to
emphasize, um, you know, I know
Doctor Brun mentioned it several
times yesterday in her
presentation, we have been.
Deeply involved, and again this
goes back to my experience as a
superintendent with the area
schools and how we can get, um,
CTE programs out into these far
distant rule districts. Uh, it's
not feasible to build a career
center at every little district
and so
We're looking at multiple
different ways, she mentioned
nation, uh, and some others.
But we're going to make that
happen. We're, we're gonna start
with our um CNA program, uh, and
then try to build, build from
there. Staff and faculty, um,
you know, in our, uh,
Coming out of the mess of 2
years ago, we have some great
staff and faculty that stayed on
board, um, Mr. Kaiser, Mr.
McVeigh, Mr. Martinez, Ms.
Gonzalez that I mentioned
earlier, those people were here
when that mess happened, and
they've stayed, and that's 11 of
the reasons that we've managed
to make it through, uh, and, and
get to the point that, that
we're at right now. Uh, our,
our, our turnover is, has
remained relatively steady.
We've lost very few people, um.
And I think we've maybe come out
better, uh, from some of those
losses, and I feel very
confident about in our staff
going forward doesn't mean we
don't still have work to do, um.
My business office is still um
overwhelmed and until we get
that special audit out until
we're completely caught up on
our audits, they're basically
doing double duty, their regular
jobs and all this additional,
um, we are under HLC.
Uh, probation at this point, uh,
our next visit is scheduled for
September of this year, uh, but
I feel very confident that we're
gonna get through that and, and,
and look better and stronger,
uh, than, than their visit about
a year and a half ago.
I probably missed a lot of
stuff. I do want to emphasize a
couple of things that we look
for, uh, in the future. The
needs that I see is, and, and we
see as, as Maoland's biggest
needs, we have to resolve
student housing. Uh, we don't
have a set student housing
location, uh, for the most part,
our students rely on either
rental properties in town or we
have a lot of motels in the area
that offer rates to our
students, uh, to stay, but
that's kind of a disincentive
for people to come here, uh,
when a mom and dad brings their
son or daughter and, and, and
what we have to offer is a motel
room. So we, we have some
different things that we're
looking at, uh, Tucumurry School
District, uh, is, is passing
over a piece of property between
our armory building and our um
building trades, maintenance
building, uh, that we're
designating to put some type of,
of housing on.
We, we, we need to look at
vehicles in the future, but, but
probably the biggest thing, and
I, I want to spend just a second
on this CTE and workforce. Um,
I've had conversations with
President Fuentes at, at Clovis.
President Linder at, at Luna,
and I think that we're gonna
have conversations about how we
can work together, not maybe
offer uh things that someone
else is offering and being in
competition, but how, how we can
work together. It's also
connected to our high schools.
Um, my view is a superintendent
is, if you want to improve your
graduation rate at the K-12
level, you better offer them
more opportunities than they're
currently getting. And you can
do that.
right now say in Albuquerque,
Las Cruces, Santa Fe, the I-25,
the bigger, uh, more populated
areas, but we have a whole group
of students out here that don't
get exposure to CET CTE
programs, uh, health care,
welding, building trades, all
those things. And so,
That, if, if I have a goal to
establish here at Maalands, it's
to, it's to find solutions to
that and um give, give those
students an opportunity.
So with that, I feel like I've
skipped a lot of stuff. If you
all have any questions, I sent
an update uh on a somewhat
somewhat regular basis to uh our
local uh legislators, uh, Mr.
Avila, uh, with, with Senor
Munos's office, DFA, um, and
HED. I'm glad to include anyone
on that and um.
I'll stand for questions at this
point or later, or if you want
to email or or reach out to me
at another time, let me know.
Uh, that, that sounds great.
Thank you very much. Uh, we'll
go quickly to questions and then
uh look to get out on the tour.
Um, we're gonna start with my
sur.
Thank you, thank you for the,
the uh summary and the, the
document with additional
information. Just a few quick
questions, hopefully. Um.
Are you still home, uh,
To a center of excellence.
Are we still, I'm sorry,
you still have a center of
excellence for the state.
Senator,
I don't know. I don't know the
answer to that. No, we are not,
I may be totally off on that, I
think that's what Representative
Chatfield's telling me.
We never, I, I don't guess we
ever had one got it. That
explains it. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Um, what's the size of a
full cohort for nursing? You
mentioned that, but I didn't
know what the size was. Yes, Mr.
Chairman and representative we
so our cohort started out very
small. We, our first one started
out at 7.
Then they range anywhere from 8
to 10, but we have right now,
uh, 13 signed up for the fall
and 13 for the the spring.
However, the board of nursing
has recommended that the limit
on those cohorts should be no
more than 12, um, they're ideal
size is around 8 because we, you
know, we're, we're a small
school and, and also we have to
do a lot of traveling for our um
clinicals.
Generally, we do a little bit,
we try to do what we can.
in local hospitals like Clayton,
um, toucancurry, Santa Rosa, but
mainly it's Albuquerque, uh,
Amarillo has been really great
about finding room for, for our
students and then a little bit
in Las Vegas.
Great, thank you, uh, thank you,
Mr. Chair, um, um, wind program,
uh, you, you mentioned working
with correctional facilities,
um, and so is that providing uh
folks that are looking to be
released with the job skills.
For when they uh are released to
be wind technicians, could you
elaborate just a bit?
Mr. Chairman and, and, and
Representative Dixon, we, so
I'm not sure this will answer
your question. Several years
ago, we had a win program at um
the facility in Clayton.
It ended because we felt like we
were, we, we were providing them
training for jobs they couldn't
get because they couldn't pass
the background checks and and
other things needed for that
program.
What we in our talks with the
corrections department over the
last year has been is they said
we'll find them jobs if you guys
can offer the training. So
that's, that's where we're at at
this point. We've had our own
conversations with some of the,
the company's pattern and
leeward, uh, they're, they're
looking into what, what roles
they, those may play, but yes,
it's for, it's gonna be a select
group. Uh, they're gonna have to
be very close to, uh, being.
out, um, they're gonna have to
have great behavior and we've
also had discussions about they
would even be willing to
transport them to our facility
to actually do the tower
climbing and safety course is
kind of a um completion of the
program, so I, I, I don't know
if that answers your question.
Thank you. Yes, I, it does. I
think that's wonderful and uh
really appreciate all the great
work you guys are doing here.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much. Uh, Senator
Trujillo, then of chat.
Thank you. um, thank you, Mr.
Chairman and thank you for the
presentation. I noticed that,
um, uh, Mains is not on the list
of
Community colleges involved in
the chess program.
You're, I'm assuming you're
familiar with it. How, how, how
do we help you do that,
maybe, yeah,
yeah, just in the wrong way.
So is, is there a way that we
can help you as a legislature to
get you into that because it
really seems like it's a pretty
comprehensive, I mean, they're
doing finance, they're doing
shared finances, shared HR and
shared payroll and particularly
for smaller colleges like
yourself.
I'm sure that you have
challenges with personnel, the
same as Santa Fe Community
College has, and anyway, what
can we do and are you
interested? So my, uh, Mr.
Chairman and, and, uh, Senator
Trio, my, my understanding is,
again, I've only been here.
almost 3 years now.
When that chess program was
started, Mains was a part of
that.
I don't know the exact reasons
we pulled out. I was also before
I, I, I came into this position,
I think it was, um,
Someone decided, you know, we're
spending too much money on it,
whatever. What the reality is,
is.
We weren't in a position where
we could change because we were
so far behind in our current
system, Genzibar, that to then
make that change would have been
an even bigger disaster than we
already had, so at this point
we're still focused on getting
things caught up, getting
trained on our existing system
and, and my staff is not gonna
want to hear this, but at some
point, yes, we, we.
We're still not happy with
ginger bar, but as HED has said,
it's where we're at right now.
And so would we benefit, I
believe so, um, but again, we,
we still have a little ways to
go and got to be comfortable
with our data before we start
looking because my understanding
is even the schools in chess
right now, they're undergoing
some pains in conversion, and we
We're already kind of at the
limit, but yes, absolutely, it
is something we would look at in
the future.
But, um, Mr. Chairman, um, I
appreciate that. I helped the
regulation and licensing
department digitize all of their
applications over 550,000
license types and.
Issued licenses. So that's
painful. It's really painful.
But I do know that the colleges
that are in it are, are even
though there's some pain in
getting there, once you get
there, when you're missing an HR
staff, and you can rely on
another college to take care of
HR matters or same with, you
know, uh, financial matters, it
can be really beneficial.
Thanks.
Great. Uh thank you,
Representative Chatfield and
Representative Herndon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh,
I wanted to speak just a little
bit to the issue of the senators
of excellence, cause like you
said, you weren't here. Uh,
How many certificates do you
give out for when, uh, each
year.
So we, uh, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Chatfield, we
That number fluctuates, um, a
couple of years ago, we were
working very closely with Field
Corps, which was a branch of GE,
uh, and we, we conducted all
their training here and their
certifications.
That they dissolve that, that
branch and so then that's what
led to our, um, partnership with
Impact, uh, to, because they
were looking for a national site
to train not just for GE but
also other energy companies.
So I, I noted in my, uh, report,
we
We had
375 workforce certifications,
uh, this past year, and I want
to emphasize those are not
certificates that are, um, I
don't know, don't, don't anyone
get mad at me, but like an
English lit certification or
something like that. These are
workforce certifications that
either led to a job or
advancement in a job, mainly
wind, uh, we also had some CNA,
uh, from, from,
This year or last year, um, but
those are workforce
certificates, um, some of them
are stand-alone workforce, some
of them are, uh, like for
instance our win program, we
offer a two-year associate
degree, but we also offer a year
and semester certificates. We
also offer a dual credit program
that involves 5 win tech
courses, uh, mainly in our area,
but we also serve some other
schools. We've had graduates
from.
Uh, Maxwell, uh, Mescalero was a
big, uh, uh, or participant in
that, uh, where those students
graduate uh through our program,
so I don't know if I answered
your question or not. So 350
plus 300+.
Uh, your partnerships, some of
these companies, they hire the
people, they pay them to come
here and get trained. They're
paying them while they're here
being trained, so they've
already got a job. You're not
having any, uh, there's a
standing offer for the ones that
weren't already hired by
somebody, by pattern and some of
these guys up on the cap, they
have a job when they leave.
Uh, so pretty, pretty impressive
program now to the Centers of
excellence. The governor shut
down the coal-fired power plant
up in the San Juan area. They
were putting in centers of
excellence in Las Cruces, uh,
well, I'm not sure what the
Center of Excellence that came
up for a win center, wind
turbine center of excellence.
There was a couple of us that
thought maybe it ought to be
here because you had established
a program, you were producing
many students with certificates.
You had experience, you were
doing the job. I don't think any
other college or us at that time
producing as many uh wind uh
graduates with win certificates,
we fought long and hard to make
this a center of excellence for
wind energy, uh.
Get a, had a lot of support for
it.
The governor had just pulled
1500 jobs out of the San Juan
area and uh she's
The, uh
The president of the college in
San Juan at the time said we
don't want it. We, we don't want
wind energy. We want to keep our
coal-fired plant by uh and
So
It was stepped on.
And we were very sad, but, but
we did fight for it, OK?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, thank you very much. Uh,
we'll have Representative
Herndon and then uh Represent
Vedetta.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and um
Mr. Moss, my question to you is
you first said that you all were
coming out from under HOC. What
is HOC?
Mr. Chair and and
representative.
HLC is the Higher Learning
Commission. It is the
accrediting body, uh, for many
of the states in the Midwest,
everywhere from actually, now
they, I think they can go
nationwide, but everywhere from
Illinois to, um, Missouri,
Kansas, all the way over to
Arizona is the regions that they
cover.
In addition to our state higher
ed department, we have to meet
certain guidelines for them to
give us our accreditation, and
that basically tells people, you
know, this college is offering
and providing support, um, has
things in order to meet our, our
accreditation cycle. So, you
know, we, um,
Had a visit in September of 23.
And you know, a lot of what they
said on their visit was, hey, it
looks like things are getting
better. Uh, Mr. Primrose and I
were both fairly new. We'd only
been on the job about 6 or 7
months, and they said, we want
to see that go longer, um, you
know, and, and obviously we're
still working through our
financials and trying to get,
you know, we, we, we present
them with our audit information
just like we do the state and um
the US Department of Education.
And so that was a lot of our
findings that, you know, we,
you've got to get some of these
things fixed, and we want to see
length of, of, of stability.
Uh, beyond that. And so they had
scheduled a visit. It's actually
a combination. They're doing a
visit on our um
What's it called the, the
corrections, the um
Basically, we, so we offer um
classes to correctional
facilities across the state.
Total of 10. We have one,
evaluation on those sites.
We have, um, this.
Also visit is also regarding our
financial issues.
And we're due for our 10-year
accreditation. So we have 3
different things going on at the
same time, just with HLC and
that's what this visit will be,
they'll be covering all those
things.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Mr.
Moss, just another item for you
to consider. When you talked
about hiring the uh uh you were
concerned about the people who
had been previously incarcerated
getting jobs in the wind
industry. Uh, now, over at the
uh regulation and licensing
department, there is a statue.
It's called Criminal offender
rehabilitation Act was that,
were these people not allowed to
get a license or what was the
concern?
Mr. Chair and Representative.
We
Again, that happened before I
came, so I'm kind of
speculating. We had a, a win
director at the time that said
we can't.
Give them part of it was he said
we can't give them that
certification because they can't
leave the facility and come and
do the tower safety climb and,
and training program.
They were basically using a
ladder, uh, installed at the
Clayton Correctional Facility. I
think it's still there, um, to
kind of do their practicing on,
but they couldn't actually
certify them, and so that was
part of it, and then also I was
told that we couldn't give them
jobs. I don't know how accurate
that is. What I do know now is
that the, the, the, the um
directors at, at New Mexico, New
Mexico Cor correction department
said we can find them jobs.
Mobbs, if you provide the
training. And so that's why
we're trying to get it back and
going again. All right, and
thank you. And one last thing,
Mr. Chair, and something I want
you to consider. So there is a
big push right now for
individuals who are gonna be
getting out of uh uh
incarceration soon so that they
are learning a trade or they are
doing work uh that uh someone
else could be doing, and they
are actually paid, uh, uh, wages
that are current wages and not
the 52 cents an hour.
that are given to uh people who
are incarcerated. So maybe you
could be one of those um
pi lo t programs to think about
how that would work. And what
happens, just so that you know,
under the plan that has been put
out is that they would be paid
the regular wages that a person
would be paid in those wages
would be going back either to
their families while they're
incarcerated or to the people
who were harmed while they were
in because of them being in
prison. And so in addition to
that, they, they can be a, an
amendment to that criminal
offender rehabilitation Act to
allow for this to occur.
On a more regular basis. So
think about that pilot program
and I think you would be one
that would be raised to very
highly in this country to see
how it would work out. So, thank
you. Thank you very much. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, representative Herrera.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, President, and I just wanna
congratulate you taking on,
taking on a role like you've
taken on is, is really yeoman's
work and um you're to be
congratulated as well as all of
your staff for how you've moved
this college forward and um uh I
think as a state we totally
appreciate good leadership when
we see it, um, I have worked at
a community college. I helped
start the foundation at
Northern.
Mexico Community College years
and years ago I was, I was, uh,
seeing that you have a new, um,
chair, uh, Mr. Beetleman,
that's, uh, that's a good
progress. Uh, how much do you
have any money in the endowment
at all, uh, for the, for your,
for Mesa lands.
Oh, Mr. Chairman and uh
Representative Pereira.
I'm guessing you're talking
about our foundation and what we
have there and so that was a
source of a lot of um.
Not just miscommunication but a
lack of knowledge back when in
2023.
So our foundation right now has
around
Uh, a little over 3 million in,
in um their accounts. Most of
that is endowed money, uh,
geared towards scholarships.
Some of it is endowed um for,
it's actually colleges funds.
Around 100 and I don't have the
exact numbers, but about 1.2
million maybe, um, one is for
title.
Or one is for um STEM, and one
is for, uh, I think it's a
faculty salary endowment. And so
the bulk of those funds can't be
used, but we are trying to dig
into, OK, what was the original
intent of those funds and then
what can we start applying them
forward. Again, when you're
doing all these other things,
it's hard to stop and
and deal with some of that.
They, they also have a lot of
funds that are deal are given or
donated uh in endowments for
specific scholarships. The
amount of money that they have,
um, you know, just to use for
support of the college is pretty
minimal. I would say somewhere
between 1000 and 300,000.
We do have a $2 million
endowment that the college
received, uh, in 21 or 22, I
think, um, for nursing.
Due to all the conflict and
Lack of knowledge, we have
placed that with the state
treasurer's office, um, the
intent is once we get through
this, to look at moving that to
our foundation because we think
we'll get a better rate of
return, but just for um
Ensuring that that everything's
where it should be. That's,
that's where that money's at. So
all told, there's around 5
million, probably in in
endowments and and things like
that.
Uh, Madam Chair and, uh,
President, um, that's pretty
impressive. I thought you're, I
thought you were gonna say you
were broke, so, uh, I think
that's, uh, that's a pretty good
start. I just have to say that
and um.
Uh, I was looking at your
fundraisers and again, you know,
this is free advice, so you know
what it's worth. I'm just
telling you, but having run a
foundation, I think, I think a
natural for you guys is to do a
rodeo and have it up at uh a
mosquito and their arena. Uh,
I'll tell you who loves rodeos,
cigarette companies, beer
companies. I've, I've done a lot
of fundraising in my life. I
think you could easily raise
easily, easily, given your
rodeo team here and giving,
given this market, you know,
I've given this ranching, uh,
culture in this community easily
100,000 and that's probably
really lowballing it. That would
be the profit off of that once a
year, and that could become, you
know, once you start doing that
as an annual event, it will
really, you know, golf is good,
you know, dinners are good, but,
but you need, you need an event
where you're gonna pull in
corporate big corporate donor.
And um.
Uh, you know, again, it's free
advice, but uh I could talk to
your foundation director about
it.
That's all I have to say.
Excellent.
Anyone else with a question?
Nope.
I think are we ready for the
tour,
Short tour.
And then at 5:30 dinner at 5:30
at Laita.
All right, and uh Representative
Chatfield said it's gonna be
really good. OK.
All right.
Ready to take us.
Uh, yeah, I, Madam Chairwoman,
I, we can tour as much or little
as you want to, I would
definitely like to walk anyone
that's wanting to through our
win facility and then beyond
that, I also want to add, if any
of you are wanna, aren't in a
hurry to get home tomorrow, I
would encourage you to stop by
our, our dinosaur museum and um
paleontology lab, um, we have
different colleges from across
the country that come to do
field work.
uh, at our lab and at our dig
site locally, uh, so we, we want
to put that offer out as well.
Like.
