department.
Doctor Cage is the deputy
secretary of the newly
established Office of Special
Education within PED that
Governor Michelle Lujan Grisham
established by executive order
on May 23, 2023.
The executive order that
established the Office of
Special Education also requires
the development of an annually
updated state plan that
establishes statewide special
education standards and goals to
improve outcomes for students
with disabilities.
Today, Doctor Cage will present
the Office of Special
Education's five-year plan, as
well as provide updates on the
work of the office now that
Doctor Cage has been at the helm
for over a year. Elias C has
worked closely with Doctor Cage
since she came on board as part
of EliasC's ongoing examination
of chronic disparities and
opportunity that have led to low
educational outcomes for special
education students and
achievement gaps between special
education.
student subgroups.
I know the committee is well
aware that students with
disabilities were one of the
student groups identified in the
consolidated Martinez Yazi
lawsuit that found the state
failed to provide an adequate,
sufficient education to those
students, in addition to Native
American students, English
learners, and students from
low-income families.
Elias C began a deep dive into
issues impacting students
receiving special education
services last interim, with the
understanding that while the
legislature has made significant
investments to address Martinez
Yazi prior to 2023, few of those
initiatives had specifically
addressed special education.
Last interim LEC staff
facilitated 9 stakeholder
listening sessions statewide
from June to August 2023.
To provide stakeholders with an
opportunity to share feedback.
And suggestions about special
education services in New
Mexico.
The purpose of the listening
sessions was to provide the
opportunity for stakeholders to
express opinions, share ideas,
and tell their stories, but to
also use what was heard as a
starting place for the special
education stakeholder working
group that met from September to
November 2023 to provide
feedback on policy proposals
that arose from the listing
sessions to ensure those
proposals reflected both
research and community voice.
In the past 30-day legislative
session, legislators bolstered
funding for the Office of
Special Education, as well as
establishing a pilot program for
special education and hard to
staff salary differentials.
The Legislature appropriated 6
million from the general fund in
non-recurring funding.
For the implementation of
special education initiatives,
including providing technical
assistance and developing a
statewide universal IEP.
The development and
implementation of a standardized
IEP was one of the
recommendations that arose from
the listing sessions and the
working group.
There was consensus during
LESC's stakeholder engagement
process that the implementation
of a statewide IEP would help
with standardization and
uniformity, as well as a smooth
transition of services when
students transfer between school
districts and charter schools.
In addition, in the 2024
legislative session, you all
appropriated a total of 15
million over 3 years to support
these salary differentials for
special education, as well as
other hard to staff positions
from
the grow expendable trust in
program fund in response to
research that suggests salary
differentials can be effective
mechanisms for recruitment and
retention of teachers in hard to
staff positions like special
education. When stipend amounts
are recurring and sufficiently
large.
Today, Doctor Cage will provide
an update on that work, as well
as sharing the Office of Special
Education's five-year plan.
And with that brief
introduction, I'll turn it over
to Doctor Cage.
Good morning, uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, thank
you, Marriott, as always, it's a
pleasure to sit here before you
and share the exciting things
that's happening in special
education.
Uh, Mr. Chair, with your
permission, I would like to
acknowledge staff that is here
with me today.
Next to me is one of my partners
in crime. This is Doctor Tyree
Jenkins, uh, he supports the
program side of special
education and all of the
initiatives that you see going
forward uh across the state,
also over my right shoulder. I
have several of our staff
members that are here with us
today, and I can tell you that I
definitely would not be the
great leader that I am to be
able to stand before you without
the support and the knowledge.
skills of those people that are
sitting here, and I just would
like to acknowledge that.
Uh, getting off into the
presentation for today as merit
outlined, uh, this office was
established through executive
order of our Governor Michelle
Lujan Grisham, and it was
because of the disparities in
special education and issues and
education not being addressed
for a very long time for
students with disabilities.
Looks like
Within that establishment of the
executive order, there were
several priorities that were
outlined definitely um searching
and finding a person that could
come and actually implement the
things that were needed for our
students across the state,
especially our students with
disabilities. Uh, there were
specific duties of the office,
such as creating a state plan,
uh, increasing collaboration
internally and externally with
agencies that promote and
undergird.
activities for special education
students, um, also ensuring that
we recruit and retain special
education teachers in the
classrooms across the state
where I most needed students,
our students with most needs,
excuse me, received the best
services possible.
Uh, we were also charged with
transferring our 619B
coordinator to our early child
uh care department so that we
can increase the transition of
students from early childhood to
K-12 education, uh, seamlessly
without losing them in the
middle.
And also there are other
components of the executive
order where we are bringing
forth professional development
across the state at all levels,
uh, from upper uh executive
leadership of superintendents
and school boards all the way
down to our educational
administrators within the
classroom.
And most importantly, including
our parents across the state as
well.
So we have essentially been
revitalizing special education
and taking approaches to be able
to address systemic change and
bring forward information. Of
course, we know that we didn't
get here overnight, so we're not
going to fix it overnight, but
we are definitely moving in the
right direction and making some
significant strides towards
ensuring that we are creating
opportunities where our students
can thrive.
And how we're doing that is
because we are definitely
investing in the workforce. Uh,
we're investing in the workforce
in our human capital in many
ways, and professional
development is the huge, is a
huge piece of being able to
start the change process, right?
Because we have to understand
and know what it is that we're
responsible for, uh, what, uh,
the individuals with
disabilities, education at calls
for, and those things that we're
supposed to be providing.
under those provisions.
Next, I'm sharing with you our
Office of Special Education
Strategic priorities. These
strategic priorities can also be
found in the copy of the state
plan, and on those documents
that we have also created for
parents to be able to get the
gist of the information from the
state plan without having
combing all the way through it.
A we conducted several working
groups at many levels. Uh, we
conducted a superintendent's
working group, where we had
Bretendants from across the
state that partnered with us for
5 sessions using the model that
EESC uh utilized in their
listening sessions. Uh, we also
had special education directors,
um, to sit with us in 5
sessions. We had 3 sessions with
parents, and we also pulled upon
the experience and expertise of
teachers across the state are
regional educational
cooperatives, so it has been uh
quite a joy to
learn and sit in spaces, uh,
with many of our different
partners across the state to
gain the information and
knowledge to be able to come up
with these 4 huge buckets of
strategic priorities and
everything that we do will fit
in one of these uh buckets in
some way, shape or form, uh,
definitely utilizing data to
inform our goals for equitable
opportunities.
Every type of data that we can
possibly think of a qualitative
and quantitative.
Uh, being culturally and
linguistically responsive, which
was also a part of the executive
order. We have taken that on,
uh, and trying to ensure that
everyone across the state
understands what that looks
like.
Profiles pathways and teaching.
We definitely know that
transitions is a huge piece of
our students being successful
from the beginning of school and
throughout their college or
career, um, events and
activities that they will have
post-secondary education.
And professional development,
one of the things that I learned
really, really early, uh, being
in this position is that it's
not because our educators and
our, our partners across the
state don't want to do what's
best for our students. It may be
a space that they don't know
what to do, because we have huge
turnover in our educational
spectrum across the board, top
down and bottom up.
So with that, there has to be a
cyclic cyclic
uh set of activities that we
perform to ensure that people
who are in charge of making
things happen for all students
understand what it is that's
supposed to be happening.
So building a stronger, uh,
special education system. These
are things that are on the
horizon and also currently
happening, uh, going forward
into 2025, we are definitely
embarking on several different
cohort academies, these cohort
academies will uh reach specific
groups of individuals that touch
our students every day.
Definitely embarking upon a uh
fellows academy.
For our leadership across the
state, and that cohort would be
a situation where we take in so
many people at a time, for
example, 30 L across the state
and we actually have a year's
worth of work that happens with
them, and the reason why we say
30 is because the cold hearts
get that 1 to 1 training and
understanding of different
components of special education,
and then, of course, in the
of that first year, bringing on
another cohort, so on and so
forth until we have uh created a
uh cohort of learning across the
state that will be for our
special education directors will
have a group, our special
education teachers will have a
group, are aspiring teachers,
connecting with those that are
coming out of the universities
while they're in the
universities, um, to get them
into education, we will also
recruit a group, our
superintendents and our
uh school administrators will
also have a group, so it is a
bit, bit advantageous, however,
I have participated in uh
different academies in my, uh,
educational career that has also
helped me outline and support
the work.
And this is something that will
be very beneficial.
Uh, continuing the professional
development, which we have a
plethora of professional
development that we actually
offer.
And also, which is sitting in
front of you now, we're very
proud to reveal our
comprehensive uh state plan.
So these are special education
initiatives, um, and some of our
current initiatives, as you
know, is the IEP project, uh, we
are currently working to uh get
that IEP front and center across
the state, um, accountability
and compliance school
monitoring. We have different
sets and levels of monitoring.
We have monitoring on the
physical, the physical side. We
also have monitoring on the
program side.
And for the first time in a very
long time, we were able to
monitor our schools, um, and our
charter schools with a program
monitoring what looks at the
actual delivery of services that
our students are receiving,
actually looking at the IEPs
under that general supervision
umbrella, uh, of requirements
that OSEP has for every state in
the United States.
We have a mentorship academy
that I am very proud to say that
we have increased our uh
membership in that 50% and we
outline with our regional
educational cooperative REC that
that particular mentorship
program should be predominantly
special education teachers and
those teachers that teach
special education students and
inclusion setting.
So I'm extremely excited that
we're offering that.
We had our first of a very long
time law conference in
September. It was very well
received. Uh, we started off
with making space for 250
participants and end up
increasing it to over 450. We
were at capacity at the hotel,
the venue that we chose, the law
conference was very well
executed uh by chief counsel
Miguel Lozano, who is a part of
our special education staff.
And we, because of the outpour
and the overwhelming responses
that we received from the law
conference, we will be
conducting another one that will
be a specifically geared to our
upper level management, our
superintendents, our um building
level administrators, uh,
because we heard quite clearly
from our superintendents that
they would love to participate
in this, so we're definitely
going to have a law conference
on a smaller scale.
to be able to uh support them
through that, and the law
conferences are something that
you would be able to see
annually going forward from
here.
Our parent resource fair and
professional development towards
the whole month of October, it
was actually from the end of
September to the beginning of
November, approximately 6 or 7
weeks, we were across the state,
um, in every area, uh, such as
Farmington, Las Cruces, Hobbs,
Albuquerque, um, and we were
also in Las Vegas. We made sure
we went uh to every corner and
centrally.
And we provided professional
development and spaces for
teachers and whomever wanted to
join, and I am so happy to say
that we did have superintendent
representation at those
particular professional
development tours. It was so
glad to have. I was so happy to
have them in the house. They
were uh very participatory and
came forward and promoted the
event and also motivated a staff
that was participating.
Intertwined within that.
professional development tour,
we also created space for
parents.
We had a parent fair each
evening of the professional
development tour, where we had
multiple partners there with
wraparound services that were
there to provide information and
support to our parents for them
to be able to know who to
contact.
Uh, what type of services are
out there that they may not have
known about, and we were very
grateful for the parents that
came out as well.
Our future initiatives, we are
definitely embarking on a Native
American working group that is
one of the things that um we
want to ensure that we, uh,
take upon this year, we have
behavior initiatives that are
coming forth that we are working
on our professional development
plan with and also policy
writing, working groups, just to
highlight a positive here, uh,
we have something that is called
a stay in school project, the
stay in school project is where
we use um
Funds so that we can ensure that
our students graduation rates
are increasing for students with
disabilities.
Some other ongoing initiatives
that we have here, um, you can
read at your leisure. It just
goes along to um continue to
explain the ways that we are
conducting outreach. We have
created in our office a space
also for parents to be able to
contact, um, not only, um,
staff, but we have a very
special lady that attends to
parents all day every day, and
that is Doctor Elizabeth.
So, we, we, uh, advertise her
all over the state everywhere we
go, and she is extremely busy
with taking care of parents
every single day, and ensuring
to uh resolve any issues that,
so getting to the state plan
overview, we've already talked
about the executive order, the
state plan was a combination of
all of those working groups that
I mentioned earlier, we unpacked
um priorities we unpacked issues
across the state.
unpacked, uh, needs across the
state and came up with the state
plan. It is also wise to look
and see what other states are
doing, right? Because we all
have an obligation through the
Office of Special Education
programs at the United States
Department of Education to
ensure that we are embarking
upon best practices and also
those strategies that are making
a difference nationally, so we
definitely utilize every
resource we could to put the.
State playing together.
You should have a copy of that
state plan in front of you for
perusing.
So along with the state plan, we
wanted to also be able to give
something to our parents where
it wasn't a 20 page document
that they had to comb through
and uh look through. So we took
the uh important things that are
applicable to parents and we put
them into uh forms of handouts.
We have a 4 pager, which
definitely covers our mission
vision and goals and our
priorities and some relevant
information that is relevant to
parents.
Next steps for the state plan,
um, of course, it is November
and we have officially released
that in 6 months, we're going to
do a 6 months uh checkpoint with
our state plan because this is
not something that we're just
putting in writing. This is
something that we are actually
performing the activities that
are within our state plan and
also measuring the effectiveness
of those activities.
Pay differentials. So this is
something that um LESC really
asked for an update on pay
differentials, as you know, uh,
was awarded uh to us through
House Bill 2 of 2024 and we
received $15 million to be
divided over 3 years. Uh, that
$15 million was to recruit and
retain special education
teachers back into the special
education classroom.
We looked at many ways of doing
this, um, however, we decided as
an office to take this on to be
able to uh guarantee that the
money was going to be used as it
was allocated.
We had several phases with this
money, phase one was to recruit
new teachers into the special
education classroom. Phase 2 is
to retain those special
education teachers that have
been in the classroom for a very
long time, and phase 3 F money
permits will be uh to
incentivize our educational
administrators that uh
definitely are what students
with disabilities every single
day in our related service.
providers such as uh school
language, uh, OT occupational
therapist, uh, PT, um, physical
therapist, um, and school sites,
all of those people are related
service providers. So the data
that I'm going to share with you
here today is preliminary data,
because we are in the process of
collecting phase 2 applications,
and we are also in the process
of
unpacking phase one information.
Uh, so within these numbers that
you see here with the
applications that were turned
into us. This is not a whole
state look. This is from the
applications that were turned in
from us for.
To us, excuse me, which was uh
56 LEA actually applied for the
hard to staff funding, and
within those 56 LEAs, you can
reference what uh Elis that was
by looking at your last two
slides, we did list out for you
what is um what Eli Ys actually
applied for the heart to staff
funding to recruit teachers.
There were 201 total vacancies
that, excuse me.
201 total special education put
2001 total special education
teachers that were identified or
positions.
Out of those 2001 positions,
1924, 1924 of them are currently
filled.
With people who meet licensure
requirements.
I am messing up all over the
place. Let me go back.
1,924 of them meet licenger
requirements. 1393 of them
actually work.
In a special education position,
which leaves 232 of them that
are in other positions.
We also looked at the uh
educational assistants, a total
of 2580 positions exist.
Yes, because some of them have
one to ones, um, some of them
have 2.
So one, it just depends, um, and
we currently had 376 vacancies,
um, within the 56 LEAs that
applied.
Our related service providers,
there is a total um FTE of 1,533
um positions, and we had 160
vacancies within those 56 LEA.
So this is just another look, a
breakdown of what we received in
the applications, um, when we
look at it, we wanted to know
how many of those positions were
vacant for 2 or more years, um,
and how many of those positions
were vacant for less than 2
years, so this is a, a breakdown
of that, uh, the red is how many
special education positions out
of those 56 schools have been
vacant for 2 or more years.
And that's 110 of those
positions have been going
forward for 2 or more years
vacant.
And for those that were just
currently vacant. There were 18
and the 14 in the middle when we
pulled from the application,
that just means they didn't
specify.
What how long it had been
vacant.
So getting into the 15 million
over 3 years.
We did some projections here of
the numbers that I just shared
with you earlier.
So in phase one, if we assume
that all of those teachers that
we uh showed you though 232
teachers were um able to receive
the stipend, and we went
directly on LESC's report of
what the stipend should be, how
we should look at the stipend,
and that's how we outlined our
framework to be able to present
this to our schools.
If we look at that in phase one.
In the orange, that will take
care of 232 teachers what comes
up to
23,020,000.
Phase 2, remember, is our
retention stipends, where we
want to definitely uh give our
teachers who have been in the
classroom for a very long time,
a set of uh pay differentials as
well.
And that would equate to
$4,265,000.
So if we combine those two,
which you see in the latter
column, we were awarded $5
million. If we were to award
every single teacher that has
applied, we have a deficit of
$1,585,000.
And I just want to make note
that that is without phase 3.
Which is incentivizing our
educational administrators and
also our related service lesson
learned. There has been a lot of
lessons learned.
Um, the funding needed for 3
phases of pay differentials if
we're going to do it this way,
um, we're definitely going to
exceed the $5 million that is
allocated for 3 years. Um,
definitely, um, there is a need
for additional technical
assistance and training on our
application process, we have
spent uh quite about a quite um
a huge amount of hours, um,
helping our LEAs.
understand and be able to
navigate through the application
process. Um, we also must
consider the extent of the EEA's
autonomy, which is based on
union agreements. We have a lot
of LEAs that wanted to apply for
the money, however, because of
union agreements, they didn't
want to uh cause any type of
risk.
Uh, with their general education
teachers and their special
education teachers. We
definitely stand in a posture to
listen to our superintendents
and we understand, but
definitely trying to operate in
the mode of which the the money
was intended.
Uh, we also learned some lessons
with our um accountability
measures that when we put forth
this type of application process
and this type of funding to
recruit and retain special
educators that we need to also
have a level of being able to go
back.
And uh check whether or not this
was effective. So ensuring that
our LEAs that received the money
have some type of teacher
mentoring, um, plan at least for
a year, um, and administrators
and stipends, recipients
actively engage in initiatives
aimed at enhancing student
performance and fostering
positive outcomes for students.
So actually getting in there and
looking at the activities and
what we're doing.
our students, um, because
incentivizing our teachers mean
that we want to also see student
outcomes.
Um, another concern that um many
superintendents spoke to me
about was teachers moving from
one district or one school to
another, um, to receive the
stipend. So what we did is
actually put um.
A measure in there where we are
collecting the names of our
teachers and it may have
happened this year, um, but our
teachers are being informed that
they will not be allowed to move
from one school to another
school each year to be able to
keep receiving an incentive.
We will have their names on a
list, and as soon as um they
apply to a new school if it is
for the funding, they will not
receive the $10,000 they will
continue to receive the
retention stipend because they
are a special education teacher.
Um, I have done this work
previously many, many times, um,
for hard to hard to staff
schools also hard to staff
specific positions, and it
definitely does have an impact
on student achievement and
outcomes. However, most teachers
leave schools because of leaders
and not because of $10,000. So
we also have to put that in
there, um, if I have a staff
member that is comfortable.
with my leadership style, a
certain monetary amounts may not
attract them to move forward. So
we are also working with our
leaders to understand that
component and ensuring that the
people that we have in our
school building levels or those
types of people that understand
the special education process
and also understand culture and
climate within their school. Um,
I already talked about the
disadvantage between general
education and special education,
um.
And also a lesson that we
learned because oftentimes, uh,
we have our bills that go out,
um, and they are um.
Interpret it differently by
whomever is reading them. So we
have a lot of experts across the
state that love to um advise us
on the intent of the bill. So
just being more clear in the
bill, um, especially when it's
special education driven so that
we know exactly what you want to
see the outcome to be from our
legislators and our senators.
Uh, next steps, uh, we will be
sending out retention letters of
eligibility, because we had to
put multiple layers in this
application process to be able
to receive the information and
also verify certification status
of those individuals as it
relates to the criteria of the
public education department and
what certification looks like.
Um, so we will definitely be uh
disseminating uh those stipends
between January and May on all
levels.
So as always, uh, we have
definitely done our public
school support request, and here
we are requesting $4 million for
our special education
initiatives, some of those which
I have shared with you earlier
in the presentation, so you can
go back and look at those. We
want to continue certain of
those initiatives and also bring
forward new initiatives, um,
also, uh, we have our special
education.
universal IEP system, which is
our electronic system and also I
IEP template which go hand in
hand, startup cost and
implementation with training and
also the technical pieces that
we have to ensure it's happening
across the state. We are
requesting about $12 million to
get that project on the way.
Uh, special education stipends
and pay differentials we already
have 5 million that is being
allocated to us for the next 3
years.
Um, and then, uh, in our uh
agency budget, you will see a
line item for special education
full-time employees to increase
or expand our office. Currently,
we have um
About
12, uh, individuals that work on
the program side and about 10
individuals that work on the
fiscal side.
At the level of outreach, um,
and professional development
that we are currently delivering
across the state. Our capacity
is very minimal to be able to
reach express especially our
microdistricts. We have about 3
staff members that currently uh
sit in a position of monitoring
and accountability. We all know
how big the state is. Uh, it was
a huge undertaking for us to to
conduct the
monitoring that we did, and I'm
very lucky that my staff stayed
with me because it was a very
heavy lift. So in order for us
to get our schools where we need
to be before we are monitored by
OSEP in 2027. We definitely need
to increase the capacity of
staff so that we can go out and
not make accountability and
compliance feel punitive. We
want it to be something where we
all understand this is how we're
supposed to be operating and
We want to support you through
getting everything where you
need it to be.
And Mr. Chair, that concludes my
presentation for today, and I
will definitely stand for
questions.
Great.
Thank you. All representlun.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, thank
you, Doctor Cage, uh, and all
these, uh, everybody that is um
been part of this, uh, very much
needed change in our
For audition and change to our
education system for our state
and public schools.
Um
And just so uh uh guess Mr.
Chair, I think the like the last
part that we're looking at these
uh page 22 when we're looking at
these.
Amounts of money that we need,
um, for our state for these
programs. It's what you said,
this is, this is how we are
supposed to be operating. I
appreciate you saying this
because it's
It's always
I would say a shame for us to
always um have to wait this long
and come to to the place where
we, we, um,
We assess these these needs and
our special needs and our kids,
um.
This like the hour, if you will.
Um, but, uh, with that said, Mr.
Chair, I was able to as a parent
with children with special
needs, um, and having to have
navigated the public school
system.
Um, and now have an adult child.
Um,
And go through all the the
things it's, it's a little
triggering. I'll tell you that,
Mr. Chair, because it always
reminds me of the things, all
the hurdles I had to go through
as a parent for my child to
receive his, um, to make sure
his needs are met.
Um, and
Mr. Chair, uh, this week, uh.
Uh, Doctor Cage and staff and
PED hosted the parent um
academy, um.
And it was incredibly
successful. I would say there
were probably over 500 parents
and then additional kids that
and they're they brought their
kids because you provided a
space, special space for the
kids to to stay and be taken
care of while the parents were
educated and participated in the
academy and the, the breakout
sessions and the information
sessions, and I say that, that
didn't exist when I was, uh,
when my child was young, um, and
having to surf and find out all
the information and resources
that I did was, was.
Very um taxing.
Um, on my household and, and my
family.
But um,
What I found out, Mr. Chair was
the parents are still going
through that struggle.
And um.
It's, it's hard to, um.
To for me to reconcile now as a
legislator because I, as I've
said in, and we always say that
the reason why I even became a
legislator was because of my son
and because of the, the activism
that I, I had to, um.
Participated and become an
advocate for him and now a
bigger advocate for the parents
and I, and I um.
I was there this week and I was
talking to many, many parents
that still didn't know their
rights, their children's rights
in our school systems and um to
be able to provide um
information for them was really
incredible and to have, you
know, just to have the whole um
wrap around their, I wanna
commend you, Doctor Cage and
your staff and everybody here,
you know, Katie's here too,
Katie Ellis is here too. She's
Um
Been, uh, it's incredible to
have her there and her advocacy
and her her work ethic to help
us, um, as well, with all of
your staff. So I'm going on a
little bit, but I do have a
couple of questions. Um,
Oh it's right in front of me,
Mr. Mr. Chair, just with all
that, I just want to say again,
thank you. It was wonderful. We
need more of it and I saw that
it is in your plan and the whole
list of all the things that
you've already done, and I'm, I,
I'm thinking to myself why I
missed that I missed that and I
missed that because
In my role now, I get to
actually uh I have constituents
that are coming to me as they're
navigating the system for their
children, um.
And uh through all your efforts
and what you've been able to do,
it's just, it's been helpful for
me to have direct lines of
communication as well. Thank
you. Um, I'm gonna go directly
to the attendance for success,
uh, act, uh, I think I missed
this yesterday. We had a
discussion on attendance and
some of the things and what it,
what is missing, uh, missing
distinction for students with
disabilities. Can you speak to
that a little bit? I know you
touched on that in your
presentation. Uh, what?
What needs to be changed in
that, um.
What we're doing now and how
we're not addressing uh our
attendance, especially our
children with IEPs, um, in the
attendance issues we have in our
state. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I'll take that just
because Doctor Cage was busy
yesterday at Parent University
and this was actually an issue
brought up in public comment,
um, in individual came and
expressed that she thinks there
may be an oversight in the
attendance for Success Act in
providing an exception for
students with disabilities that
need to get required services
and that not being considered
within the act.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair, is
that in fact true, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, this is not my area
of expertise, but I believe it
is true.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I think
that that's something that we,
we should be able to remedy um
and
So does this mean that we need
to amend the act, or is there
another way that you're looking
at um
Adressing this, Mister Chair.
So, uh, Mr. Chair, thank you,
Representative Luhan over in our
cabinet discussions, we are
looking at uh revisiting some of
our acts. Uh, we have discussed
the attendance and several
others where we can specifically
outline provisions for our
students with disabilities. Um,
I will definitely get what
cabinet to ensure that we are
looking at that particular
section of the attendance Act.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and then
my last question is just go to
the
The portion of your presentation
where you talked about the
cohorts, um, and all the the
different groups that you're
going to address for to educate
them, um, what are those numbers
are, what are those numbers now
and what do those numbers look
like for you as your, um,
increasing the outreach, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative Luhan, that is a
new initiatives. So those
academies are things that we're
bringing forward, uh, starting
in 2025, which is a call for the
4 million in the special
education incentive, um, in
initiatives. Thank you for that
clarification, but it is as it
is now, what, what do we have in
place for educating um our
administrators are educators uh
at present time, Mr. Chair. Mr.
Chair, thank you,
Representative.
hunt for that question. We have
several special education
director academies, we give 2 a
year through our regional
educational cooperative number
9. We have leadership academies,
we give two of those a year that
we give through regional
educational cooperative #2. We
have our mentorship academy. We
have a law conference. We have
several working groups, so we,
we are attending. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. I, I just outlying if I
could get some of those numbers
and the participation.
schools and what districts are
participating. Um, I think
that's, that's really
significant for us to have that
information. Um, and then we'll
talk more about your, your
budget issues at another time.
Um.
Cause I think other other
questions, thank you.
Representative.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you.
For your, uh, presentation. No,
I, I, I want to tell you that I
spent 2 out of my 32 years
dealing directly with special
education and gifted educations.
Um, I am an advocate, but I also
Understand how a working
knowledge of this. So, uh, Mr.
Chairman and uh Doctor Cage. Um,
Can you tell me or I have heard
some concerns about the release
of federal IDEA funds to
districts to support our
students, uh, you know, that
were targeted by the officers
budget education. Can you
comment on that? Mr. Chair
Representative Baca, uh, could
you please clarify targeted.
Well, the bottom line is this,
Mr. Chairman, is that districts
had not received their their ID
of funds until right before the
end of the fiscal year, in many
cases.
And so what that has caused for
districts is that they have
These monies and these upcoming
deadlines as far as for spending
and the refunds that were
released.
Um, that had to go through their
own local school boards were
late.
Typically we receive them in
January, February, many times
before we see him in November.
It is, uh, my understanding that
many of our districts did not
received those.
Until almost the uh month of
May.
Mr. Chair Representative Baca,
um, at this point, I am not
aware of any specific district
that has not received their
funding. I can also tell you
that our KPI is 10 days within
our organization, and I am
definitely the one who does the
request for reimbursement
approvals. Um, I am also to the
contrary, under um,
The um understanding that a lot
of our school districts have a
lot of carryover money, so
they're not actually spending
the money allocated through
their federal programs within
the calendar year that it is
allocated, um, when we give them
money, they're supposed to be
able to spend that money within
that 12 months that those
students are there. Um, however,
we have a huge amount, almost
60% of our LEAs that carry over
money from the.
year before that they didn't
spend one portion of it, um, so
I can definitely take the names
of those LEAs and look at that
for you and get back with you on
who may be receiving their money
late and why, but I know over
the last year since I've been
here, that's been a point that
we've really worked hard, uh, to
make sure that we were
mitigating.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chairman. You
know, we can go back and forth
about the, you know, I'm not
specifically talking about the
art of bars.
Much of the districts would have
large carryover numbers or
monies because they receive
their funds so late in the
school year, and so that they
must be carried over and so.
Um
I, I'll go ahead and leave from
that. So, uh, Mr. Chairman and
Doctor Cage, uh, is the state of
New Mexico currently under
corrective action, uh, from
federal and if so, for what
reasons?
Mr. Chair Representative Baca,
the state of New Mexico is under
needs assistance.
Um, that is not currently
corrective action, but the very
next step will be. So that's one
of the reasons why we're working
very hard to get our state up to
date with compliance measures
and accountability measures and
understanding the requirements
of the idea. There's only one
state currently, uh, one,
entity, uh, currently that is in
the corrective action phase with
OSEP.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Doctor Cage.
You know, we talked about.
Teacher differentials in pay.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and Doctor
Cage, can you tell me what are
some of the reasons that we
have? Have you been, you've
received from districts as to
why we have a large number of
vacancies in special education.
What are, what are some of those
reasons? And again, Doctor Cage,
please briefly, you know, yeah,
um.
Mr. Chair, Representative Baca,
I am very long winded, however,
some of those reasons, uh, deal
with uh teachers feeling like
they're not supported by uh
administration also behavior,
which is one of the things that
I'm asking for as an initiative
is one of those things that
teachers uh feel is very
difficult to manage in the
special education classroom.
Thank you, ma'am, and that's a,
a question or area I hope that
you address because student
behaviors and increasing student
behaviors are, are problematic
and so Mr. Chairman, my, my
question is when you talk about
support, what kind of support
have you been providing our
paraprofessionals or our support
professionals.
I will say this, and, and
through my colleagues here, some
of our hardest working people.
Our special education
assistants.
Uh, and assistants, that's why
many of my colleagues, we
support a bill to increase that.
So the question is, what type of
support and or training is
provided that to that staff that
will most closely work with
students.
Mr. Chair, representative Baca,
as a state entity, we provide
opportunities for all levels of
professional development. When
we train our leaders and we
train our special education
directors, the onus then has to
be on our school districts to be
able to provide those level of
trainings. What I'm doing from
my office is ensuring that they
know how to support our
educational administrators as a
form of special education
teacher myself, I can tell you
that I couldn't do it without.
What we call Paris in that room.
So we are definitely uh pressing
the envelopes with our school
leaders for them to understand
that special education is not a
second thought, it's not an
afterthought. It is something
that should be at the forefront
and everybody that is in those
rooms with our students,
definitely need to be trained.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
thank you, Doctor Cage. You, you
talked about that we have
created this department about a
year ago through executive
order, and you've talked about
the data, and so I'm going to
ask you just a couple of
questions, and you may not have
the answers to it, OK? Um,
But one of the areas when you
talk about student outcomes, it
would be very interesting to us,
as you're making your request
for the expansion of some of
these programs or what are the
student outcomes that we have
seen, as far as
Um, proficiencies as far as
graduations, as far as
transitions. The other part that
I'm really interested in is your
child find your DD in early
interventions because the fact
is that we know that one of the
best, um,
supports for our students is to
identify them early provide
their targeted support.
In their area of need, so that
we can get them.
Um, you know, back to
Or we need them to be. And so,
do you have data like that? And
if so, where can we, the
legislature.
Find that down.
Mr. Chair Representative Vacca,
thank you for that question. I
am a person who loves data, and
yes, I have all of that data and
it will be presented with our
budget and our PSSR. I came
today prepared for to present
what was asked, but I can
definitely get that information
to you and I can tell you right
now that we have about 16% of
our total population of students
that is in education across the
state that are identified as
special education. Uh, we have a
About 8% of them that are
waiting on evaluation that are
under the special education
umbrella. I can also tell you of
last year's data cause we just
released the data on student
performance, where we have seen
some gains, but we were
approximately 7 to 8% per uh
proficient on student outcomes
for students with disabilities
across the state and it varies
by LEA because some are higher
and some are less with reading
and math results.
But I can't tell you for me,
even in EEA that may be 34%
proficient within their total
numbers need to look at what our
students with disability numbers
are, and even 34% proficient is
not good enough. So I'm
definitely working in those
areas to ensure that we are
providing the necessary
information on how to look at
data, which is why that was one
of my buckets, but I can
definitely get all of the data
that you just
talked about to you after this
meeting. I'll close with this,
um, Mr. Chairman, Doctor Cage,
the other concerning trend is
that we're seeing an increase in
our percentage of students
statewide, as far as the number
of students on an IEP.
And, and my, I'm very curious as
to the reasons why.
Um, and, you know, as far as,
you know, we're looking when we
talk about funding, because this
is not, and please understand,
as many of us sit on the LFC as
well.
And it's for folks that are
coming here, they're gonna ask
some questions.
We're asking for increasing
funds, what are we currently
done with our funds before we
expand our uh area of services,
so, um, do you have, I mean,
again, the, the question
regarding the increase in
numbers in special education. Do
you want to comment on that
briefly, or is it something you
want to get back to us?
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh Representative
Baca, I do have the numbers. Um,
I've been here a little bit over
a year and um I want to be quite
candid, coming in, the things
that has or has not happened
over the past 2015, 10 years has
definitely created a web of
things to be unpacked, and one
of the things that I've
uncovered uh through monitoring
through being out and across the
state, is that because we don't
have related service providers
and a lot
of these areas, which is one of
my asks for this committee.
Our school districts are making
determination based on no data
to give students IEPs. Our
school districts are also making
determination to give students
IEPs based off of no knowledge
of the special education world.
So that's why I'm working so
hard for awareness and knowledge
and skill sets to be created
across the state.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for uh that
information, Doctor Cage, our
students that we have been
speaking about definitely
deserve our very best supports.
I appreciate your work.
Or
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Doctor Cage for taking the job a
year ago. We appreciate that. So
I hope you don't feel we're
attacking. It's just like you're
we're a panel of almost
everybody here is an educator
and his experiences. Um, one
thing I wanna say, yesterday we
had 2 presentations that I think
it would behoove that special
education, leadership to listen
to, one was on data systems and
the problem with fragmented data
systems which PED.
As you probably know is um has
had, and the other was state
commissions on education and
some of these, um, and we can
give you the handouts, for
example, Maryland, when they
measured accountability, they
were very specific. So I've been
perusing this and it's
excellent, but when you look
down to accountability, some
people have asked for numbers. I
think.
That kind of um.
Masterful checklist would be
helpful, especially since it's
covering 3 years, so they were
too really deep dive, uh,
powerful presentations that
identified areas that our whole
education system has to do, uh,
when comment I want to make.
And that's when we look at
special education, and we look
at outcomes on testing and
everything. And I'm speaking as
an instructional coach and as a
longtime inclusion teacher, the
general education part of an
inclusion team.
Special education is diverse.
We have, I think in my school,
uh,
The last elementary school I
worked at had about 1150
students.
And one qualified for the
special state test.
Uh, that was unique to someone
with extreme disabilities, um,
as someone who is a testing
coordinator who often provided
um the various, what do you call
them?
Um
What you're allowed to do
according to the disability of
the student.
It's everything's piled
together. I had a brilliant
inclusion student who could not
read.
Um, but orally he was brilliant.
So as his education and we have
the new systems that, you know,
you go to the Chrome extension
and it reads,
He was a masterful learner.
But he could not read because of
his brain set up. We have
students across the autism
spectrum. We have twice
exceptional and I feel like we
have to identify the subgroups.
We do subgroups based on race,
income, and things like that,
but the subgroups in special
education are very diverse, and
I always remember working with
the 8th grade student who could
not do basic arithmetic.
and her next step plans had to
include how she would do at the
time, algebra 2. So it's like I
just feel like sometimes the
data we get, it's not
segregated.
Disaggregated.
So that's just something that
when we look at growth in
groups, I think we're missing.
On the conversation. So I just
wanted to make that comment.
Um, my next question is, what do
you think?
Inclusion as inclusion teacher,
I received one powerful one day
training, which my special ed
teacher couldn't go to because
she covered the class.
In classrooms across the state,
and I'm from APS originally
recently retired from APS.
The inclusion situation where
people are being pushed to do
inclusion.
But often the special ed teacher
is covering multiple classrooms,
and so it's not a deep dive
inclusion model. Has your
department had time to study
that yet, and we know we have a
lack of special ed teachers, and
that's one reason these
inclusion models.
have far too much of a load for
the special ed teacher.
How, how can we address that?
Mr. Chair, thank you,
Representative Garrett. Um, I
can tell you that we have not
addressed specifically the
inclusion model across the
state. Uh, we are, are still
unpacking a lot of the rule that
has been around in the statute,
of course, as I said earlier,
the interpretation depends upon
the reader, um, also, um, it is,
we're very unique here with the
way education works very
different from where I come
from, um, and some of
the things that I've tried to do
since I've been here. I've had
conversation with um our
universities to try to increase
the number of special education
classes, general education
teachers are taking, uh, because
one reading class does not beget
knowing how to take care or uh
teach special education
students. I've also been been
very fortunate to sit before
several superintendents for them
to look at the inclusion model,
um, but from a state level.
one of the initiatives in our
academies, uh, will be teaching
the inclusion model and what it
actually looks like, uh, getting
teachers in the classroom first,
to be able to identify those
special education teachers that
are inclusion teachers because I
was one myself, um, to bring
both parties to the table in a
space where they can understand
the relationship.
Thank you and thank you, um, Mr.
Chair and thank you, Doctor Cage
for bringing up the teacher prep
programs because most of us here
who are uh licensed teachers.
One class, 3 credits, an
overview I had worked in an
exceptional children's home for
a summer, and that's really
where I learned what.
Disabilities in the variety. So
I hope that we can look at that
with our teacher, and then we're
also working on requirements,
new looking at leadership
preparation, because some
people, if they're special ed
teachers or leaders and become
principals or superintendents,
they have it, but, but many
simply don't. So thanks for
bringing that up because it's
something as a committee we have
to work on.
Um
Let's see.
Um, another question I have, Mr.
Chair, is, and this is where I
think numbers and geographical
spread as you report back and
analyze on the related service
providers, a huge problem is
educational diagnosticians, as
you pointed out, and bilingual.
I think in um
I don't want to supersede
representative Baca, but
actually my friend is the
bilingual diagnostician, his
district.
Of 8000 kids, and she can't
possibly do the case so and
that's, that's a district that
has a diagnostician, and as you
pointed out, many don't. So
thank you for pointing that out,
but it would be good and then uh
as an instructional coach, um,
our SLP was in Denver.
Uh,
and the aid was in the classroom
and it's like I know that speech
and language.
Uh, professionals don't only
deal with actual pronunciation,
but it's like there's no way
that lady in Denver, you know,
is gonna be able to do some of
the things that she really
needed to be able to do. That's
another issue. So just, I'd like
to see, as you analyze the data,
the numbers, the geographical
spread and the projected hopes.
If we can get it by category.
And see which categories,
including social workers,
including which categories in
which areas um with our regional
education cooperatives. I know
some of it can be addressed, but
not all of it.
Uh, let's see.
Um
And then another issue, um,
Mr. Charon and Doctor
Cage is the alternative
licensure. We had a bill did
that pass?
The
Natalie Firosfield.
The alternative
Teachers are dealing with so
much a friend of mine who
recently became an alternative
certified teacher has to do
letters training. And then, you
know, you have inclusion, so
it's just a huge load that we
sometimes forget about what the
teacher in the classroom is
actually juggling, so I'm
concerned about that
alternative.
Uh, and then my final question.
Um, is on the special education
universal IEP electronic system.
I think we gave 6 million last
year. We're asking for 12
million. How is that being used.
And how does that relate to the
fragmented, uh, software systems
and data systems in PED if it
does relate.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Garrett, yes, you gave 6
million, not specifically for
the system, it was titled
Special Education uh initiatives
because we asked uh for a larger
amount and that's what we
received. However, in our
research and trying to get the
implementation phase done for
the um initial uh start of our
implementation of the
infrastructure, we knew it
wasn't enough, so those
initiatives of that.
6 million have to do with our
parent university, our law
conferences and those other uh
special professional
development, um, activities that
we have been performing across
the state. So that's what we're
utilizing that money for to
bring forth professional
development, um, I also in very
briefly, um, had the opportunity
to partner with Las Cruces
Public Schools, and that
superintendent has also allowed
us to provide a level of tech
assistance to overhaul and
revamp his special education
system for his whole school
district. So we are utilizing
some of that money as well to um
increase knowledge in Las Cruces
and also have Las Cruces become
a model district that we can
have other school districts and
superintendents partner with us
on the process that we took to
get them up to date.
So, Mr. Chair and Doctor T, what
is the status of the statewide
IEP electronic system.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Representative
Garrett We are currently in the
planning phase of that. I
actually, um, met on this week
earlier this week with the
people that we are the
organization that we actually
partnering with and so we're
going through layers of planning
and getting some feedback from
our executive huddle, um, they
are actually be coming down to
present to our executive huddle
that consists of state agency
leaders, and also the
secretaries of higher education.
early childhood, our current
second secretary of Education to
just overall bring about an
awareness of what it is, how we
are planning on using that and
just collaborating on what that
rollout could possibly be. So
right now we are just in the
beginning phases of that to see
how that looks and what that
looks like and what all that we
need to include within that
planning process.
Thank you. And will the ESC
folks we invited to that
meeting, and I'm thinking of
Tim.
We so not the initial one, but
we will have more opportunities
for our um organization that
we're partnering in to present,
um, and it won't just be
specifically exclusive to the
executive order, we also want to
create other opportunities for
feedback from the field. And so
when we do establish that date,
I will definitely get that over
to you all.
OK, because Mr. Chair, my
biggest concern is that we don't
set up another standalone system
that doesn't speak.
To the already fragmented
systems within the PED.
Uh department. That's my big
concern, and whether or not 12
million, are you gonna come back
for 12 million more next year.
So just super concerned about
taking the time to get it right.
So that we don't have a
More stuff to clean up later.
That's all. Thank you.
Representative block.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Doctor Cage. Thank you,
Merritt, thank you all for being
here today. A couple real quick
questions, I'll be brief, I
promise, Mr. Chairman, uh,
talking about
The appropriation for the
current office. I know it's
through executive order. We
didn't appropriate it. How are
you being currently funded.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Black, we are
currently being funded federally
and the a few um appropriations
that are made through committee,
uh, from our legislators, but
the bulk of our budget is
federal.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for that. So on this
slide here, the 2 million on the
bottom, Mr. Chairman, Doctor
Cage, is that just for
operational
Office expenses and.
Salaries, etc. Mr. Chairman. Uh,
Mr. Chair, Representative Block,
that is for staff, FTEs, that's
for salaries.
Perfect. OK, thank you, Mr.
Chairman. And I only ask that
question because I, we heard
this bill during the 2023
session in the committee that I
sit in, and I remember on the
FIR it said it had a 2-year
impact fiscal impact of $1.6
million. So I'm just wondering
what has changed to increase
that amount to 2 million just
for one fiscal year, and how do
we see that being funded in the
future since this office is, it
was a bill, the bill died, they
said, OK, we're gonna do it
anyway, put it in.
The executive order, how, how is
their stability in the office.
That's kind of my big concern
with this, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chair Representative block,
um, me coming into the office
and identifying that the number
of staff or FTEs as we call
them, it's not sufficient
capacity enough to be able to
provide the support across the
state, is which is what has
caused this increase. Uh, so
definitely identifying specific
staff for specific reasons to
support because the only way
that we're going to get better
is to be able to provide support
instead of a blanket.
Across the state so that we can
really roll our sleeves up and
get our leaders and our teachers
and our parents where they need
to be, so that we can provide
opportunities for our students
to be successful. So this would
be something that would need to
be reoccurring every year if
we're going to uh sustain the
momentum of the office and the
efforts of the office, um, to
get special education where it
needs to be.
Got it. OK, thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you, Doctor
Cage. So then new FTEs, new
folks that you're hiring, how
many new ones are you intending
to hire with this 2 million
appropriation and then uh
Yeah, I'll stop there real
quickly. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, on that question, Mr.
Chair Representative Block, I
have identified 15 FTEs to also
address uh Representative Baca's
concerned about money getting to
the LEAs on time, so, uh, some
uh FTEs are allocated for our
fiscal team, also to address
representative Garrett's concern
about having specific data. I
have two data people right now,
so to be able to provide the
level of data comprehensive.
all the way down to categorizing
it, um, I need people to be able
to do that. I have 3 monitoring
people. There's no way we can
monitor the effectiveness of
program and fiscal of our LEAs
uh without having people to do
that work. It is extremely
overwhelming, and then we also
have to have a level of people
to be able to provide the
professional development and
technical assistance needed
across the state. So a total of
15 is in that $2 million ask.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you so much, Doctor Cage
that, that helps me a little bit
with the numbers and everything.
Last question, Mr. Chairman, I
promise, uh, regarding the, I
know the bill when it was a
bill, it said that there would
be new requirements statewide
for certain uh special education
programs, and I know that there
were some concerns from school
districts and cer certain
schools that just said that that
might not necessarily work with
their framework during your
listening sessions, have you
heard a lot of that and how are
you?
addressing those concerns of
being mandated kind of a one
fits, one size fits all approach
that doesn't necessarily fit all
schools, Mr. Chairman, Doctor
Kate.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Baca, thank you for
representative block, sorry,
thank you for that question. Um,
one of the things about the
individuals with disabilities,
education Act, and the Office of
Special Education Program, those
pri priorities are mandated by
federal law, um, not necessarily
a one size fits all, but
definitely federal law. So where
we have a lot of autonomy in our
schools that are certain things
that we cannot.
have autonomy on when it relates
to our students, especially
those students with
disabilities, which is the
reason why we have so much
disparity across the state in
our uh service delivery models.
Uh, one of the things that we
have to ensure is that we are
compliant, uh, with the the
provisions and the priorities of
those federal mandates and
that's what we're trying to do
here, especially going into our
monitoring. Uh, so yes, I have
heard those things and I've
also utilize the data and also
pulled uh the federal mandates
to show them that this is not a
doctor Cage thing. This is
something that we're, we are, we
are charged with doing from the
Federal department and just
because we've got away from
doing some of it doesn't mean
that they're right or they're
wrong, but we have to get back
to doing what it is that we're
supposed to do. So definitely
not a one size fits all, but
everybody has to understand that
we
don't have the right to say we
don't do special education here,
because it's federally mandated.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I,
I agree. I don't think anyone's
saying that we shouldn't do any
special education or I don't
know if anyone's saying that
it's not a very popular
position, but thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you, Doctor Cage
for clearing that up. Appreciate
it.
Representative Madrid.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh,
thank you for joining us, Doctor
Cage. This is a very
enlightening. I'm a former uh
EA.
And everything we're talking
about was my motivation to come
into this room to try to impact
education more for uh EA's and
IAs, uh, I, I gotta say to you.
The plan you have in life is, is
a plan that needs to be
rendered, uh, fully and
completely.
Because the fact is, I would
also encourage uh this LA and
EA's and IAs need to have a
dashboard. They can be
important, compliance is to your
awareness.
That does not do anything but to
impact the end goal result,
which is making sure our
districts are following the
mandates and that is compliance.
The realization is that when we
do the right things with special
ed. I was an inclusion teacher.
When we do the right things,
they work.
They impact.
They have long-term effect in
within the community.
I am struggling and have
struggled for 6 years.
In my community, this
underserved with teachers.
So, their answer is
IAs, EAs.
Now, some of these are specially
trained for special ed.
They will take that person out
and put them in the classroom.
And sometimes, like I, I'm
dealing with a chaperone. I'm
dealing with a, a majority of
some of my lead people, 2 years,
IA's running a classroom.
And we can't sit here and, and
act like this is not impacting
the administrator. You say we're
gonna pay more to the
administration. That impact has
to return.
But we need the dashboard. So
these people like myself, who
did not fear administration.
But understood administration
for what their job was to do for
us.
And that was the way I
reciprocated many times, so you
can understand how I sat in in
many houses that ends, but the
outs is what got me to educate
my people.
And the people that I rendered
with are people that are at
risk, underserved.
And we're sitting on dollars,
not being spent sometimes to
enhance this classroom quality.
There is no doubt that an
administrator like uh uh
Representative Garrett was
talking about, they will perform
as well. But at least if you
have the support, and this is
what we're talking about,
special needs. You need more
than one sometimes, more than 2
or 3 because of the, the
severity of handicap.
And instead, they're not even
getting the training to go and,
and impact these young people.
I was put in a scenario abruptly
within a week's time.
In
And
what I was doing in special ed,
or I was doing the actual class
of uh computer science and then
we bluffly said, hey, next week
you're going into the uh special
ed and you're gonna take care of
this, um, uh, severe uh child
that has uh a high propensity
for hitting people
I left with PTSD within 2
months. And I don't blame you.
It wasn't his fault. What I
blame for everything that I
asked and requested for by law
that should have been given to
me, was not given to me.
That's the importance of a
dashboard.
The autonomy to be able to speak
your mind about the services not
being rendered because there's
no other way to make compliance
without knowing what's happening
unprofessional to our kids. When
we
sit and talk to my colleagues,
both sides of the aisle.
As a stake, we're almost the
other way.
We almost said we were special
needs.
than regular.
And we shouldn't negate either
one of them.
We have the law, the legal
responsibility as a body to take
care of these young people and
the people that take care of
them.
So I commend you, I encourage
you, and I tell you to keep
ahead of course, cause one of my
colleagues may not like to hear
the, the downside, the, the, the
little people's side, that is
all I do.
It's a fight in the voice of the
people that don't have a voice,
and they have a right to be
taken care of as well. I think
Garrett's point, we both ran
that bill to, uh, what do you
call it, to make the field that
these people from there back
into regular head, that should
be our proving grounds to being
able to say, hey, this is a
fast-paced person. Let's get him
a course. Let's get him night
school, whatever they're willing
to do.
But we're not making those
endeavors yet. So I think you,
your overall is broad and needs
compliance because we'll always
sit back here and say, well, how
are they gonna do it? And
there's no answer. It's either
PED or you.
But I think given time, I never
say get rid of people. I never
in my life have I said to get
rid of anybody here because
everybody's invested individual
teacher, EA, IA, they're vested.
So why would we Stockton, say we
gotta get rid of some driftwood.
Even driftwood still floats.
It just needs to be considered
in what direction it's floating.
If it's not in the right
direction, we have no capability
of outcome.
So,
I just wanted to make that
statement, uh, Chairman, and I
thank you for allowing me to do
so, and I look forward to
hearing the things to come in
the years. I'll be keeping, uh,
a, a watch from afar, but I
thank you for what you're doing
and addressing it. And I have
some, something to say to the
people when I get back. Thank
you. Thank you, Chairman.
Thank you. I don't have anybody
else on my list. Um, I did have
a couple questions. Um, what's
the department's guidance for
the um
Stipends for special education.
Teachers, I'm assuming it's
those that are licensed as
teachers, is that it?
Mr. Chair, um,
Could you clarify guidance?
Um
So I guess, are you giving the
stipends or suggesting that the
stipends go to those that are
special education certified.
Yes, they have to be certified
based off of the criteria for
the New Mexico Public Education
Department.
I mean
So
I mean, I obviously understand
the intent of doing that is to
fill the vacancies within
special education, um, I guess
part of the concern as well
that's been brought up a couple
times, but in different ways,
was um like inclusion.
Um, because we have um
inclusion, which I think is one
of those areas that needs to get
bolstered, um, in a big way
because so much of our inclusion
teachers who are special
education certified are busy
with the compliance side of
things, filling out paperwork,
um, making sure that there are,
um, you know, families are
contacted that students are
contacted that they're getting
um
the appropriate information from
all of that student's teachers,
um,
That
It's taking away from that
inclusion class time that
involves the class time itself,
but also the preparation side
and part of the issue, as I'm
seeing it, is that a lot of that
is falling on the general
education teacher, and we've
talked about kind of the the
lack of training that new
teachers and the continuing
continual training that regular
education teachers have on in
special education, and so when
you have
of a classroom of 1315 students
with um different IEPs, um, it
becomes that much harder to to
work with, and I see one of
these areas of providing
stipends as, you know, you had
mentioned kind of that tension,
um, and we've had this
discussion for years and in the
legislature here, um.
In the past 8 years about
whether to provide stipends, do
we put it in statute? How are we
going to do this? Um,
And I, and I see that as, as one
of those areas that if we're not
really starting to empower
general education teachers, um,
in being confident in providing
those very necessary services to
our students in that capacity,
while also relieving that
workload, um, and I know a lot
of it's not state, but federal
requirements, um,
As being a continual point of
tension. Um,
As, as far as providing stipends
to, to exclusively special
education educators. Um, and I,
I guess.
My other question is around um
bills. Um, do you all have
anything besides, um, budgetary
requests in terms of policy
legislation that you all are
looking at.
Mr. Chair, thank you for your
comments, and I'm sure it's one
thing that has shown through
from me today is the passion
about the work that I do. Um, I
too suffered with everything
that you're saying, so, um, it
is not foreign to me, being a
special education teacher or
regular education teacher,
inclusion teacher, instruction
coach, and master teacher went
through all the ranks, right,
have seen it from all different
levels, um, and before this
position being a special
education, uh.
director at the EEA, um, so to
answer your question, which I
think leads to how are we going
to relieve some of the work on
our teachers, um, definitely,
uh, an old point of contention,
as you said, um, earlier, but
for me it's being able to
understand what the work is
because oftentimes we work
harder because we don't
understand what the work is also
being able to identify.
that special education
classrooms sometimes have to
have 5 adults inside of that
special education classroom to
be able to uh remedy uh the
level of work. So it's going to
be a huge undertaking from the
state level to be able to train
and bring forth that knowledge
to our executive level
leadership at the school
districts, um, and I'm talking
about some superintendents board
members, um, building level.
administrator, special education
directors. These are the people
that actually run our school
districts, and they actually
interpret what it is that we
send down from the state level,
um, and actually disseminate
that upon those players with
within the school, those
teachers, whether they're
inclusion or regulate it or uh
special education, um, so that's
definitely a part of everything
that we're doing and trying to
do, um, for me it has been a
huge lift. I have to be honest
with you.
Um, because we have a lot of
different mindsets across the
state and because we've always
done it this way, we want to
continue to do it that way. So I
fight every single day on many
levels to be able to bring the
information like representative
Madrid said to be able to hold
people accountable, to be able
to bring compliance measures in,
and this is where I'm gonna call
on you guys for support, um,
because there has to be a
general understanding that in
order to create a workforce
where we sustain the teachers
that
we need. We all have to come to
an agreement of how to make
those things happen, and
It definitely does not just fall
on one body. Also with the, the
point of tension as you, as you
talked about with the uh pay
differentials, that was one of
the things that I shared with
you that I learned. We have to
have clearer language in the
bills that we put forth because
somebody is always going to
interpret something different or
look at it in a manner of how to
approach it or how to address it
or who's included and who's not
included. Um, so thank you so
much.
For uh your comments and also
your question, uh, Mr. Chair.
Yeah, thank you for that. I
guess, um,
So
I guess, are there any specific
bills or areas, po, um,
places where, where you all are
looking into.
Sorry, Mr. Chair. Um, we are
currently working on some bills
and I do have our uh policy
assistant secretary here, um,
that could possibly speak to
that. Uh, we have been working
on some things, so can he come
forth with your position, with
your permission.
And Mr. Chairman and members of
the committee, excuse me.
We are working on a legislative
proposal, but
Um, we don't really have much to
share in that area at the
moment, we are working with the
governor's office and hope to
soon have something to be able
to talk with you about.
See something on that
The Representative Garrett, Mr.
Chair, um, Dark cage, you
weren't here because this was
before your time, but the
special ed proposal was dropped.
Not before the set. If we didn't
have any clue about it. It just
came. So, so Mr. Froser, just a
reminder that
The education committees don't
like to get things when the
session starts because then we
have no in-depth discussion or
preparation. So just a heads up.
Thank you. Thank you.
Yeah, thank you, Representative
Garrett because that's what I
was going to bring up. I mean,
that's the whole point of our
interim process, and we had a
presentation yesterday, um,
about the importance of
interconnectedness and
collaboration between the
departments and Dr. Kage you
just spoke about it, um, that we
need it from, from both sides of
our equation, um, in order to,
to move forward because for us,
this is when we're um doing our
preparation work and we're able
to have our staff really delve
into it.
And, and, and talk with the
various stakeholders on
legislation so that when we come
into session, we're making um
the best informed decisions
possible. We can have an
understanding that the policy
that we are working on in the
budget considerations that we're
working on and passing are
things that the department is
going to be able to carry out,
um, in return. So, so that would
be something that certainly like
as, as the chair of the standing
Committee would like to have.
Before the session starts,
preferably by December, so that
we can really have our LESC team
really um delve into it and we
can provide our comments, um,
ahead of time, but
representative.
Thank you, thank you, um, um.
Mr. Chair, and, and thank you,
uh, Doctor Cage. I've, I've been
a big fan of yours ever since I
met you, but my takeaway is that
we need to have uh 23 million in
recurring funding.
Uh, to operate special education
in this state, uh, to implement
this plan, is that correct?
State money.
Mr. Cha and Representative, if I
may, yes, to, to implement the
plan, that is what the agency is
requesting.
That was my question. And I
guess the follow-up question is
how much do we get in matching
federal funds, uh, from the feds
to implement this program.
What's the ratio there?
Mr. Chair, um, representative.
Herrera.
The money we receive from our
federal is uh not matching. It
is based off of our student
enrollment in our annual
determination, uh, but on my
last, um,
And I, the, the name of the uh
the grant is actually escaping
me, uh, but, uh, we receive
about 109 million.
So we're talking about really
the state putting in 24 million
to the fits 109 million is what
we're talking about to implement
this plan. Well, um,
Thank you for that. That's, I
like to start with the money.
So, uh, and figure that out and
um and I'm very grateful to you
and all of your staff.
Uh, uh, this is just really
challenging work. We understand
that.
We support you and um thank you
for this presentation. And Mr.
Chair and Representative, if I
may, now, I think you're
original question was, if this
is recurring funding, it is not
all recurring funding. The 12
million for the statewide IEP,
um, there would be follow-up
expenses as part of the system,
but that would not be a
recurring 12 million. And as
well, the foreman for special
education initiatives, that
number is like that is below the
line non-recurring amount. And
so that
We may see that change from year
to year, but I also wanted to
point out that, that you all
have a much more significant
investment that goes directly to
the LEA as uh a part of the SCG
formula or special education as
well.
Thank you. All right. Thank you
all for being here with us this
morning. Thank you.
Right.
Right, Mark, Mr. Romero, please.
All right. Good morning, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
um, hope you're all having a
wonderful day.
Let me please introduce myself,
Mark Motoya. I serve as one of
your senior policy analysts, and
I am joined today by Miss Irish
Romero, the executive director
of the public school facility
Authority.
Um, we're gonna go ahead and
start with a brief overview of
Capital Outlay in the state of
New Mexico. Uh, I know some of
you are very familiar with the
concepts that can be covering,
especially those that serve on
biscuti or attend that
regularly. Uh, I'll try and be
concise. I could talk about this
all day and really bore your
tears, I'll try not to do that
this morning.
So let's go ahead and start with
a brief background of Capa and,
um, stay in Mexico for public
schools, um, prior to the Zuni
lawsuit, which was filed in 1998
and the formation of the public
school Ca Council, the PSCOC
districts were really left to
their own devices to raise funds
to support facilities and the
repair and maintenance of those
facilities in their communities.
They uh really relied on the
district's ability to generate
local funding through uh items
such as general obligation bonds
or directed provisions from
legislators.
This uh posed two issues for
school districts and trying to
pay for their facilities.
One was a Capitol schools, I'm
sorry, capital funding for
schools was constrained to a
district's taxable land value.
Bonding capacity and was
providing a significant
advantage for property rich
districts.
Another item that was uh in play
here was districts unable to
raise sufficient property taxes
or secure direct appropriations
or unable to find necessary
repairs or replacements in their
communities.
This only lawsuit? I know you're
all very aware of this, but it's
a brief recap of how that plays
into capital outlay for schools
in New Mexico. Again, 1998 ZUY
Public School District sued the
state of New Mexico.
The plaintiffs claim that um
districts with extensive public
lands or small tax base cannot
raise the funds needed in their
communities to support
facilities.
On the other hand, schools with
the ability to raise taxes could
build extravagant facilities.
Later on, Gelt McKinley and
Grant Cibula County Schools
joined that lawsuit in 1999, the
court found in favor of the
plaintiffs, and quote, uh, and
ask or ordered the state to
establish and implement a
uniform funding system for
capital improvements and for
correcting past inequities.
In New Mexico, public school, a
couple of family.
Apologize. In New Mexico,
School capital funding is shared
between the state and the local
districts.
The state provides funds to two
methods, one based on local
property taxes, and the other
based on state adequacy
standards.
Iss raised funds via bonds,
property levies, investments or
property sales.
These can find funding efforts
to support facilities and need
for repairs in those districts
throughout the state.
1975, the public school
Capitality Act was enacted.
Uh, point out to kind of
revisions to that in 1999, based
on the findings of the Zin
lawsuit, um, they ruled for a
more equitable facility funding.
And in 2003, the act shifted
more towards the standards-based
funding methodology.
The public school Capital
Improvements Act, also known as
SP 9 or the 2 mil levy allows 2
mills to be levied by a school
district for up to 6 years with
voter approval.
uh participating districts are
guaranteed a minimum level of
funding with state covering any
shortfall.
I will avoid going into
specifics here for the the
The, um, you know, effort of
time, just of time. I will also
not read all the uses of
espionage funds, but on slide 8,
you'll see those outlined. I
will make one point here. Um,
these funds can also be used for
digital initiatives, um, such as
copper lines, fiber optics,
telecommunication,
telecommunication equipment.
The public school Buildings Act,
also known as HB 33, allows
districts to raise up to 10
millions of property taxes for
schools. Tax rate is valid for 6
years with voter approval and
can be it can be combined with
SB 9 efforts.
Not to exceed 15 mLs.
Again, here I did provide a
brief outline of the uses of HB
33. Again, additional uses can
be um items to support
telecommunications and digital
efforts such as satellite uh
fiber optic, and other items.
General obligation bonds, also
known as geo bonds. These are
backed by ad of their own
property taxes. It can be used
to issue debt by districts and
raise funds needed for their
school facilities. They do
require voter approval.
Education technology notes, also
known as Ed technoes, these were
enabled with the education
technology equipment Act in
1997. It does follow in 1996
amendment to the New Mexico
Constitution.
These are also backed by a
poverty taxes similar to geo
bonds, unlike uh geo bonds, they
do not require voter approval.
And they mostly support needs
for technology such as
infrastructure, computers,
software, maintenance leases,
and so on.
Also with this uh districts are
able to issue debt just like geo
bonds to support those. And I'm
sure you're well aware of this.
directed legislative
appropriations, direct
legislative preparations are a
source of capital funding
allocated by legislators for
specific school districts and
their projects, funding sources
include the general fund, er tax
bonds, or statewide geo bonds.
Federal impact aid. This is one
representation of Pilts or
payment in lieu of taxes, that
will impact aid our funds that
are provided to districts that
are unable to raise the
necessary property taxes on land
in their community, either by
the presence of a military base.
and the land that those service
members and their families
reside and work on, or tribal
entities in the land that they
reside on. Um, this does
support, uh, schools with the
ability to raise taxes with the
presence of those land.
And it supports children living
on federal property or tribal
land, or children with parents
working on federal property or
tribal land.
Who attend schools in those
districts.
Offsets right off the bat,
offsets are no longer in place,
but let me give you a brief
history of the purpose and why
they are no longer in place in
2003, the domeso legislature
introduced offsets, which
reduced the state's portion of
their kind of share in building
facilities, and it was offset by
the amounts that uh school
districts could raise some other
means, including federal impact
aid.
Um, in 2023 Senate Bill 131
eliminated offsets, the PACOC
staffed by PSFA, uh, made this
change to their, to ensure
equitable school funding. I
think the goal there was to not
Penalized schools who are able
to raise funds for other needs
and reduce state's full support
of efforts in the communities to
build the adequate facilities
with this, I'm going to briefly
pause. I'll return to this, but
I'm gonna pass it over to Miss
Irish Romero to cover PSFA and
the work they do. And then we'll
talk about the collaborative
effort and the work that we've
done in the interim. And some of
the legislative items that we'll
be bringing to you in December.
But with that, let me pass it to
Miss Romero.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, uh, again, my
name is Iris Romero. I want to,
uh, uh, give you the insight
that I've been the executive
director now for about 10
months. So it's been a great
transition. It's been exciting
to be part of this, uh, uh,
great department, great
initiative, and um I look
forward to uh continued service,
um, getting our school districts
what they need and it pertains
to capital outlay.
Um, I want to go over the agenda
real quick and forgive me,
there's no page number, so I'll
work with Mark to keep us on
track on where I'm at, um,
briefly, it's this is gonna be a
quick presentation. I want to um
mention some uh of the PSCOC
members. We have 3 new members,
um, on that on that council at
this time, so I want to
introduce them. I wanna, uh,
introduce you to the
applications that we received in
this new funding cycle that
started in July and closed in
September of this year.
As well as some construction
phase awards, uh, that came on
the out of cycle, um, this
fiscal year.
On your next slide, these are
the members of the public school
Capitol Outlay Council, as you
know, Chagian has been there
about 17 years, and he's the
seasoned member of of the
council, um, we have Mr. John
Senna, who is your
representative there on the
council, um, we have Charles
Sylvie.
Uh, representing legislative
finance Committee.
Mariana Padilla came from um the
governor's office, and now she's
a representative for the public
education department.
Clay Bailey has been on the
council, um, representing
construction and industries
division, Miss Ashley Leach,
director of Department of
Finance Administration.
Stewart Ingham is uh
representing the PEC.
Uh, our new, another new member
is Shana Kapier. She replaced
Raoul Bursaga on the Legislative
council Services representative,
and now, um, from the governor's
office, uh, Miss Sarah
Mickelson, um, from ECECD, which
is a great uh person to have on
the council to help us through
the pre-K, um, that come
through, um, our, uh our office.
Um, before I get into the uh
applications received. I just
want to give you a quick
reminder of the current programs
that we, um, currently
facilitate. We have the
standards-based programs, which
is the school building and
replacement, renovation or
additions. We have the systems
space which is building systems
replacement or upgrades. We have
pre-k, we have teacher housing,
lease assistance, and the
facility's master planning
assistance. So those are our
major uh program.
programs that we, um, administer
within PSFA.
So I want to talk about now the
applications that have come
forth, um, which the application
cycle started in July, um, a
quick overview, uh, our
Application cycle this year was
based on from a July to
September. We're having a 2
cycle, 2 cycles this year. In
the past, it was kind of open
season where they can apply on a
monthly basis. Um, that wasn't
efficient, um, and so the
council approved us to go on to
a a main cycle, which again
opened in July, ended in
September, and these particular
uh applications are going to be
heard now in December. There
will be potential
For a second cycle starting in
January and going through um
January, February, March, at the
end of March, April-ish, and
then be uh heard in uh June of
fiscal year 25.
So as you see here, um, these
are the standards-based awards,
that will be heard in December.
We have cliff combined school
out of silver. They're looking
for a replacement school.
We have a consolidation uh
request from Bluefield, which
would be combining these three
into a consolidation.
We have real Rancho who is
requesting renovations and
upgrades for their Lincoln
Middle School and Rio Rancho
High School with addition
upgrades and um additional
upgrades and additions. Keeping
in mind the standards base, uh,
we opened it up for the top 100
from our fad, um.
System or ranking system, so the
top 100 could apply during this
cycle.
Our next slide.
Is our systems based.
This is where we opened it up
for the top 300. And this
includes exterior and the
exterior envelope, mechanical,
electrical, plumbing, HVAC and
those types of assistance. So as
you can see here, these are the
ones that um will be requesting
funding in December. I won't go
through each of them, but if you
have any questions, we can, um,
I can take those.
Our next slide where we are, we
have pre-K.
This is where Rear Rancho was
coming for assistance with a
cafeteria and kitchen, uh, at
their shining star preschool, as
well as renovate their puesta
del Sol or um or their pre-K. I
believe the cafeteria and the
kitchen request is based on the
um whole day.
mandate that I believe the ECCD
is coming forward with.
And then next slide we have our
teacher housing. Currently we
have our teacher housing pilot
program. And these two districts
are coming forward with a
request for a teacher housing.
Uh, next, I want to talk about
the
When these projects are awarded,
they come and get awarded in two
phases. Uh, one is going to be
at the design phase. They come
and get their award for design
and then anywhere between 12 to
18 months later, they come for
phase 2 request, which is the
construction-based funding. This
here are going to be the
construction phase fundings of
these um particular awards.
These are going to be
standards-based projects. We
have Gadsden Middle School with
a full school replacement.
Um, in 2021, they were awarded
their feasibility study.
And in 22, they got approved for
the design of um replacing their
school and now they got awarded
their construction phase
funding.
We also have Albuquerque Sign
Language Academy, where they
have their new charter school
facility, and we were able to,
or the PSCOC was able to support
them, uh, with their
construction phase, uh award.
Your next slide, you'll see um
Some other ones, we have 2 and
Rosa who has a systems based
project that came for their 2nd
phase of that systems for their
HVAC replacement.
Um, we have Zuni who came for an
early work package for their
teacher housing.
We have Portalis High School,
who came for their construction
phase funding for their roof
replacement. Your next slide, we
have rat tone.
Coming for their award language
change, which was to uh do a
combination school.
In Hobbs, their new middle
school, they got an award
language change, which is the
design phase for a new facility.
Keep in mind we have 2 hubs,
middle schools here on, on your
slide. There was a feasibility
study done within Hobbs to
determine uh whether or not they
needed an additional middle uh
middle school, um, if they had
capacity at their current middle
school, so, um, this was done
around
Um, basically you're 22, and
based on that, um, feasibility
study, it was determined that a
new middle school was needed as
well as the replacement of
Heiser Middle School.
Uh, we also have Ellen Maordo
chaparral Middle School, who
came, um, they came forward to
request to do a redesign. The
state is not participating in
that redesign, except for the
balance that they had on the
initial design of that facility.
So they um are getting ready to
create or design their facility,
and we will see the construction
phase funding coming at a later
date.
And finally we have uh central
Gallup Central High School. This
is a high school that is uh
focused around CTE.
And so, um, they were awarded
their design phase funding to
get started on that. And with
that, I'm gonna send it over to
uh Mr. Montoya.
Thank you, Iris. Let me go ahead
and pull the slides back up.
All right, so in New Mexico, we
have um the teachers did a lot
of work to really address
equitability and provide the
facilities that are needed
throughout the state. A lot of
that work was done after Zuni,
um, 1999, um, court hearings and
their findings. Um, but
Like any great system, it does
need to be reviewed, assessed,
and maintained.
Um, just like this building,
beautiful building, needed to
check things, keep maintenance
up as we go along, right? So
what I'm gonna talk about now is
the collaborative work that
legislative Finance Committee,
that education Study Committee,
and PSFA has done to really look
at those issues and to kind of
come up with a plan to address
them and move forward and
continue to make good work, uh,
in this state. Uh, during the
2024 interim, um, we did look at
the formula.
Some items that have been
recognized before, but we did a
little deeper dive into it and
to see what's actually needed.
Two things that came up to the
top, um, as far as topics was
affordability, rising
construction costs have made it
harder for districts to cover
their share of their projects
and require greater state
support.
Waivers, the PSCOC, the public
school Caity Council, is
granting more waivers or
reductions to their local match,
suggesting that there may be
some items that we need to look
at with that form a little
deeper.
Let me talk about some of the
things that we found with the
formula. One assumption that the
formula makes is that schools
will take full advantage of SB 9
and partial advantage of 8
partial advantage of HB 33.
However, what we found is that
many schools don't take
advantage of HB 33 and sometimes
not even SB 9.
Next assumption that the
statewide adequacy standards
accurately reflect how much
square footage the school needs.
In reality, minimum adequacy
standards cannot be used to
construct a functional facility,
but are still used in
calculating that district's
ability to pay for a project.
per square foot. The assumption
is it costs $307.47 per square
foot to replace a school.
However, we've seen recent
conjunction costs rise well
above $307. We've seen them, we
put 600 $700 per square foot.
Schools will be replaced over 45
year period. That's the
assumption the formula makes.
However, schools don't plan that
way. Many schools build their
districts all at once.
Or as needed.
So one item we dove into along
with great effort from PSFA
staff is the waiver criteria.
We noticed that the waiver
criteria might be overly
prohibitive and not grant the
access needed by some districts
for a reduced waiver match. If
you look at my diagram here on
page 18 of your slide deck.
You'll see that in waiver
criteria B, we're looking to
reduce um that schools have
greater than 70% of free reduced
lunch.
And we're also looking to get
rid of the, the requirement that
local match is greater than 50%.
And you'll see wave criteria
see, we're looking to get rid of
that completely.
Let me talk a little bit about
temporary mass reductions, what
was provided by SB 131 during
the 2023 session. What it did is
it reduced local match, um, for
years. FY 23 or FY 26 when it
will sunset.
Some district's local match was
reduced from 33% to 50, 50%
based on their size and their
membership numbers.
The reduced local match again
will sunset and FY 26.
At which point the calculation
will revert to the base formula
2, which is the version we're
using right now, the stay and
local match.
Without an extension, um, these,
they're match may increase and
again be in a position where
these communities cannot support
the districts, uh, facility
needs.
So during our presentations and
our work, um, to Piscuti or
Piscuti.
We presented a number of options
that could be taken to move
forward.
Option one, do nothing.
We provided the effects of doing
nothing to be good.
1, SP1 is still in place,
knowing that it's gonna sunset.
But we also realize that there
are issues, as I mentioned, with
the State formal that we will
not be addressing.
We would be pretty much kicking
the can down the road for
another day.
Option 2
Adjust some of the items that I
identified here in the formula
to kind of make it work for now.
But realizing that there are
additional items that need to be
identified, worked out, and
there is a deeper dive needed
into the state local match
formula.
Option 3, as we mentioned here,
clean up the waiver criteria and
extend SP 131.
Again
Could be considered as a
band-aid fix and kicking the can
down the road a little bit.
We did finally recommend is
option 3A, which is we still
need to clean up waiver
criteria, still needed, and we
still need to extend SP 131.
To help districts support their
facilities, help them meet the
needs in their communities.
However,
The A part is allowing us time
to really dive into the formula
and find suitable solutions and
fixes for items that we are
identifying and identify other
items that we have not quite
dove into and really studied the
effects of.
As you can imagine, it's good if
did choose option 3A.
To clean up waiver criteria to
allow districts that need
waivers access to that ability
and allow them to move forward
with the projects that are
desperately needed in their
communities, and to extend SP
131, which temporarily reduces
their state local match.
What this does is not only helps
the districts in the meantime,
but it gives staff the ability
to work, gives us time to look
at this a little more
effectively and come up with a
solution that could work. Again,
I do want to note that as a
great system, it's not static.
This will need continuous review
and work throughout the life of
our capital LA system. But
This is a preview of what I'll
be bringing to you in December.
I'll be bringing, bringing um a
brief, um, I'm sorry, a draft
bill and deeper analysis to
study the effects of what we're
proposing. Um, with that,
Ms. Romero and I will stand for
any questions or comments
you don't mind, I, what I do
wanna also mention is um Pipe
boots on the ground.
And we hear.
Where the struggles are. We hear
the frustration.
And we share in those struggles
with them and so I, I'd like to
really thank my staff and, and,
um
For us taking a lot of a more
proactive approach.
We know what could be done, such
as the, the waiver criteria of
how it can impact positively
impact, um, these, these school
districts. Is it the fix, as Mr.
Mataria says, no, it's not, but
it is something we can do right
now to get them eligible to come
to the table for these local
match reductions. And so, um,
yeah, we, we, we just, I just
wanted to share that that we we
share their sentiment, we hear
them, and so uh we're able to
work with our partners.
the LFC LESC to be able to be
here today and at Macuda with
draft legislation to get this
going for this, for this
session.
Right. And with that point, I
know I said I was done, but I
lied. Um.
I really do want to commend PSA
staff. They are the boots on the
ground, as Mr Senna said in his
comments, we're trying not to
work in a vacuum in our offices,
we're trying to work with the
people that are doing the work,
that know the details are in
working in the weeds, when we
come up with these solutions to
see if they will work into help
us realize anything that we're
overlooking. So again, thank you
to you and your staff.
All right, Representative Baca.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for your, uh,
presentation.
Uh, I'm gonna be just kind of
brief and direct, so I don't,
um, because this is more concern
because many of our schools and
school districts.
are
serving kids and inadequate
facilities, aging facilities,
OK?
Um
Can, uh, Mr. Chairman, what
besides the waiver, OK?
Um, what other supports
have been or are there in place
for schools and especially
schools that are seen.
A lot of growth.
Yeah, I think, um, Mr. Chair,
memberAA representative Baca. I,
I think that's a main focus of
our work is we want to see what
we want to do essentially uh
affordability study, right? We
want to really see what
districts can do to raise their
own cash, and to make it more
effective statewise as to what
we need to do to support those
projects. Um, there's some items
that I did mention here, but
it's really also working with
those districts to understand
the process. A lot of districts
don't understand.
the process to go to the PSCOC,
right? It can um seem
complicated. Some of them have
never gone to raise bonds. Some
of them have never done that
work. Some of them don't realize
the capabilities they have. I
think that's one effort that
PSFA and their staff has noted,
they're doing work to do that
outreach to, to say, hey, you're
on, you're on the list. You
qualify for help from the PSCOC.
This is what can be done, right?
Um, but
Since Irish says the boots on
the ground and she knows more
than me. I want to pass over to
her to really talk about some of
the specifics. Mr. Chair,
Representative Baca, um, just to
reiterate, yes, we are um
mentoring these districts, uh,
every time the ranking comes
out, we reach out to them.
You're on this list. Um, these
are the things that need to be
done. Uh, you don't have a bond
advisor, maybe, uh, you should
start looking into getting a
bond advisor. These are the
efforts that need to happen in
order for you to be able to come
to the PSCOC.
Then they do come.
Again, the staff, um, Mrs. Elise
Ramos, Mr. Parks, mentored them
to get ready to come to the
PSCOC.
Um, the other thing is, as Mr.
Matoya said.
Being proactive. We see where we
can help immediately. That is
Extending 131, that is removing
obstacles out of the waiver
criteria.
We understand that the funding
formula is so robust.
That we need additional
studying, we need to get it done
right. And we can't keep moving
bits and pieces out of the
formula.
Um
And so, yeah, we're definitely
being proactive in in helping
them uh to be able to qualify
for.
And then Mr. uh Chair
representative, I think one of I
I I want to focus on is they're
out in the field, they're
talking to districts, they
realized the ever changing
environment and the
Needs that change, right. So one
thing that they are doing is
they're looking at their
adequacy standards, their APG,
their advocacy planning guide,
to see if it's in line to see if
it's really capturing, you know,
if a school can be built based
on those standards, and if it's
accounting for the, the needs
that are constantly changing the
communities. I think that's
another item that I want to
point out. They're not stuck.
They're not static. They're
trying to respond and they're
trying to do their best to meet
the needs that are out there,
members of representative Baca.
I'm glad he brought that up. We
are looking to
have a new updated set of
adequate adequacy standards,
hopefully around January of this
coming.
Yeah.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you. Let, let me just kind
of, my school district law
school and school district has a
very good relationship with PSFA
and PCOC. OK, so please
understand that, but um,
The, the question really is
One of the challenges where,
where we have some
difficulty is when we have
systems needs, roofing, air
conditioning.
When
completed actually affect the
ranking, and so many districts.
are in that very um difficult
spot between making improvements
to existing buildings, and then
with the potential of losing.
Their place on the land or on
the in the in the list.
Um, Mr. Chairman, uh,
And uh Mr. Merrill, the other
big question or actually the
thing that you brought up and
highlighted was actually this
cost per square foot.
Um, it's when we talk about 300,
we've seen some requests that
have come in about $1000 per
square foot.
And what that does for many
school districts is that when
they initially went out there
for their design monies, and by
the time that it takes 4 to 6
years from
The approval to actually getting
schools built.
The increase in costs of
construction materials.
Is creating another gap.
Um, so that's something that we
need to look at it and get a
handle on. There's, I, I don't
know why we're seeing
construction.
costs
That have tripled and 5 years.
Um, Mr. Chairman,
Um
And the panel, uh, Mr. Montoya.
What is the outstanding balance
that we have of the awards to
school districts. In other
words, how much money has been
Awarded
And how much is still out there
and then how much has been
reverted. Do you guys have any
idea about that?
Mr. Chair Representative Baca.
So
We have currently about for
fiscal year 25, about 325
million uncommitted.
I know there is word that
there's a lot more money out
there, which um it there it is
true, there is in our bonds
probably about a billion
dollars, but with that being
said, that doesn't reflect the
awards, the projects that have
been awarded. So the uncommitted
currently, again, this is a a
living document our financial
plan is about 300 million. That
is available for other projects.
Um, I could definitely get back
with you with our financial.
a plan and give you exactly how
much has been awarded again
would have to have a timeline as
to from when to when do you want
this data from, of what's been
awarded.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh,
really, my point was to be is
that many districts may have
received an award because, but
due to lack of funding, local
match, lack of bonding capacity,
those projects are not being
completed, and that's really
what I wanted.
Um, to highlight, Mr. Matoy, did
you want to comment on that?
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Baca, no, I think you make a
great point, and that's actually
a topic that's come up at PSCOC
a few times, and I mean, most
recently, um Miss uh Romero and
her staff have come up with a
way to kind of establish a good
faith means, right? Um, before
there was these hard limits of
you have to raise this much
money.
In order to qualify for our
funding also effective waivers.
I think they're they're aware of
these issues as well. And
they're, they're really digging
deep to trying to address in to
see how they can really help
districts. I think one thing
since the day I met Mr. Merrill
and her staff, they're about
making projects work. They, they
want to, to work on behalf of
those districts and do what they
can, whether it's through
advisement, support, making
their policies work for
districts. Um, but no, I, I
appreciate you bringing
that point up and, you know,
that's something that it does
need to be considered.
And, and thank you, Mr.
Chairman, in my last uh comment
is from my colleagues here.
When we're looking at surpluses,
when we're looking at monies
that are available.
There's been a lot of money that
we've been, has been requested
for different departments uh in
different areas, um.
And I do think that this
committee and others need to
make recommendations about
making an investment in our
facilities for our students.
Um, and I think that's an
investment as we're saying that
we're looking at the
Expected us uh usage is 45
years.
The monies that we have now.
In making an investment in
schools long going to, you know,
be in existence after we're
gone, so I do think that
investing in our schools and our
schools facilities for our
students. We talk about future
money or we talk about
investment now return on
investment that will be in place
for years and years, so, as my
colleagues, I think we do need
to take a hard look at that and
making and trying to help fix
this problem of our students
being in facilities that are not
meeting their needs and their
educational.
learning environment. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Represent a veteran. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you both for
your presentation. I'm curious,
how long does it take for a
school, uh, um, from the, when
they request the design to
completion. What's what's the
time frame on that?
Mr. Chair, Representative
Hereta, I can take anywhere
between.
Uh, 4 to 5 years, you know.
When I first reviewed this
proposal, I, I have not been a
great fan of this whole process
for years. I, I, I
I think it was set up to make
you guys the honest brokers for
schools that were, you know.
Having problems building and
getting good contractors and and
I I get what, what it came
about, but I, you know, I, and I
know you're proposing
legislation to kind of fix it at
the edges, but I, I, I really
kind of think you need kind of
torethink the whole thing. I
mean, I, I build an office
building. It was only 8000
square feet, but that's probably
or 10,000 square feet, but we
did it on time.
Under budget within a year
period. That was from breaking
ground.
To moving in.
So
I don't it 5 years is just too
long.
It's just too long for
everybody.
And, um, and prices escalate in
that time, you don't know what's
gonna happen, so.
I've never
I, I, I, I've looked at this
formula and I just kind of
backed away and said this is
above my pay grade, you know, I
know how to build a building,
but I just wouldn't even know
how to navigate the system, and
it really penalizes schools.
In declining enrollments.
That's what it really penalizes,
and you know, there's suggestion
that first you have to um.
Uh
You know, close down a.
Uh, a, a low enrollment school.
Well, that'll kill us
superintendent, you know, just
take that one to the bank. You
close down a local rural school
in a rural community.
That superintendent's job is
probably gone in within the
year.
So, so we have, you know,
political problems at the local
level and we have declining
enrollments in rural schools,
and then we have some schools
that are just going, you know,
they, they, they can't find
enough desks or classrooms to
keep the kids that they have
coming in, and we take 5 years
as a state to respond.
Um, so I
You know, I will.
I will support whatever you guys
do, but I think the whole thing
is kind of a mess.
And, and I'd like to see
legislation from you.
You know, that I hear the
complaints, you hear the
complaints, we all know the
system doesn't work. What if
you, what if you were to just
build a whole new system. That's
what I'm interested in. And, and
I'll shut up there. I, you know,
it's, it's enough, but you get
my point.
Yeah, so that's what I have to
say, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair
Representative
we're having um some preliminary
conversations, I, I would say,
um, you know, the, the
interesting thing about, I think
the system is that it was built
to address, obviously the
lawsuit and the idea that some
districts had the the capacity
to build their own schools and
others didn't, right? Similar to
the way that we've talked about
our, our school funding formula.
Um, the interesting thing about
it is that we've had to make
tweaks to that system as our
budget picture as a state
changes, right, in times of lean
requirements get tighter, as we
have more money and people
weren't coming because they're
requirements were so tight, we
loosened those requirements and
then we got a flood of projects
to the point where I think it's
actually driving the cost to to
representative Ivaca's point
where we don't have enough of
the workforce and the demand
exceeds the supply there.
But to your larger point, I
think part of this is is maybe
uh it's time to sort of
reevaluate.
Um, what is the point of the
program? And then what is the
best way to go about thinking
about that in a, in a long term
strategic way, and I think the
You know, Iris and her staff are
looking at strategic planning as
a as an agency, but I would, I
would argue that the, the
council probably needs to start
thinking about strategic
planning.
For capital in public schools as
a whole. So I, I would just say
that you're, you're
In line with a lot of the
conversations that a few of us
are starting to have on the
council, and we'll continue to,
to work toward and hopefully
inform that process that staff
is looking at the formula
itself, so that the formula
serves that larger vision.
Thank you, thank you for that,
uh, Mr. Chair and, uh, Mr. Senna
and Iris, I'm, I'm curious, uh,
of your reaction to my
statement.
Mr. Chair, Representative Perea.
We, I feel you. I agree
wholeheartedly and, um, as Mr.
Sanna says, we've already had
those conversations of
Possibly bringing somebody in a
consultant to help us just
review the formula and do we
have to start from scratch?
And I love the idea of what Mr.
Sala says is looking at it at a
higher level, uh statewide
level, not just the formula. So
I agree wholeheartedly, and
we've already started those
conversations. And um I guess,
Mr. Chair and um presenters
said, I'd like to also add that.
Uh, we have to remember that 2/3
of our superintendents are new
this year.
You know, so
If this process takes 5 years.
I'm gonna tell you no new
superintendent who's just trying
to get a handle on their budget,
figure out how they do a board
and figure out what their board
needs is gonna start this
process because it is too
complex. It is just too hard.
So, so, so, you know, small
schools that really need these
services, they're not gonna
tackle them and, and, and when I
look at the list,
When I look at the list, I can
almost name the superintendents
behind these uh projects.
Right? They're probably the best
in the state and they've been
there a while, and they have,
you know, they have, they have
good people. They have good
people and they have continuity.
So when we don't have
continuity, you know, and that,
that, that isn't on you, but it
is, it is.
It is in keeping with how we
look at systems, management,
and, and, uh, I worry about that
too, and then when we have a a
charter school getting 34
million.
You know, that's uh
That's kind of eye opening.
When the the state or the
legislature will have no
control.
Over that school at all.
And it's a private group of
citizens that will run that
school. So there, I think we
have a lot to consider and a lot
to do, and, and I think you
ought to.
I
I don't know if anybody studied
the way other states are doing
it and who does the best job in
uh uh uh.
Um, Mark, if you've done that,
I'd like to hear something about
that.
Oh, Mr. Chair, representative.
Yes, I've done some work. There
are many different forms of uh a
system. Some of them don't have
any system, they really rely on
the district's ability, right?
But they all to say who's doing
it the best, I think they all
realize that they don't quite
have it figured out. I think a
lot of folks look to us, uh, I
think, and it's a source of
pride, even though we know that
we need to fix what we're doing.
But a lot of, a lot of people
are still trying to figure it
out. And I think the point, the
point you made earlier about
this kind of fixing things
around the edges, you're
absolutely right. Um, but I
think what you, what, the way I
see it.
Because we're allowing districts
to continue with their projects.
In the meantime, while we figure
it out, while we do the deep
dive that you're talking about,
because we realize that we do
need to do a deep dive and
really tackle the the formula in
the system as a whole. Um, so I,
I'm nodding with you and pure um
Agreement.
Mr. Chair, um, Representative
Hereda, as it pertains to the
process. We've gotten um so much
better, I wanna say as we do a
lot of outreach. We understand
the uh turnover and
superintendents and we do a ton
of outreach, presentations at a
lot of events. We um, go
directly to the school
districts, uh, especially when
the ranking comes out, letting
them know you qualify and we
mentor them.
It's best that we can, given our
limited staff to show them how
this process works. And we've
even streamlined our processes
to make it a little easier for
them to come for funding.
Uh, Mr. Chair, and, um, I was, I
know you guys. I know you guys
really reach out and I'm just
saying, you know, we have a high
school that I think is 60 years
old, because we have declining
enrollment.
We, I mean, it's a mess. HVAC,
nothing works.
Uh, it's a continual problem. I
dump Capi Alley because that's
the only way they can get money
to fix it.
And, you know, I
It's another problem. I can't
capital outlay my way out of,
but, you know, that's, that's
what we have to do in rural
areas, uh, because they just and
the turnover superintendent says
they get a new one probably
every
16 months probably.
Because it's a difficult
situation to hold on to and to
lead and because of board issues
and a lot of other things, so,
so, uh, that's just my
statement. I'm not very helpful,
but I would like to be helpful
in, in just suggesting that we
look at the whole modeling, you
guys know what the problems are,
and I would be, I'd bring
something really revolutionary.
To the, to the house. I
wouldn't, I wouldn't just, you
know, kind of, kind of twisted
around the edges.
Say what you want, see how much
it's gonna cost and put it out
there. That's my recommendation.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for being here, um, building off
of what uh representative Baca
andrere said, I'm really
concerned about the
modernization of the HVAC
system. That's been, I've been
working on bills for that the
last 4 sessions and um sometimes
not so responsive as a teacher
who taught mostly in portables
on the west side of Albuquerque,
uh, and was told after COVID to
open the window.
So
Or good circulation and I opened
the window and the sand blew in.
Every day, and I know that all
over the state I was just
driving recently from hatch to
Demi during a sandstorm, and I
can only imagine what the
schools all over our state that
have to deal with that deal
with. So I think we really have
to look at it.
Um
With clean energy, solar power.
Especially, um, we need to look
at it and I know that there's
some responsibility that lies
with the districts and schools
themselves.
Uh, as to when they control
heating and cooling, but I think
we just need a comprehensive
deep dive. There's been huge
amounts quoted, but it's and
I've sat outside with kids with
having asthma attacks. So
there's the air quality within
the classroom.
And within the school facilities
that that are shared by gyms. So
I just wanna encourage us.
To really and and really include
PSFA to really
We really have to tackle this,
and there's, you know,
requirements for all new
buildings, but as we retrofit,
it's just a very serious issue.
That, um.
With also we have climate
change. I mean people can
believe in climate change or
not, but I tell you, when you go
into a classroom now on August
7th, and there's no cooling, and
you're trying to teach kids,
it's impossible. We talk about
test scores, I would go in to
have tests, uh, in late April,
and I, they would just have
turned on the swamp cooler,
you've put out all your test
materials, you walk in in the
morning and there's bugs.
And sand all over the test
papers because they turned on
the old swamp coolers, and now
you have to clean up all the
dust and dirt. So it's just
something that I think as a
legislative body, particularly
uh, the two groups that we're
talking about here, we have to
really deal with.
So
Thank you for listening.
Let's act.
All your questions, folks?
OK. All right. Well, thank you
all so much. We appreciate it.
You know, all right, we got
rules. PED rules.
tab 13 folks is Connor makes his
way over.
Please, when you're ready,
Connor.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, uh,
now it's time for your, I'm sure
your favorite part of the
hearing, which is the rule
review, very exciting. Uh, this
one is, should be relatively
quick. There's only one rule to
review, uh, and in terms of
answering any questions you may
have, it's likely we'll take a
bit more of and it takes a
village approach just cause
there are a lot of different
sections of our policy expertise
that are covered in this rule.
So this is a proposed amendment
to New Mexico administrative
code 6291, which is general
provisions.
Uh, and so this is primarily
intended to align rule language
with two pieces of legislation
that were passed during the 2024
legislative session, first one
being House Bill 171, graduation
requirements now known as laws
2024 chapter 2, and Senate Bill
137 relating to school board
training, which is now known as
Laws 2024, chapter 43.
In addition, this proposed
amendment will also revise
special education modified
diploma options.
So with graduation requirements,
uh, the House Bill 171 directed
the PED secretary to develop
guidance to support school
districts and charter schools to
develop graduate profiles. These
profiles could then help inform
the creation of next step plans
for students as they consider
their path after they leave high
school.
Uh, districts and charters under
this new rule would however be
required to use a department
approved template for these next
step plans.
Uh, it also adds definitions to
general provisions for graduate
profiles, next step plans, enter
in next step plans, and final
next step plans, and also allows
academic units earned in health,
algebra 1 and geometry prior to
high school to satisfy unit
requirements for high school
graduation.
Uh, and then finally revision
proposed in this rural update
also strike most of the language
surrounding uh competent
demonstrations of competencies
that was a key provision of the
changes to the graduation
requirements.
In terms of school boards, it's
uh pretty in line with that it
is very in line with statute. It
just clarifies exactly what the
new requirements are for
mandatory training for school
board members increased from was
previously uh 5 hours of
training, now it's 10 hours and
it specifies exactly into our
blocks what the topic, what
topic should be covered in those
trainings. In addition to that,
it also offers the makes clear
that those same requirements
applied to uh charter school
governing body.
bo d ies as well. Uh, the rule
itself does have previously rule
language with general provisions
address both charter school
governance and uh and uh public
school district char uh
governance in the same section
of rule, they split those out,
they are still the same
requirements for each, but they
are separated in the actual
language of the rule.
Finally, uh, the big, uh, other
big headline here is special
education, modified diploma
options and uh the major changes
one are similar we talked about
with the demons uh
demonstrations of competency,
most of that language has been
removed, so, uh, eliminates
state assessment requirements
and the big change is that it
classifies the ability program
option as a state-defined
alternate uh alternate diploma,
and the department also proposes
the language clarifying the
individualized education
program.
team is the sole decision maker
and whether or not a student has
the most significant cognitive
disabilities before they can be
enrolled in the ability program
of study.
Uh, in terms of impact, it's
this rule this updates mostly
serves just to align rule with
statute passed by passed by the
legislature, uh, and the impacts
of the operations of PED are
expected to be fairly limited,
especially in the in the
immediate term. Uh, changes to
the graduation requirements will
not be enforced by the
department until the next school
year, 2025, 2026.
Uh, but that mandate for the use
of a department approved
template may result in some
process changes at the local
school level to account for that
change. Uh, graduation
requirements that are addressed
here, that's likely not the only
changes that are going to be
needed for rule. Next step plans
are not only mentioned in uh the
general provisions portion of
the administrative code, but
also in rule related to
apprenticeships, dual credit,
career technical education. And
so as we make these changes,
it's likely there'll need to be.
additional changes going forward
in other sections of the
administrative code. So this is
likely not the end of this
conversation as they were the
department works to align rule
with statue.
Uh, with the changes to the and
definition of the ability
program option has a
state-defined alternate diploma.
Uh, this is likely, uh, going to
allow for reports to the federal
government to more adequately
capture how many students are
graduating with a state
alternate diploma or a regular
diploma. Uh, currently, all high
school diplomas issued in New
Mexico are reported to the
federal government as regular
diplomas, so it'll just be uh a,
a fuller picture of the types of
diploma options that are being.
used that are being pursued in
New Mexico.
And finally, uh, the proposed
rule also clarifies that school
board trainings other than those
provided by the School Board
Association, as long as they are
department approved, are, are an
option to satisfy the
requirements of this rule. Uh
department themselves, according
to this rule, could also provide
training or they can approve a
third-party trainer to do this.
So this could expand the
universe of options or uh
eligible trainings to satisfy
the requirements of rule.
That's the big headlines. Like I
said, it's gonna be pretty
quick. Happy to answer any
questions.
Representing vodka.
Thank you, Mr. Sherman. Thank
you, Connor.
Uh, my question regarding the
rule for school board training.
Oh, who currently oversees
school board and what mechanisms
or uh safety nets are in place
for those who are not in
compliance with the 10 hours of
training.
Uh, Mr. Berger, I might actually
defer to John here with little
outside my wheelhouse.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, thank
you, Representative. So, um,
Statute gives the authority over
school board training to the
department.
Uh, traditionally, or at least
historically they had designated
the school board association in
the rule to be, to provide that
training. The change, like
Connor said, um,
Includes other folks can
actually provide the training.
So PED can provide the training.
School Board Association can
still provide the training, and
anybody else that um you know,
meets the the requirements of
the law. To your point about um
what happens if they don't.
Um, the law currently requires,
and this is the bill that you
all passed this last session
requires that members
Um, that school districts.
Host the members, their school
board members, and whether or
not they met those training
requirements as part of their
school report card, the
NMvistas, uh report card. There
is no
Punishment, if you will, for
those, for those members that do
not meet training requirements.
It's a, it's a public
accountability function at this
point. So, your name goes up and
it says you met him, and it says
how many hours that you took, or
it says you didn't meet them,
and how many hours you did or
did not take.
Uh, we tried to do that.
We tried to do that when uh
creating the legislation, I
worked on this with the governor
and and Senator Stewart, and we
tried to find a way to like.
You know, punish school board
members who didn't do the
training, but, you know, they're
elected locally.
And it is the local governance
system that elects them, and so,
so if they're elected, so all we
could do is really put that
those uh that training on the
dashboard and require that, so
that people could actually see
that they either did or didn't
do training, and that was kind
of all we could do.
Mr. Chair.
And Johnson.
Uh, thank you, uh, mister.
Uh, set up and thank you,
Representative. I, I guess the,
the question about it is.
When does the LESC, and we look
at
Improvement in our student
outcomes.
Um, and we look at some of the
governance of school boards and
low student performance.
It is a partnership.
Between our community.
Our elected officials.
And our staff.
And
Quite honestly, a, a well.
Running an effective school
board is a huge asset to any
school district.
For school boards that may be um
having some difficulties or we
have individual school board
members.
That kind of
Get outside of their lane of
house Bill 212.
There has to be some oversight
and accountability. We as
ourselves as elected officials
also have that same
accountability that if we stand
outside of our lanes, we do need
Not just to support as a, as
Um
As a legislature, but also
giving local boards.
support to help govern
themselves.
That is my statement with that,
Mr. Chairman and uh colleagues.
Representative Garrett.
Thanks, thanks, Mr. Chair.
Thanks, Connor. Actually, this
is more exciting than you even
mentioned. Um, on the next step
plans, didn't we request or
didn't they state that they
would move it to online.
Options statewide.
I know some districts may have
it on online already, but
Do we know the status of that?
for 6 years,
Representative Garrett, uh, the,
the graduation requirements bill
was a little bit before my time,
so I'm gonna defer that down on
this.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Um, I don't
believe that it's a requirement
that it's online. It is a
common, it should be a common
template that all districts use
across the state.
Right.
Mr. Chair and, and Mr. Cena.
It should be a line. It should
be provided by the state.
So that each district and
charter school doesn't have to
figure out how to do it.
That's my.
Right. Any other questions,
folks, um, I had one question,
Connor about um statewide
student assessment system, so
standard based assessments, um,
my understanding is that it was
from 3rd grade to 8th grade, and
this rule is stating that um
now kindergarten through 8th
grade and high school, um.
Any, any reason why the change
in the inclusion of K through
2nd grade and standard-based
assessments.
Mr. Cha, jump right in. Um,
that's not something that I
don't think is new to this
particular rule and may have
already been in place. So we'll,
we'll just confirm that that was
existing language.
Cool. I appreciate that.
Thank you. Yes, Mr. Chair, we
can look into that. Yeah, no,
for sure. Thank you. Other
questions? OK. Cool. Thank you,
Connor. I was gonna say.
But you're taking an early
break.
It's just gonna go straight to,
the
right, the directorsenna,
please. Uh, thank you, Mr.
Chair. I'll be, uh, pretty quick
here I wanna make sure everybody
gets home. You know, it's been a
long week. Um,
So, I'll go over really quickly.
You should have a copy of our
newsletter uh under your last
tab, I believe it's 14. Uh, if
you don't let us know, we'll get
you a copy. Um,
I'm just going to highlight a
couple of things. Uh, one, as
always, we have our chairs
letter and um specifically, I
wanted to mention the chair
mentions the election cycle
here, I won't get into too much
other than to say we'll have a
number of new members, uh, in
the legislature this year and as
always, LESC will provide an
onboarding, um,
To those new members, where,
where we, we participate as part
of LCS's general onboarding
program for new members, and so
we'll have a, a presentation to
give to those those new members
so that they understand what you
all do during the interim, well,
how we support you as staff and
how we can also support uh
members outside of this
committee, both during the
interim and especially during
the session as they think
through education related
issues, and so I'll have a
presentation ready to go for
those folks during that
orientation piece. Um,
If you can take a look at this.
Top little bite size in the top
left hand corner, I think that's
especially relevant given the
conversation today, this talks a
little bit about the departments
ask for its agency budget this
year, and it includes that $2
million request for additional
FTE for special education, and
so just to clarify, you know,
PED has had a special uh
education division for a long
time.
Um, the Office of Special
Education as it's now called,
is, is new and and was given
some additional structures and
responsibilities, and as Doctor
Cage said earlier, that
additional $2 million at the
department is asking for us to
bolster the current uh capacity
in special education at the
department.
Um, I won't belabor it too much,
but obviously there's a, a piece
here about better education, uh,
Representative Garrett, you
mentioned again today, uh,
connecting to Tim's presentation
yesterday, the importance not
just of systems, but that the
systems align, talk to each
other, are governed by a shared
set of principles, right, and
expectations, and whether or not
that sits in a particular
current state agency or requires
the need for
stand-alone agency, I think is
something that you all will
should continue to consider how
do we streamline that? And I,
and, and I'll just sort of uh
anecdote I guess is
We have a big state
geographically.
But as far as education goes,
for instance,
We have about the same number of
students, maybe even less across
the entire state.
That the Los Angeles Unified
School District has in one
school district.
And they use one data system.
Once student information system
to to deal with all of that,
right? So the, so that we would
use one system.
And probably some connecting
systems to that.
For one state like New Mexico is
not unheard of, and it's not,
not something that we couldn't
do, right? So oftentimes we, we
think we have this big state and
we need all these systems and,
and I understand that local
folks have different preferences
for what that look should look
like. Um, but as far as
efficiency and scale, it's
definitely something that's uh
possible.
Um,
The, uh, on the back page, your
top story there is about the
proposed bill that we'll bring
to you in December about
restraint and seclusion, that
was part of the larger
presentation yesterday, um, but
it's something that I think it's
been a sort of a hot topic for a
while now, and we'll, we'll
bring to you more in depth in
December, but sort of an intro
there. um, and then lastly, our
graphic, which we always try to
have something visual there for
you so that you can
Um, see with the work that we
do. This is um that graphic that
Annie presented in her
presentation about residencies a
couple of a couple of days ago
already.
And then lastly, Mr. Chair, uh,
I just want to give a first of a
general uh appreciation to the
staff, as always, they are the
heart of these committee
meetings and um
It just seems like the more
people we have, the more work we
have to do. And I just want to
point out that they've been
extremely busy over the last
3 months at least. You know how
quickly these, these meetings
turn around, and they work very
hard for you to make sure that
they're producing high quality
products and formative, helping
you make good decisions, and
they put on, uh, usually, and I
said this to them last week,
they usually have smiles on
their faces while they're doing
that, not always, but most of
the time.
And I, uh, just wanna extend my
appreciation um for their work.
I want to give a special shout
out today.
To our office manager, office
administrator, uh, Alonzo Baca,
we just completed our annual
audit, and we had 0 findings.
Over the, over the last couple
of years, we've had a couple of
small cleanup items, like one
item a year where it was, you
know, just fix this small thing,
fix that, all of those have been
resolved, and for this last
fiscal year, we had no findings
at all. He keeps us in order and
make sure we get our, our I's
dotted and T's crossed and that
all your paperwork is processed
and that you get paid for the
work that you do in terms of
your per diem. And so I just
wanted to say a special thanks
to him for his work because he
does a great job. And just with
that, Mr. Chair, that's all I've
got.
Questions, comments.
Represent, I will be brief.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um, one
of the, uh,
Person congratulate you,
Director Senna, and your staff.
We, you know, as you say before,
uh, we sit up here, but our
work, we would not be able to do
that without the information and
support that you guys providing
so.
I, I think that, you know, you
guys are a huge part of this
team and this process, so thank
you to you and your staff. Uh,
Mr. Chairman, one of the
areas that I think has come up
through the interim is the need
for data.
And, and you know, in in data
and not just
Um
That in large chunks, but
actually broken down by smaller
pieces and I, I've talked many
times about the data for our,
um,
Investment, the ECECD. I talked
today about data in the areas of
special education. We've talked
about different, so that that is
going to be
An area as we are going to be
providing legislation and
possible support for these.
You know, I'm gonna, and it's
not you that's doing that, I'm
for those districts or these
those departments that are out
there, we need to make sure that
we have those data so that we
can support your efforts.
Um, Mr. Chairman and uh Mr.
Senator Director Senna.
One of the other pieces in
December, are we gonna be having
that list of committee supported
legislation because I know and
I, I kind of heard.
is that some of the departments
may not have been as responsive,
which has delayed our process.
By now we should have
pretty good idea of what's
coming down, um.
As far as the pipeline.
Mr. Chair Representative Baca
will absolutely have both, uh, a
budget proposal for you to look
at, uh, the, our, our annual
high level like we, as we call
it, so that you can look at, um,
Our staff recommendations to you
based on what we know about the
public education departments uh
proposal at that point, they'll
also be here to talk about their
budget, as well as your
education partners, and we will
definitely have uh
At least a small list, if not a
larger list of proposed
legislation for you to look at,
that should be well connected to
the work that you've been
looking at all summer long. So
that's very important. I do want
to say, um, despite the
That maybe there's some
legislation coming from the
agency that we haven't seen yet.
I do wanna, um,
Thank the agency for being a
partner and other external
partners too in developing this
legislation, I think restraint
and seclusion is a good example
of how we've worked with both
agencies, uh, and advocates to
to craft something that's been
worked on for a long time and
hasn't quite been figured out,
but did want to put that out
there, but to your point, um, I
meet with the, I meet with the
public education department on a
weekly basis. And um I asked
these questions every week. What
have you got coming? What should
we know about? I will say the
staff does its best to be
uh
Upfront about those proposals,
but obviously they don't control
all of that and so we, we may
end up seeing something that we,
that we haven't seen up to this
point.
Like it's true.
Represent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and
Kind of an off the wall
question, but John, do you know
Mazos, how much the, uh, how
much salary the director of the
state lottery system gets.
What's the salary?
Mr. Chair, Representative,
absolutely not, but we will find
it for you. I think it's upwards
of 200,000.
I'm, I'm just trying to remember
that. I, I, I it just brought to
mind a bill that we had in in
the upper corner there, so thank
you for that.
And I also want to thank you and
all the staff. I mean, I think
that goes without saying uh.
I'll never forget last year I
was running about 7 bills and
chairing a committee and I ran
late to a committee hearing to
present a bill and I said, oh my
God, I forgot this stat tell the
staff it's gonna be up this
morning and I turned around and
there were.
John and Jessica right behind
me, and I thought, oh my God,
thank God. So I just want to say
that you, you really do take
care of us, um, uh, and, and it
was toward the end of the
session, and you know how
everything starts flying.
And I, I still remember that day
and I was very grateful for
that, um.
Without me asking.
making sure we were uh we were
covered as legislators and uh uh
I truly appreciate that support.
Thank you.
Others
All right.
Well, thank you, Director. We
appreciate it. And of course,
thank you to the staff for
putting together all the work
for this meeting in the past 2
3.5 weeks since we last met or
so. Um, we really appreciate it
and see everybody back in
December.
And thank you all. Thank you to
all the folks who participated
in person online, um, we'll see
you all in December.
