Meetings that are now going to
be archived, uh, they're a
little shorter, more to the
point.
So the links archives so that
you can click on that meeting
and see the minutes full entire
minute you can see the meeting
and when that
Subject matter, um, was
discussed by the committee.
OK
Any questions on the meeting
minutes? Emotion.
I motion Representative
Armstrong, second by Senator
Rodriguez. Any objection to the
motion?
Tab L.
additional professional services
contract for
Uh, some healthcare, additional
healthcare work, the committee
recalls there was $600,000
appropriation to LFC over two
years for contract work to
assist with digging deeper into
healthcare. This would be a
$60,000 contract with a woman
named Dorothy Moeller, who has
extensive, um, health plan and
healthcare experience who would
help us dig into, um, any
proposals for, uh, uh, Medicaid
Forward program.
Uh, really helping dig into the
issue of you've been providing
like a physician's rate
increases through Medicaid to
helping us understand whether
those rate increases are
actually getting through.
Not only the health plans, but
the health providers themselves
down to the physicians to help
with recruiting and retention.
Mr. Chairman
Um,
That's the only contract that
we're asking for approval and
that would come out of the grow
appropriation.
Um
Senator Hickey appropriated this
money to the girl, correct?
That's correct. Did you consult
with him on who his employees
gonna be.
All right.
Any questions about the grow
contract.
So, go ahead.
the motion by Senator Rodriguez,
seconded by Representative
Small. Any objection to that
motion?
no
Charles.
Tam, Mr. Chairman. This will be
our, um,
Requesting approval from the
committee for our budget request
for September 1st.
And we'll start the season off
right with a flat budget
request.
As you can see on the total year
over year, uh.
The committee and the
legislature has been very
generous to
Beefing up your staffing levels
as well as, uh, compensation
increases, and we think we're at
a good spot to be able to have a
flat budget, need to move money
between categories, but overall
it would be a flat budget
request.
Where did we land in the in the
pay study.
Are we gonna make adjustments
halfway through.
do we land within the pay study
of what we're paying everybody.
We made all of those adjustments
uh during the spring and uh the
final ones uh with the start of
the fiscal year, so everybody's
within the new pay bands and um.
Yeah, we're sitting good.
Any questions?
And what
Just a real short explanation of
what other is.
That includes items like uh your
per diem, uh, travel, um.
Equipment costs or leases for
copiers, things like that.
It's a junket to Hawaii.
Any other questions?
Me a motion to adopt the.
Approval.
It's like a small, second by
Senator Rodriguez. Any objection
to adoption, the budget.
See no.
Those are all the action items,
Mr. Chairman, and I just
encourage the committee as
you're listening to the
presentations to flip through
tabs and.
Through Q as well as S to look
at uh the other standard
reports, pretty stable, but, uh,
cash balances and all those
accounts we talked about are
pretty high, um.
Modest increases in some agency
hiring for FTE.
Um, and then the program
evaluation status report is MS.
Uh, Charles, I've seen on the
news this morning where they're
complaining that the union is
going to come to the legislature
about fixing air conditioners.
Can you pull the cash balances
to the schools?
And, and see, it was an
Albuquerque school district that
kind of started it and air
conditioners aren't fixed and
they want to run the bill in the
legislature.
But they have the, I wanna see
those cash balances, get them to
everybody, so.
When the media starts calling,
they start saying, oh, we don't
have the schools don't have the
money, they have the money in
the cash balances to fix their
air conditioner and then.
I don't know I guess
particularly for Albuquerque,
did they go to PSCOC for
maintenance and repair
buildings.
Well, Mr. Chairman, not only are
there cash balances for
operations that could help with
some of that school districts
also have access to their local
mill uh revenue SB 9 and HB 33
is what they're.
Could, um, usually referred to,
so Albuquerque.
Historically has had
As much cash as they bring in
revenue in those accounts every
year and the intent for those uh
mill levies are for heavy
maintenance, things like roof
repair, air conditioning, things
like that. So we also pull those
cash balances as well.
In addition to the operations.
Maybe we can also pull
Albuquerque's maintenance record
on there.
On their buildings and their air
conditioning system like.
Kind of odd that.
It's the media, so it's kind of
odd that they want to come back
at us over the air comm systems
when they have the money to.
and replace those so.
Get ahead of that one. Any other
questions?
I, I have one thing on the cash
balances, Charles, is there any
way to separate these cash
balances from reoccurring and
not non-reoccurring.
And see how much money they've
spent reoccurring and
non-reoccurring.
Well, Mr. Chairman, this report
in Tab P.
You as a legislature have
created.
Along with agencies creating
some of these accounts.
These are all earmarked accounts
within the Treasury.
That this is a point in time
status report of um
How much cash are in them.
You're right, some of them are
like operating accounts.
That have their operating money
flowing through them. Some are
static, that are earmarks, um.
That have revenue like the
healthcare affordability fund us
an example.
Some are dependent on whether
you put money into those
accounts, so we can work to try
to.
Color coder flag, which ones
agencies are using for their
operating budgets and it
basically shows you what kind of
cash flow is going on.
year over year.
I mean, the, so on on June 30th,
right?
Do we have a some type of report
we can generate where.
We have
Non-recurring money that we
appropriated to them that I
spent.
And we can use the 20 million
for behavioral health of CYFD,
which now they're spending for a
building that can be, how, how
can we separate that as we look
forward and say.
Here's your
Non-reoccurring cash balance
money and here's your
reoccurring money and see how,
how well they're spending it.
Yes, you'll have a a report this
fall from the evaluators digging
into those non-recurring
appropriations, so we go in and
look at those on a regular
basis, uh, for like a budget
status report and we can figure
out how to come up. Usually we
do that on a.
Appropriation by appropriation
basis, but we can work to see if
there's a query to pull it out
from a report overall for.
Say all special appropriations
from the 23 legislative session,
that's an example. What's the
burn rate, um, at a point in
time.
And then
When you do the cash balances,
can, is there any way to set it
up for the future, right, where
you have non-recurring cash
balances and reoccurring cash
balances.
Well, you have appropriations
that haven't been spent in so
many years and.
Well for the recurring, you
would.
Analysts go through and on a
regular basis as part of their
budget analysis in the fall.
We'll see, are there structural
surpluses like every year the
agency is only spending like.
95% of their budget.
Uh, and that informs whether or
not.
They need to give them as big of
an increase that they're asking
for because they don't spend all
the money they already get.
Uh, anyways, so that's, you'll
and you'll see that in the
budget documents all fall with
the reports of actuals on how
much revenue they brought in and
then how much spending did they
do.
And I'm planning on holding.
Uh, some.
Uh, Zoom calls for members that
want to start going over kind of
refresher, um, had a look at all
those budget documents before
you get into the budget hearings
this fall, so look for those
notices and uh to have.
Hm.
Well, uh, just to give an
example on.
And page 4, economic
development.
As 777 million in their
operating in July 23 and then
it's 24 and they only have 45.
$30 million go.
Right, so this report, Mr.
Chairman, does have limitations.
It's a snapshot.
It tells you if you see a big
change like that, the analyst
should be following up with the
agency to say.
What's, what's affecting these
differences year over year. Help
me understand. It could be a
point in time that
The day before they had a
transaction that hit.
That normally hit
Uh, their budget
On a regular basis, but the year
before it hit the day after we
pulled this report, so.
Those are the types of things we
would follow up on, and that
that one just kind of sticks out
cause I mean Lea is a line item
by itself, so 81 to 71, but an
operating fund of 77 million.
That's a huge for that agency
that that's where they've been
putting somelita money into
their operating budget, Mr.
Chairman.
How can they put lead into er
they have a.
A standing practice where
they're bringing Lea.
Through a bar into their
operating budget.
Um, I, I think they should be
keeping it separate, but they
worked it out with DFA to be
doing that and it kind of skews.
What
What it looks like going on with
their operating budget.
Representative Dixon, you're
just as puzzled as I am to bring
Lena into your operating budget
when Leda is a like I don't
know,
The media that is a line item,
correct, Charles?
And it's appropriation for that.
Leader project. How can they
borrow out of something
statutorily into operationally.
Its chairman, you usually do
make that appropriation to the
LEO fund uh through a special
appropriation.
And then when they're taking
money out of that fund, you're
doing a budget adjustment and
bringing it into their
operating.
I think it's skewing their
operating budget numbers.
Dixon, you got a question?
You got to kind of look under
the rocks sometimes, Senator
Woods.
On the, on the last page.
Where it shows the uh
34101 mineral leasing.
Last page of what Center Woods
we're with you.
What's your last page of the
cash balances? OK.
Are we still on cash balances.
OK.
On the 34 101, uh,
Mineral leasing.
When does that, when was that
cash fund go into the general
fund or is this already
considered into the general
fund?
These
The lists it's uh
Page 10 to 10.
Uh,
34 101 is the agency code.
Yes, sir, Mr. Chairman.
Mineral leasing these items and
the items at the bottom of page
9 are all
Kind of funds that are in
transit or in the suspense
account, so they're, they're
sitting outside of the treasury
and they're identifying them and
then they're gonna send them to
where which funds that they need
to go to. So that's at a point
in time how much was in the
suspense fund for the mineral
leasing uh revenue.
Then they'll determine how much
to transfer to the Early
Childhood Trust Fund, how much
to transfer into the general
fund.
OK.
So, so essentially all of these
funds, these cash balances.
Not all of them revert.
Back, some of them.
Stay with the agency and, and
Sometime I'd like to have a a
kind of a, a breakdown of which
one of these stays with the
agencies and which one I'm
revert.
Right, I think that's what the
chairman was asking for
identifying the ones that are
related to their operating
budget that might revert versus
that are non-reverting uh funds.
OK, thank you.
So
Yeah, no.
Any other questions?
So then I think we're kind of
wrapped up.
Clayton who's going to start us
off.
Uh, yes, thank you, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, good
morning. Um, my name is Clayton
Lobo and I'm one of your program
evaluators, um, and, uh, today
my colleague Ria Serna and I
will be presenting an LFC policy
spotlight report on state water
uh infrastructure, which you
should find in your binders
under tab J.
First of all, I would like to
thank and acknowledge the
leadership and the staff of the
state Environment Department,
the New Mexico Finance Authority
and the various local
communities where we conducted
site visits for this report.
So, if you would please turn to
page 4, you will see that state
capital outlay subsidies allow
many water and wastewater
systems to ignore financial best
practices.
Government entities across New
Mexico are reporting $5.77
billion in water inf
infrastructure needs.
And although local governments
are primarily responsible for
providing safe water to their
communities. The state allocates
hundreds of millions of dollars
from multiple funding sources to
support water infrastructure.
The largest source of state
water project funding is capital
outlay appropriations and as
previous LFC reports have
pointed out, capital outlay
appropriations are diffused
across multiple projects through
a political process where
funding is not fairly or
systematically directed to
projects based on project
readiness or community need.
Local water utilities, ideally
should operate as
self-sustaining enterprises
where rate revenue is sufficient
to cover today's operating
expenses and tomorrow's repair
and replacement needs. However,
many water systems are not
setting water rates uh to
adequately cover their
short-term or long-term needs,
which then later require
subsidies from the state.
Many New Mexico water systems
are also having issues with
basic operating practices such
as completing financial audits
or developing asset management
plans. This is concerning
because of local water systems
are struggling with the basics
of completing audits or
developing management plans. It
signals that these systems might
have, um, uh, might lack the
capacity to provide safe water
to their communities.
In the next few years, local
water systems responsibilities
will only increase as new
federal regulations are rolled
out regarding water
contaminants. Regionalization
and consolidation may be an
option for smaller water systems
that are struggling to raise
revenue, recruit and retain
staff and secure financing for
water infrastructure projects.
You, the legislature recently
amended state law to make it
easier.
For water systems to regionalize
and consolidate.
Which may help water systems
increase capacity and deliver
better services to the public.
And now, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee, if you would
please turn to page 6 of the
report, I will present the
background section of the
report.
On chart 2, you will see that
New Mexico has over 1000 public
water systems comprise of a few
large and hundreds of smaller
systems across the state.
On page 7, the report describes
how government entities are
reporting 5.7 billion in water
infrastructure needs over the
next 5 years, primarily
concentrated in smaller and more
rural counties.
On page 8, figure 2 shows the
various funding sources for
financing water projects. This
figure shows that the state's
different sources of water
project funding, except for
capital outlay appropriations
generally have an application
process with uh a rigorous
vetting requirements.
On the top of page 9, chart 4
shows how New Mexico has
received an influx of federal
funding to replace lead water
lines and also to test for water
contaminants on the rest of page
9, the report describes how
state capital outlay
appropriations are the largest
source of state water in
infrastructure funding, but
these capital outlay
appropriations often only
partially fund projects.
And pages 10 and 11 discuss how
neighboring states have more
systematic and centralized
approaches to funding water
infrastructure projects compared
to New Mexico's capital outlay
Appropriations process.
Now, Mr. Chair and members of
the committee, if you'll please
turn to page 14, you will see
the report's first finding.
Insufficient local water rates
con contributed to 123 million
in state funding requests from
three communities.
According to the American Water
Works Association, water utility
systems should be
self-sustaining enterprises.
However, many New Mexico water
systems are not meeting this
recommended best practice. The
amount of money that people pay
for drinking water through their
water rates varies widely across
the state, as shown on chart 7
ranging from a low of $10 per
month for 6000 gallons, to a
high of $119.
per month.
Despite this variation in water
rates, many water systems have
operating deficits, whether they
charge high water rates or low
water rates.
On page 15, the report describes
how LFC staff reviewed the
financials of 80 different water
systems and found that 40% of
these water systems had
operating deficits which were
supplemented through grants,
cash balances, or fund
transfers. These data suggest
that more than 1/3 of water
systems are not setting water
rates that can meet their
operating expenses or long-term
capital needs.
On page 16, you will see a case
study of the Camino Real
Regional Utility Authority, or
CRUWA, which is in Donia Anna
County. In late 2023, 3 out of
crew was 4 arsenic treatment
plants were offline and had
intentionally been bypassed for
over a year, allowing water with
excessive arsenic to reach the
public. Evaluators from the
state Environment Department
found Crua had failed to
adequately
Raise enough revenue to properly
staff, operate, or maintain its
arsenic treatment plants.
Although Crua has taken uh
corrective action since these
investigations.
Uh, the authority still has
significant improvements to
make. Crew also recently
received $9 million from the
state for infrastructure
upgrades.
This case study illustrates how
chronically low water rate
revenue and deferred maintenance
over time can compromise water
safety and public health.
Now, if you would please turn to
page 17. The report describes
how the city of T truth or
consequences is losing 25% of
its water because of an aging
and leaky water pipe system
dating back to the 1960s. The
city will receive over 25
million from state funding
sources to replace roughly 18%
of its water lines.
If you would now turn to page
18.
Chart 8 shows that over the past
decade truth or consequences has
shifted uh has transferred um a
total of 1.3 million from its
water systems, uh, to from its
water utility systems to its
general fund, meaning that the
city moved money away from its
water systems, which could have
been spent on waterline
replacement. The city has
recently stopped this budgetary
practice though. This case study
illustrates that local water
systems need to proactively
repair and
place their infrastructure over
time rather than waiting for
critical breakdowns.
On the bottom of page 18, the
report describes how the city of
Santa Fe requested but did not
receive $88 million in state
capital outlay last year to
replace an aging and
non-compliant wastewater
treatment plant.
The city of Santa Fe was
recently fined $2000 because
it's wastewater treatment
facility was discharging uh high
levels of E. coli bacteria into
the river. The city plans to
borrow $120 million to replace
this wastewater treatmentment
facility and raise its rates by
16% over the next four years.
However, city officials have
publicly reported that the
repair work on this aging
facility should have begun a
decade ago.
The city could have instead
gradually raised rates over time
and begun saving fun and over
time to replace this wastewater
facility. And now, um, I'll turn
things over to Ria to present
the rest of the report.
Thank you, Clayton. Good
morning, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee. If you would
turn to page 20 for the report's
second finding. Many water
systems struggle with basic
operations, even as new federal
rules will increase duties.
In May of this year, the Office
of the State Auditor reported
that 132 mutual domestic water
consumer associations, or 50%
were out of compliance with
their audit requirements as
shown in chart 9.
The report highlights 3 water
systems whose 2022 capital
outlay appropriations totaling
250,000 were voided due to audit
noncompliance.
Water systems out of compliance
audits have limited access to
capital outlay appropriations,
as well as other funding sources
such as the Water Trust board
and Colonia's Infrastructure
Board.
If you'll now turn to page 21.
To assist small public bodies,
achieve audit compliance, the
Office of the state auditor with
an initial $500,000
appropriation provided technical
assistance to 122 small entities
who subsequently regained access
to $2.6 million in capital
outlay appropriations.
On this same page, it is
recommended, it is a recommended
best practice for water systems
to have an asset management
plan, a tool that assists with
the, with furthering the
system's infrastructure
improvements, effectively and
efficiently.
The water trust board and the
Colonia's infrastructure Board
both require applicants to
either have or develop an asset
management plan to receive
infrastructure project funding.
Data indicates that many systems
lack an asset management plan as
shown on chart 10.
Now turning to page 22.
The top deficiencies identified
with the New Mexico Environment
Department or NMED's drinking
water, sanitary inspections were
inadequate infrastructure
facility upkeep, and lack of
operational and maintenance
plans as shown in table 3.
When water systems struggle with
operational and maintenance
issues. Their customers could be
at risk.
Additionally, public water
systems will soon need to comply
with new federal regulations on
lead, copper, and PAS, or PE and
polyf floral acyl substances.
At the bottom of page 22, enemy
D reports 36% of drinking water
systems, which is roughly about
203 systems did not meet at
least one federal drinking water
requirement at the end of FY 24.
Turning now to page 23 enemy D
provided written notice to 138
drinking water systems across
the state that they were
violating regulations requiring
them to submit a plan to resolve
their non-compliance or risk a
penalty of up to $1000 per day,
as well as potential sanctions
from enemyD or the Environmental
Protection Agency.
Now if you'll turn to page 24.
Enemy D estimates 6% of water
systems around 63 water systems
may be out of compliance with
PFASST regulations. Also,
federal regulations will require
all drinking water systems in 2
months to have completed water
service line inventories
Staring at the bottom of page 24
and continuing to page 25, the
report highlights how many
systems do not know the
location.
of their water and sewer lines.
The village of Pecos, for
example, does not have an
accurate pipeline location
information which leads to
delays in repair work and
subsequently increased costs.
If you would now turn to page
26, the report's 3rd and final
finding is small water systems
could increase staffing and
financial capacity with
regionalization.
New Mexico has 1,055 water
systems and 1380 certified
system operators, creating
competition amongst systems to
recruit and retain operators.
As shown in figure 11, this map
illustrates the high demand for
system operators in rural areas
with small systems.
Now turning to page 27.
Water and wastewater operator
certifications dropped
significantly during the
COVID-19 pandemic and are still
below peak levels as shown on
chart 11.
Also on page 27, the report
reviews how regionalized systems
share certified water operators
achieve audit compliance and
secure increased financing for
water infrastructure projects.
In 2023, you, the legislature
passed the Regional Water System
resiliency Act to help small
water systems pool their
resources and regionalize.
The case study on the lower Rio
Grande public.
Water Works Authority in Dona
Anna County highlights how this
water system, after merging with
12 ro systems improved its
finances to hire a general
manager and a finance manager
achieved audit compliance
secured over $89 million in
financing and built capital
improvement reserves for its
water systems.
If you would now turn to page
28, NMED is using federal funds
to partner with technical
assistance providers to
encourage regional partnerships
and increased capacity among
small rural systems.
Other states such as California
and West Virginia have enacted
requirements for failing water
systems to strengthen system
partnerships or consolidate.
The National Conference of State
Legislatures notes that these
policy approaches can create
workforce efficiencies and help
small water systems address
issues that would otherwise lead
to water quality violations.
Clayton will now discuss the
report's list of key
recommendations.
Uh, thank you, Ria. Uh, Mr.
Chair and members of the
committee, if you would please
turn back to page 5, you will
see this report's key
recommendations. Among these
recommendations, the report
recommends that the legislature
should consider providing
additional one-time
appropriations to the state
water project fund to address
water infrastructure needs that
the Environment Department
should continue using um
drinking water, state revolving
fund dollars to promote regional
partnership.
And that public water and
wastewater systems should set
rates that are sufficient to
support current operational
spending and long-term needs and
uh pursue regionalization if
their rate revenues cannot
feasibly and affordably meet
their short term and long term
needs. And now with your
permission, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, we
will now stand for questions.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This report, while enlightening,
is also frightening.
There is no more basic need than
for human beings to consume
water, the necessity.
The criticalness.
When you turn on your tap.
You have the expectation and
usually the confidence that
you're gonna be drinking water
that is potable and good for
your health. At the same time we
know that without proper care of
these systems, as Chairman.
Much can go wrong.
And people's health and lives
are in danger.
We're talking about systems even
in Berlio, town of Berlio that
have high levels of arsenic.
That is why it is so critical,
Mr. Chairman, that we do
everything necessary to protect
the citizenry because the
reality is that often.
Governments and water system
operators don't.
Understand or have the
wherewithal to do what is
necessary. Back in 2000, Mr.
Chairman, the legislature
removed the water department
from the city of Albuquerque,
the city of Albuquerque was
providing water not only for the
citizens of the, of the
municipal Albuquerque area, but
they were also providing water
for the vast unincorporated area
which I served as county
commissioner and I, uh, I now
serve as a, as a state
representative in doing that
under that leadership of
Former Senator Aragon Marie
Aragon and Speaker of the House,
Raymond Sanchez, that
Utility was removed from the
direct control of the city of
Albuquerque who constantly under
different mayors would raid the
fund of that water department
for other pet projects and while
doing that, it was ignoring the,
the water lines, uh, the
improvements to the uh water
reclamation plant which was in
my district as well, and
These little systems we just
heard sometimes do the same
thing. They take money that is
supposed to be channeled back
into their operations and go to
other things.
That is absolutely
inappropriate.
This is a complex issue with
many, many moving parts of
German, but
One of the key items simply
would be legislation that would
prohibit water systems from
moving any of that capital that
is generated by the users to
disallow it for any other
activity except for the
improvement of the system. Ms.
Chairman, I'm making more of a
state and not much of a
question, but I consider this
incredibly important.
If not taken care of, we could
be on the national news if
there's a major, major failure.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Armstrong
Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
um, uh, just, uh, uh point uh to
something to point out that in
the report, um, you know,
various, various states have
different legislation on how to
deal with um uh
Uh
Uh, local systems moving money
from utility funds to um their
general funds. Some states
prohibit that. Um, other states
require that local systems have
to have a separate uh approval
special hearing in order to
transfer utility funds out of
utility funds for other
purposes, um, and uh that uh
part is on page 18 if you wanted
to look into that further.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um, uh,
it's it's uh embarrassing to, to
see this report about truth or
consequences, and, and saying,
you know, because I fought
really hard to get them funding
for their water lines. They have
wooden water lines.
Um, not saying that it's not a
problem that they should be
replacing these. Every entity
should be replacing these. I
just want to make sure that
people remember.
That
It actually costs a little more
money to do these types of
things in rural New Mexico
because the contractors have to
come from, uh, you know, usually
out of the small town and um
They don't.
They don't have the GRT or the
income that somebody like Leo
County or or uh Donana would
have to, uh, to fix these water
lines. I know we've been
waiting. We have capital outlay
for a uh storage tank, water
storage tank in uh in the
Magdalena area and the price has
tripled.
By the time they got the money,
through capital outlay, they got
the went through the bid
process, everything went up. Now
they don't have enough money to
do it. And I, I'm not whining
for rural New Mexico, but what
I'm saying is when we start
talking about what, what are we
gonna do? Let's keep in mind
that a lot of these small rural
New Mexico towns don't have
access. They, they, they don't,
they can't get loans.
Or they have maxed out their
loan capacity.
And so I don't know what the
answer is, but I do know.
That NMED, if that was a private
entity?
They would be fighting the hell
out of him.
And they're not, I mean, it
doesn't do any good to do it.
It's all state taxpayer money.
But if it was a private entity,
They would be getting some hefty
fines, and I just read in the
paper somewhere that they
removed the fine from El Paso
that dumped, it was a $100 plus
fine.
For dumping sewage into the Rio
Grande. I don't know who did
that. I don't know who, I can't
remember, can't recall.
But
Let's be fair.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Represented Vincent and then
Representative Garrett and
Senator Woods.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for this really important
report.
Um, in making your
recommendations, have you met
with New Mexico Finance
Authority officials from the
Water Trust board, the colonius,
and the programs under them.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, uh, yes, as part of
this report, we did have a
conversation with officials
from, um, the, uh, New Mexico
Finance Authority.
OK, because Mr. Chair, I'm just
concerned about the amount of
money they have. They do have a
vetting process. Also, did you
do any audits of apprenticeship
workforce pipelines because a
huge problem in rural New Mexico
is who's gonna do the work when
we went to the Hernandez, um,
Mutual domestic, it was a woman
in her late 60s and, um, there's
no one in line to replace her,
and that's a big problem. Did
you look into what kind of
workforce pipelines there are.
Um, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um,
so this report did not do a
specific audit in terms of
looking at apprenticeship
programs. Um, however, during
site visit, you know, during
site visits to different
communities, uh, the need for
water and wastewater operators
was highlighted. If you look on
page 26, um, figure 11 shows a
map um highlighting, uh, the,
um, uh, workforce solutions
department data on job postings,
um.
For water and wastewater
operators, and you'll see that,
you know, the need is, um, you
know, concentrated in, in rural
areas of the state, um, so
that's where those regional
partnerships or sharing of uh
water operators and wastewater
operators and regionalization
efforts can help, um, with those
workforce pressures.
Thank you Mr. Chair, and, and
thank you for that. That's the
extent of my questions right
now. Also, thank you for
mentioning the need to not just
use capital outlay for unvetted
projects. Thank you.
Representative Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Clayton, I
had a question for you. So
whenever, whenever people put,
say, uh, a small village or even
a big city.
When you put the infrastructure
in the ground.
It has a shelf life, correct?
What is that shelf life?
Um, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, uh, that would depend
on the type of uh
infrastructure, um, you know, in
terms of a, a full breakdown of
that. I, I don't have those
figures readily, you know, off
the top of my head, but that's
where the importance of an asset
management plan comes into
account, um, because, you know,
asset management plans, they're
recommended best practices, and
that's where you have an
inventory of all your, your
infrastructure and you list that
shelf life and you go, OK, you
know.
These, these pipes that we
installed, uh, many years ago,
they're, they'll completely
exhaust their shelf life at this
time we need to start saving
that and gathering the package
financial package in order to,
to do that replacement. So
that's, that's where this report
highlights the importance of, of
that those times types of uh
asset management practices.
Thank you. And one.
The point that I'm making is
when we, when we put
infrastructure in the ground.
And we say that it's going to be
good for 50 years, then we
should surplus that equipment
right then, right there, and
there should be a committee or
somebody that could come in and
direct.
Villages and towns, especially
the small rural ones on what
their rate structure needs to
be.
So that they can put back into
that system and then put it into
a fund, and at the end of, um,
if that shelf life is 50 years,
then they have enough money to
start replacing stuff. And the
reason that I, I bring that up
is because, um,
In small rural places.
I was actually a fire chief, but
one of my.
Other duties assigned as I ran
the water department, um, and we
did, we would literally fix.
Water leaks every single day.
And when you dig something up.
And you see.
5 patches on a line that's 20 ft
long.
You know how hard it is for me
to fix something when I know
it's not right. The best
practice would be to take that
section out, put a new section
in, and then.
Put it on our asset map to show
that that's there, but I want to
replace, I want to replace a
bunch of it at one time and then
have a good asset there and
just, you know, piecemealing it
all together.
So I, I wish we could go to, it
almost reminds me of the forest,
you know, we're barely being
able to thin it.
And this, this were barely being
able to fix this until it's so
dilapidated, now we get put on
the map and you see all these
bad reports and, and it is
embarrassing because we do good,
but we could do a lot better.
Um, Mr. Chair, members, the, uh,
committee, uh, just appoint, um,
uh, of additional information to
add. Um, so when, when, uh,
there's, uh, dollars in the
water project, the state water
project fund, and entities go to
the New Mexico Finance
Authority, the, the New Mexico
Finance Authority can provide,
um, uh, some of that technical
assistance and, um, does require
the development of asset
management plans getting to, um,
you know, that, that.
Forward planning that you're
discussing.
Thank you, thank you for that
and thank you, Mr. Chair, for
the time.
Senator Woods
This is exactly
The exact problem I'm having in
eastern New Mexico, um.
I've got two different
One smaller town and one larger
town.
Over there scratching her head
right now, thinking about going
with a, a water contractor to do
the waterworks and manage their
water system.
And essentially sell their water
system to.
This this company
And on one of those water
systems.
The contractor told me that they
needed a $6 million.
Improvement on that system, and
there's 400 m.
And that's $15,000 a meter.
And how do you ever recover that
$15,000 in a water fee.
Um, you know, we, we talk.
About we shouldn't use state
money and we shouldn't use this
or that, but.
If we provide that water, if, if
those citizens are going to have
that water and yeah, they, they
did just as you say, that was
the income.
Enterprise unit for the town.
And every little town is going
to use the same enterprise unit
because that's the only
fundraiser they have.
They don't have any gross
receipts tax. They don't have
anything else.
And
Those city fathers
Look at that as the only source
to do anything.
With any any repairs because
there's other, there's other
streets and different things
that they need money for and
many times they need a
Uh, cost share piece for that.
So yeah, it's a problem and
They are not collecting enough.
Over the period of time, and
their rates.
To achieve the goal of
replacement.
It's, it's a very short-sighted
deal, but also
The escalating cost of materials
to rebuild that system is not
helping them either.
So, yeah, I'm all for it. Let's.
Click your fingers and get her
done.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Representative Small.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you for the report, um,
great recommendations, Mr.
Chair. I'd actually like to ask
Director Sale and, um, RLFC to
think about preparing a sort of
an overall funding package.
As we move into the budget
cycle.
Um, acknowledging many of these
needs that are out there sort of
our financial position
incorporating, you know, these
and upcoming policy
recommendations.
Because you know, I think all
the committee members are saying
very similar we have funds to
help really take a big step
ahead, but if we don't fix, uh,
a lot of these processes, then
we'll find ourselves back in the
same situation, um.
So I, I know the executive, uh,
infrastructure uh leader Rebecca
Russ is working on this. I have
The most confidence in us as LFC
in a bipartisan way to approach
this in a very collaborative
fashion, uh, and one that sort
of just like the report does.
Doesn't sort of select
stakeholders to talk to or not
talk to really goes out to as
many folks as we can, including
the executive and tries to, um,
As close as possible, build a
comprehensive funding with a
policy requirement component and
probably education and
recommendations as well.
So it's a pretty large sort of a
bit of an open-ended ask, but
we've got the resources this
year and I think with the LFC
and, um, with the work that Cali
and others have done a whole lot
of background too. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Representing Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I had
a question, uh, relating to the
recommendations on page 10 and
then page 30, dealing with the
ranking of water projects and,
um, the, the idea of an
interagency council for vetting
projects.
With the creation of the new
infrastructure office. Are we
expecting the infrastructure
office to take on some of those
responsibilities, or do we need
to, um, set up something
specific to look at.
vetting um and prioritizing.
And I see Kelly's there. Thank
you.
Yeah.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative
Dixon.
Uh, with respect to water in
particular, I would probably
expect the function of the
infrastructure office to be more
on funding coordination and
identifying funding gaps across
all of our sources as opposed to
vetting water projects. Um, I
would say that the answer
probably also depends on sort of
whether you all are interested
in taking a different direction
on capital outlay for water and
sort of what shape that might
take.
I think, you know, through the
water trust board, Collonius,
the revolving funds. We probably
sort of already have mechanisms
in place through existing
programs to do vetting and
prioritization. And then the
question is kind of how do we
fit additional sources together
and do a better job of funding
these projects completely as
soon as possible while also
trying to incentivize fixing
some of the underlying issues
that have created these.
Problems in the first place.
Thank you. Uh, thank you, Mr.
Chair.
S though.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for the report. I just
have a question, uh, you know,
on page 6, he says, uh, the
Mexico government entities
report 5.7 billion water
infrastructure needs. Does this
include also in the report, Mr.
Chairman, uh, the tribal
communities or are they separate
or they excluded, um, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, that
data comes from, uh, um, the,
uh, state data collected from
the, um, infrastructure and
capital, um, infrastructure ICI.
I see ICIPs, and so, um, uh,
tribal entities would be
included in that.
But that's only if they included
water infrastructure in the
IACIP, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, that is correct. And
if they didn't, then they would
not be captured.
Correct. OK. All right.
Thank you.
Um
You represent a small, I think
we gotta, we gotta figure this
out, right? But I mean, I can
tell you stories and so I have
some federal buildings. I had to
do water testing, right? for the
federal government and we're
required to do it
and
Same water system, two different
buildings. One has Legionella. I
don't even know what Legionella
is, right?
And tested 2 times and now they
say you got to rebuild the
infrastructure in, in the
building because they got
Legionella. I don't know if
Legionel notified the city they
had it in their system. They
just ignored me, right?
And, and so you go through those
stories and you know we give
money to Gallup for water for
water pipes for lead pipe
replacement which they were
screaming the top of their
lungs, right?
I don't use it.
sits there for 2 years and then
they don't use it, right?
And then you look at the Gallup
water pipeline, they spent $1
billion on that. It's going to
be cheaper to, to bathe with
bottled water than it is to
bathe with water out of the
system.
Um,
You look at the poorest of the
poor and you do an 18% increase
on water, right?
That is a large number if you,
if your average water bills.
30 bucks or 40 bucks, right?
And and you do an 18% increase,
I mean that affects the bottom
line in in people that are
living paycheck to paycheck.
And they're going to make the
call do I buy bread or do I pay
for the increased utility rates.
Uh, I mean, there's a lot
happening here and then you look
at Representative Dixon brought
this up on page 10, right?
You look at over, uh, the past 5
years, we put $1 billion in
water in 609 million still
remains unspent.
Do we know if that's because
they're underfunded or what does
that cause?
Um, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, uh, we can look
into that. I, I don't have a
specific causes regarding that,
uh, regarding chart 6.
I mean, so we can put all this
money there, so the 609 million
is still sitting there, right,
unfunded. They can borrow money
at 0% interest, right?
They can
Do what they need to do to try
to get that the contractors may
be behind. I know the city of
Albuquerque is like $120 million
behind in their water projects
or they can't get the
contractors to get the to get
the systems in.
You got
A problem with the guys that run
the sewer and the water
treatment plants, because
usually a long time ago in
cities, you know, the, the guy
that ran the plant was training
the guy that.
was under him to run the plant,
right? And then all of a sudden
we came along and said, oh, you
got to have this certification
and that certification. And then
he said, oh, you got to be
college educated and, and all
this, and we've eliminated some
of those guys. Sure we can get
them certified, right?
But
They may not want to go to
college, right? Maybe that's,
they want their grandpa ran the
wastewater treatment in Gallup
there. Uncle ran the race water
treatment plant and that's what
they're doing because their
uncle said that's a good job and
so they're bringing him up and
then all of a sudden he hits the
wall where he can't, he can't
move up in small towns, I mean,
but this happens in Las Vegas,
you just go across the deal who,
who ran this small water systems
and probably one family that
brought their family in and
taught them how to.
Fix meters and then brought them
up in the water system, I mean.
Could we look at some of that
and see how what the
requirements are to run a
wastewater and water treatments,
or do you know those?
Um, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, the requirements
for becoming water or wastewater
system operator are through an
examination administered, uh,
certification examination
administered by the New Mex
Mexico Environment Department.
And, and how hard is that test?
Um, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, I, I, I don't
know how hard the test is, um,
but the test, uh, the, the
standards for the test are, uh,
I believe set uh through the,
um, uh, water quality commission
through the office of the State
engineer, uh, and, uh, um, and
then, uh.
Administered by the New Mexico
Environment Department. Welcome
to the world of secret shoppers.
I want you to go take that test.
Mr. Chair, um, there's also
different levels of
certification required for
different systems and the higher
level operators in particular
have to have the most hours,
take more tests, um, and those
are some of the positions that
are particularly hard to fill,
especially for smaller systems
which do sometimes get things
built for them that require
those higher levels of
operation.
The name slips me, but when we
did the return to work, right?
We did it for those.
Wastewater. I think the first
time was for wastewater
treatment and and those lower
guys in the utility systems,
right? So we can get those
operators because they've seen
in small communities, and we did
return to work, right?
They'll maybe look and see how
successful that was.
Like
Uh, um, so, um,
I'm sorry. The question is what
was the impact of the return to
work policies on the, um, water
operator, uh, workforce. So in
terms of
The, so I, I don't have that
particular figure. Um but
According to Workforce Solutions
data, there are about around a
little over 100 vacancies every
year, um, or 100 positions open
in water and waste
water and wastewater operators
every year, um, and a lot of
that, um, the majority of that
would be transfers from one
system to another indicating
competition, and 30% of that
would be, uh, operators exiting
the workforce.
Yeah, because if you don't have
the.
If you don't have the operators,
right? And they're jumping.
Now we're going to create this
same more we created with the
law enforcement, right?
An arms race to who can pay the
most to get an operator and.
That's free market system, I
think, but.
But I mean, how, how do we get
some of that control and how do
we create those?
I, I really, if you don't want
to go take the test, I, I may go
try to take the test and see
what happens, I mean.
It'd be interesting to see how,
how easy or how hard that test
is to try to get that, but.
You're smarter than me because
you're wearing a tie today.
And uh
We should try that and see and
then I'll get to Represent
Garcia in 1 2nd, you know, I ran
a bill, I think a couple of
years ago, and for them to
increase their fees to do
testing, right, and the
executive vetoed it.
And they had no idea and then
two weeks ago I get an op ed
about why I didn't get money for
fees.
So.
It's it's very interesting to me
how, you know, I mean the
political side versus the other
side, right? But I mean the
executive vetoed that bill.
To increase the fees so they can
do more testing and and and
check these systems.
I don't think they ever ran it
again and then the exec says
she's not raising fees and and
look at the predicament we're in
in in water quality and and
going throughout.
So
How out of the money we have, I
want you guys to think about
what what of small city is, if
we're going to set aside money
for this, right?
And we have $5.5 billion in
capital.
me like Kelly, get me the last 5
years of Rios and and where
they're at and the total dollar
amount.
And then
How, how do we get that money to
him, right, cause.
Everybody wants money in in I'm
just using Gallup, I mean
grants, grants did get money for
a water system. They did use it
within one year. They got their
work done. They, they, the
streets are tore up the orange
barrels are everywhere and.
But they're they're doing it.
So I don't, how do we generate
this money, right? And how do we
say, OK, to municipalities, if
we, if we pay for this system in
Las Vegas' water system was in
trouble. I think they just
finally got it cleaned up.
How do, how do we get them the
money and then say, OK, well you
gotta do it.
Right, and you have this amount
of time to do it.
And, and it's pressures on the
mayors and the and those guys
running the water systems.
I, I, I.
Otherwise they won't do it.
We never had money in in
Bluewater Village for 6 years
for a water system and they
never even touched it.
You know, would even start in a
section or anything.
And and so.
I mean, we can put all the money
everywhere and that's true with
capital, but it doesn't mean
they're gonna spend it.
Representative Garcia.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Sherman.
Thanks for the presentation, you
know, you have findings and you
have recommendations, you know,
what are we gonna do about these
small communities, they they
can't come into compliance under
their audits are wrong.
You know, you can give them all
the money you want, but yet they
can't use it cause they're out
of compliance with the audits or
wrong. We need to address those
issues, Mr. Chairman, because a
lot of our, especially in my
district, a lot of these small
communities.
Don't have the means.
For the way to come into
compliance and rather fros. So
how do we address that issue?
Uh, absolutely, um, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, and
Representative Garcia, thank you
for the question. So, um, part
of that is, um, you know, uh if
you'll go to the page 26 the um
third chap, the 3rd finding of
the report highlights um how,
you know, you as the legislature
amended state law to make it uh
easier for um small water
systems to regionalize and
consolidate um in
In order to uh pool resources so
that it rather than having, you
know, 5 systems that might not
be able to hire a general
manager or um have their own um
have a full-time bookkeeper to
get into audit compliance, etc.
or have the rape population to
be able to uh.
Have a revenue stream that can
support that. Um, the
legislation that, um, that, that
was passed, uh, recently, um,
uh, makes it easier for water
systems to engage in those kind
of um consolidations, um, and
the, the this section of the
report also has a case study um
where, um, you know, small water
systems that were out of
compliance and couldn't access
capital funding because of that
we're able to um do just that.
buy, become one entity, not
necessarily combine their pipes
but become one administrative
entity in order to um gain
capacity uh and raise more
revenue in order to be able to
address their infrastructure
needs.
Thank you Mr. Chairman, you
know, but that's a rough finding
well, but the problem still sits
there.
You know, because all these
people are not coming into
compliance.
And they're struggling on what
they're doing, you know, I have
one village up there that their
water race went up like about
200%.
Cause I was a a part of the deal
you have to get more money into
it so we could do what we're
needing to, and they just don't
have the means, you know, that's
my, my concerns and you know,
I've been uh represented for 8
years and I've been fighting the
same battle for years now.
Nothing has changed. You know,
these people are still
struggling and.
You know, I'm glad that the
environmental department has not
filed against him, but it'll
come to that soon if we don't do
something about it. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
I don't know, like dig a little
more in and figure out how we
pay for it, how we.
And we hold their feet to the
fire to get the stuff done, I
mean.
I'm surprised the mayors aren't
here screaming and saying, hey,
we need help, we need help. And
then, and we're digging into it
ourselves, I mean.
Uh, be interesting to have you
contact the mayors and say what
priority level is this at? Do
you know the system exists, the
people that.
In your community, know your
systems is bad.
Uh, we see it all over. I forget
who was the arsenic one I seen
in the news the last day or two.
Where they weren't testing for
arsenic at a certain level.
And then they found out, do you
know who that was? Did you see
that in the news too?
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I, I don't have that
specific system and um I don't
know the answer to the specific
uh system you're thinking of.
there's one in the news in the
last couple of days, so.
Um, thank you guys, but.
Figure it out.
Very simple tasks
should take about 15 minutes.
Kelly, you're coming back up.
Are you running for the door.
Oh, we have our.
Deputy Secretary from the
Environment Department here,
right?
What, what bureau are you in?
Tell me again.
Morning.
Anybody have any questions for
the environment department
before we change.
Mhm.
Yeah, well, the governor signed
the bill?
Tell the secretary that's our
question for him.
Thank you.
Like
Thank
He's the only guy that helped me
in the environment department on
the Monday morning.
Kelly, you're gonna start us off
or?
Mr. Chair, you guys should all
have handouts with everyone's
favorite giant spreadsheet
attached to them. Easy to find.
All right, so I'm gonna start on
page one of the memo on the top,
um, you can see from the
headline and in that first
paragraph that at the end of the
first quarter of FY 24, uh,
outstanding capital outlay
balances totaled almost $6
billion across roughly 5600
projects. Um, Mr. Chair, you
asked me a month or so ago where
this number was going to be and
you thought 6 billion, so I
guess you don't need me to do
these reports anymore. You can
do the math in your head. Um,
So obviously these numbers are
quite high, um, they keep
growing every year that I give
you these reports at this
quarter, um, and what is the
reason for that? The most basic
reason is
Um, that the amount were
appropriating to these projects
and the number of projects we're
appropriating, keep growing at a
faster rate than spending in
project closures.
Uh, we've also seen significant
increases in revenues to the STB
programs, those have grown
dramatically over the last
couple of years and that is also
playing a role in driving these
numbers up. So you can see, uh,
also in this first paragraph,
sort of a breakdown of how we
got to that $6 billion number,
uh, a little more than half of
that is uh tied up in projects
authorized by the legislature.
So that includes both uh state
agency.
Local and higher education
projects that you all fund
through the capital outlay
bills.
Um, another 650 million about
imbalances are in the severance
tax bond earmark programs.
Uh, and then the other sort of
biggest figure in here is the
balance in the public school
capital outlay fund, uh, which
has also grown quite
dramatically in the past couple
of years and the absolute
balance in that fund now sits at
$1.6 billion and I'll talk to
you a little bit more about
what's going on there and some
of the implications in a minute.
So, uh, in chart one, you can
just see a kind of simple
illustration.
of how large appropriations
packages are contributing to the
growth in capital balances, um,
you can see that they started to
tick way up in 2022 and then
continue to grow in 2023 and 24,
the kind of orangey red bars
here are showing you the balance
on the total appropriations
there and sort of the other
dynamic you can see here is, of
course, uh, spending tends to
catch up, um, after a few years,
uh.
But it's quite slow in the
beginning. Um, to give you a
sense of what color of money
this is, um, on the legislative
projects about $2 billion of the
balances general fund and about
1 billion is severance tax
bonds.
So moving down to the key points
on this page, um, I wanted to
just kind of unpack some of this
for you and give you a little
more detail on the spending
trends we've seen recently, um,
as well. So the balances were
reporting to you do include
about 1400 projects that you all
funded in the 2024 session, uh,
totaling $1 billion about in
general fund and $350 million in
severance tax bonds that were
authorized for road and tribal.
Projects.
um, our
Our reporting does not yet
include any of the 2024 general
obligation bond appropriations,
but we'll start tracking those,
um, probably next spring,
assuming they're assumed they're
uh sorry, approved by voters,
and that's when the bonds for
those projects will go out for
sale.
Um, in the last two bullets
under key points, you can see
some details on spending, um, so
we're estimating that close to
$370 million was spent in the
last quarter on legislatively
authorized capital projects, and
that amounts to about 15% of the
previous quarter's balance on
those same projects. Um, this
spending level was um probably a
little higher than past
quarters, uh, because a bunch of
projects were facing reversion
dates in June.
So as of mid-June when we pulled
this data, uh, there is a little
bit over $120 million still
sitting on projects that had
2024 reversion dates.
Um, the Board of Finance
continued to process draws on
those projects since we pulled
this data and about half of it
was drawn down, um, they're
estimating that about $12
million in severance tax bond
appropriations are going to
revert and kind of more
importantly, there's still $550
million in balances on 2020
general obligation bond projects
that have gotten an extension to
spend that money, um, so we'll
be hoping to see that money.
gone down over the next year.
Since the first quarter of this
fiscal year, um, a little over
$700 million was spent on
projects authorized by the
legislature or about 26% of the
total at the beginning of the
fiscal year. And then you can
also see some details on
spending for the other items
that are included in our totals,
um.
You know, everything was spent
down except the balance in the
public school capital outlay
fund, which went up, um, by
almost 3. interestingly here
too, we are seeing a little bit
of an increase in overall
expenditure rates on capital
balances relative to 2022. Um,
this fiscal year they increased
by about 5% over the same rates
in FY 22. Um, I think sort of
what you might be seeing here is
A couple things, um, one, it's
partly a reflection of the fact
that things really slowed down
during COVID, um.
Also, a lot of these projects,
um, that were reverting in 2024
were authorized during COVID and
sort of my hypothesis would be
that those took kind of longer
to spend than usual, um, in the
spring of this year we had a far
greater amount uh still
outstanding on projects that
were about to revert than
normal, um, and we did see that
come down, although there's
still quite a bit of money out
there.
Relative to normal. Um, OK, if
you want to turn to page 2 now.
Um, chart 2 at the top of this
page, you can see how
outstanding legislative
appropriations break down by our
major category and the basic
takeaway here is that most of
the outstanding money for
legislative projects is tied up
in local projects, followed by
statewide and higher education,
and then you can see the reauth
amount also there in yellow.
Um, I also wanted to say, um,
relative to these balances, um,
and I've told you all this
before, but you know, we track
unspent funds and spending as
sort of our simplest proxy for
what weather projects are
moving, um, but because of some
of the chronic challenges with
the capital outlay program, we
know that spending is a pretty
imperfect proxy for actual
project success or what I mean
by that is whether the
Funding is actually resulting in
projects getting done and put
into service in your
communities. Um, and better
tracking these outcomes and sort
of addressing some of the issues
that we know can get in the way
of ultimately achieving these
outcomes, um, is something that
still needs some work, um, and
that we can continue to focus on
going forward.
OK. Um, moving under, moving
down the page, um, to the items
uh under the headline
implementation of 2024 capital
outlay initiatives. I wanted to
give you all some implementation
updates on things that you put
into place this session. So, uh,
the first of those is the
capital Development Reserve
Fund. Um, this is a new fund
that you all created um through
a bill sponsored by
Representative Lente and
Representative Small.
Um, aimed at reducing
volatility, revenue volatility
in the capital program.
Um, and essentially
transitioning the capital
program to rely more on cash and
less on debt and sort of create
the same way you have done for
the general fund, take out the
roller coaster and create more
steady growth for the capital
program over time. So in June,
the board of Finance, as a
result of this bill, sold 7
severance tax notes totaling
about $475 million for a
one-time transfer to seed the
capital Development and reserve
Fund, uh,
This fund will now start
spinning off money for you all
to appropriate every year, um,
with that first distribution
expected to be around $24
million the bill that
Representative Lente and
Representative Small sponsored
specified the uses for these
funds to be for planning and
design or for construction of uh
smaller projects, so
construction dollars for
projects under $5000. Um, how
exactly
You all want to appropriate this
money, um, this first year and
then maybe it might be different
uh after this year is sort of
open for discussion and we can
talk about that a little bit in
the Q&A if you'd like to.
Um, all right. Uh, you will also
created a new infrastructure
planning and development
division within the Department
of Finance and Administration
last year and that division now
exists, has the director and has
begun hiring staff, um, DFA's
federal Grant Bureau has been
transferred to the new
infrastructure division, um, and
in this first year with
staffing.
Uh, the division is focusing on
staffing up its funding
navigation function, uh, as well
as some of its planning
functions and is also focused on
putting new systems and
processes in place that are
really going to provide the
foundation for working towards
its larger policy goals going
forward. Um, so this includes a
new system for planning,
funding, um, and managing
capital projects, um, that the
goal of
That is really to improve our
ability to coordinate funding
for projects, um, and to track
project status and outcomes, um,
like I mentioned before, uh, at
least with legislative capital
outlay, we really don't have a
good way of knowing, especially
with all the projects that are
out there right now, when the
money is spent, what the actual
result has been for the public,
um, and we hope to be able to,
you know, on kind of the front
end, do better planning, get
money together for high
priority.
projects quicker and then know
that when the money is spent
that the thing has actually
gotten done and met its intended
purpose.
Um, I also kind of wanted to
highlight for you guys that um
implementation of these systems
and the divisions work overall,
um, could provide additional
support to you all um for your
capital appropriations, um, that
would be sort of at your request
direction and discretion. Um,
and, you know, I think something
to think about now, um, for you
all as this division is getting
up and running is, you know, if
there
are specific things you would
like to see them do that you
haven't maybe heard us talk
about already. Um, now is a
great time to sort of raise some
of those um needs and ideas um
to Wesley and I and I know
they're um very open to figuring
out how to meet whatever those
needs you guys have are.
Um, all right, uh, moving down
to the bottom of the page. I
also wanted to provide you an
update on the New Mexico match
fund, um.
So this was created as a result
of House Bill 177 sponsored by
Representative Dixon, um, and
received an initial $75 million
appropriation. Um, this fund is
to provide required local match
for competitive federal funds,
um, and intended to facilitate,
um, New Mexico communities and
state agencies and seeking those
federal funds and hopefully
winning them more readily. So
about 65
1 million of that $75 million
appropriation is available um
for award to the eligible
entities for the matching funds
and then the rest was set aside
for slightly different purposes,
um, $200 is for administration
of the program, and then 7.5
million is set aside for
implementation grants, um, which
essentially would be available
to entities that apply for the
matching fund assistance and
then receive federal awards.
Um, if they need, you know, kind
of technical assistance and
managing the grants, doing the
federal reporting, stuff like
that, um, they can apply for
funding to get that support.
Um, all right. And if you turn
to page 3 and then there also is
an attachment right behind the
big spreadsheet detailing the
awards they have made so far.
So, um, to date, DFA has uh made
contingent awards to 29
applicants, um, totaling about
$44 million I call them
contingent awards because
essentially they're they're only
actually made if the recipients
receive the.
Federal grants. Um, if they
apply for the federal grants and
they don't get them, then that
money would kind of go back into
the pot.
Um, most of these awards are
benefiting local entities as
opposed to state agencies or
higher ed institutions, so 26 of
those awards totaling $41
million. So the vast majority
went to local entities, um, with
about $29 million of the
committed funds so far going to
local entities in rural areas.
Uh, only one on one, only one
award went to state agencies and
to to higher education
institutions. Um, for
The funding that is still
available, um, it is sort of
open for application on a
rolling basis and DFA will take
those whenever, um, and they're
continuing to make awards, the
figures I have in here for you
were up to date as of last week
and I just got a new spreadsheet
last yesterday, um, with a
couple more, so this is ongoing
uh and we can continue to update
you on it.
Uh, moving down the page, um, I
also wanted to give you a little
bit of an update on construction
costs, um, so you can see in the
first paragraph here, just some
national trends on construction
costs, uh, non-residential
construction costs were up about
1.3% in July over the previous
year and subcontractors were
charging um between about 1.5
and 3% more for their services
relative to last year. Um, so
these are really good numbers.
Relative to what we've seen in
the past and kind of signaling
that um, you know, costs are
increasing at a much more
moderate rate and the, the
really dramatic increases we've
seen since the pandemic should
be leveling off. Um, material
costs are sort of going in a
number of different directions,
some still going up, some going
down, some staying kind of flat.
So what does this mean for what
we're actually seeing in terms
of construction costs in New
Mexico and the requests that
we're uh starting to receive for
next year's capital process.
Um, through the public school
capital outlay Council, um, we
are seeing that the cost of
construction for new public
schools, uh, seems to be
leveling off, although at a
quite high level, um, relative
to just a few years ago. Um,
PSFA, uh, the agency that staffs
the public school capital outlay
Council is projecting school
replacements that are currently
on its project schedule to cost
between about $600 and $1200 a
square foot, uh, with the
Variation largely being a result
of location, so construction of
schools in um more rural remote
areas is quite a bit more
expensive than a less rural
areas.
Um, and this does, you know,
represent a significant increase
over the last couple of years,
but it's about even with what
we're seeing at this time last
year, um, so that's good. Uh,
you know, one sort of outlier in
all of this is the request we
just heard a couple weeks ago,
um, for capital outlay from
higher ed institutions in 2025,
um, we continued to see these
requests reflecting a projected
significant cost increase.
Even relative to last year, um,
some projects that are asking
for additional funds that
requested and received um sort
of phased funding last year, uh,
their requests are reflecting an
increase on a per square foot
basis of about 50%. Um, so this
is something um my team is going
to be working on a lot this
budget season, um, trying to
kind of unpack why requests have
gone up this much.
Um, validate them and also um
talk with the institutions about
potential cost control
strategies that they might be
able to pursue.
So, um, more on that as we get
into the budget cycle.
OK, um, at the bottom of this
page, I'm going on to the next
page, I wanted to also kind of
talk to you a little bit on some
trends and some non-legislative
capital programs in particular,
sort of the dynamics between
revenues to those programs and
demand and we're seeing
different things in different
programs. So starting with the
public school capital outlay
funds, um, I mentioned at the
start of this program that the
fund now has an absolute balance
of $1.6 billion.
Um,
I probably don't need to tell
you that's a lot, um, but you
know, it, it's totally
unprecedented for that fund, um,
just a couple of years ago, um,
we were talking about
uncommitted balances in the
public school capital outlay
funds being around $500 million
they're still, they've kind of
continued to hover around that
level, um, for two years and
And uh now we're looking at if
the public school capital outlay
Council continues to tap its
full bonding capacity which
which has kind of been its
default practice for a number of
years, those uncommitted
balances, so that's not the
actual balance, but just the
amount of money that is there
that's not sort of planned for
any project, um, over the next
two years, just that could go up
to nearly $1 billion. Um,
interestingly enough,
This is happening despite a
major increase in the cost of
building new public schools and
also changes that you all have
made that have were intended
just to kind of increase school
district participation in the
fund, um, in reaction to large
balances in the fund. Uh, so the
big thing that the legislature
did was make across the board
reductions in the required local
match that school districts have
to bring. So essentially the
state.
For all school districts, the
varying levels, um, committed to
for the state to take on more of
the burden of the cost of
building new public schools and
for the districts to do less.
Um, this has had the effect of
increasing participation and
demand for these funds, um, yet
essentially, you know, the
potential revenues to the fund
are just so high, um, that we're
continuing to see the potential
for those uncommitted funds in
the uh.
Public school capital outlay
fund to keep increasing to quite
high levels. So, um, what does
that mean?
So a couple of years ago, um,
when there was some concern
about these balances rising, the
public school for the Capital
Outlay Council for the first
time just skipped a bond sale
altogether. So they essentially
passed on the opportunity to
bring more money into the funds.
Um, I think kind of revisiting
how and why um we're bonding at
what level for the fund is
something the council needs to
start to look at.
Um, you know, while there might
be some reluctance to not take
money that is available for
school construction and the
fund, sort of important to keep
in mind if you don't do that,
what happens to that money and
what happens to it is it flows
to the severance tax permanent
funds, which benefits the
general fund, which benefits
public schools, um, in different
ways for operational uh purposes
rather than capital and you
know.
I would sort of say that my
major takeaway from kind of the
revenue trends to the fund right
now is that capacity appears to
be higher than actual need. Um,
despite sort of costs going up.
Um, all right. If you'll turn
now to page 4,
the couple short paragraphs on
the top about the water trust
board. Um, this is another, uh,
non-legislative capital program
that benefits from the severance
tax bonding program and um here
we are seeing, I would say a
totally different dynamic in
terms of uh the kind of balance
between the revenues to this
program and demand for it.
Than we're seeing in the public
school capital outlay fund. Um,
so, uh, with rising oil and gas
revenues, um, these earmark
programs, which are the water
trust board, the colonius
Infrastructure Fund and the
tribal infrastructure fund, um,
have seen essentially two
doublings um in the amount of
money going into each of those
funds over a couple years. Um,
and now they're kind of leveling
out at a historically high
level.
Um, distributions to the water
project fund in 2023 and the
amount available for award to
water projects has exceeded
about $120 million for the last
two years and um last year you
all appropriate appropriated
additional funds on top of that
to the water trust board, $18
million through the capital bill
for cost overruns for existing
projects and then you all put an
additional $500 million into the
water project fund.
Um, for new projects.
And the reason you did that is
essentially there has been much
greater demand for the water
trust board funds than there has
been money available, um,
despite those revenue increases.
Uh, this trend looks like it
will continue again this year.
Um, the water trust board just
kind of went through the first
phase of its application cycle
where they ask communities to
submit notices of intent to
apply for the funds. Uh, they
got 90 of those with preliminary
requests totaling
$330 million. Um, so depending
on where those final numbers end
up both in terms of the revenues
and the actual requests as they
go through their next phases. I
think we would expect the demand
for those funds versus what's
available to be the demand to be
somewhere between double to
triple, um, the amount of money
that's available there.
So, um, just to kind of tie this
back to a couple of things that
you heard in the previous
presentation, um, and just to
kind of briefly address um some
of the questions that you had.
Um, so,
You know, one of the things you
heard from Clayton and Ria is
sort of a recommendation for
funding water projects more
through programs like this and
less through capital outlay, and
there's a couple of reasons for
that, um, to Representative
Armstrong's question about sort
of rural inequity, um.
And um Representative Garcia
brought this up as well, um, you
know, these, these programs have
a way of sort of objectively
evaluating those kinds of needs
and awarding grant money, um,
based on those needs, um, which
we don't, you know, we don't do
very well in capital outlet. It
is all grant based, but in sort
of the system as a whole, um,
the way the local appropriate
work we're not prioritizing more
grant money to the systems that
have a greater financial need
for it. Um, you know, the other
advantage of these programs is,
um, they can create policies and
incentives that uh sort of
Incentivize the systems to take
steps to address some of those
underlying operational and
financial constraints that
create some of the capital
problems that we have today, so
that both were fixing the
infrastructure, but also
hopefully fixing some of the
operational problems so that we
don't end up in the exact same
place we're in now, 20 years
from now after we've made
billions of dollars of new state
and.
investments in these programs,
um, so, you know, essentially
one of the things that you all
might think about is, you know,
whether you want to look at
strategies to kind of get water
funding out of capital outlay
and direct some of that money,
um, towards programs like this
that um communities are using
and that we know are working
pretty well on a number of these
different um levels with the
problems these system.
are facing.
All right, uh, now, Antonio is
gonna take you through some um
local capital I capital outlay
highlights for the meeting
location. We didn't do specific
project spotlights this time
since we're bringing you this
big report, but he's gonna give
you some kind of uh summary
information on Capitol Outlet in
Lincoln County and Riodoso and
then take you through the 1
million and greater report.
Thank you, Kelly.
Uh, good morning, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, as
Kelly mentioned, I will be
providing a brief overview on
the status of capital
appropriations in both Lincoln
County and the village of
Riodoso, uh, starting on page 4
with Lincoln County, you'll see
that local entities received
about 79 capital appropriations
totaling $19.8 million between
2020 and 2023, uh, as of
mid-June, about 46
of those funds remain unspent,
uh, per year over that 3 year
time span, there was about 10 to
26 appropriations uh per year.
Uh, moving on about 15 higher
education or state agency
projects received appropriations
totaling $6.8 million
outstanding balances on those
projects equate to roughly 41%,
driven largely by a 2023
appropriation to the Homeland
Security Department for flood
damage in Riodoso.
Uh, additionally, in the 2024
legislative session, local
entities in Lincoln County
received nearly $500 in capital
outlay as well.
Uh, if you'll turn your
attention to table 2 on the
left, you can find the top
recipients of local capital
outlay in Lincoln County, which
includes Riodoso, uh, Lincoln
County, Hondo Valley Public
Schools, uh, Riodoso Downs and
Corioso in that order, but among
others.
Turning to page 5, you'll see
tables 3 and table 4 represent
the top ICIP priorities, the top
5 ICIP priorities for Lincoln
County and Riodoso.
Um, and we also provided a
similar summary on the village
of Riodoso where the village
received about $8.1 million
split between 12 capital outlay
appropriationations between 2020
and 2023.
Um, additionally, during the
2024 legislative session,
Riodoso was allocated $950,000
in capital appropriations
divided by two larger projects,
one being $500,000 for forest
and watershed improvements and
the other being $450,000 for the
construction of the Fort Staten
uh Veterans conference Center.
Uh, lastly, at the bottom of the
page, Riodoso's ICIP details
about 63 capital projects with
total estimated costs of
approximately $356.9 million.
Uh, one of the projects Riodosa
received uh during the 2024
legislative session included on
the was included on their ICIP
for watershed improvements and
the removal of trees, in which
case they received $500,000 of a
$900,000 request.
Uh, now, Mr. I'll just quickly
go over some of the attachments
we have at the end of the memo,
starting with our 1 million and
greater reports for the 4th
quarter of FY 24, which we
provided updates on about 778
active projects totaling about
$4.5 billion.
Notably, you'll find 73 blue
rated appropriations that have
been fully expanded or completed
this quarter, and 258 red rated
appropriations indicating no
activity, significant obstacles
or delays. Recent
reauthorizations or no reporting
reflected in the report here.
Mr. Chair, you can also find
some of these projects detailed
on page 6 of your memo.
Next behind the million and
greater report we provided
summaries on the status of the
Water Trust board, Collonius,
and tribal infrastructure fund
projects. And finally, under the
uh attachment F, the final
attachment, we have a list of
projects authorized by the
legislature for which general
funds have not been budgeted.
Currently $89.4 million in
general funds are considered
authorized but unissued with $70
million related to 2024
appropriations for entities not
a.
Compliant, not ready to proceed
or that have not completed the
required questionnaires for
these funds.
Uh, Mr. Chair, if you would
like, I can go through the 1
million and greater report and
provide a couple of key
highlights.
And before I do so, would you
like me to go through maybe 1 or
2 and pause for questions or go
through the entire report and
have questions. Tell us what
page you're gonna start on, uh,
page one, Mr. Chair, because
everybody has been reading the
Kapala Bible.
A.
Page one of the big sheets,
correct? Yes.
OK, go through. OK, maybe 1 or 2
on each page and.
Go through all the pages of,
uh, Mr. Chair, beginning on page
one, lines 3 through 14, you can
see there are a number of court
replacement or renovation
projects underway statewide. Uh,
some of these projects are
progressing more quickly than
others, for example, the Santa
Fe County Magistrate Court
Building construction is one
that has experienced delays.
Uh, and just below that
underlines 17 and 18 under the
aging and long-term Services
Department section you can see
balances on the GOB packages for
senior centers. These continue
to carry large balances
including more than $12 million
on 2020 projects or more than a
third of the overall
appropriation package for that
year.
Uh, if we move on to page 3 of
the reports under the Department
of Cultural Affairs, uh, 3 and
4, you'll see that the agency is
making good progress on most of
its appropriations, and you can
find details on the sites
benefiting from statewide
appropriations in the project
status column.
Uh, next, Mr. Chair, on page 4,
you'll find the Department of
Finance and Administration, uh,
their local government division
manages the most local capital
outlay projects of any agency,
including the largest portion of
member projects. Uh, on the top
of page 5, you can see several
major appropriations to the city
of Albuquerque were reauthorized
in 2024 and have significant
balances remaining, um, on that
note, some of these projects
that are closed in the last
Quarter are on this page, page
5, and you'll see others with
2024 reversion dates still
showing balances. If these
projects are not noted as as
reauthorizations, this may mean
their final draw request had not
been processed at the time the
quarterly data was pulled. We
will update these again next
quarter and expect to see more
project closures then.
Now, if you'll go ahead and jump
to page 13 in the report.
will be finishing off with the
Department of Finance and you'll
see a few new 2024 projects
funded for over $1000.
Next on to page 21 starting line
378, you can see updates on the
progress of the new building for
the educational retirement
Board, when this project is
complete, the General Services
department will finalize a
purchase of the old building,
which will then house the public
regulation commission.
And just after that on page 22
starting on line 391 is the
environment department section.
This is where you will find
major appropriations for local
water projects, uh, in the first
part of this section you'll see
a number of recent
reauthorizations were currently
lacking reporting on.
Uh, Next, a little further along
in the report on page 27 line
490, you can see the request for
proposal for construction of the
new forensic unit at the
Behavioral Health Institute in
Las Vegas is currently
advertised.
And onto line 492. You can see
the new small homes at the
veterans home are substantially
complete.
Next on page 28, line 503 and
504 at the top of the page are
the status of funds appropriated
to the executive Office
building. The building is moving
into the design phase, but the
future of the Casitas that are
part of the site remains to be
determined.
And lastly, Mr. Chair, um,
jumping to the end of the report
on page 42, you will see several
appropriations for dams under
the state engineer's office and
the status of those projects.
We can now stand for questions.
Thank you.
Um, Mr. Chair, I wanted to
mention one more thing, um,
you're Antonio will be sending
out your sponsor reports, um,
sometime next week, so look for
those and if you have any
questions, um feel free to get
in touch with us, um, and, you
know, as he mentioned, there's a
number of projects with 2024
reversion dates um on this
report. Um, again, we do expect
to see more of those come off,
but uh we didn't have final
information on those. So you'll
see that some of
Those with significant balances
were rated red for that reason.
Um, I also wanted to mention
that um we, over the past year
have um been in a little bit of
a whiplash system with the
reporting system for capital
outlay. Um, there is an attempt
to transition it to BFM, which
is kind of the new budget
management system, um, that
essentially was unsuccessful, so
we've gone back to CPMS.
And uh you all appropriated
money to DFA to build a new
system that actually works,
which um Wesley and the
infrastructure division are
working on. Um, this was the
first quarter that we went back
to CPMS and um as Antonio
mentioned, you know, we do give
red ratings when entities just
aren't doing their reporting,
um, and we think there is
probably more of that this
quarter due to the reporting
system change again, so we hope
to see the.
Reporting improved next time we
give you this report this fall.
Don't mail me mine, it'll all be
ready.
Uh, questions.
I agree.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you both for the.
Report, um.
I'll let you know that I've
already spoken with our county
manager to and his speakers on.
Um.
You will get your updates for
Lee County and uh
On page 19.
I think
Can you tell me what bond not
sold where, where does that put
us in, in, in the process.
On the project status I have a
bonds not sold on several
different projects, one of which
is uh a Lee County project. Most
128.
Yes, um, Mr. Chair,
Representative Pettigrew, so,
um, all of those projects at the
bottom of the DOT section from
2024, um, are the projects that
were appropriated severance tax
bonds in last year's capital
bill.
Road improvements. Um, those are
actually authorized for FY 25,
um, so they haven't had an
opportunity for the bonds to be
sold yet and essentially the
first opportunity for DOT to
certify the need for these
projects to the board of Finance
will come in December.
Um, and then.
Yeah
Cool. They'll have another
opportunity in June, um, so
hopefully we'll have a better
update at our next quarterly on
whether they are likely to sell
any of those at the December
sale.
Perfect. I was thinking that
that was an authorization for
next year, but I wouldn't, I
wasn't sure and just wanted to,
to verify that for that, for
that one and for, for 128 and
for 380.
I do appreciate the update,
Chairman, uh, is there a way
that we can get this in a non
PDF version to where I can
manipulate the spreadsheet.
Um, Petty Greer. Thanks. Yeah,
it might scare you though.
Either that or we can just break
it up and just send me the Lee
County portion.
Whatever works best. Thank you,
Chairman.
Representente.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you. uh, Antonio, thank you,
Kelly, for the presentation this
morning and publicly I want to
acknowledge your work in Capital
Outlay and all the things that
you have done to help inform all
of us, even when it's sobering
about how our communities are
doing or or what they're not
doing perhaps in some cases, and
I know that we get defensive
when we hear our, our counties
or our towns are not spending
money efficiently, but sometimes
to the point of Representative
Armstrong, you know, it may be a
little bit difficult in some
cases where rural communities
can't spend money.
As efficiently as as a city of
Albuquerque, right? And we
understand that so the process
is
That we've inherited, uh, now
being in the 2nd year of being
more intimately involved in
capital outlay are those that
may in some cases be outdated
and we've acknowledged that and
we've tried to work on things
that we can try to improve upon
and uh publicly saying that one
of those things is on localized
level trying to have those local
governments provide their lists
of requests for the year to be
moved up uh versus it being done
the first week of of the
session.
Uh, as it's been done in the
past, moving that up to perhaps
in the fall or even earlier than
that as we move along, so I
think that does a lot so that we
can be more informed as
legislators to appropriate funds
on projects that we can know
more about and they can vet and,
and the staff can vet for us so
that we can have a list,
hopefully, and I know that this
is the case in the house where
Cali has started the process of
providing our membership, uh,
lists like this color coded with
um our own individual
Projects and how they are
stacking up and are they green,
are they yellow? Are they, are
they blue or are they red? And
so hopefully for all of us, we
can make much more educated
decisions on how we're going to
move forward and what projects
we need to continue to fund or
maybe just hold off on funding
because they're not spending
their money. And so I know that
a lot of these things are works
in progress and we look forward
to um enhancing this process for
the capital outlay process
because in some cases, these are
the only dollars.
That many of our communities
receive in the year to help fund
their their projects or help
fund the governmental
organizations for things that
they really need. And so as you
move forward, I just want to
again publicly acknowledge Cali
and Antonio and your staff and
LFC for all that you've done
for, for us and for, and, and,
and for how we help our
communities to help get them to
a point where they can hopefully
get to a point that they can
have.
Infrastructure that they can
help their own citizens out
with. So thank you again, thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Uh, Representative Lente, I know
that DFA is moving the deadline
for the ICIP requests to
September, I believe.
So I, I don't know if cities and
counties know that yet.
I don't know how we get them the
word and then our deadline moved
up to December.
For our requests.
And so they've moved up those
timelines.
Uh, just so you know, Mr.
Chairman, that's something that
that we do know, but just to let
people know publicly that this
is going to not to be a punitive
in measure, but to help the
whole entire process so we can
be much more efficient and much
more effective as as we fund
projects. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Representative Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And thank you, Kelly, for the
presentation, uh, on the, I had
a question on the infrastructure
planning and development
division. You said it is a new,
it's a new portion of that. So
will that, will that, um,
division be able to come out
into, um, counties and
municipalities and kind of run
hurt over those.
Projects, will they come and
check them out, make sure that
they're online, is that what, is
that what that?
Division is for.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative
Vincent, um,
So I'm, let me back up a little
bit. Um, one thing that they are
planning to do for sure, um, in
terms of getting more involved
with communities is, um,
providing a lot more support,
um, and guidance on the planning
process, um, so kind of
providing communities with more
assistance and planning,
developing and prioritizing
projects, um, we've also talked
a bit about
have splitting the ICIP process
out into categories, um, which I
think would be quite helpful for
you all either in your
individual capital
appropriations or you know,
potentially any time the
chambers or body as a whole has
interest in sort of special
funding project, uh, packages,
um, or approaches for specific
project types so that
communities aren't necessarily
in the position of like, well,
you know, we need 5 things that
The senior center and we need to
fix our water system and our
parks, you know, etc. and trying
to prioritize those all into
just 5, but sort of for those
different major categories, you
could have a priority list for
each of them, um, which you all
could choose from.
Um, I, I think it's a little bit
of kind of a TBD thing as far as
like the extent to which um the
division will get involved in
actual project execution.
Um, but certainly, um, from my
perspective, like I see this as
a vehicle for the legislature
and the executive to kind of
build out those statewide
support strategies for
community.
that need them sort of cradle to
grave for these projects from
both the planning and
development toward the grant
management and actual execution
that we can somehow put a system
in place that has those things
available, um, for communities
that need them but is not sort
of a, you know, you have to do
this sort of thing.
And thank you for that. So, you
know, when we have when we have
a fire.
Um, we normally give people the
percentage of containment.
Which is like a report card and
what I would like to see is
maybe a performance base to
where I'm not saying that they
need to come down and really
supervise projects, but to make
sure that we're on track because
when I flip over here to this
2nd page and I think I come in
as Representative Linte was
wrapping up. I look at my
counties and you know, when
they, when they come to us with
ICIP.
request
and they tell us how bad they
need them. And then I look here
at where there are only 23%.
That that that, um, it's, it's
bothersome to me because I'm
gonna get it done kind of
person. I if you need the money,
get in there and get the project
done. Let's get it buttoned up
to where I don't have to, um,
Call you and kind of hound dog
you and tell you you need to get
that project done. You know, we
need a better report card than
that.
So I was hoping that maybe that
IPDD division could possibly
come down and
Maybe even get with the
legislators. I'm not trying to
ask for these if if they don't
have time, I'm not trying to put
them on the hook, but for me,
for sure, I would like to know
what their progress is so I can
say, you know, let's, let's get
this sped up a little bit. Thank
you. Um, Mr. Chair,
representative Vincent, so on
that front, I think, yes, like
definitely one of the goals of
this division and the system
they're trying to develop now is
to allow us to much better know
So where projects are at and
when the money is spent, like
what happens? Did it get done?
Um, that is a huge sort of hole
for us in the system right now.
Um, they're also moving towards
being able to track projects on
a project basis regardless of
funding source. Currently we
track appropriations, um, but as
you all know, many of the,
especially larger projects in
your community require a lot of
different funding sources to get
them done. Um, so we're trying
to
Focus on the project, not the
funding source, um, and you
know, this would allow us to
provide better reporting to you
as well as to be able like over
the last couple years, you know,
to be able to just generate
lists for you of projects that
are like.
Ready, but still have a funding
gap they need to fill that would
help you all prioritize.
Thank you and I look forward to
seeing you develop and roll out
that program that's going to be
outstanding and then my second
question was.
So you'll see one of my biggest,
um, appropriations was um.
Senator Burt and I, excuse me,
Cinder Burt and I had a, um, an
appropriation that or a project
that we needed to help with one
of our subdivisions that they
had a dilapidated.
System and they actually ran out
of water and they were actually
trucking them water in.
Um, weekly.
To
Provide water to the community,
not the the small community that
I'm talking about, not Rioso.
And I know that we could have
taken our money and stretched it
a lot further, but I think that
um they this particular, um,
this particular project that
we're working on, they did go to
the water trust board.
And they did get, I think the
amount of money, well, the max
amount of money that they could
possibly get out of the water
trust board. So I guess I'm, I'm
asking more for direction
since, since this was an
emergency thing.
We probably, it was a good idea
to go ahead and make them whole.
On this project by Senator Burt
and I giving him that money
instead of just sending them to
the water trust board.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Vincent based on what you just
said, which is what I know about
it, I would say yes.
Thank you for that. I just need
a little bit of affirmation
every now and then that I'm
doing the right thing with the
money. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Well, when you figure out
capital outlay, let us know
cause I'm Senator Campos and
Senator Rodriguez and I have
been there a few years and we
haven't figured it out in our
time. We've never been able to
change it in.
The history since that it was.
Hatched
Um, Kelly, there's some things
that are alarming in here to me.
Somewhere in here and I was
glancing through CYFD had money
for building improvements and
repairs.
In here and then the other day
they took behavioral health
money.
And used it for.
Building additions and repairs.
I don't know what page that was
on. I circled it in red, but I
can't find out which page. I
mean, did they not know that
they have capital sitting there
in in large dollar amounts and.
Um, Mr. Chair, um, they do know
that they have capital dollars
sitting there, um, hold on, I
wanna.
I don't know what page it was
on. I circled it with a red
pencil and
services, um.
So
What page?
Starts on page 26, but.
There's 3 in a row for CYF.
Um, oh, they're on page 28.
So lines.
Uh, 505 through 507.
Um, so these are appropriations
that date to 2022 that have been
um reauthorized several times,
um, including just this last
session, um, so, uh, we did
tour um that new home in
Albuquerque a couple of months
ago, um, uh, myself and Rachel
Mercer Garcia, um, and, you
know, we, we put the same
question to them
Um, um, you know, my
understanding was that at this
point, um, their intention was
to not make significant uh
capital investments in that
facility, um, because it wasn't
necessarily a long term
solution, um, and they're
exploring some other things, so
that was the answer we got on
that, um, you know, I would say
these appropriations kind of
remain a significant concern
about
um, for both capital and
programmatic reasons, um, and
the direction of these capital
funds in particular is.
Basically still um undefined.
But, but how do we stop them
from that and it's in the, I'm
sorry, they were in the red
sheet in these and it's page 5
to 7.
And there's 3 in a row, but I
mean they, they took critical, I
think critical money.
For behavioral health.
And made it for capital
improvements.
When they had capital money
sitting there and then gave you
the excuse that, oh, we don't
think it's gonna be long term.
Well,
Well, there's nothing in the
statute that stops them from.
From taking operational money
and turning it into capital.
Even though it's appropriated
that way, is there anything in
the statute?
I don't know, we should look at
that because.
I mean,
I mean, they, they chose to do
what they had wanted to do, but
they had the capital to do that.
Instead of taking the behavioral
health money.
Just
That's not common sense to me,
but.
knows anything in common sense
occurs in capital.
Hm
Um,
I, I, I don't know, certain
combos left the room. I know he
tried changing capital for.
Umting times.
S Rodriguez, I don't know if
you've tried it.
I think I attempted it once.
Uh, but I don't know how we fix
the system, I mean.
2019 projects are still sitting
here, right? That's almost 56
years old.
And and we're just sitting here
holding them, I mean, sure,
getting the ICLP out earlier
helps a little bit.
But I mean, how do, how do we?
I mean, you've been there a
while, Kelly, what, 3 or 4
years?
Um, Mr. Chair, um, so, you know,
I mean, I think there's a number
of different ways we can
continue to improve the system
and, you know, essentially like
we can provide you with lots of
options, um, depending on what
direction you want to go. I
think we have taken some
important steps recently that
sort of laid the groundwork for
um doing this um smarter if
that's the direction you'd like
to go.
Uh, so, you know, one important
thing that the new capital
development funds, we have did
was essentially create a
mechanism for funding, planning
and design, which we haven't had
before, um, you know, this is
kind of one of the best
practices that the local capital
outlay system lacks, um, is that
we haven't had a sort of clear
way to fund planning and design
and to separate it from
construction, um, nor for you
all to know sort of where the
Project is that um when you're
being asked to appropriate
dollars to it. Um, so, you know,
one of the things we can talk
about is how to put that to good
use, um, and to, you know, over
the next couple of years, get to
a point where we can sort of
separate some of that funding
and produce more projects, a
better pipeline for you all and
more projects that are coming to
you that are actually um ready
to go. Um, and then I have, you
know,
Lots of other ideas we can
discuss also, but um I, I do
think we have more tools that
we've had in the past and, um,
you know, we're, we're ready to
support you all in whatever
direction you want to go with
it.
Oh you have 112 people that are
stick their head in the troughs
and never look up and think
about common sense and then then
we sit here all year long and
see our projects aren't moving,
our projects aren't moving and I
don't know, I, I just.
I, I, I guess give us some big
ideas, right?
Give us some big ideas that that
fix the problem and, and I, I
don't know if we need this as a
motion, but I mean, no more
napkin plans, right?
From these universities, right?
I mean, here at UNM wants this
new building and then you hear
at UNM that they're not fixing
this other building and it's not
even on the list, right? And
that was a medical doctor's last
year and it wasn't even on the
list and then you hear that you
need it.
So I mean,
When we're doing capital, I
don't know if we have to do this
by motion, but no, if they don't
have a set of prints. They don't
have a set of plans.
I mean, do not put them in the
capital.
I mean, do we need, how do, how
do we instruct you guys to do it
that way?
Um, Mr. Chair, so on the higher
ed front, um, you know, uh,
You over the last year,
especially, um, have been
pushing them on that front, um,
and we have been taking that
message back to them as well,
um, you know, I do want to, uh,
Give UNM credit for hearing this
message with one of their big
projects, um, they're looking at
building a new medical school,
which is, you know, and
important thing for the state
and um the need is certainly
there like they're doing major
research out of a building that
has like, you know, their labs
have like wires going up through
the walls and um systems that
wouldn't pass code anymore, um,
so, um, they have
requested planning and design
money for this facility this
year, um, before they're gonna
ask for construction dollars.
We've not seen that from higher
ed institutions in the past, so
we're trying to push in that
direction, um, as well as Connor
and I will be working with them
on kind of the pre-planning
business plan phase that they're
kicking off really soon. Um, so
we are working towards that
stuff on the higher ed front and
think it's important there to,
um, as well as on the local
level.
Um, you know, another thing I
would suggest is that we may
start by focusing on kind of
specific priority um areas and
the investment and one of those
would be water, um, which you
heard some suggestions on just
this morning, you know, I think
it's especially sort of focusing
again on what not just are the
dollars getting spent, but what
is the outcomes of the spending.
Um, where it's most important
that we improve and reduce the
risk that the dollars are spent
and don't result in actual
benefits to your communities is
on these critical infrastructure
types, um, and something like
water is, I would say, you know,
in the scheme of things like
sort of an easy one because we
have programs that we know work
already, um, that we could sort
of supplement funding for and
try to carve them out of the
capital outlay.
Process. Um, so that for our
most critical infrastructure
types we're not um creating
those kind of risks that things
don't ultimately get done or
don't get done quickly enough um
when they're intended to meet
critical needs.
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just
really quick, you know, when we,
when we're in the, in the uh
session during the session, all
of this happens really fast, and
we have to, you know, we get our
list and we check through our
list. It would be awesome if we
could have.
This list combined with the new
requests.
On the same page because we're
always so rushed.
When we, when, and we're trying
to allocate and we're trying to
make decisions and I've got some
counties and municipalities that
request and give me a really
nice booklet with their with
what they want to in priority.
I've got another one that.
Gives it to me like this.
And so.
If we could, if we could unify
it and then when they make those
requests. I've also got a real
problem where I've got this city
of Sequro and the county of
Socorro, and they all come back
as just square.
And I don't know if it's the
city I don't represent the city.
I represent the county. And so
it gets really confusing and um
if we could have it all in one
sheet where we could actually
see, oh, Magdalena's had a $100
for the Benjamin Well, and it's
in the red and they haven't
spent a dime, but they're
requesting more money.
For another one. Well, I will
know why and that'll bring it to
my attention. So it would just
be helpful if it was simplified
and we didn't have so many
places to try to go and find it,
uh, just a suggestion. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Um, Mr. Chair, if I could
respond really quickly to that,
um, so to Representative Lente's
point, um, we have been um
working with LCS and leadership
staff, um, both majority and
minority in both chambers, um,
to talk about implementing an
earlier deadline um so we could
better prep materials like that
for you and so you all could
have more time. Um, this is
something I think when you do
all have individual staff, um,
we can help.
Train them to support you better
in, um, but, you know, one of
the most basic things was that
it's gonna be hard, no matter
how many staff you have if you
don't even know what is being
asked of you until the session
starts and then obviously
everything gets a lot more
complicated.
Um, so, um, you know, I think to
start, uh, I think LCS will be
finalizing the date soon, but
they're going to kick it up a
little earlier, um, and then for
next year, you know, we could
look at moving it up even more,
um, and then I guess what I
would say to you all is, uh, for
this year, you know, say we have
like an extra month, um, where
you'll have your request a month
a month-ish earlier, um, you
know, I mean, we're totally open
to
hear from you guys how we can
support you, um, with getting
whatever you want to know about
those requests, um, and
certainly we can try to have
like up to-date sponsor reports
ready for you then and if, if we
can have those conversations
about what you think you might
want different um for this
session as soon as possible we
can prepare for that.
Can you hear me? OK. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman, for obliging me a
second time. 11 thing that I, I
met with some of the members
that had some, some issues or
some concerns regarding the
capital outlay process and, and
one is to the point of, and this
is probably a germane form to
bring this up in, but the, the
issue of the governor vetoing
capital outlay after the fact.
and how we move past that, that
when we give to communities in
our districts that regardless of
if we.
Don't vote for a certain
initiative or for political
reasons then for for reactive
reasons she goes or the governor
may go and veto capital outlay
projects that we've actively
funded. Is there a process where
the legislatively or some other
way where we can get around that
so that we can make sure that
that money that we receive as
legislators gets to the
communities that it was intended
for.
Thank you Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for a second go at
this, the spreadsheet that we
talked about, Chairman, would
work perfectly, starting in
October, I'll start meeting with
all our political, my political
entities and and go through that
and then at the end of December.
We meet as a as a entire group
and go through those whole
things so that as we can look at
these spreadsheets and if we
have them, like I said, if we
can get it in an Excel
spreadsheet to where we can
manipulate it.
We can get the updates and we
can if, once, uh, people are in
position, I'll make sure that
those are.
Change and you're getting those
updates. I did get commentary
chairman back that yeah, last
month was kind of a difficult
thing to get updates into the
system. It wasn't a lack of
attempt. It was just some system
glitches, so we'll we'll stay on
track with that, that
spreadsheet will help us, uh, or
at least help me.
Because we're already I'm
already made my decisions by the
time I get to session.
Thank you.
Well, it's the $6 billion dollar
question, right?
How do we, how do we fix it? How
do we make it accessible? I
mean,
You know, the Navajo Nation is
just.
It's hard to get through their
process. So it's like a 10 ft
concrete wall in the chapters
can get through. And, and then
the money doesn't get spent and
they're struggling no matter
what it is, whether it's a road
or a water system or street
lights or whatever it is, it's a
10 ft brick wall that they can't
get through and that's why you
look at McKinnon County and
you'll see a lot of red, it's
because of that 10 ft brick
concrete wall. I don't know how
we fix that. We can't fix their
government. Then you go to ZUNY
and you
Zun on hardly any list, which is
a smaller pueblo, and the
pueblos are pretty good about
getting their stuff done. It may
take them a little more time,
but I mean sometimes there's
just that way in the city and
the county in Gallup are kind of
that way and Grant seems to get
their stuff done and, and so.
I don't know, can you, is there
an email system when you guys
send this out to city counties
in the quarterly reporting that
you add legislators to and say,
Hey, this is the Kapa a list
from DFA. You're a legislator in
that area or that district in
Antigu is red and say your
cities and counties are not
spending the money in their in
the red or in their in the green
if they're good in the green,
right? Or they're in they're
yellow so that they know we're
watching their capital outlay
and all the capital outlay, I
mean with AI that should be
pretty simple these days, right?
I mean we need to create a new
system
and maybe we'll have that.
That call of council and, and
DFA and say,
How do we create this new system
that alerts everybody in the
system that their capital outlay
is in the red.
So
I hate thinking saying think
outside the boxes I would never
want to be in the box, so I
don't want to think outside the
box, but I mean, think about in
reality how we make things
easier and.
Go away from the the 2020 I
don't when it was created, but
1950 era cap outlay system in
the new era and we're the only
state in the nation that does it
this way.
I mean, and politically, you,
you give capital to people that
you think you're going to vote
for your next election and try
to appease the masses and then
uh
You're trying to win their
reward, but you're just creating
headaches for everybody in the
system. It, it just creates a
headache for everybody in the
system, I mean.
M
We won't ever get rid of it.
So we can
Work on improving it by 350%.
And we'll have a bunch of
freshmen coming this year, so,
um, yeah, Mr. Chair, um, to that
point and sort of, you know,
building up what I said to
Representative Armstrong's
question, um, I think with all
the new members into we're also
available to work with them and,
um, help train them on all this
stuff coming into their first
session. Um, and we can
definitely, uh, think about
those other ideas with the new
system. I also just kind of
wanted to point you guys
To this authorized but unissued
list that we include every
quarter, um, and I can send this
to anyone who wants it
electronically as well. So it's
the 2nd to last attachment in
your packet. Um, I would say
this list is sort of like you're
bleeding edge indicator of
communities that are probably
going to have the most trouble
spending this money, um, because
they're the communities that are
having trouble getting over the
first hurdle of just getting
access to the funds, um, this
This list is quite long right
now.
Uh, the 2024 projects in
particular, um, that we're not
able to be issued, um, is
extensive.
Um, so, you know, this, this is
another thing aside from just
the, um, green, yellow, red to
kind of key in on, um, on
communities that are struggling.
And 11 thing you'll see on this
attachment in the last column,
um, is the reason that the funds
have not yet been issued to
these communities and
essentially there's 3 reasons.
One, that they weren't audit
compliant, um, 2, that they
didn't return the questionnaire
that they have to.
out to access these funds, um,
or 3 that the in the
questionnaire, they indicated
they were not ready for the
funds. Um, there can also be
anti-donation issues that are a
part of that. So just to make
you aware that's there.
No, I think that's a good point
and, and so maybe we make those
ineligible.
They're in audit compliant, I
mean, the statute says they're
they're ineligible anyway, and
we give them capital and they're
still ineligible.
I mean, do we just say in some
role if you're out of audit
complaints, then you're
ineligible and then we don't
have to worry about it.
I mean, we gave money to the, to
the auditor last year for some
of these small water.
Water districts to get in audit
compliance and I don't know
where how far he's gotten, but I
mean.
I mean, bring that up at the
next.
LCS meeting and leadership
meeting, I mean.
If you're out of audit
complaints, then you should be
ineligible.
You just, we're going to fund.
People that are ineligible and
all we're doing is putting the
carrot out there and they can
never get it.
And I'll shut up, Mr. Chair, we
have suggested or asked about
adding like audit compliance is
kind of a checkbox on the
request form, um, so that when
you all got it, you would see if
they were audit compliant or
not, um, that has not been done
and I, I think they're
reluctance has kind of been that
it's a moving target, um, you
can be not audit compliant one
month and be audit compliant the
next. Um, you know, I mean, my
sort of thought is you might as
well have the information at
least and then you.
You can make that judgment, but
we can bring that up again.
Yeah, well, let's answer the $6
billion question before it gets
to be a $7 billion question.
I don't see anybody else's hand
up.
So I appreciate your time. Thank
you for being here.
I think we're all adjourned.
Everybody have a safe trip home.
Some of us got to go to Santa Fe
tomorrow.
Tax and revenue.
tax stabilization.
Uh
Thank you guys. We're adjourned.
