I guess let's get started since
the sentences here. We're gonna
start out because yesterday I
don't know Senator Woods had a
day of prayer yesterday. Senator
Woos you want to start us off
with a prayer this morning.
Our Heavenly Father, today we,
we come to you with a, with a
heart that is, is looking to
help New Mexico to be a better
place. We just want to pray for
our state and pray for a nation,
dear Lord, and this.
Be with us through these times,
these troubled times. We have so
many people in need, so many
things that need to be solved
and we have the people around
this table to get that done and
dear Lord, just give them the
wisdom to do that.
In Jesus' name I pray on men.
Amen.
Joey, you're gonna start off.
Yes, sir. Good morning, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee. So we are behind tab
F in your binders. We have uh
this morning a preview of agency
special supplemental and
deficiency requests.
Uh
So, um, before we begin, I
should tell you that, uh,
Agencies, um,
Agencies were given an earlier
deadline than in past years for
special requests uh from the
Department of Finance and
Administration. So that's
enabled us to have a little more
time with these uh appropriation
requests, but uh we do uh think
that
These requests are currently
incomplete. So for supplemental
and deficiency requests, DF DFA
set a deadline in November, so
we still expect there are some
out on that as well as we don't
have any um requests for public
schools. So if you uh think
about last year, there was a
total of $635 million in in
special uh appropriation
requests for public schools. So,
um, we, we do think that there
are probably still some requests
that are not included on this
list.
about to go over. So in total,
agencies requested a total of
$2.717 billion.
Uh, that includes uh 2.674 from
the general fund 35 million in
other state funds, 750,000 in
interagency transfers and $6.5
million in federal funds.
Um,
this, you know, excluding those
public school appropriations I
told you about this uh
represents an increase of $519
million over the request that
you all received last year. So
it's a 23% increase from the
2024 requests. Um, and, and
significantly more than
traditionally special
appropriations, uh, have, uh,
have been in, except for the
past few years. So at the bottom
of page one in your packet, you
can see uh uh over time, the
growth.
In those requests to where we're
now at $2.7 billion.
So, uh, what, so the actual, the
number of requests we received
this year is actually down
slightly from the prior years,
but as I said before, the
dollar amount of the total
requests are up significantly.
Uh, why is that? Well, so one of
the things that we, we haven't
really received in
Prior years. Oh, do you want me
to put this up on the
OK.
Maybe if I can ask. So Mr.
Chairman, as I was saying, um,
One of the reasons for this
significant increase in, in
funding for requests versus uh
the number of uh request is we
have a larger
Larger number than ever of nine
figure appropriation requests.
So, um, 5 agencies submitted at
least 7 requests for more than
$100 million. Um, you can see in
page 2 total requests uh from
the largest agencies. So higher
education, including all of the
institutions and the higher
education department had a total
of $584 million in requests. Uh,
again, that's all of the
institutions, um, the
environment department
was the largest single agency
with a total of 474 million in
requests, um, followed by the
Department of Transportation
with 350 million. So if you
think about that in terms of
All of the other agencies that
aren't.
Um, specifically mentioned on
this list, they had total
requests of 460 million. So
those couple of agencies with
extremely large requests are,
are, um, are dominating these uh
total requests.
So just a couple of areas that
you're going to see when we go
through the list. Uh, you're
gonna see a lot of
Uh, request in here from
agencies for information
technology, um, including, you
know, requests for software,
hardware. There's a lot, there's
a number of requests for
cybersecurity. Um, and so
there's at least 55 million in
total requests for technology.
That's not including big
requests from the Department of
Information Technology for
broadband cybersecurity, and uh
those large IT projects that you
all do every year, that's known
as the C2 process. Another area
where we're
Seeing a lot of requests is to
purchase vehicles. So there's at
least 7.8 million in here for
vehicles, uh, mostly from the
General Services department. Um,
that's in addition to some
pretty sizable request we saw as
part of the capital outlay
process. So, um, so both GST and
M-nerd uh requested uh vehicle
funding and specials and in the
Capitol outlay, Department of
Public Safety didn't request a
special appropriation for
vehicles, but they had a 17.
$9 million dollar request in the
capital outlay framework. So
overall, this one time funding
requests for vehicles is pretty
significant across different
areas of the budget.
Another area where we saw a lot
of requests was in the, it was
for agencies to do marketing and
promotion, promo, promotional
campaigns. We'll point some of
those out as we go through. Uh,
another thing for you all to
consider um as we're going
through this is, is where
agencies are requesting funding
for personnel. So you always
need to be cautious, um, with
personnel fun funding personnel
with uh with non-recurring money
would would when those can turn
into recurring requests. And
we'll highlight a couple of
those as we walk uh through the
lists, uh, and as I mentioned, a
lot of agencies requested
funding both in specials and in
capital outlay for facilities.
That's something we're gonna
have to keep an eye on is make
to make sure we don't double
fund those across different
areas of the budget.
Uh, so, uh, before we, we dive
into the spreadsheet, um, Mr.
Chairman, I did want to make a
quick note about uh ARPA
appropriation. So the state and
local fiscal relief funds. So,
last time, this year, last year
at this time, there's about $445
million in unencumbered ARPA
funds. As that stands, uh,
today, that's down to about $45
million. So some of the work
that you all did during the last
session in, in
And exercising oversight on
agencies to make sure all of
those funds are obligated by the
December 31st, 2024 deadline,
um, has shown results. So of
that 45 million, we've reached
our LFC analysts have reached
out to those individual
departments and, you know, and
we've heard back from them that
those agencies are expecting
those uh balances to be fully
obligated by the deadline. So,
um,
We're hearing from agencies,
they have plans to fully
obligate all of those funds
before the end of the year. In
addition, I will say the
Department of Finance and
Administration has been taking a
proactive role in assisting both
state agencies and uh local
governments that received some
of the state and local fiscal
relief funds. So to help the
Uh, I, all the agencies and
local governments fully obligate
those dollars before the federal
deadline.
And so with that, Mr. Chairman,
I think we're ready to go into
the list of requests and just
keep in mind, so, um, most of
these requests are from agencies
that you all haven't heard from
yet, so that you're gonna hear
from in November and December.
So when reviewing these
requests, uh, you know, we are
happy we're, we're taking notes
on your questions, and we'll
forward those along to agencies
to address in their budget
presentation, there are a small
number of agencies that had
requests that you heard this
month and we're working with
those agents.
where we need you to get more
information on the details of
those requests.
But as we go through the list,
if you have questions you want
us to reach out to the agency
on, please, please share those.
Joey, these are new requests,
but do we have their unexpended
balances from the years in this
too, or do we know that number?
Oh, yes, I'm sorry. I, I should
have mentioned that before, Mr.
Chairman. So in your binders
behind tab Y.
There is a list of all of the,
what are we, 2022 and 2023?
Sorry, 24 and 2023 special
appropriations and the balances
for those appropriations. I'll
point a couple of those out as
we go. Um, but again, behind tab
Y, all of the special
appropriations that are
currently active and um
And available to agencies. So
the question of the day is gonna
be why are we going to give you
more money? I, so Mr. Chairman,
as I said, I'm going to point
out a couple of those those
instances, and I think that's
right, right? So we've got, you
know, some agencies with
appropriations from 2023 that
are still active, that are
coming back and asking for more
money for the, um, for those,
and it, you know, sort of think
about.
Uh
Information technology requests
that we do through the C2
process. You all are going to
see a huge number of requests
for reauthorization of C2
projects because you keep adding
new money to the pro the process
before all of the old money has
been spent. And so really taking
a look at some of these requests
and, and prioritizing is like,
OK, before.
You grant additional funds. We
expect to see the funds that you
already have appropriated spent,
I think is, is something to keep
an eye out for.
So, um
Mr. Chairman, uh, behind the
bullets on tab F, we have uh 23
page spreadsheet of agency
requests. So we have a total of
252 requests so far from state
agencies and higher education
institutions, and I'll just
start at the top here with uh
the judicial agencies. So in
total, judicial agencies asked
for 79 million in uh in in
requests. Again, this year, as
with prior years, we have a
number of uh
small requests in here for, for
small um whether it's uh
Information technology needs,
uh, facilities, things like
that. I will point out, uh,
To, uh, pretty large requests.
On line 9, you see a request
from the administrative office
of the courts, uh, for hardware,
software, and project management
for remote and hybrid judicial
proceedings across the state.
Um
Going back to what you were
saying before about the um the
prior year request. So you all
made an appropriation of $16
million back in 2023 for the
same purpose. If you look at
that uh spreadsheet behind tab
why you'll notice there that
initial appropriation still has
a balance of about $10 million.
Um,
Uh, so, AOC also requested some
capital outlay dollars uh for
courtroom modernization and text
to speech software, so examining
the extent to which those uh
those requests overlap one
another, um, and the status of
the of the current money that
you already have out there, uh,
is, is key to this one. I'll
also note on line 12 AOC also
requested um $25.2 million for
judicial facilities. Uh, that's
in
In addition to a $20 million
capital outlay, uh, request for
courthouse in the courthouse
Improvement County Matching
Fund.
So we should probably just shred
the section with the courts.
OK, um, well, I will move down
the list then, uh, Mr. Chair,
uh, if you turn to page 3 in
your packet, um, on line number
36, you see a $4.5 million
dollar request from the second
judicial District attorney for
the Organized Crime Commission.
This is one of those areas where
I was talking about personnel
requests. So the agency
indicates that that uh that um
request would fund 10 FTE at the
agency, and so that's something
you all will need to consider if
you wanna uh find
uh
Potentially recurring, uh,
personnel requests with a
special appropriation, uh, in
that area.
Mr. Chairman, uh, with that, I
thought those were the only ones
I had for the judicial agencies,
if you want me to move on to DFA
or if you, anybody had any
questions about the items uh
that I skipped over. Yeah, let's
just jump in there if you have a
question and so that way we can
keep rolling.
OK. OK. Any other questions, any
questions?
The in Padilla.
What is OSF?
Other state funds, Mr. uh Mr.
Chair and Senator Padilla, um,
so.
Yeah, so thank you. Yeah, we
were wondering over here on the
Senate side, but the other
question I had is, was there
anything here on the ERP studies
or implementations on the re uh
there's a lot of IT stuff. So,
um Mr. Chair, Senator, sorry,
I'm not familiar with that
acronym, but we'll have to go
back and find out. Enterprise
resource planning, it's sort of
a replacement for share.
Uh, so, uh, we, we will get to,
we'll, we'll get to uh share
with the Department of Finance
and Administration, um, but
we'll probably have to follow up
on, on that question. Thanks.
OK, what page me on Joey. So
we're on page 3.
And um I'll just note very
quickly uh on line 45, uh,
request from the tax and revenue
Department. This is sort of an
annual placeholder, the $5
million that they request uh for
um
In case you all make any changes
to the tax or motor vehicle
code, this, uh, gives them a a
source to update their systems.
It's really just a placeholder,
um, for
Until they determine what's
needed for those changes. Um,
as, uh,
Uh, Senator Padilla was asking
about a moment ago, the
Department of Finance and
Administration on online 46 is
requesting $1 million for an
audit of the share system, uh,
so,
Uh, Mr. Chair and Senator
Padilla, we're probably gonna
have to reach out to the
department for more information
on that specific request to, to
be responsive to you, but uh
they, they are requesting money
for share.
Uh, moving on to page 4,
continuing with, with uh DFA
online 52. You'll see a $75
million request for the New
Mexico Match fund. So you all
provided a $75 million
appropriation in 2024 for that
fund. Um, DFA has made
contingent awards of 55.2
million. So what I mean by
contingent awards is, uh,
essentially before DFA grants
that money to the um local
government, the tribal
government.
Or uh the state agency that uh
was awarded those dollars, they
have to receive a federal award.
So we're gonna have to keep an
eye on to what extent agencies
and local governments are
receiving those federal awards
to see if that 55 million is
going to be drawn down, but the
department's requesting $75
million to continue to make
those contingent awards, uh, to,
to those local governments and
uh other other entities. I that
fun run out really quick.
And, and so maybe look start
looking at bumping up that
number.
not
You're gonna have to speak on
the mic, Charles.
Mr. Chairman, um,
They've obligated 55 of the 75
million that you've
appropriated.
But
We're still waiting to see if
the if the agency that
Uh, got the matching funds
actually gets awarded the grant.
So it's contingent on them
actually getting the grant
award, so that's why Mr. Simon
is saying we're gonna need to
really monitor that, because if
they don't, if they strike out
on the ground, then that money
would not be up, could be
deobligated and spent somewhere
else. Um, and that's correct if
um
What happens, so, Mr. Cha, uh.
We're 6 months into the program.
So if
Um, the agency finds out that
The applicant doesn't receive
the award. They put the money
back in and could still um
authorize it again this fiscal
year. Is that correct? Uh, so,
uh, Mr. Chairman and
Representative, that's correct,
right? So that money would
remain in the fund for for
reward, but the point is you're
6 months into the grant program,
and you spent
2/3 of the money obligated 2/3
of the money. And Mr. Chair, I
should point out, uh, it's
actually a little more than that
because there was some set aside
for technical assistance and
administration.
Um, so the total available was,
was about 62.5 million, so 55
million of about 62.5 available
for actual grants.
Um, in addition to $7 million
worth of training.
So, um, Mr. Chair, and I'll ask
Kellida.
Weigh in on this,
so the law, um, allowed a small
set aside for DFA staffing to
run the program, but then the
bigger chunk that was set aside
is for technical assistance for
administering the federal grants
for local communities if they
receive them, which in the past
has been like actually having
the capacity to spend the money
in line with federal law.
$5 million.
Or technical.
Oh, all right, keep going, Joey.
But think about a different
number cause you're 6 months in.
There's, there's killing off the
top 10%
for operation and if.
You have more people apply in
the next 6 months, you won't
have soul language.
So, um, Mr. Chairman, moving on
to lines 54 through 56, you see
several requests from the public
school insurance Authority and
the General Services Department
for, uh, for insurance costs. So
on line 54, you see a $62.9
million request from NIPSI for
uh
For, and I'm actually looking at
this language, the language is
wrong, so we, we accidentally
have in here, uh, a duplicate
request. So the $62.9 million is
for the health benefits fund,
uh, the agency is asking for
that to offset COVID-19
expenses. This is an area where,
um, as you all heard in, in
great length, uh, the other day
in subcommittee, uh, the, uh,
The expenses of the benefit fund
are, are outweighing the, the
revenue into that fund. Um, so
the, uh, authority had passed
along a larger, initially passed
along a larger rate increase for
FY 25, um, to school districts,
then what was available in their
budget, um, the agency did agree
to pull that back to to allow
schools a little extra money in
their operating budget in the
current year, but that likely
means they're gonna be deficit
spending, uh, in the current,
uh,
In the current fiscal year and
so they're asking for 62.9
million to backfill that fund
and rebuild their fund balance.
Um, on the online 55, you see
$120.5 million to build, uh,
help rebuild the, the fund
balance of their risk fund. That
fund in particular has been, uh,
has seen a large number of um
pretty serious claims related to
school sexual misconduct, um,
and as well as pretty
significant claim
for, for wind and hail damage.
So the agency is requesting uh
some funds to offset future
premium increase and uh to
support sexual abuse prevention
training.
Inner woods.
Well
On these funds, why, why don't
we include that on the
BED budget.
So, um, Mr. Chairman and
Senator,
Typically as part of the public
school support um request and
appropriation you all include an
amount for insurance, uh, what
is happening here is the agency
is projecting that the amount
available for that, for that in
the public school support budget
is insufficient to meet their
needs. Exactly.
I, I will, I will say this is,
this is, uh, the, the risk fund
in particular is uh an area
where the agency does have a, a
pretty significant current cash
balance, but they're, they're
concerned about the, the, the
amount of liability out there,
and, you know, and want to make
sure that they have funds to pay
claims. But, but what I'm
getting at.
On risk funds.
On on especially uh
The the sexual abuse, that kind
of stuff.
If we don't keep some kind of
control.
On the individual.
I don't know how to say this,
but the, the, uh
The, the school district, if
there's a one particular school
district with has exceptionally
high risk, uh,
Then
If we don't designate that.
Particular risk to that
particular area.
It's, it's hard to control.
Those, those risks if we don't
do it to an individual area if
we just blanketed it out there,
then there's no responsibility
to correct the problem. I
understand the, the hail and the
fire and the flood and and that
kind of stuff is, is something
that we may have to socialize
more.
But, but this is socializing.
A whole lot of stuff that we
should be accounting for in the,
in the Fed budget. Yeah, so, um,
Mr. Chair and Senator, I think
that's right. One of the things
that was discussed at NIPSI's
subcommittee hearing the other
day, uh, one of the members
asked them about
Is the agency taking steps to
take a look at where those large
Um, sexual misconduct claims are
coming from and, you know, and
frankly targeting the risk
payments towards those, those
districts that are generating
the losses. And so a couple of
things. One, targeting uh the
areas where we're seeing those
losses and 2, taking a look at,
at, um, school district policies
and if school districts refuse
to adopt.
Best best practices for
preventing these kind of these
kind of claims, charging them a
higher rate. So I think the
agency has
indicated a willingness to do
that going forward, but again,
they're asking for this large,
uh, this large amount of money
to sort of shore up their fund
balance so that they have um
funding to pay claims should
they come in. But what I'm
trying to say is
Somewhere
The general public has to know
this information, and by not
putting it in the pe budget. It
is kind of covering it up over
here.
And, and the general public
doesn't understand the cost of
these.
Of this crime, so to speak. So,
uh, more transparency is what
we're after in the budget, not
trying just to turn around and
cover it up in a separate fund.
Saying, well, it really doesn't
exist.
And that's my opinion. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Represents Syria. This is, this
is Mr. Chairman, also to support
House Bill 28 was its training
everyone to learn how to um spot
problems and how to report them.
So everyone in the school
system, contractors, has to take
this training and they're just
getting it started. So that's
big chunk to,
everyone is getting they get it
started yesterday.
Those 3 lines are 250 million.
We just insurance liability. Mr.
Mr. Chair, that's correct.
I'm gonna go leave and go to law
school.
Menel is not in, this is just
schools and GST, yeah, so, so,
Mr. Chair, so the, the public
liability fund does cover
medical malpractice for uh
University of New Mexico
Department of Health. So there
is some med mal in that, but,
yeah.
Um,
Continuing with GSD online 57,
you'll note a $5 million request
to purchase uh electric vehicles
uh for the
The General Services Department
manages the fleet for, for most
state agencies. Uh, that's
duplicative of a $5 million
request in the capital outlay,
uh framework, uh, also for
electric vehicles. As I
mentioned before, as we go
through this list, you'll see a
large number of requests for
vehicles at a number of state
agencies. So last year, um, you
all, uh, gave the department $2
million
$22 million dollar appropriation
for vehicle replacement. Uh,
this year they're asking.
Make sure we assign those to the
state police. And, and, and
again, Mr. Chairman, that's not
inclusive of the 17.9 million
the state police requested for
uh in capital outlay.
Uh, so online 59.
Uh, you'll see a $5 million
request from the New Mexico
Sentencing Commission on um
Uh, for a crime reduction
grants. Uh this is another uh
item that you all have
previously funded in the past.
So there was a $4 million
appropriation in 2023, uh, for
the same purpose, uh, according
to our uh research that
appropriation has a $2.9 million
dollar balance. In addition,
there's a 2.5 million uh 2024
appropriation, um, to the
sentencing commission for the
same purpose.
Um
And uh with that, we can
Take any questions or move on to
the department of Information
Technology.
So do it has a total of $200
million 210 million dollars in
requests, uh, includes $10
million for cybersecurity, $80
million to support the
department's rollout of their
broadband plan. The broadband,
broadband is seen $1.3 billion
in federal broadband awards, um,
most of that is 675 million for
the, for the bead program. Um,
the office has, uh, uh,
Until 2029 to spend those funds.
There is a 25% state match for
those funds, uh, but that should
already be covered with funding,
uh, the, the broadband office
has already received, uh, in the
Connect New Mexicound, there's
about 254 million in state and
federal funds uh for the
state's, uh, broadband plan.
On line 61 and 65 in uh for do
it, you'll see a couple of
programs to subsidize uh
internet access for New
Mexicans. So on line 61, you'll
see 35 million for the broadband
affordable connectivity program
that was previously a federally
funded program that the agency
reports, uh, that, um, that
money has, has dried up and so
this would provide funds to the
state to continue that program
they estimate that that would
support about 90,000
Users
Uh
This is all, you know, we, we
talked a little bit about, uh,
the possibility of are you
making recurring commitments in
the in with non-recurring money.
So this would fund one year of
that program, and so I guess the
question is do you only intend
to fund 11 year of it, or is
this, is this gonna be a future
recurring need as we go along.
The same four line 65, so, uh,
the, the do it's requested $70
million for a satellite
connectivity infrastructure
deployment projects, so that
would subsidize satellite
internet service for um for uh
areas that currently don't have
broadband service, um, uh, that
would fund that program while
the uh broadband deployment
program is being rolled out.
Thank you, Chair. Um, and I, I
don't know if you'll have this
level of detail, uh, but still
on the line 65, is that existing
satellite, uh,
Technology, or is that this new
kind of stuff like Sky and a few
of these others that are being
developed in New Mexico as an
example.
Yes, so, so you're, you're,
you're, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Padilla, you're right, I don't
have a lot of detail on this.
We're gonna have to talk to the
department about that. What, uh,
what they have said is uh
is to launch the accelerate
Connect New Mexico satellite
connectivity now program. That's
the extent, that's the extent of
what we know, Mr. Chair, we
don't know if that's existing
stuff, or is this developmental
research and actually I I'm
remembering we do have some more
information. I'm, I'll, I'll
look that up and get back to you
what the department has provided
to us and uh and then on, on the
other piece, Mr. Chairman, so,
yeah, so the $9 monthly uh
subsidized fee for uh low-income
students, uh, it was like $9 I
think Comcast.
had the contract or whatever,
that's completely dried up. And,
and, um, you know, uh, the
presenter is absolutely right.
Uh, that's, this is one year's
worth of
Support or to help here.
Uh, do, do we, have they given
you any data on what multi
multi-year and can we get a,
like a discount of some kind if
we did another commit a
commitment for several years or?
So, um,
So, Mr. Chairman, Senator, I
don't know that we that the
department has looked into, can
we get a multi-year discount,
um,
So I, if, if memory serves the
uh program was to provide $30
subsidies to 90,000 homes. Uh,
the rest was for administration
of the program. So, um,
I, I can, I can get that
information. I, I have it here
about what we were, uh, about
what the
Um
What the agency is saying the
annual operating costs of the
program would be, um,
Well, I should, I should say the
annual subsidy cost of the
program, um.
But it's, it's, it's pretty
significant. So Mr. Chair, I
don't expect you to know this,
Joey, but uh, so, you know, $9
and now you're saying $30 you
know, for whatever that, that's
a 300%, that's a quite an
increase on what this would
typically have cost. So, we need
to find out what, what the
department's willing to do, you
know, to negotiate these rates.
I mean, that's a significant
increase per household.
When we were getting it before
for like 9 bucks.
So
Yeah, it's.
The, the new one?
I'm carrying his confirmation.
Maybe I should go talk to him.
And, and, and, and so just to,
to break down a little more with
the, what the agency's request
is. So 32.4 million for 12, for,
for the 12 month 30 and I'm
Looking at this now, uh, the 30,
it was is a $30 subsidy for
90,000 homes, that would be a
cost of 32.4 million with 2.6
million in administrative and
compliance costs, so, uh, you
know, pretty hefty
administrative fee on top of
those subsidies. So I think
you're right, we've got a, we've
got a lot to ask the department
about the details of that
program and how it would, would
move forward in addition to
like, if you were all to want to
set this up, like, what would
the, what would the out here,
um, potential liabilities?
Well, if we went to the rate
that we had previously, Mr.
Chairman, that's 2.5 years
versus 1 year. Yeah, so, right,
thanks. I'll follow up.
So we're talking about
Existing programs.
That these specials are gonna
cover.
So, um, Mr. Chair, uh, and
senator, my understanding is
that the affordable connectivity
program, it was an FCC program
that was funded by the federal
government. This would allow the
state to continue funding that
program now that federal funds
are no longer available.
But what I'm getting at, if we
plan this to be a long-term
program, why isn't in their
budget request and stood a
special.
Uh, so, um, Mr. Chairman,
Senator, I don't have an answer
for, for you on that, but I
think that's something you would
want to ask the department when
they come before you, um thank
you very much. This is called
budgeting 101 to keep their
budget below the 3% and adding
their recurring money and one
time money and then bring in the
baseline up later.
I understand the
I understand the dance.
But what I don't understand is
why we put up with the dance
you want a new dance partner
glad Joey. OK, Mr. Chair, moving
on to the tourism department.
You'll see it on line number 70
is $60 million or 16, not 60 $16
million request for national and
international marketing. That's
on top of $18 million that's in
its operating budget, uh, for
advertising.
expenses. Uh, this is something
that you all, um, uh, frequently
fund with with special
appropriations, uh, but you, you
blend sort of the the special
appropriations with the
operating budget. Also for the
tourism department line 73,
you'll see they're asking for $2
million for operating costs for
the marketing excellence Bureau,
uh, that was something that was
created by legislation a couple
of years ago, uh, to give state
agencies a place where they can
go to sort of uh access the
expertise.
ease of the tourism department
in um some of those marketing
programs. As I mentioned, uh,
before, as we go through this,
you'll see a number of agencies
have requests for marketing, and
that might be an area where, um,
you all, if you decide you want
to, to fund a a marketing
program can, can make it
contingent on uh the department
utilizing that this bureau that
was created as part of that
legislation to uh operate those
programs. Uh, next up we have
economic development department,
and I'm going to flip over to
page 6.
Um, online number 79, we have a
$10 million request for the JTI
program on line number 80,
there's a $38 million request
for uh Lita, um, according to
our analyst, uh, the, oh, I
thought I had it. I, I will get
you the balance for Lita in just
1 2nd. I think it was good if
you, if there's any questions,
Mr. Chair, I will look up the,
I'll stall for you. Thank you
78, the outdoor equity.
fun. That thing has been very
successful in what it's doing.
And so I think we need to look
at that number just.
To flag it for you.
That's a pretty low number, I
think it was, did we put 20 or
25 million before and it ran out
in 16 months or something.
Mr. Chairman, the outdoor
recreation, where they go and
build new trails. That one's
been funded at about $10 million
per year, and they've
effectively deployed that. The
outdoor equity is where they're
trying to get low income youth
uh engaged in outdoor
activities. That's been a
smaller program, but also uh
wildly popular in uh effectively
used of whatever money you've
deployed.
What's the other one then?
What's the outdoor rec fund?
Uh, yes, that one it's been used
to basically build and upgrade
uh trails and outdoor
recreation.
Uh, facilities that Farmington
and everybody uses to build
their swimming pool pools. That
one was the quality of life, um,
appropriations. That was you,
you funded about 90 million over
two years, uh, for those types
of projects. Uh, you didn't put
that in the budget this last
session. Um, but that, that's
the one where Demming used it to
build a new lake in a water.
Uh, park in Cuba used it for new
new park, rodeo arenas across
the state, uh, those types of
things. So, let's look at that
one again and let's try to get
rid of, yeah, I don't remember
which one that was. It wasn't
outdoors called something else.
What was it called? It was the
recreation quality of life
grants that DFA effectively
administered, and you heard a
program evaluation of that
project earlier this year. I
think that was beneficial to
everybody. They all long enough
for you. You stalled long
enough. The, uh, leader of
balance was 72.7 million. You
could strike the leader of
money.
Armstrong.
Paul Chapman
uh this chair, I'm just curious,
do these trails go on national
forests? Do they go on state
land? Do they go on BLEM, uh,
Curious about where
Where can you put state money to
build a trail and be sure that
you're that uh people have
access.
The investment that we made.
We will confirm Mr. Chali Kelly
already knows, Mr. Chair
Representative, I, I think it's
like quite a wide variety and
that program is driven by
applications from
Local and, and there has been a
mix of trails and kind of other
recreation facilities, including
like skate parks and stuff like
that.
Mr. Chair Kelly, it is not used
to purchase land.
It's only used to build trail.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative,
yes.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
I, I did have a question on, we
skipped over it on the 67 on the
ethics commission. It says for
operational costs, including
personnel services and employee
benefits. And so I know that you
all are going to keep an eye on
something that should be
requested in
Uh, their budget, not in a
special, but it um it sort of
sounds like they added a lot of
stuff in there that might be.
OK for that. So I'm, I'm uh
I think there's a lot of
entities doing that and so I'm,
I would just request that we
really keep a close eye on that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
They did that to us last year.
But
Thank you, Chair. So I just, I
don't want to skip over too
quickly lines 79 and 80. Uh,
Joey, can you do the math for us
out loud one more time on
Like, so what's still sitting in
JTI and what's still sitting in,
in LIA and why would these, I, I
think I know what the chair is
gonna say, but why, why would,
why would they ask for this? I
thought, I thought I heard you
say there's 72 million in the
balance at LIDA, and they're
looking for 38 and
That's exciting and everything,
but I'm, what's this all about?
If there's this large balance
sitting there.
Yeah, so, um, mister, Mr. Chair
and senator, um, I'm asking
about the J tip balance right
now. We'll, we'll try to get
that for you. I don't have it
here, but it's typically the
department's request to come to
you with uh with a big
essentially project that they're
going to spend the all of the
leader balance down over time
and come to you all and and ask
for an additional funds that
lead a balance of 72.77 million
was at the end of August. So
portion of that is probably
going to be spent, but
Um
But we've, we've we've noticed
that typically there is a
remaining balance. You know, and
I, I don't want to discount that
these programs have been wildly
successful for our state. But
that's a, that's a significant
increase of 38 million when
there's $72 million sitting
there. And I'm not aware of any
large
I mean, there, there's a couple
of things that have happened and
few in my district, so I'm very
grateful for that. But I'm, I'm
just trying to figure out what
what why the almost doubling of
what's in the bounds, or I'm
sorry, 50% of what's in the
balance there.
Um, we need, we need more detail
here.
Uh, just in January they'll have
a $5 million balance, and then
The minute we leave Santa Fe,
they'll have a 70 $100 million
dollar balance.
You brought Joy. So, um, Mister,
Mr. Chair, uh,
Continuing on, uh, with
regulation and licensing, you'll
see a number again, as I was
saying before, a number of
different requests for vehicles
and equipment at RLD mostly for
the cannabis control division,
uh, including, uh, one that
would be contingent on uh the
legislature passing a bill
giving uh that that agents of
the cannabis Control Division
law enforcement powers.
Um, moving on to page 7 and the
Office of Superintendent of the
Insurance line number 90, you
see an $18 million request for
medical professional liability
insurance premium reduction. So
previously you all have made
appropriations to backfill
deficits in the patient's
compensation fund. Uh, this
would not be for that. This
would be to provide a 20%
discount on uh premiums. So,
Uh, the, uh, uh, the agency is
projecting 2024 premiums of
about $90 million. This would be
a 20%. Everybody's got
discounts.
Representative Armstrong first.
Uh, thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman.
I, that
We aren't lying. That's
ridiculous like 90, 90, yeah,
990, right? Yeah, 90.
Uh
I don't know. I don't even know
what to say about that. Uh,
that's
That's ridiculous, but there
were two things that, that was
one thing for sure that we
skipped over, which I wanted to
go back to, which is 88.
OK. A pilot project to provide
financial assistance to drivers
who would otherwise be
uninsured.
It's against the law to be
uninsured, Mister Chairman.
That that needs to be flagged
right there. That
And number 88.
And then uh back to on, on 80,
is that typical language to put
in there shall not revert and
may be expended in future fiscal
years.
So, um, Mr. Chair and
Representative for Lita and
JTip that is typically something
that you all have included, but
you want to be, you'll see a
number of requests with that
language, um.
We typically would not recommend
that you do that, but it has
been a practice in the past for
LEA specifically to not revert
and remain in leader. That's why
there's a fund balance. OK,
uh, but I'm highly concerned
about number 88.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Right, on, on 90.
A 20% premium reduction to who?
So, um,
Mr. Chair and uh senator, I'm
gonna have to get back to you on
that because I don't want to
give you inaccurate information,
but, uh,
Uh, so, uh,
No, I didn't get a number on
that, but um I would have to get
back to you that, uh, and, and
get you an answer to that.
OK. I, I'm I'm sorry, Mr. Chair,
Senator, I just got an answer to
that eligible providers that are
part of the PCF.
So if you're a provider that is
part of the patient's
compensation fund, you would get
a discount.
On top of the guarantee of that.
That fun.
You would get additionally.
Well, so your premium would be
reduced, so you would if you're
part of that fund.
You already have caps on the
Liability, right?
OK, get back to me.
Yeah, I was in the week. Yes, I
will have, I will have our
analyst connect with you and,
and, and get your questions
answered and and Lujan as well.
Representative Dixon.
Thank you. um, thank you, Mr.
Chair. uh, thank you, Joey. I, I
would like a little bit more
information on this line as
well. Um, I am wondering, so if
it's for the professional
liability insurance and um
The OSI would like to
Help reduce.
Insurance premiums, is that
correct?
Uh, Mr. Chairman Representative,
yes. it would be really helpful
to know what um, you know, cuz.
Certainly
It would seem that this is a
More of an emerging issue.
Um, or newer.
Um
And so it would be really
helpful if we could understand
better.
What the increases our providers
have experienced.
I think that would be very
helpful, um, not that I am
Supporting this line item, but
You know, the data behind it
would be helpful, um, as we're
making decisions. Thank you.
Yeah, and Mr. Chair and
Representative, we with our
analysts and get um more
information on that, and that's
kind of why we're doing this now
at this point. We're a long way
from making recommendations, but
this gives us the opportunity to
ask questions of the agency and
get you the information you
need. You better put a big red
flag on that one.
Represent
building and center.
Eels. Thank you, Mr. Chair. You
know, as I look at this, I just
think about our problems with
the insurance uh that's coming
up with the, the areas that have
been subject to fire and we've
lost all these homes, uh, we
have problem with the insurance
uh as far as medical liability.
We have problems with the
insurance in our, in our medical
fund that was has been upside
down. We've been able to
appropriate money, uh, you know,
and I, I think the
Well,
Also, the lack of medical
professionals coming into our
state because of the lawsuits
that can be brought against
them. And I think maybe we as a
legislature need to take a long,
hard look at the ability of
people to sue.
To bring lawsuits.
And maybe the limitations that
we increased.
And uh the ability of people to
get insurance on their homes.
Uh, it, it is a
It comes through many line
items, but it goes back to your
insurance and the insurance goes
back to liability and that goes
back to our
Legal system to our laws in the
caps that we put on.
These lawsuits. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
We look, look at it and but in
total, you're gonna see 300
million of subs subsid.
Sub
subsidization of insurance
across the board because of
what's happening in the pro the
real, the real problem and
represent Armstrong, you may
know this, right? Hedge funds
have taken over insurance
companies, and they're pushing
their margins on those hedge
funds that you have to make
these margins, and so is, as the
rates go up and the claims go
up.
Who knows if we're gonna get
insurance again in United States
after New Mexico, Florida,
right?
After all the natural Rosswell.
I mean, that, that will make
insurance companies look at New
Mexico completely different, but
the whole insurance system.
It's probably gonna
Go down at some time.
Uh, center guy goes, chairman,
thank you. I was going, uh, into
the same lines that represent
Chatfield, uh, do the fires and
flooding, I know the insurance
can be really hard.
Individuals to um
To get here in New Mexico, uh,
but I did want to go back to uh
line 88, which I've
Run often, uh.
Built to look at the uh
The statute for that uninsured
motors.
Uh, and I've got a meeting on
November 1st.
With the superintendent of
insurance. I'll bring that up
because that may be the way to,
to deal with this other than
just throwing money into
A deep hole, uh, but I just want
to bring those to the fire and
flooding.
In this uninsured motors.
So, thank you. Thank you,
mister.
Thank you, uh, Representative
small.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, thank
you to our analysts, uh, as we
look at this.
Um, sort of specific item, uh,
bringing it into context. I
think the comments about sort of
overall insurance, healthcare
access, um, and quality, all
very, very germane, um, Mr.
Chair, I know we all know this,
but we're investing in medical
professionals and a number of
different ways, including loan
repayment.
Um, support for the our uh
higher education institutions
now practicum support and
others, you know, graduate
medical education to get our
healthcare professionals out
into rural areas. There is
nothing wrong with us using
state dollars wisely to expand
medical uh healthcare access,
affordability, and quality. And
to me, that's, that is what this
bucket is.
There are challenges from
different perspectives. But
that's ultimately what we're
doing. We want to expand
healthcare affordability, access
and quality for New Mexicans,
whether or not in, you know,
we're gonna test all of our
potential investments against
that basic premise and goal.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
All right, Julie, roll a little
quicker. OK, so moving on to the
cultural affairs department.
I've just highlight two lines
for you real quick on line 95.
There's a $5 million request for
compliance with the Native
American Graves Protection and
Repatriation Act, um, for a
couple of years. The federal
government stepped up
enforcement um in this area and
so the departments, uh,
projecting, uh, that they'll uh
have to, they'll have some
expenses in that area, uh,
reviewing their collection. Um,
in addition, there, uh, looking.
For $10 million for the rural
library's Endowment Fund, the
agency is projecting that that
would increase disbursements
from 26,500 per eligible library
to 35,000 per eligible library.
Um, and then, um, just real
quick on the Department of Game
and Fish line 97, there's a $10
million general fund request.
So, um, that's
Basically for Department of Game
and fish operations and it's
essentially assuming that the
agency which has come in the
past, asking for increases in
license fees that they will
continue to be unsuccessful in
getting uh increases in those
fees.
Activities
I would like a further
definition as to where that
money is going to be spent.
Conservation activities is a
pretty broad category.
So,
I would like Senator Woods it's
basically I think 2 years ago we
gave him 5 million.
To hold them from their
licensing cause they don't have,
they can't make their
operational costs cause they
haven't got a license increase.
The last 60 days, so we put 5
million in and kind of hold them
over. I don't know why they're
asking for.
10 now, but I
Maybe it's labeled wrong, but it
is to replace the losses from
their license.
Yeah, so it would be just
general, it would be in in in
lieu of license fees, right,
general fund in license fees. I
will say, um, uh, the, we'll,
we'll find exactly what the
agency asked for, but basically
they asked for just money for
the Department of Game and Fish
as a special.
A further definition,
we'll,
we'll work on that for you.
All right, keep rolling. Keep
going. OK, so, um, beginning on
line 99, we have a total of
$25.8 million for the energy,
minerals and Natural Resources
Department that includes $8
million.
Online, uh, number, I'm sorry.
$8 million online 109 to fund
the land and water conservation
fund state match. Uh, so that
was created this last year, um,
and provides local governments
with a source for matching funds
for federal, uh, land and water
conservation dollars right.
Uh, one second, Representing
Chatfield, you had a question.
So as we move forward, everybody
stay on the same page because we
still have $2 billion to spend.
30 minutes so the the request
for the big horn sheep uh from
Department of Game and fish.
Everybody knows I support
conservation. I support
department of game and fish. I
just wanna make sure that these
appropriations are not to
purchase property, which has
happened a time or two in the
past and, and, uh, so.
Just want to get that out there.
I'm not sure how to define it.
I'm all for conservation. I'm
all for, uh, watershed
restoration. I'm all for fixing
the problems that we have, but
we need to keep our private land
private and uh
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
OK, keep rolling, Joey.
So, um, Mr. Chair, um, next we
have the state engineer, um, uh,
there was a total of $49 million
in requests, um, and, uh,
That includes $40 million of
sport uh future settlements uh
for Indian water rights cases.
Um, last year you allocated $20
million for Indian water rights
settlements. Feds haven't said
that they're set a settlement
yet, correct?
On any of those and so we're,
we're building the fund that the
feds have not settled upon.
Uh, so, Mr. Chairman, yes,
that's correct. So moving on to
the early childhood department,
you can see
online, uh, 120
$104.6 million request for for
child care that would include uh
improving student-teacher ratios
and, and uh
Uh, increases the staff wages.
That's when we're gonna have to
uh get you more information on.
I don't have a lot on it right
now. Joey, let me ask you, and
hopefully Kelly's listening
somewhere.
Somewhere online.
I learned last night that if
you, you have to drop your kids
off at 8 o'clock.
And if you have don't, if you
want to drop off at 7:30, they
charge the person more to drop
him off at 7:30. And then you
have to pick him up at 2.
If we don't pick them up by 2,
then you gotta pay an additional
fee.
And so this is really not
daycare. This is
Who can pay for daycare and it's
not helping the people that need
daycare, cause those are not
working hours.
So can Kelly's probably
listening, she can.
Yeah, I mean, that's just
unfair. I mean, if a, if a lady
has to go to work at 7:30 and
you to work at 8. She's got to
drop her kids off and get to
work. She can't leave at 2.
And then pay a fee to be early
and pay a fee to be late and
call that free childcare. I
mean, dig into that. So, um,
moving on, uh, to, uh, page 10,
Mr. Chair. So on line 126. We
have a request from uh the aging
and long-term Services
department for uh
$20 million for the Kiki Savera
senior dignity fund, uh, that
would be contingent on the
legislature creating an
endowment uh to support that
fund.
Uh, online number 130, we have
uh request. So we, we begin uh
on online 127 with requests from
the Healthcare Authority
department. Um, that's, that's a
total of 179.6 million from the
healthcare authority. That
includes uh 54.3 million, uh,
for, uh,
What the agency has projected
the shortfalls in the medical
assistance program.
Uh, in addition, the agency is
requesting on line 135 $32
million to support a Medicaid
initiatives that, that are part
of their waiver program, uh,
that they've received a waiver
from the federal government that
includes um
There's several programs
included with that, uh, it's uh
includes some reentry
programming and, and some other
areas.
Uh, Mr. Chair.
OK.
That is, I'd like more
information on that.
Because that
Depending on how that's written
up, that could be a very low
figure.
So if you could provide me some
more information on that
particular line, uh, 135,
please.
Thank you, for sure.
Sam Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh just to
fall back a little bit to line
126.
The appropriation to the
kikiwara senior dignity fund,
uh, we dealt with that a little
bit up in my part of the world.
We've set up some programs for
our seniors, and that was not,
uh, that was a fund that
couldn't be used only for just
the initialization of, of a
program and couldn't be the
program couldn't be continued
and I, if this 20 million helps
some of those uh programs to
To, or the change in the wording
that's requested or whatever
helps them to be continue to
provide services to seniors.
Very important in our rural
areas, uh, we don't have a lot
of services. I see these people
with tears streaming down their
faces as they load them in the
car and move them to Albuquerque
from their home where they've
lived their entire life, you
know, it's in this geyserrara
fun is a great idea. Any way
that I can support uh making it
fit the needs of today. I do.
Thank you.
So, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Uh, on, um, the Medicaid, uh,
waiver initiatives. I, I have
some more information on that.
So, they're asking for 3.6
million for medical respite for
for for homeless, that would be
housing initiatives, uh, 14.3
million, uh, for food, uh, for
pregnant, uh, members with with
comorbidity factors, uh, 3.2
million for um housing and food
capacity infrastructure, uh, and
5.9 million for
Justice involved medical
services and $4.5 million for uh
building infrastructure for
those for the justice involved
medical services. We can follow
up with more information that
we, that we have on that, but I
did want to note that they, they
do specify what initiatives
you're looking to fund with that
and all of that is put in by
law, the statute already.
So, um, Mr. Chairman and
Senator, my understanding is the
healthcare authority received a
waiver from the federal
government to use Medicaid funds
on these kinds of programming
and this would further support
those but it says general fund.
It doesn't say, no, so Mr. Chair
and Senator, this would be
general fund money for the same
purpose.
OK, I'm not gonna argue anymore.
Thank you. Come on Joey we got 1
billion. OK, um.
So, um, moving on, Mr. Chairman,
um, we're continuing uh with the
workforce solutions department,
um, I would just want to note
for you lines 143 and 144.
There's no general fund in, in
these requests, but this is uh
for workforce solutions, um,
And uh the energy transition
displaced worker assistance
fund. So they're asking for a
reauthorization of the funds
that you all appropriated, uh,
previously, as well as uh $6.9
million in fund balance uh for
that, um, for that program. You,
you mean how many years later
since they closed the power
plants in year.
The reauthorizing the 5.9, so
they still have a fund balance.
And and yes, Mr. Chair, there
that that's what line 144 is,
that, that's a fun balance.
And, and so I think it needs to
go away at this point. They
haven't done their job in that
many years.
It's been 6 or 7.
year.
So
The sad part about all of this
is all of this money should have
been spent before we closed the
power plant, which should have
been spent 3 years ago.
And uh what we did is we diddled
and dawdled and then we gave
people money that don't live
here anymore and have a good job
in Wyoming, where they continued
to coal mine.
And we've not really helped
anybody.
OK, so flag that one for us
cause we'll need to put it for a
different purpose because they
will workforce solutions had
their chance. I'm not sure the
people of Farmington had their
chance.
Keep going, Joey. So moving on,
Mr. Chairman, I'm now uh down at
the bottom of page 13, and the
Department of the Environment.
So the total request for the
Department of the Environment
was $474 million.
Um, that, uh, includes 250
million for the strategic water
supply program and 150 million
to begin a program for, uh,
remediation of contaminated
sites. Uh, there's a number of
different items in here, um.
And if you have any questions, I
don't have a lot of information
for you, but I'd be happy to
make notes and, and get that
information.
Keep going.
OK, moving on down uh on a line
36, 175, 36 million and 175, uh,
the corrections department, 36
million for the department to uh
create an, an opioid treatment
program. So, uh, this is another
one of those areas where we've
got some personnel money in uh
the special appropriations
category, um, this would be for
the department to build up that
program, um, you all previously,
uh, funded, uh, some
medication assisted treatment
programs for the department.
Joy, let me ask you a question.
Can you take all those
They're trying to build
reoccurring funds in in one time
money.
And staff inside that like this,
this appropriation. Can you take
and separate those for us so we
can say this appropriation has
employees and so it will, could
be a future general fund.
So, uh, Mr. Chair, we do have
information on where where the
agencies are requesting personal
services and employee benefits
and can include that.
Maybe can color code them and
then yep, we can do that like
that so we can get the
separation.
Representing Chatfield, Mr.
Chair, I'm sorry, I'm sorry for
going back. We can't go
backwards. It takes me forward
looking uh committee.
The, the, uh,
some of them we need to take a
minute and look at and uh the
POs contamination in uh eastern
New Mexico, uh, there's a neat
quite a lot of money here for
that, and we need it.
But I think the Feds ought to
reimburse us that money, and I
wonder are we, are we doing
something to about that?
I think the feds, I forget who I
had the conversation with, was
it the secretary.
But then we have to pay for it
and the feds reimburse us once
they determine the level of POS
to replace the pipes to get
clean water so they're drawing
the POs into the system in
Clover
For thinking. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, please keep me in the
loop on that.
Representative on the line 175
of the opioid treatment program
work, we have so many other
funds, um,
From from the settlements and
and other programs with DOH. Can
you just get more, get me more
information on that and how
that's all connected and why
they're asking for $36 million
for that program. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
OK. So, Mr. Chair, if uh there
are no more questions on
corrections, my next uh note is
moving down to page 16, line
185, beginning with the
Department of Transportation,
there's a total of $350 million
in requests for DOT, uh,
notably, um, for this year, uh,
the department is requesting 175
million in road maintenance
funding. So that's bigger than
the, you can see the line above
the 100
50 million for construction. So
that's kind of a reverse of what
we've seen in the prior years
where we were asked, uh, we were
getting requests for large
amounts for um big construction
projects and uh this year, the,
the request from the department
is uh on the maintenance side.
Um,
with that, I will move Senator
Gonzalez, hold on one second.
Oh, thank you, Mr. Chairman and
um.
On 188.
And uh this was yesterday or the
day before when we had the
tourism here.
And I asked him how much funding
they have and they said 500,000.
Yeah, so, Mr. Chair, um, that's
correct. So the tourism
department, um, I believe has
500,000 of DOTs.
Um, allocation that you all made
last year, and I think that was,
uh, can you look up what that um
allocation was. So this also
funds just litter pickup, so DOT
contracts with, with, uh, folks
to go out and, and pick up
litter on the side of the road.
And so that's what the other
funding, Mr. Chairman, I guess
the only thing is I think they
just need better communication
because my question was, how
much is there?
And the answer was 500,000.
And it's a big difference to 10
million.
Yeah, yeah, um.
So, Mr. Chair and Senator, I
think you're correct, the
agencies do need to communicate
and work together what tourism
was, I think, saying is like,
our portion of the, I think $10
million appropriation from the
last year was 500,000. The rest
EOT is using for other purposes.
Very well, thank you.
Uh, Representative De la Cruz.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, uh,
speaking to the request from
NMDOT while I wholeheartedly,
uh, support the reconstruction.
Of our roads, our state roads.
Uh, at the same time, I, I
always have frustration related
to the maintenance of our state
roads.
Because not just the state, but
also local governments, they
all, they very often love the
glamour of new construction or
complete reconstruction of an
existing road.
It's not so much for
maintenance, and generally for
most of the citizenry, it's that
maintenance on a daily basis or
on, on a regular basis that is
lacking. So I really support
that we increase that
maintenance budget because
I think that's where the
For most of our
Taxpayers where the rubber meets
the road, pardon the pun. Thank
you, Ms. John.
And Joey on, on 187, the Royal
Air Service. I thought we had
that already built into
reoccurring.
So, uh, Mr. Chairman, uh, no,
there's, there's no recurring
money from this. You, you all
have done in the past several
non-recurring appropriations,
and I do believe there is uh
some unspent dollars in that,
um, we can get you more
information on, on what
resources the department has for
the rural Air Service
enhancement Program, but there's
currently no recurring funding
source for that. OK, but I mean,
I don't want, I mean, Gallup's
got a flight, Las Cruces has a
flight, right? Silver City had
a.
Carl's bed has a flight. Tala
has a flight.
I mean, everybody's got a
flight, so I mean.
As long as we're not expanding,
let's try to make sure everybody
has the flights that they
perform, I know. Gallup wants to
become an international airport.
Yeah.
I'm serious.
Yeah,
they want an international
airport in Gala.
With run one runway in the ASOS
doesn't work, which tells pilots
what the weather can destroy on
that point, um.
M.
It's uh oh.
We have had that in Taos for a
few years.
And uh they have expanded, but
the difference.
So they're putting in their
portion.
And
with this.
I'll never forget when I was in
San Diego on the beach one time
and it said, by the house, $49.
From San Diego.
Pretty good, no? Yeah.
was an interesting going.
OK, Joey. OK, so Mr. Chairman,
moving on to the higher
education department and higher
education institutions. This
begins on uh line number.
Uh, 192.
Uh, and as I said before, at
the, at the top of my
presentation, there's a total of
$584.9 million in requests for
higher education, that includes,
as you can see on, um,
Uh
Line number 192, that um that uh
oblique reference there is to
the technology enhancement fund,
uh,
The higher education department
requested $20 million. That's
duplicative of requests that you
will see from the University of
New Mexico on uh line number 209
on page 19.
Um, that's the $50 million
request and I believe tech also
has one as well.
Um, so in other words, there's
several, uh, requests for the
technology enhancement fund, um,
On that, um,
Sorry.
Moving back up to the top, so,
uh, on line number 194, you have
a $30 million request from HED
for building replacement and
renewal, and $5 million for uh
equipment replacement and
renewal. Those are typical
requests uh that we see from the
department every year.
Other big requests from uh from
higher education institutions,
including if you can see on page
number 2.
Line number 214. You can see a
request of $137.5 million from
New Mexico State University to
create an endowment to support
women's athletics. So that again
would be an endowment fund. The,
the purpose of that, that would
push off about $5.5 million a
year. So, uh, 137.5 million for
about $5.5 million a year for
for women's athletics. Well,
that Joey, is that not violate
the
The equalization of men and
women sports, I don't know what
title number they call that, um,
would that violate the Title IX
because it has to be equal now.
So, um, Mr. Chair, I, that,
that's a good question that we
can follow up with uh the uh
university on, but I think
that's very likely something
they've considered. I don't know
if the director has a further
comment on that, Mr. Chairman,
they're basically asking the
state to take over their Title
IX obligations, uh, and provide
no additional funding for
women's athletics. That's the
exact amount that.
And according to the
university on women's athletic.
The
Uh, thank you, Chair, and so on,
um,
This line 227 on page 21, Joey
the uh or a cybersecurity
vulnerability mitigation service
learning program, etc. etc. So
we've created the Office of
Cybersecurity.
And not just here for higher ed,
but multiple other agencies. Why
wouldn't they be getting this
kind of work done for them by
the Office of Cybersecurity so
that it's all tied together,
linked together, etc.
So, Mr. Chair, and, and Senator,
I think that's a strategy that
you all have pursued in the past
where you've
Said, OK, let's take our
cybersecurity money and focus it
at the Office of Cybersecurity,
that way we can, you know, take
advantage of economies of scale,
and that might be something that
you want to look into doing is
if, as I said before, there's
throughout this you probably saw
several of those small amounts,
some of it's for technology, but
a lot of it's related to
cybersecurity, right? Whether
it's new firewalls and stuff
like that. Is that something
where like you in the past have
done, you say, OK, do it. Um,
You know, analyze our most
serious vulnerabilities and, you
know, go after those first
rather than trying to fund a
bunch of different programs all
over the place. Well, yeah,
essentially, I think we're just,
you know, we're not
accomplishing the goal of tying
it all together, which is what
we really need to do. I mean, if
you have um
You have a transaction you need
to do with state government, you
have to adhere to the state
standards on, on, you know,
information security. If you
don't, you don't get your
transaction processed. That's
essentially what, what that
office is supposed to be doing.
So I'm not quite sure why all of
these other agencies and
departments need to have other
dollars related to
cybersecurity. We're never going
to really tie it all together
and learn from each other if
we're doing a bunch of piecemeal
stuff all over the place.
It was the whole point of
creating the office. Yeah.
So.
I'd like a total on at some
point, if I could maybe get a
total on what, what, what are
all the other cybersecurity
dollars going into either these
supplementals, these extras or
whatever, and the budget, etc.
that are outside of that Office
of cybersecurity. If there's
someone that could pull that
together, I'd like to see that.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and Senator, we
can do that for you. Thank you.
Uh, so admit, Mr. Chairman, I
found on line 237, uh, again,
uh,
Another $50 million request for
the technology enhancement fund
that I was talking about before,
um, and, uh, with that, uh, Mr.
Chair, if you have any questions
on any of these items, I'm happy
to uh make notes on questions to
uh
To get information for you.
And, and if not, we can move on
to the small number of requests
we have for um
Supplemental and deficiency
appropriations. Let me look in,
in 249.
That's a DD waiver, and that's
for guardianship for employee
benefits. So that shouldn't be a
general fund increase in theirs.
Yeah, so, um, Mr. Chairman, line
249 is a supplemental request
for the department, uh, or for
the developmental disability
council, uh, it's a supplemental
request which would normally be
Um, section 5, or section 6 for
the current year. They have in
their language asked for this to
be extended through FY 26. So
essentially it probably should
be considered a special request.
Basically, um, the agency has
been
Barring contracts money into
their personal services.
Um
Uh, budget to account for um uh
salary increases.
OK, it's like a no no, but Mr.
Chair, uh, who's
wait represent oh chapter.
support
For this is forward.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, 2019, I think I was selected
in 18, uh, came in here in 219.
We had a budget of a
A little over 198 million for
special appropriations.
The requests this year are 1.139
billion.
So in that short time, oh.
We went from 198.4 million to
1.13 billion.
Uh
Remember the, the saying about
uh a million is 7 days and a
billion would be, you know, if,
if dollars were seconds, a
billion would be 32 years.
That's an enormous, enormous
increase. I don't think we
should starve our institution. I
don't think we should starve our
state, but we need to take a
real hard look at the folks that
are just
putting that request in there
because uh
They, they feel like that we're
gonna be an easy.
Easy to roll over.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Senator
Sheer, right?
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair.
I, I'm not sure what the right
answer is for line 249
developmental disabilities
Council, but currently they have
a wait list of about 300 people.
They're anticipating a wait list
of 500 people by the end of the
year.
The guardianship, yes. So,
We need to figure out how to do
that, whether this is the right
mechanism or not, I don't know,
but they've got a huge backlog
that we need to address.
Yeah, this is not the right
mechanism to do this, so we
Put that on your list, Joey.
OK, and jump to the
Sent here.
This
Just this.
Thank you, sir. Sometimes you
look alike.
The, the, the question I have
is, these are special.
Appropriations.
Now, if I wanted to carry a bill
during the session for a special
appropriation.
And
How would I go about would I go
to an agency and ask them if
they wanted to
Administer the special
appropriation.
And what I'm talking about is a
say a study.
To determine whether a
Uh, maybe cultural affairs would
take on a new project.
Uh, and ask for a feasibility
study to do that.
Would I do that through
legislation? Would it be a
memorial? Would it be a, just a
regular bill, uh, would I go to
approach the particular agency
that are request that from.
How, how is that done?
Uh, um, my first thought process
would be to put it into to grow.
And put it some some amount to
get the
The study done in the first
year.
And then the outcome you want
from the study, so they can
start it the next year, and then
Come back and see how it worked
in the first year. So you're
gonna find it. That would be my
recommendation, Senator
Rodriguez. Thank you Mr.
Chairman Senator, I think one of
the things, two of the things
you mentioned probably would be
very doable is first I've seen
it done in a memorial first
because they study it and they
bring in different tasks, um,
holders, the stakeholders in
there to uh to work together to
see what would be the best
outcome and then put it into a
request after that, because they
determined together with the
stakeholders, what the amounts
are that are needed.
Uh, before you start, you know,
requesting from a, from a
department or from integral or
whatever, but either way would
be good. It's just questions are
gonna come up as to what, who
contributed, who the
stakeholders were, who
determined this amount of money
and the needs and that kind of
thing, so you may want to have
that first, but either way would
be good.
But, but in that scenario, would
you go through the DFA and say
just to sign the task to DFA
Chairman, Senator, what you, you
would do there in that request
would be if you do memorial, for
example, you put the task force
together, um, through the
language of the memorial, for
example, not the names of the
people that you put in the the
task force shall include, for
example, uh, a member from DFA
or one from the cultural Affairs
department, administrative.
agencies and so on, so you name
who you think is appropriate to
have a say so in there and have
some, have some input is what
I'm trying to say. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
This man
last year.
Hey Joe, you're going next tab.
Uh, so, so, Mr. Chair, with
that, I was, that was all I had.
If you had any questions on any
other items that you wanted us
to look into. We were, um,
We're happy to take, take note
and, and get information back to
you like we have on a couple of
those items that remembers a
line item in for a couple of
shredders.
Uh, so, Mr. Chairman, equipment
like that, I would generally
recommend be included in the
operating budget for agencies.
We could lease one after. Thank
you.
I think that's it.
Tell you, you're kind of warned.
Hello, Wesley.
Get that pay raise.
Uh, all right, Mr. Chair, we're
behindab G now.
Um, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Callie Carswell,
Capital Olay analyst for LFCAG.
Um, I'm joined by Wesley
Billingsley today. He is the
director of the new
infrastructure division you all
created at DFA last session.
Um, Wesley's not gonna present,
but he'll be available for
questions afterwards.
Um, so I'm just gonna, well, let
me start out, um, the purpose of
this hearing is to give you all
an overview, uh, TAGE Senator.
Um, give you an overview of
Capital outlay requests for
state agencies, judicial
entities, and higher education
institutions. So, um, for any of
you who have not been through
this with LFC before, uh,
essentially we're talking about
what we call the statewide
framework for
Capital Outlay and that
essentially means the roughly
half of the capital bill that
funds, um, state owned stuff, so
projects for state agencies, um,
sometimes like major water
projects on the rivers, um, and
higher education projects
primarily.
Um, I am going to present mainly
from this memo on top, but
there's also detail sheets in
the back on all the state agency
and higher ed requests.
So, um, to start out, executive
agencies and judicial entities
requested about $1.3 billion for
more than 100 projects.
Uh, when you add in the
recommendation from the higher
education department as well,
um, the total we're looking at
in terms of requests is about
$1.5 billion.
Uh, interestingly, on the
executive agency and judicial
side.
That total request amount uh is
up about 20%, uh, but the number
of projects requested was almost
exactly the same as last year.
So why is that, um, I think
there's a couple reasons. One,
we've got more new construction
requests from state agencies,
then we had last year, um, and
those tend to come with a higher
price tag. We're also probably
seeing to some extent.
With a couple projects in
particular, um, an increasing
construction costs that, um,
we've sort of seen hit the state
agency side a little less than
public schools and higher
education in the last couple
years, and that probably is
generally because they've just
had a lower, uh lower level of
activity on new construction in
general.
So, 3 agencies are requesting
total capital appropriations of
more than $100 million. Those
are the Department of Health at
nearly $150 million the energy,
minerals and natural resources
department at almost $240
million in the general services
department at $150 million.
Um, and all three of those
cases, those numbers are driven
by a couple, uh, or just one in
some cases really big requests
from the courts, uh, include
funding for the construction of
two new magistrate courts and a
3rd round of funding for a
state, uh, part of state cost
sharing for a district court
renovation and construction, and
the two new magistrate courts
they're requesting are in Siela
County and Santa Fe, and these
requests would both supplement
existing appropriations for
these projects.
Um, we have some additional
requests from state agencies as
well, uh, that would also
continue or complete projects
that the legislature has already
made major appropriations to,
and you can see a list of those
at the bottom of page one of the
memo.
Um, so those include $100
million to fund the executive
office building in Santa Fe. You
all have already appropriated
$85 million to that project,
$120 million to supplement
funding for a new forensic unit
at the uh behavioral Health
Institute in Las Vegas. You all
have already appropriated over
$100 million to that project.
Uh, $60 million to continue the
build out of the statewide um
P26 public safety radio
communication project.
Um, $10 million to supplement
funding for uh a new
administrative building, uh, for
the Department of Public Safety
in Albuquerque.
And $7 million to uh complete
funding for a law enforcement
training facility for the state
police in Santa Fe, uh, that
would benefit law enforcement
agencies statewide.
You'll turn to page 2. Thank
you, Wesley.
Um, so on the, on the next page,
I wanted to um give you an
overview of the requests for
funding for new construction. So
essentially building new
facilities or replacement
facilities for state agencies,
um,
There's a fair amount of text on
this page just giving you a
little bit of context and some
kind of preliminary analysis on
some of these requests.
So, um, our largest single
request this year is the $120
million request from the
Department of Health to complete
funding for a new forensic unit
at the behavioral Health
Institute.
So, um, essentially, the
forensic unit is for the
criminally involved.
Uh, population at the behavioral
Health Institute. So folks that
have been court ordered to be
there, uh, the current facility
is an old prison.
Um, that is, uh, quite
substandard in terms of kind of
modern expectations for a
psychiatric facility. It wasn't
built to be that, uh, this
project does need to happen, um,
however, this is the 2nd time
that it has doubled in cost. Um,
so you all provided nearly $70
million for construction two
years ago, um, the request last
year doubled that cost estimate,
and then it happened again this
year.
The cost of this time is based
on, uh, the project actually
going out to bid for
construction, um,
However, it seems like it was a
surprise to both Ge GSD and DOH
as well. Um, so Charles and I
have requested a follow-up
meeting with all of these folks
as well as a fair amount of
documentation on what happened
here, um, and why the estimate
was so off, um, and options for
phasing construction or
potentially reducing the cost of
the project overall.
So, um
Hopefully next month we'll have
more for you on all of that. Um,
Mr. Chair, do you want to stop
for questions or?
OK, I'll, I'll get to the end of
page two, and then we'll pause.
Um, OK, uh, the second bullet on
this page, GST is requesting an
additional $100 million for the
executive office building, um,
which would essentially be a
cross Don Gaspar from the
Roundhouse, um, here in Santa
Fe, um, many of you are familiar
with this project, just a couple
things I'll point out, um, the
state is still in the process of
essentially negotiating with the
city of Santa Fe, um, over
potential demolition of those
three, casitas.
Don Gaspar, um, and we also
still don't have a final list of
who would actually go in this
building. Um, and which, you
know, kind of has an effect on a
couple other projects, um, which
I can tell you more about if
you'd like to hear about them.
Um, OK, the third bullet, um,
two agencies are asking for
large appropriations for
construction of facilities, uh,
that would support programmatic
programmatic expansions, um,
that have not necessarily been
vetted or funded by the
legislature yet, uh, both of
these projects did receive
initial smaller capital
appropriations last year for
either a feasibility studies or
planning and design, and those
things have not yet been
complete.
completed yet.
So, um, those two projects are
the requests are $40 million for
a new fire training academy in
Santa Fe for the Department of
Homeland Security and Emergency
Management and $15 million for
veterans resource, uh, center in
Albuquerque for the Department
of Veteran Services. Um, the
next bullet, I also wanted to
make you all aware that the $40
million request for the fire
training academy is related to
an $8 million request from
The energy, minerals and natural
resources department for a
wildfire response facility in
Santa Fe. Um, this is a facility
that currently exists on lease
land in Santa Fe, um, and the
lease is expiring and they have
to move, um, however, uh, you
know, we raised the issue and
these requests were brought to
the executive Capital Outlay
Committee of uh whether these
two requests might be considered
as one project.
Um, they're actually both
looking to locate on the
National Guard site in Santa Fe
and there is some space that
they would sort of need
dedicated, but there's also some
space they should, they could
share, um, so we might be able
to see some cost efficiency, uh,
from, you know, treating it as a
collaborative multi-agency
project rather.
And two different things.
Um, and then the last, uh, the
last project I wanted to point
out.
Here, actually I have one
flowing onto the other page. So
I'll do 2 more bullets and then
I'll stop. Um, MAD is requesting
an additional $70 million for
the reforestation center in Mora
County. Um, they, uh, have told
us that they now have $40
million in total funding for
this project, including $20
million from the feds. They have
also made this same request
through FEMA, um, for this
funding and if they were to
receive that, they would with
withdraw the request for
additional.
State funding, um, I will also
say that they're starting the
design of it, um, and they could
build the center out in a phased
approach, um, starting with the
existing $40 million that they
have.
And then just one more bullet on
page 3,
I, uh, also wanted to highlight
the two agencies are requesting
funding for new office space in
Albuquerque, um, those include
$14 million from the, from the
environment department, um, for
office space that the state owns
in Albuquerque as well as $5
million for an analytical lab.
And then 12 $12 million for
office space for DFA, um, the
legislature did provide a $1.5
million dollar appropriation
last year to GSD to do an
Albuquerque master plan, um, and
so one thing you all might want
to consider is whether the
master plan should be completed,
uh, before we start expanding
the state's footprint in
Albuquerque. And I will pause.
And woods.
OK, uh, Kelly, uh, the last
first, Gary,
Have we got absolutely every
inch of state office building
filled up right now. It, it, are
we utilizing all of our office
space in every state building.
Let's say in in Santa Fe.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator Woods, I
will follow up with GST and get
you a precise answer on that.
Um, but they have told us that,
um, since the return to work
policy that offices in Santa Fe
have been quite full. Um, and
the
Aside from that, kind of the
impetus for the request for
expansion of space in
Albuquerque is primarily related
to hiring, um, and there being a
larger pool of applicants for
agencies in Albuquerque who
don't want to commute.
OK,
and they said, and the return to
work stuff, only 16 people have
come back to work. I don't know
what agencies or where, but only
16 people, so I mean, I can't
know why they want more office
space with only 16 return to
work.
chair Wesley might be able to.
Fill you in a little bit more on
this from the executive side.
Mr. Chair, um, I can't really
speak to Parra. Um, I can speak
to DFA though. We, we actually
um don't have any additional
space. We, we are um bursting at
the seams and so um we're
actually trying to find other
space within Santa Fe to, to,
um, to expand, um, our offices.
And so we're looking at like the
Joseph Montoya building, for
instance, I think environments
moving from one place to
another. And so we might be
looking at space there. Um so I
know from a DFA perspective, we
definitely need more space, um,
at, at financed administration,
um, but
I don't know the exact answer to
your question for the pair.
Yeah, Miss Chair, if, if, if you
could get back to us.
And answer that question if
Because we have a lot of state
buildings around Santa Fe.
Uh, I would just feel better if
we knew how much occupation was
going on.
On every square foot of that,
and I know that we moved the
PRC.
Down by the square none know
that we've done different
things.
But
I've heard there was 2 or 3
floors of some buildings.
That are unoccupied. Now, maybe
rumor.
Just
Just so that you will set aside
that rumor would be a great
deal.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Representative Garrett.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Do we have
an audit of the office space
being rented or owned in
Albuquerque because as these
people make requests, we have
PED we
Do we know who and what is in
Albuquerque.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Garrett, yeah, we do have an
inventory of leased space, um,
so I don't have that at the tip
of my fingertips right now, but
we can get that information for
you, and, you know, the, the
point of doing a master plan
would be to kind of quantify and
analyze all that information
both to your and Senator Woods's
questions, so that we have um
You know, a, a kind of
More precise gauge on the need
for who across the agencies as
well as kind of the.
Great, Mr. Chair, thank you for
that.
And her guy goes.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for the presentation. I was
gonna ask, uh, going backwards
to the Department of Health uh
120 million requests for the
forensic unit. Uh, I noticed
when you've got it written very
well of origin of 70,000 75,000
square foot or 100 beds, but now
it's 125,000 square foot for 90
beds. Do we know why the
increase in the minimizing of
bids.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator, yes, um,
so what we were told by DOH last
year, which is when this initial
change happened, and it was, you
know, surprising to us for the
same reason. I think you're
reacting to it.
Um, was that the increase in
space was related to essentially
like requirements for clinical
space for this kind of facility
that I guess the department was
not aware of when they made the
um initial request, um, and
You know, I, I would say it sort
of raised some concerns about
planning in general, although we
are sort of past that point with
this project, um, where we do
have a, you know, at this point
we really need to think about
how we can bring the cost of
this down as much as possible.
Well, I appreciate it, Mr.
Chair, and, and I'm brand new at
this, this is my 3rd day in this
committee, but uh I do
construction and uh I was gonna
ask if the plans were completed
at the new amount, so you've
already answered that, uh, since
COVID
Uh, our construction costs
aren't instate costs increases
it's out of state. I told one
entity in Artesia for me.
Back then, by all the red iron,
keep it on the ground, so what
that way as you get more money,
you can act direct and complete
the building, uh, but it was
just really odd for me that they
would
And I understand totally missing
it on planning, but to decrease
the beds,
I guess to me, um,
This facilities can be very
important to the state. I would
have kept the number of beds.
And increase the pudding for
whatever it was, and part of
this goes back to uh Senator
Woods's question on the state
side office buildings, a lot of
that ends up being storage.
Uh, we in our office had to
build more offices.
And we ended up getting access
to store our stuff. You've got
to maintain it for so long, but
I'm wondering if that after the
audit, that's what we'll find
there's a lot of places that we
have that are occupied.
By paper, not people, but uh I
appreciate that, that's all I
wanted to, to make sure that the
design was thought through
enough. um, Mr. Chair, Senator,
if I could just raise one more
point on that, you know, for
both state agencies and higher
education facilities, um, this
committee has really been
pushing them to try to get the
planning and design further
along before they come to the
legislature asking for major
construction dollars, so that we
can sort of reduce what, for
some of these projects has been
a very
large amount of uncertainty um
in the actual cost.
And for this in particular,
there appeared to be a problem
with um the estimate from the
A&E firm based on the final
design and what the market
actually produced when they went
out to bid for construction, and
we're trying to figure out why
that estimate was so far off. I
appreciate that. So I'm also on
school boarding units. Our
original design on facility was
estimated at 300 actuals, $1000
square foot.
And so a lot of those are not
negotiated as there are of state
entities, and you're gonna pay
what you're gonna pay shipping
and everything else, so I, I, I
like the idea of getting it
locked in and started sooner
than later, but I don't think we
go down anymore. We continue to
go up, so thank you, Mr.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Hi,
Kelly and Wesley, thank you for
your work. Just quickly, um,
Kelly on the Department of
Health, they are requesting,
they're one of the uh agencies
requesting over $100 million in
capital, and I noticed 148.6
here, but then, uh, when you
look at the next page, um,
there, it's 120 million for the
New Mexico Behavioral Health
Institute, and I know that um we
appropriate 103 million last
year for that, but from 22 to 24
anyway, but.
The question that I have is
where are the other 28.6
million. If it's 140.
Um, what are the requests,
148.6, 120 accounts for the
behavioral health forensic unit.
What else are they asking for? I
can't find it in here. Um, Mr.
Chair, Senator Rodriguez, if you
turn to the first attachment
behind the bullets. um, and page
2 of that, and I apologize this
printed in the wrong
orientation, so it's kind of
small. Um, you can see starting
on line 65 there are DOH's
requests. So, um, the majority
of it is through, um,
is from additional kind of
statewide requests they make for
all of their facilities every
year. So 17.5 million for um
essentially deferred maintenance
and capital renewal, um, 4.5 for
equipment and instruments, um,
2.4 for health and safety
projects and, uh, almost $4
million for a new intermediate
care facility. Good. Thank you
very much. I, I will go back to
that and see
representative Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Kelly. My question was on
the 40 million for a fire
training academy in Santa Fe,
and I was just wondering why
they had selected Santa Fe for
that particular um.
40 million since we have a state
fire academy there in Socorro.
And
What Socorro would look like
with 40 million.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Vincent, that's a great
question. We asked similar
questions. Um, so the responses
we've received so far is that
there is a desire for another
training academy in northern New
Mexico, um, particularly for
volunteer fire departments in
smaller communities, so they
don't have to travel to Socorro,
um, you know, we were all, we, I
would say are also concerned
about.
the impact on the existing
facility and the question of
whether, you know, if we build
this, we'll have 2 that are half
used versus one that's fully
utilized. Um, they told us their
expectation was that they would
both be fully utilized, um, you
know, but I would suggest you'd
probably want some more
documentation on how they
arrived at that conclusion.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'd love
to sit down and talk with the
HSEM about that because I think
that um we need to keep things
more centrally located for
everyone and there's a great
facility in Socorro now.
And it, it is in
I think it's in desperate need
of an overhaul.
And to be able to put at least
half of that money into it, you
would have a great facility, and
11 thing just for the record,
you know, we're sending most of
our people out for aircraft
firefighting and rescue, we're
sending them to Dallas, and I
would hope that we would be able
to put our.
Firefighting rescue in, in this
uh
Particular money, so we don't
have to send our New Mexico fire
train. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Baca. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Kelly. Um.
Couple of quick questions and
first comment.
Uh, like some of my colleagues
that do also have concerns about
the request of some of these
facilities. We've heard through
this committee and through this
interim, all about the telework
and how many people have
returned to work, and also the
uh AI and how many jobs that may
actually change your structure.
So,
When we talk about creating
Buildings and facilities.
That may be
Unused or emptied or for other
purposes.
I, I also, uh, Mr. Chairman and
Kelly, uh, the, the request
regarding the, the DOH um
Facility aid for $103 million.
At 100 beds, that's a million
dollars uh in person there.
Uh, when we look at funding of
schools and we look at other
types of agencies, our school
children who uh
Are going to school in ancient
buildings.
Is there a separate request that
was not here as far as for our
public schools as far as our
facilities.
Building schools and other types
of things.
This
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Baca, so, um, typically, school
construction does not go through
the statewide portion of the
capital process because of the
public school capital outlay
council and that dedicated
funding source, um, there has a
couple of times in recent years
been a distribution, um,
included in the capital bill
from the public school capital
outlay funds that has gone out
to all districts for
essentially like flexible
additional flexible maintenance
dollars, um, but districts don't
bring bring direct requests to
the statewide portion. They do,
however, sometimes bring
requests to individual
legislators, um, for
discretionary funding for things
that the public school Capital
Outlay Council doesn't fund. I
think it was in my, my, many of
you talked to many of the
schools in the districts across
the state. Part of the reason,
part of the obstacles is that
they do not have the district
share.
To order the bonding capacity to
pay for these Asian buildings.
I, I heard it during one
committee that the average age
of a facility in New Mexico is
like 45, 50 plus years.
And when we're talking about
trying to address a need.
These schools have the job of of
educating and training our next
workforce who will then later
serve the district and serve the
state. So I, I really, and
again, I know this is not you,
this is your reporting on it.
But I asked the committee that
when we're looking at these
types of things and we're
looking at these requests.
We have to realize that we have
the responsibility also to look
as far as our schools and many
of our
Our aging buildings, um, and Mr.
Chairman, I'll finally end with
this is that we talk about how
do we
How do we get students, how do
we improve our schools, and I
did have said many times, I
think that we need to support
both CT and creating, you know,
whether it be facilities to get
our kids and encourage them to
go back to school. So, uh, I, I
do, I do want to express my
concerns for
For this expansions, especially
these great expansions, uh, for,
for space that I fear would only
be
They can
Mr. Chairman, thank you,
Representative Chatville.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, just
wanted to talk a little bit
about the reforestation center,
uh.
I am recalling the trip that
That some of us made up, and I
remember that they carried all
the seed from New Mexico, uh,
Plants to propagate new plants
out in the, in the back of a
pickup truck and uh I remember
how, how, uh,
You were offended by that, that
we didn't have a better facility
up there and the, the uh
Projection at that time was 80
million to put in a nice new
modern one. I hope that the one
we put in will have the ability
to exist if a fire comes to that
area again and it will have the
ability to have
Uh, electricity and water, uh
for the plants so that we, how
many thousands of trees did we
lose 7000 or something like
that, uh, during that last half
Canyon and
Uh, Hermit's peak fire, so I
think that's a very important
facility. We've had more, not
less fires and uh we need to
Uh, revegetate those areas, I
think it's uh important that we
have a holistic look at what's
going back, trees, shrubs,
grasses, forbs, uh, uh, a lot of
it comes back on its own, but I
think that's an important
project.
Uh
How we get the feds to, uh, chip
in on that. I'm not sure, but I
think it's important for us to
fund it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Garcia.
Oh, thank you, Mr. Chairman, uh
Kelly, on the, on the, on the
magistrate courts on the first
page.
Abola County, they were 2.5
million existing funding now
asking for 10.7 million more. Is
there any movement on that
facility?
They purchased property or
anything that you know of, cause
you know, what's gonna happen
here.
As time goes by, this is gonna
get more expensive, and we're
gonna be having the same
conversation next year and more
money. Do you know anything
about that?
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative
Garcia, yes, I believe they do
have a site and they have used
the existing funding to start
design, um, I believe they're in
a county facility now that
they're on a month to month
lease on, um, and I can get you
additional detail on where the
site is.
If you would like.
I thank you for that, Kelly, you
ever think about purchasing the,
the place they rent already?
You know that's a very new
building. It's got problems, but
they were thought about doing
that.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative,
um, my understanding was that,
um, the county did not want them
to occupy that building anymore,
and I think they had other plans
for it, but again, I don't
remember all the details off the
top of my head, but I can get
them for you, um, after the
meeting.
Thank you, mister. Thank you,
Kelly.
All right, Mr. Wesley, you're
up.
Got a notebook.
Oh, Mr. Charro's still me. No,
no, no, wait, wait, I, I. It's
you, your question, sorry, I
thought you were telling us
Wesley's gonna have to take
notes here, or Kelly can take
notes while you're talking, um.
We have to get the executive
office built.
Before the next administration
comes in, cause we know what
could happen.
If the next administration
doesn't want that building,
they'll hold it up and tie it
up, so.
I mean, I mean you're the office
of infrastructure.
So we're gonna get you a little
red wagon so we can load the
wagon for you.
But I mean, that building has to
get built because everybody LLC
is running out of, out of office
space, right?
They're kicking them out, and
we're gonna go to Cuba. You
don't want your old boss's
office building lease space. I
was over there the other day and
has a fallout shelter with a
hole in it, so the birds can fly
in and they got to put a net
around the fallout shelter so
the birds can't come in.
Um
So we've got to figure that out.
I, I, I mean, I don't know where
we're gonna build this thing,
but they cannot get stuck on
this side across the street.
I mean,
This is pre, how how long did
you stay at West Charles? 15
years?
great recession.
So this is prior to 2010.
That's how many years?
24.
24 years we've been looking at
this.
Same site, we're gonna have to
move off to a different site and
you guys are gonna have to start
going and saying, OK, here's
sites that we can build it in
Santa Fe.
And and cause it's 24 years
later and we still don't have,
we still don't have it.
I mean, we can start in
If the new executive modular
buildings and put them in
modulars across the street at
the PRC and take over the 4th
floor while they're waiting for
the building.
Probably be a
I pushed in, but we got to get
that thing moving. There's,
there's no other choice,
everybody needs space, everybody
needs for us at LFC, we know we
need 5 or 10 offices.
And that's just LLC. I don't
know what LESC because they're
in the same, they're in the same
position in so.
Take that to your boss and tell
him that's a uh weekend task.
Um
The other, the other big
question is,
Uh, I want you guys to look at
really like, like the, the, the
other for the Las Vegas
Behavioral Health Institute.
Or we run into this problem and
we're running into it in the
veterans centers in tier C.
is that we can get staffing in
in small city locations.
And so we're placing those in
The consequences where they
don't have the staff to run the
veterans center and then we're
subsidizing, and then they're
not completely full. I don't
know if that's gonna be the
situation in Las Vegas, but it
could be.
When you build a $200 million
building and then we don't have
the staff or the people to run
that. And so are we scoring that
as we look forward and saying,
OK, what's available?
That, that's a mental health
institutions, the doctors, the
nurses, the security is there
enough of that workforce there
to staff that building or we
place it in the wrong place and
saying.
It needs to go into a larger
metropolitan area, Albuquerque,
Santa Fe, Las Cruces.
Uh, somewhere there so that it
can get staffed correctly.
Are we looking at any of that?
Um, Mr. Chair, yes, um, you
know, at the staff level, we
always consider the um capacity
to operate and operational and
programmatic implications of
facilities, um, with this
facility in particular, um, what
we heard from DOH most recently
is there is, I think, around a
50% vacancy rate for behavioral
health techs.
Um, and they, uh, essentially
use, you know, contractors and
travelers to fill that gap, um,
and, you know, I, I do not
anticipate that the new facility
will dramatically change that
challenge there.
So, it is a challenge and
probably will continue to be. So
we're going to pay a higher
operational cost, because we're
using contract employees.
keep the building that capacity.
So then we're double, we're
doubling our costs.
For operational site, so.
Have, have you ever kicked
anybody off this list and said,
The staffing doesn't meet the
requirements or you don't have
the requirements for the
staffing into the building, and
so you need to go pick another
location or
You leave that up to us to do
the dirty work.
I take that as a yes.
I think, you know, I, Mr. Chair,
I, I think the answer is, you
know, that our job as staff is
to gather that information to
you and provide it to you, um,
and then, you know, ultimately,
those kind of hard decisions are
yours as lawmakers too. Yeah,
uh, I mean.
in, in Wesley while I got you
here. If we're gonna build $100
million 200 million dollars
executive buildings. Here's 20
million for DFA for a new
building. There's another 14
million for the environment
department to lease space,
right?
Uh, who else is there? GST
that's 100 million.
The forensic unit, I mean,
So there's, there's over.
1
40 million roughly 134.
And we think it's with the
numbers that are coming in, it's
probably gonna be a $200 million
bill. That's pretty high cost to
office space. I mean, we got to
figure this out, but whatever it
is, it's gonna be, but
I caution everybody that
Everybody's learned that there's
a lot of state in the money and
so let's go design something and
then they say, oh, we'll design
you.
They asked for a $10 million
building and they get a $40
million building and then the
costs are running up and then
they say now we need $80 million
and it's unsustainable. I mean,
it's gonna collapse at some
point, especially in PSCOC we're
talking about a million dollars
a classroom for a kid in small
areas. I mean, that is gonna
collapse the system.
There's nothing wrong with
having nice things, but
collapsing the entire system to
not replace schools wherever
they need to be replaced.
Uh, I mean, we're setting
ourselves up for that.
I don't know if we're
You better be looking forward at
the cost and saying, well,
here's your cap.
Wesley, have you designed a cap
and a floor for for building
costs, right? Well, you're new.
Can we design a cap in the
floor.
That agencies can design with
based upon the number of people
occupying that.
Mr. Chair, we have not done
that, but I can definitely look
into getting something like
that, um, developed, um, Mr.
Chair, when it comes to the, the
request for a new office space
in Albuquerque. Um, I think,
obviously, environment put in
their requests and we had our
requests. I think we're gonna
look at working with GSD on, on
their master plan and figuring
out how we can get one facility
for as many state agencies as
possible to fill that facility.
Um, we do believe at least the
DFA that um having access to
the, the city of Albuquerque,
um.
um, would benefit the state. And
so that's part of the reason for
that, as well as we know that
there are lots of state
employees already that do travel
from Albuquerque to Santa Fe,
and this might be a way to, to
be able to, to keep those
employees and, and not lose
employees and and and help with
retention. So that's kind of the
goal of that $20 million
request. It wasn't just for DFA.
It was actually for all state
agencies. Um, I think 20 million
did come from a conversation
with GST on a potential space,
um, that, that is in
Albuquerque, um, and that we.
Looking at potentially
purchasing and renovating, um,
but again, we want to, we really
do want to wait for their, their
master plan to be fully
developed, um, before we make
that decision.
So I, I just found your space
while you're talking. The space
of Saint Francis where all the
other agencies are located.
Why can't we place an executive
building there and park for the
parking garage next door.
And that resolves our issue.
Of where we're gonna go because
24 years.
So, I mean just thinking about
that in, in Wesley for your, I
mean, you're, you're gonna have
to really think about staffing
up cause the, the chatter around
the legislatures, the
infrastructure offices.
That's why I said you're gonna
need a wagon. All the bills
you're gonna get introduced for
you to do more work. Um, and,
and so, I mean, you need to look
at design engineers and cost
estimators in staffing so you
can get a control of what these
numbers are, are.
Doing but I, I, it's an
interesting question that I'd
love to develop a cap and a
floor.
For agencies to say, OK, how
many people are eating in this
office, so I need 20.
Right
And so what does that number
look like and put it, put a
floor in a cap.
And say, here's what the market
range is.
And to do that in
I mean, a lot of these costs are
run by CES.
Because CES uses a Gordian
system for estimating, and if
you buy a bolt at Ace Hardware
and it's a
29 cents.
In the Gordian system, it's
going to be like 350.
And so the multiplier is getting
hard and that's what they're
using their, their numbers to
come off and is the Gordian
system.
And so
I don't know how we control
that, but Kelly, let's keep
rolling, I guess.
OK, um, so back on page 3,
starting under the bold blue
heading that says request to
benefit local entities. Um, so
while the statewide framework
is, you know, primarily intended
to fund state owned
infrastructure, um, there are in
some cases requests that state
agencies make, um, for
essentially pools of funding for
specific purposes that
ultimately uh benefit non-state
entities.
Um, and we have seen a little
more of this in recent years,
um, so just wanted to highlight
these specifically for your
consideration. Um, I already
mentioned this one, but the
administrative office of the
courts is requesting an
additional $20 million for a
county matching fund for
improvements to district
courthouses. Um, so counties are
actually responsible for
providing the facilities for
district courts. Um, uh, the
initial funding that the
legislature provided for this.
um, of essentially 50/50 cost
sharing for these improvements
between the state and the
counties, um, was prompted by
some litigation, um, over this
issue in a Otero County.
So over the past few years, the
legislature has appropriated $30
million to AOC for this purpose,
which has been fully committed.
Um, DFA and Wesley can speak
more to these requests if you
have questions, is requesting $5
million to uh complete interior
improvements to the Mora County
Courthouse, as well as $20
million for emergency capital
needs for local entities, um,
you all made this appropriation
for emergency needs to DFA for
the first time last year at the
$10 million level, um, and
Wesley can inform you about the
progress of those funds.
Um, a request we always have,
um, the benefits non-state
entities is from the aging and
long-term Services department,
um, for senior center projects
statewide this year they're
requesting $33.5 million.
Um, these projects are one of
the, uh, traditional uses of the
general obligation bond bill,
um.
That you have available to you
every other year. So I, I just
wanted to point out here that
this request is, um, much higher
than is typical, uh, for
non-GO beers, so prior to 2023,
uh, the, the off your
appropriations for statewide
senior centers were much, much
smaller, um, and you can see in
this bullet, uh, a sense of
scale is that in 2021, the
funding package was only $3.8
million
there certainly are needs.
at the senior centers, uh, there
has been some trouble, uh,
spending down these funds
efficiently in recent years. Um,
you can see there's a balance of
$22.7 million of $24 million in
total appropriations from 2022
for this statewide package, um,
the department has been focusing
on getting these balances down
and providing more assistance to
senior centers. Uh, they've done
some reorganization and, um,
some staffing change.
and at a higher leadership
level, they are putting more
focus on this, um, but, you
know, this continues to be an
area of concern for us and
something you might want to
consider, uh, with this large
request.
In a non-geo year.
Um, the border authority is
requesting $800,000 for
feasibility studies for natural
gas infrastructure in Luna
County and a Demming truck
bypass and $1.7 million for a
water storage tank in Columbus,
um, they also, um,
Uh, do make requests on behalf
of local entities related to
their charge down there. Um, and
this office of the State
Engineer is requesting $5
million for statewide
improvements, uh, which would
supplement, um, existing
dedicated funds that they manage
for this purpose.
Um, and I would say, you know,
might also be additional to
request some of you all may
receive for your own capital
outlay from individuals as well.
Um, Mr. Chair, do you want me to
pause again or would you like me
to?
Go forward with higher ed first.
represent the stop right there,
but we're gonna roll through
this pretty quick, so.
But
Sure
Stemming bypass, which road
would that be off like 70, 10.
Uh, Mr. Chariff Senator Garrett,
I don't know, but I can get that
information for you.
Wesley, uh, there's another note
for your notebook. We know we
don't have a secretary long term
in aging. We don't have a deputy
secretary.
And so who's making the capital
request, is it?
Whoever
It was under them. Is that why
the numbers so high this year,
so that's a question, so.
Uh, Mr. Chair, it's their
capital um projects bureau over
there that's doing this and
making the request, um, they
have the, the senior centers put
in the same request that they
would normally put in, um,
whether it was a GOB or non-GOB
or, and so that's why this is
showing as something that's
similar to a GOB year, um,
because the need is still there
regardless of whether there's
funding sources um for GOB or
general funds. So that's, that's
how the request was made, um,
and why it's, it's higher than
it has been in other non-GOB
years.
OK.
Good, Kelly.
OK. Um, so moving on to higher
education, um, you do have
another attachment, attachment
be behind the memo, um, with
detail on all of the higher ed
requests, as well as there's a
column titled HED
Recommendation. So essentially
what happens with higher ed is,
um, in the summer, higher ed
institutions make their capital
requests, um, before a committee
that both Wesley and I sit on,
um, then the higher education
department, uh, brings its own
recommend.
related to how to fund those
requests to the state agency
capital hearings that happened
on October. Um, so here you can
see what the institutions
requested and what the
department is recommending for
funding, um, and then LFC staff,
uh, works with you all after
that to develop essentially its
own recommendation for higher ed
funding as part of the statewide
package.
So this year higher ed
institutions requested $429
million in capital outlay for
2025 and the department has
recommended funding, um, 223.4
million of those requests, um,
which is more than double the
funding that was included for
higher education in the 2023
statewide framework, which is
the last non-general obligation
bond year.
Um, if you turn to page 4, in
those bullets, you can see some
of the major projects that are
included in HED's
recommendation.
So, um, you know, I wanted to
just make a couple of quick
comments about, um, that sort of
delta between uh what the higher
ed department is recommending
this year, and, you know, what
you have made available for
higher ed and uh a similar
revenue situation recently.
Um
You know, that number is partly
driven, uh, by some major
projects that are, uh, estimated
to have quite high costs that
you partially funded in last
year's general obligation bond
package and now are seeking
additional funding, so that
includes $50 million for um a
new humanities and social
sciences complex at UNM, $20
million for renovations to the
College of Pharmacy. Um, you
know, I, I would say this is
kind of validating, um, our
concerns about the
sustainability of construction
costs being what they are right
now, um, for higher education,
it's a particular challenge
because they're dedicated
funding source, um,
traditionally for new
construction has been that
general obligation bond
capacity, um, which, while it's
growing, it's growing gradually
at a much slower rate than
construction costs are growing,
um, and higher ed institutions.
uh, continue to have quite a
high, um, demand for new
construction on their campuses,
as well as significant deferred
maintenance needs in their
existing facilities. Um,
Uh, this committee has been, um,
urging higher ed institutions
like state agencies to get
further ahead on planning and
design.
Uh, before they come and ask for
major construction dollars, the
traditional practice has
essentially been to ask for it
all at once in the GO years for
major projects and while that
used to work OK while costs were
more stable. Um, it has been a
real challenge now and
additionally, just given the
Big price tags on some of these
projects, um, you know, this
committee's perspective has been
that the legislature needs sort
of more information on uh what
these facilities look like, what
they're gonna do, what's driving
the cost before you make, you
know, $100 million
so you'll see on the 3rd bullet
under uh HED's recommendation,
um, UNM is asking for a $30
million for planning and design
of a new school of medicine. Uh,
so this is
an example of them being
responsive to our requests, uh,
that they
Basically that they asked for
planning and design money and
contribute some of their own
funds to that purpose too,
before seeking new construction
dollars. Uh, this itself is a
big number, cause this is
expected to be a very major
project like a multi hundreds of
million dollar construction
project eventually, um, that is
likely to have great importance
to the state, um, but needs uh a
lot of planning investment on
the front end to make sure it's
successful, not just from a
facility's perspective, but.
Um, more importantly, from a
kind of programmatic
perspective.
Um, OK, and then on the cost
thing too, uh, in the second
bullet on page 4, just wanted to
highlight sort of what we're
seeing here. There's quite a
spread, uh, in the requests, um,
for higher education buildings
in terms of cost, um, we're
seeing anywhere from $1000 a
square foot to $1800 per square
foot, um, and, you know, we're,
we're scrutinizing these costs
and asking um institutions for a
follow up, um, where they
seem kind of out of step with uh
what's typical around, um, and
do you want me to wrap up before
I pause again, just real quick.
OK, um, at the bottom, I just
kinda wanted to highlight, um,
some things for you all to keep
in mind with your local
requests. Um,
So, first of all, um, I want to
highlight, uh, that, um,
The Legislative council service,
uh, with support from
legislative leadership in this
committee has implemented an
earlier deadline for local
requests this year. Um, the
governor has followed suit, so
it will be, uh, for the
legislature, the deadline for
local requests will be December
13th, and then the governor's
request portal will close
December 20th.
Um, this is essentially born of
kind of a policy initiative of
this committee to uh make a
process-based change that could
provide legislators with more
time to consider their requests
to coordinate with each other,
um, to, you know, kind of
organize requests and buckets,
so you sort of know as the body
as a whole, like, how much are
you being asked for for water
versus roads versus whatever
else, um, so that you can sort
of think about where the needs
are and what your
ities are, um, as a collective,
as well as as individuals, and,
you know, essentially that at
your own discretion, um, you
can, uh, with staff support that
will be coming to you soon, um,
get more information about some
of this stuff, um, should you
want to do that.
Um, we're still working with LCS
to kind of figure out what the
next steps will be after the
deadline in terms of what you
all will get and what form when,
um, so that you can put that to
use or, you know, perhaps ask
staff to do certain things for
you, um, should you wanna do
that, uh, so I hope to be in
touch with you all about those
details soon.
Um, additionally, uh, the final
attachment here is what the
project summary sheets will look
like, it's the same as last
year, um, we've also worked with
LCS over the past couple years
to get the information you
receive to be more in line with
the kind of voluntary vetting
criteria that you all have
adopted and recommended to the
legislature so that it's easier
for you to look at a request and
sort of know whether it meets
some of the key criteria.
out that we know support project
success or not, um, in a, in a
pretty easy fashion. Um, so I
can answer more questions about
that if you want or
individually, um, should you
want to know how to use this
more. Um, I also wanted to just
highlight real quickly which
Leslie Wesley can talk more
about if you're curious, um, the
governor did send out a kind of
letter of direction, um, to
local and tribal entities on how
she, uh, plans to prioritize.
The requests and some of the
kind of vetting criteria they'll
be looking at with their own
requests, um, which was a first
on that front in Wesley can tell
you more about that if you want.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Just
real quick, um, so the, the
governor's office um is going to
be considering um aspects of
different proposals submitted.
And so there's, there's 4
criteria that we had to outlined
and first one is the requested
project is included as a top 3
priority of the entity's ICIP
list, uh, as a current fiscal
year following fiscal year
priority. So we want it to be on
the top 3 priorities for, for
those entities, um, entities
requesting funding should
demonstrate that they have
exhausted all other possible
sources.
Um, so when they fill out the
ICIP there's, there's sections
in there for secured and
potential funding. And so we
want to see that they've
actually tried to apply for some
other, other sources of funding
outside of Capital Outlay.
Um, the entity requesting the
capital should demonstrate
commitment to the project um by
putting in their own funds. So,
um, that's only when, when, when
they can, um, we know that
there's some entities that, that
don't have the means to do that.
And then the last thing was
funding requests of at least
100,000. Um, so those are the
four primary things we're
looking for. Again, I'm sure
that we will receive um some
requests outside of those four
conditions, um, but those are
what we're looking for when
we're, we're going to be making
those funding recommendations.
And, and basically you said the
floor was 100,000.
Mr. Chair, yes, that's what
we're looking at. OK.
Any representente. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. I just want to,
uh,
Give a shout out to the team,
Kelly West and, and Antonio for
what you've done for the
capital process. I know the
small changes that uh she's
talked about this morning, uh
with the earlier days for
project requests, the earlier
dates uh related to the LCS and
how they respond to the
legislature as well as the
status reports, the reports that
all of us will be receiving, uh,
hopefully by next month, the,
the green, yellow, and red
sheets that will let you all
know where your projects are at
and making sure that we're on,
on task if you're if they're
asking for more.
money, uh, we got to make sure
that they're spending that money
before we give more. So I want
to thank you all for those small
changes, but I think they're
going to be very effective in
helping all of us make better
decisions on how we are
providing that capitality. So
thank you all. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Mr. Chair, if I could
follow up on that real quick,
um, so to Representative Lente's
point, um, last year, um, at his
request and then with the
agreement of um leadership from
both parties. We did change how
we formatted your sponsor
reports.
which each of you receive once a
quarter, essentially giving you
a status update on your past
capital appropriations. So they
do now appear in this.
The same way we do this million
and greater report where
essentially you get a color
coded progress rating as well as
these kind of qualitative
updates that entities are
supposed to provide, um, so we
are working on a new quarterly
report for next month's LFC
meeting and then we issued the
sponsor reports right after
that, so, um, you should be
receiving those, um, by the end
of November and at the very
least before you get your local
capital outlay requests, and
those
can be a resource for you, um,
for the past couple of years, we
have been recommending, um, that
legislators consider
prioritizing, completing funding
for existing projects before
starting new projects, given the
vast number of projects out
there, capacity constraints, and
cost issues that uh we've all
been seeing some red ink for
mine. Thank you.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I'm, I'm just, you, uh, Callie,
did you say you sit on the
higher education capital outlay.
OK, so I'm, I'm just kind of uh
scrolling through this and I see
where like New Mexico military
institute requested 3 million,
but they received 2.25. Are we
not just creating shortfalls for
these entities if we don't give
them.
Uh, you know, the full amount
that they're requesting because
I'm sure they've
I'm assuming that they've uh
Do a, uh, you know, an estimate,
received an estimate on this. So
how, how does that come about?
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Armstrong, um, so, you know, I
would say first of all, how
precise these numbers are
depends on a lot of things. Um,
the, the committee, uh, tries to
prioritize, um, at least being
able to complete functional
phases of projects with the
funding it recommends, um, for
something like this request, uh,
where it's, it's essentially a
broad request for a number
of different projects that are
related on the whole campus, um,
they, you know, I would say the
rationale in part is that if
they can't receive the full
funding, they can at least
complete some of it. Um, another
issue we would look at with
these requests is, um, funds
that the institutions have on
hand that they might be able to
contribute to completion of a
project. Um, so those can both
be factors and where the number
ultimately ends up, and then,
you know, like I said, LFC goes
through and does its own its own
version of this afterwards and,
you know, part of the purpose of
these hearings is to get
feedback from you all, um, on,
you know, what you see and what
questions, um, you have with the
request.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you. You, you know,
Mexico military, they have a
large foundation fund of like.
A couple 100 million.
And they have cash balances that
they could do this on, but
everybody's relying on us to
give them free money.
Instead of using their own, and
that that's where I think a lot
of our our capital gets plugged
up.
Representing Gaza, I mean.
Senator Gallegos is not here.
I'm gonna pass around a letter
from DOT when we asked about
ARPA and and have you spent all
the money?
And Kelly said today that the
ARPA money's been programmed in
DOT.
Here's a letter that says they
really didn't program it till
maybe today.
They just made the transfers
today.
And so
Look at that and so as we move
forward with the ARPA, that's
going to tell you that.
Some people don't have that
program and they're not really
sure where, where it's going
yet. Mr. Chair, just real quick,
I can speak to that. Um, so we,
we do have, um, we do have the
responses from all of the
agencies when it comes to AARPA
funds and so, um, sometimes I
think it was DOT and Higher
Education department did have um
the the dates out um further
than, than what we wanted, um,
and DOT was one of them who just
did that transfer today. And I
think the higher education
department is also doing a
transfer really soon as well.
Um, so we are aware of these,
um, but they should, they should
meet the encumbrance
requirements um by doing these
transfers.
Cutting them pretty close within
30 days after Mr.
Thank you.
That's it, Kelly, right?
We're gonna attempt to tab Jay
because people exit and leave,
we need to take care of the
committee business. You can send
it that way.
Wesley, thank you.
Make sure your boss gets you
that wagon cause.
Charles the Stark
Mr. Chairman, uh, just has the
meeting minutes from our
September meeting.
So Mr. Chairman, a motion by
Senator Gonzalez, seconded by
Senator Rodriguez, any objection
to the motion on the minutes see
none there, doctor.
What's next? That's it.
Uh, the rest of the items are
informational, um, and we can
move on to the
presentation. Anything you'd
want to highlight right now on
the, on cash balances or
anything that on there.
And their stuff out.
Um, on tap him under the cash
balance report.
Uh, just because it came up this
morning on page 5.
Towards the top, you can see the
patient's compensation fund.
This is the medical malpractice.
With cash of 243 million.
Uh, on hand as a, uh, the
beginning of September of this
year, up significantly a year
from from the prior year. You've
infused that fund with about
$100 million from the general
fund.
Uh, to help prop it up.
Uh, but on an actuarial basis,
they still need.
Uh, I think they're pretty close
to being solvent.
I need to take a look at that
report, but you've made
significant infusion of cash
into that particular program.
You're you're gonna speak a
little louder, Charles. Uh, the
other one, Mr. Chairman, is on
page 7.
205 million in the wastewater
facility construction. This is
one of the revolving loan funds.
This is a good one where you may
see a lot of cash, and the next
question is, how much in
liabilities are booked against
that cash.
Uh, and is it, is it real, uh,
unobligated or not. And that one
is a significant amount of that
is obligated.
I would point out as well.
We used to have a little stars
next to the big ones.
did, and I
Didn't get that copy in here.
That's the last one that I would
like to highlight today, Mr.
Chairman.
Right? Who's gonna start it?
Uh, Senator.
Members of the committee. My
name is Dylan Lang. Uh, I'm, I'm
the, I have the honor of being
the state personnel director,
um, we're, we're here to talk
about the pay implementation
plan in our budget. We're
normally in a subcommittee when
we talk about our budget, so I'm
very happy to be in front of the
whole um uh committee now, uh,
joining, joining me is, is Jaime
Trujillo, our ASD director at
State Personnel Office and
Cynthia Sandoval, who is our
director of work um.
Of course, uh, planning, just
want to let you know that you
got to meet these two people and
see them, cause they come to
work every day fun, uh, to help
agencies succeed, um, and, and,
uh, help state employees. So,
um,
Without further ado, um, I'll,
I'll start with the job
architecture program. I know
that, uh, the committee met and
grants, um, maybe in, in, uh, in
May of this year and, and the
whole study was went over by
Deloitte, um, just, just really
briefly as, as you know, the
LFCO and DFA, um, jointly
oversaw a study to study the
state's classification and
compensation system in, in June,
the, the report came out, the
final report came out. Um, some
of the key findings.
Uh, where that
Out of the 225 benchmark job
classifications, the average
compensation.
For state employees, um, was
10.4% above the government
market.
So we're doing all right. Uh, I,
I, I will tell you about
compensation for classified
state employees when they're
comparing other state government
positions. But they also found
though is that uh um 4.5% below
the general industry of the
market is the compensation for
state employees. So, um, I just
want to let you know that um
because of, of the work of you
all and, and, and the governor
um over since since uh Governor
Lujan Grisham came, came into
office and with your support,
uh, salaries have increased.
Um,
somewhere between 22 to 24%. um
For state employees generally.
So we are not seeing um the dire
situation related to
compensation, um, that was uh
originally um thought.
So I'll tell you that, but also
what they found is that the, the
state's pay structure is over
overly complex, and it has 12
separate salary structures and
112, 112 individual pay bands
that agencies deal with when
trying to compensate state
employees. And so, uh, what the
recommendation of the, of the
study was, is to move to one
salary structure.
Again, we, we have 12 now, and,
and we would have around 20 to
25 pay grades from 112, and that
is a, that is a large, uh, uh, a
large change, um, in, in how we
um assess compensation and, and
make compensation decisions in
the state.
But before I think we can have
that happen. It was very clear
that we needed to upgrade our
job architecture, the levels of
each job, what the job does,
what the classification
requires, as we look at the
industry and um the market
around us, right? What are other
states doing? What are other
industries doing when it comes
to a CFO when it comes to a
management analyst when it comes
to finance positions. And so,
the, the goal really was is to
do this job architecture, um,
program again in consort with uh
The LFC DFAO, and, and a
contractor, right, to start this
program and I'll go over it a
little bit, but that's, that,
that's really where we are now.
The hope again is to find a
funding source to do this job
architecture so we can move to
one salary structure. And once
we have one salary structure.
Right, it'll be based on market
practice and it'll be based on,
on the market. Pay will be
determined on, on, on, on the
geographical areas around the
Mexico based on pay, how much
they're paying and, and, in, in
Arizona and Colorado, and Texas,
and we would be much more
flexible to make changes to pay
uh with this new salary
structure, and then again
software needed to um implement
this and so this is, this is the
plan. We are still trying to
secure uh funding for this.
I'll, I'll start by
over the presentation, um,
generally, I don't want to spend
too much time because I want to
make sure if you all have any
questions that, that, that you
can ask us. Most of the
material, um, not related to
this, uh, uh state personnel
budget is, is, is straight from
Deloitte. Deloitte's
compensation study, um,
generally. And so these are just
some images, um, if you want to
go back to the first one about
what I was saying in the Mexico
right now, we have 112 salary
structures. That is, that is
quite large. And you can see
what um, uh, well, those are
uh, the pay bands and the salary
structures are 12. They're
really based on your occupation.
It's not based on the, the
general salary uh structure,
just one. It's, it's really
based on your
Uh, again, your occupation and
within your occupation, you have
a, a varying levels of pay bands
that you can pay. And so this
is, this, this has become
cumbersome to um deal with and
especially when you're trying
to uh uh uh career path, so you
see yourself grow in state
government, help with retention.
You can't really see a path
forward and, and, and just as an
example, if you go from a, if
you can see 70, I tried to make
it big and you can see uh a pay
band 70, it's between S and E.
SF and ED, you know, and so just
if you're a um
A a regular person, right? You
don't maybe not, wouldn't
understand that there's an SF 70
ED, um, but I could be in a 70,
I could get a raise, um, but,
uh, uh, to a new, uh, um,
A job with new responsibilities
and, and not actually make any
money. And so this is, this is a
problem. And so we, we try to
wanna, we wanna move to a new
system, which, um, as proposed
in Deloitte, but again, be one
salary structure every
classification would be on there
and they would only be 20 pay
bands and with 2 pay bands, it
really gives and empowers
agencies, right, to deal with
market changes and pay, however,
um, they deem uh the market
allows or in the other internal
valuation that they believe.
If we have a uh uh uh uh a
charge, right, to, to move to a
clean water economy, right? I,
in the environment department in
the, in the OSE we're going to
privilege and want to pay those
departments, um, better, and
that's the valuation that these
agencies get to have. And so
with the pay band that's so
wide, they don't need to come to
the state personnel office and
ask for an increase in the pay
band. They, they, it'll just be
there for them. And if they have
the budget and they um have the
program and they, and they come
to you.
and, and, and get approved. They
can be much more nimble and, and
how they want to pay their um uh
employees. And so that's, that's
the recommendation from
Deloitte. This is what it just
looks like if you have any, uh
any questions too, but what this
will actually also necessarily
require
is a fundamental change in how
we do compensation, we would
move to uh almost fully
market-based evaluation system.
We would, where we would use
real-time market data.
From our geographical neighbors
and, and other, other um
comparators that we want to to
see how much we're paying pilots
to see how much we're paying um
inspectors, uh, uh, um, plumbing
inspectors, right? And then
making those and then uh the
agencies would, would be able to
make those pay, um, adjustments
accordingly, um, without waiting
two months, um, coming to the
state personnel board to get it
to, to, to do a a salary
structure, um, review, and, and
make those changes. And so this
is what we would.
do, and it would also benchmark
the salaries. That's what we do
in compensation. We actually use
um benchmarks, um, positions,
right? Like a nurse, no matter
where you are, you, you're gonna
have a nurse and how much are we
paying nurses, right? And New
Mexico should, should allow
flexibility in the pay band to
pay nurses comparable, right?
Again, to, to, to whatever their
budget will allow for, right?
Um, and, and the government
market. So this is, this is the
big change. I'm just telling you
from a spoke perspective about a
market-based system.
and determining um
Compensation, which allows us
flexibility um that, that we
didn't have before. And this is,
and this is just uh a follow up
on, on, on our, our ability to
again retain and attract new um
Workforce with, with these
changes. So the, these are all
um some recommendations. We'll
go to the next one. Just
generally, I think the big part
before we move to one salary
structure is we need to make
sure that the classifications
are proper and the people in
them are actually doing that
work for so long, uh, we, we
didn't give salary increases uh
to state employees. And so the
only way a state employee could
get a raise, maybe not the only
way, but, but a way a state
employee can get a raise is to,
is to move up, move in,
move, move jobs uh in a
different agency or move up. We
have levels, 123, ABO. So even
though I'm not doing the work of
an advanced position.
I need a salary increase. I've,
I've been here, you know, 5
years. And so, instead of the,
the flexibility of an agency to,
to pay a salary, commit um uh
for, for my service, I have to
move into a new uh uh
classification or a new
position.
Even though the work doesn't
change. I'm still doing the work
of a basic. I'm still doing the
work of an O or a level 2, but
now I'm in an advance. And so
this has led to compaction. This
has led to new people trying to
come into the state system and
how do you then align that
person? How do you place that
person in a division based on
years of experience and
education when somebody is above
them who may, who may not have
that based on the, the facts on
the ground that they were being,
they are, they're being promoted
because they need to move jobs,
right? And so what this will do
job architecture, uh, if we can
find uh funding is have a third
part and uh a third party um
individual uh company do this
work with in conjunction with
the LFC DFA and the state
personnel Office, um,
is to actually look at every
classification, look at the job
families, the subfamilies, the
career tracks, and actually look
at the classification. There's
two examples that are going to
be absolutely essential for you
all um to understand and, and
the real work of this and one is
to consolidate and build out
classifications. Right now we
have about 800, and these slides
are from Deloitte. We have about
800 classifications in the state
of New Mexico.
Some, some agencies have more, I
mean, some, sorry, some states
have more, um, some, some have
less, right? But I think that
what, what we see is that we can
probably get that down. And what
that means is, then we, we just
have one level of work and then
compensation can be uh
determined based on the
knowledge, skills, ability,
education, right, and experience
for those positions. We were
successful in, in, um, uh, uh
consolidating the attorney
classification, uh, last year.
There used to be 4 levels of
attorney, attorney 1234. If you
look at the market, there is no
attorney 1234. There's just an
attorney.
And the attorney's pay and that
the attorneys work um is, is
going to be determined by
skills, knowledge, ability.
If and so what we did is we
collapsed those 4 into one
attorney position, raise the pay
band so you can actually advance
in your career when I say
advanced, I mean be compensated
in your career without having to
move a position, an arbitrary
position. Attorney 1 to attorney
2. Attorney 2 to attorney 3,
Attorney 4 to 3 to a 4, right?
Cause all that is is you've been
an attorney for 2 years.
Not, not based on your skills,
knowledge, or ability.
You've been a bit an attorney 2
years, right? And we can see
that with nurses, we can see
this in a lot of different
classifications. And so this is
something that we want to do to
consolidate and build out, and
this is the job architecture. So
when we're really talking about
job architecture, it is bigger.
This is the actual work that
needs to be done. We would look
at the actual classification.
Do, do we need to have other
levels or do we need to take
away levels? Will you go to the
next one. So, um, and again,
this is something that is
Happening nationally. And we
actually haven't had a, an, an
actual uh re-looking at our
classification system since
2001.
Where every other comparator
state around us, the, the last
time that they did it was 2018.
So we're, we're due to look at
exactly the size of the jobs
that we have, because the work
done in the size of the job
should
Compensation should follow that.
That's that that that that's
what I believe um generally. And
so 11 example just for you all
to see is our IT CIO
classifications. Here's an
example of 5. There's so there's
5 classifications that
Basically do the same, same
work.
They do the same work. And so if
we're successful in, in a job
architecture program, it will
actually be consolidated into
one.
IT CIO there'll be a 40% range
in which you can pay this
individual, uh, uh, based on the
work that they do. And so you
have the flexibility as an
agency.
Right, to pay this individual
based on, on, on the work that
they do. So instead of just
having a ITCIO 123 ITCOI 4045.
We just have an IT CIO. It's
just like attorney.
It's just like a nurse, right?
And you can, you can distinguish
their knowledge and their skills
and their responsibilities. Um,
and then compensate them for
that. Instead of just having
these uh arbitrary uh
classifications that we've used
in the past.
So that's one example about
building out and the other
example is consolidating, or I
guess, um, is you have a
business, um,
I guess legal assistant.
Here's a line one is the current
title, line one, and we'll see
that in the compensation study
generally that the real big
problem that we have is in our
manager classifications. They're
so broad, so it gives
flexibility to the agency to
assign work to this manager, but
it's so broad, we actually can't
distinguish the, the, the
characteristics. So are you
managing a program? Are you
managing people? Are you
supervising people? These are
all distinctions that we need to
build out. And so here's one we
have a line one, but we should
have a child support legal
assistant.
manager and a DOT line manager,
those are two different, um,
positions. We see this with
environmental scientist
classification, the
environmental scientists in the
state of New Mexico are doing a,
a, a wide range of, of different
jobs all under the same
classification, we should hone
that in. And I will tell you
that they have, um, are in the
process of submitting a, a
classification study for um our
environmental scientists, so we
will do this work, because I
will tell you that this is a
task of the state personnel
office generally. It's just,
it's a staffing issue that we
can't do the whole thing for the
state and right now our rules
really require
agencies to come to us and say,
yes, we have the money, we have
the funding, we would like to um
expand, subtract, be able to pay
more money for these, for, for,
for these positions. We do a
study.
We don't use market data because
we don't have the software. It's
$60,000 that'll be part of our
budget request. And so we, we
meet with subject matter
experts, right?
And, and, and we put our own
internal evaluation on what the
job does and how much you can
pay. So we're trying to
modernize this process. And so
these are just two examples of
the job architecture program
and, and, and the process, uh,
I'll pause there, um, after
telling two other things about,
about this. I know that we're
concerned about compensation the
most, um, here in this
committee, but what the study
also um brought, brought,
brought to brought to the fore
is that state employees are
generally
Like their work, right? They,
they generally like working um
in in the state of New Mexico.
And um there were, they were
studies, I mean, uh, there was a
data collected from the state of
New Mexicans. We, we did a
survey or when, when I say we as
Deloitte in conjunction, right,
with the uh our three agencies
did a survey they emailed out,
um,
Uh, to every state employee, a
survey about, you know, the
culture, the agency, the team,
why they leave and why they
stay.
Right? And so we had um
Over almost 6000 employees, uh,
respond.
Um, they, they believe that.
They agree that the state of New
Mexico would at 84% of the state
of New Mexico culture is good.
They agree that the agency um
culture at 78% is good. The team
culture is 83, um, that they,
they stay for the ability to
maintain work-life balance for
the benefit and the relationship
with their manager.
Right? So I just, I just want to
let you know and, and, and
highlight some of the positives
that we did have, um, as a
result of the study that we are
paying above the government
market for most of the positions
that were benchmarked.
So we have room to grow.
Um, and, uh, and so hopefully
with, with funding, we can move
forward with the job
architecture program project,
and then, and then move to one
salary structure that allows
agencies the flexibility to pay
uh employees, uh, uh, what the
market tells them to and then
what internal valuation that
they have for those markets. Um,
so I'll I'll, I'll pause there
too. I don't know if anybody
else would like to say anything.
Keep going, cause the next is
our budget request.
So, um, uh, let me, let me
actually pause there. Uh, are
there questions before we go
into the budget? I know we have
represent dela Cruz
representative De la Cruz, maybe
first.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So,
I like the the notion of job
architecture.
Uh, but it assumes that
supervisors
are well educated and
knowledgeable of what you're
trying to accomplish.
How will the state handle a
situation where you have a
supervisor.
Who despite well-documented.
Performance on behalf of an
employee is not able to move
into a higher rate of pay.
And then finds.
Which kind of defeats the notion
that you're not just having to
look for a higher level job so
you can get a raise.
How will that happen? Chairman
Representative, it's gonna take
a team, right? And so that's
that, that, that's the, that's
our approach generally if we do
find funding for job
architecture, it will be uh LFC.
It will be DFA, right? People in
charge, the agencies in charge
of money, it will be the state
personnel office who has the,
the um uh the expertise in the
program, um, um.
Knowledge to do this, uh, with,
with Deloitte using best
practices in the market, right?
To, to say what these
classifications are. Um, we
also, uh, uh, provided you a
logic model, um, on, on the last
sheet of our, of our paper, um,
in which we outline, you know,
the, the how we're going to
implement this program, and one
of them is to have a steering
committee made up of agency HR
and agency decision makers,
right? So we will hear from if
this supervisor pretend is, is
just because we're using
environment, I'm gonna continue
to use environment as an
environment, and they need um
some coaching, or they need
some, some understanding of,
well, we need to actually
minimize
Your classification. You're not
actually managing people. You're
not actually managing um a
program, you're
Your classifications miss
assigned. And so with the group
of us, we will make this
recommendation to, to change
that classification. We won't
affect pay, but because it's a
group talking about what's,
what's best and what's, what's
the market needing. Hopefully we
can get by in uh from everybody,
but yes, there will be some
challenges, but hopefully,
because it is a a state effort
to make these changes that they,
that they will come along.
German, what recourse will an
employee have if he find himself
in a situation.
As I described now.
Granted, there will be employees
that think they're superstars
when they're average at best.
But on the flip, there are some
amazing employees that get stuck
behind a supervisor that just
stubborn, you know, has their
own issues, and is there a
recourse for an employer, Mr.
Chair, representative, there's,
uh, if, if uh
If, uh, leave the architecture
pro pro uh uh uh piece.
Separate if a, if an individual
employee believes that they are
being denied a promotional uh
opportunity, um, you know, they
should definitely discuss that
with their agency HR, um, and,
and, and to try to to try to
help that, that process
generally, and they can always
um
Uh, file a complaint, uh, if, if
they believe that they are
somehow, their rights as a, as
an employer being violated. Um,
so that, that's, that will
always be the case, but um,
They always say you don't, you
don't leave jobs, you leave
managers, but that's always, uh,
that's always an option too for
an individual employee who
doesn't feel like there are um
career growth opportunities for
them. I, I will tell you that
also part of the state, uh, uh,
personnel offices, we have a, we
have a training session that was
uh a training uh division that
was celebrated also in the, in
the study, we have over 144
catalogs for training to
support, um, development of
current state employees, um,
anywhere from
You know
Using Outlook, using Teams to
leadership. I think.
Please wrap, I know we have a
number of other folks on, we
want to go to the um the budget.
I know this is, these are
important issues, but succe
please.
Sure, so you can, you can always
thank you chair uh
Representative you. There,
there's ways to develop
currently in the, in the state
and I encourage them to, to, uh,
Oh, let us help them grow.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just
think that our human resources
are perma. Thank you. Thank you
and thank you,
uh, we're gonna go next to
representative Baca and then uh
we'll have 3 more folks.
Represent Baca, please. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman and uh thank
you again. I will be brief and
so I expect, you know, just
relieve the brevity.
I know that it's gonna come up
during budget requests, but can
you tell me about the $60,000
that you need for sophomore.
What software, what will that
actually track and do?
Uh, Chairman Representative,
that's, that's pay factors, that
is the um uh software used to,
to, to, to analyze real-time
market data for positions. This
is almost solely what Deloitte
used in, in its compensation
study to determine um where we
would place our current
classifications on a salary
structure. This is that, that,
um, that software is absolutely
essential for the state to
implement this new process.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And
what, what I
Do we also, and again, you don't
have to expand on this. Do we
also have software that's
talking about participation,
retention.
Funded vacancies, uh, those are
also very important.
As well as the time to process
new employees. One of the things
that we get all the time is the
length of time from when a job
is posted to the time that we
get them on or, or get them at
their job site. So, do we have
software?
That tracks those
Uh, Chairman, representative,
we, uh, one of the findings of
the of the study is that we do
have outdated technology. Um,
right, right now at the state
personnel office, we are, are
trying our best to um uh uh uh
have, have much more of a
workflow for new employees and
to, and to serve employees from
hiring through development to
retiring, but that's, that, that
is something that we are um that
we have to live with, um, at uh
DFA and now the share team is
under DFA technology is a huge
piece. Uh, we, we try our best
to, to
use the technology in place,
but, but the state personnel
office is, is not in charge of,
of, of, of administering the,
the software and thinking for
sure my last thing will be is,
it's been told us we have a
labor force or there's a, a
group of 200,000 people that are
not participating in this labor
force. That's of interest to me.
The other interest to me is how
many of our graduates are we
retaining to fill the jobs that
we are creating these pay band
for bands for in New Mexico. So
that's gonna be another, you
don't have to get back to me on
that, but
Any future conversations will be
is how are we
Keeping our students and
creating opportunities that we
invest this money into our
colleges, to our tuition, but
then we create a job for them
here in New Mexico. Thank you
very much Represent Baca. Next,
we're gonna go to uh Senator
Scherer, and then, uh, Senator
Gonzalez.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. A, I'm
very impressed that we're
finally getting
Somewhere besides
112 pay bands, um, you know, the
US military has 24 pay bands.
And it doesn't matter if we have
the current 2.5 million service
members or World War 2, 16 or 17
million service members, 2 or 24
pay bands.
So we can figure that out.
The army has about 160
classifications.
So as opposed to 800 or 500,
it's 160.
Out of 16 million people.
Uh, and some of them are
infantrymen. That's me. Some of
them are more specialized.
Sergeant
Now Representative Harry Garcia
is a machine gunner, both
infantrymen, but he's a
specialized infantryman.
Uh, but we also have musicians
and electricians, and plumbers
and aviation technology.
They got it down to 160.
For 16 million people.
spread all over the globe.
Doing all kinds of things and 24
pay bands.
So
Uh, the big difference, and I've
tried to talk about this before.
Is the cost of living allowance.
Uh, and that's
what we call the cola.
And so, yes, you get to move up,
you get to go from a private to
a sergeant to in there's a list
of sergeants you go up to a
lieutenant to Major to a
colonel.
Um
But
A lot of it's just time and
service.
How long were you there?
And what was the inflation? Are
you going to get a 1% raise this
year or, or 9% raise.
But you didn't have to change
jobs.
And so I think the cola, in my
mind is the key.
Uh, I like the idea of 20 pay
bands, yeah.
800 classifications.
Still 700 too many.
So
Thank you. Thank you, Senator
Senator Gonzalez, please and
then Representative Lujan. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman and uh
Just a, a thought since.
Today's presentation.
Oh
With the investment pension.
Oversight committee.
Uh, we have a lot of
presentations, a lot of
information and actually our
state is one of the very few
that offers a very
Solid, you know, pension to our
employees.
Does anything like that ever
come up?
Do they tie together or they
don't, uh, uh, Chairman Senator
Gonzalez, um, they, they, they
are separate, but it does, when,
when you start talking about
compensation. I mean, that's a
total compensation is, is what
we use in the, in the state of
New Mexico where, you know, uh,
I think you're the Joey gave
you, uh, you know, uh, an
example of, you know, the
average total compensation in
the state is, is now at $106,000
and that is your pension.
So, uh, uh, though the pension
isn't going to be touched by
this particular piece, benefits
aren't administered by the state
personnel office, but
absolutely, anytime you talk
about compensation, that needs
to be brought up. And that's one
of uh where we're an industry
leader in uh in that regard.
Very well. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Thank you very much, Senator
Gonzalez. Representative Lujan,
please. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So
Using the, the market data, um.
Structure. Are you using this as
a tool are you using this as
the, the mechanism for each
agency to really come up with
their own uh pay plan for their
uh employees, Mr. Chair.
Uh, uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Lujan, um, uh, agencies already
need to have their own
classification plan on how they,
and, and how they pay. So this
would allow them the freedom to,
to, to, to, to pay, um, uh,
however they, however they deem,
uh, uh, that they'd like to, um,
in the pay band. This is very
wide. Now generally, but we have
a statewide, um, hopefully that
we can implement a compensation
plan. The agencies are now under
this if we move to this model, a
much more flexibility to pay.
Yeah, that's what I'm asking,
right.
now they have to abide by the uh
spell rules, correct? And so
they have to ask for some
permissions after 4%, 10%
increase and that sort of things
are those rules. How are you
going to address the, the spell
rules, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair Representative Lujan,
the rules will always be in
place, you know, we are a, um, a
compliance agency as well, um,
about 90% of your HR actions
that you handle at an agency are
done at an agency level, about
10% to, to ensure there is no
fraud, waster, abuse has to go
through the state.
personnel office and also DFA.
Um, and so those will still be
in place, right? And so just as
long as you're not paying, uh,
for instance, higher than a 15%
increase, salary increase, no
matter how much the salary is,
that will still have to come
through the state personnel
board. I appreciate that that
was my concern, like you're it
seemed it.
In your presentation, it seemed
like you were giving more, more
of that flexibility where where
maybe some of the rules are
going to be changed as well. Um,
my other question is when we
have
In, uh, some of the changes that
occurred management is in charge
for um hiring.
And keeping track of those sorts
of things along with HR is like
a support, which means it would,
so it was reversed. It used to
be HR was in charge of all of
hiring, recruitment, and all
that sort of thing. And we put,
uh, we made a change to give
that responsibility to
management and um.
And supervisors. Is that still
going to be in place or are we
gonna, like, are we going to
change that because you
mentioned the dynamic of um
management and and supervisors
and kind of right fitting them
for their positions, Mr. Chair.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative
Luhan, get training will be a
huge issue. I mean, a huge
project of our plan in place. So
if we do move to this new model,
we will have a trainings on the
best way for managers and HR and
decision makers to, uh, to, to
all come together for the same,
for the same goal in hiring the
best and, and brightest and, and
pay them generally, but that
will take a training, it will
take a a mindset shift to ensure
that um everybody's in, in, in,
in concert working together for
pay.
Mr. I just think that you're
gonna, there are gonna, you're
gonna have to look at some of
the rules when you're changing,
when you're adding a 40% range
of pay.
And you're giving that
authority, you're giving that um
flexibility to the agencies. I
don't know how that fits.
I'd like to maybe visit you
offline and see how you're gonna
be doing this, and also my
opinion is, when you gave the
responsibility for the um
Hiring and everything to our
management supervisors and kind
of took out the HR factor kind
of.
We didn't, we had longer periods
of time waiting for for jobs to
be filled. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
That's my opinion.
And having worked with the state
and as an HR person, but I would
like to have more information.
Thank you. Great. Thank you. OK,
let's go straight to the budget
presentation.
Yeah, uh, absolutely, um members
it's uh agency code 305 in our
books.
378 is what I meant to say.
So again, we are um excited to
be um in front of you as I'm
flipping through our actual
budget, um, you know, request, I
think just very generally, um,
Was that? OK. Uh, we are asking
for about a million dollar
increase. Um, this includes um a
3% increase from the FY 25 base
amount. Um, a real request is,
is, is 778,000 for 6 vacant
positions, right? And, and, and
we'll get into that, um,
generally, um, we are not
funded. We are, we are
underfunded and so we need these
6 positions to actually do and
implement the recommendations of
the study. We cannot do it
without a more FTE generally.
Um, again, we have about 90,000
for appropriate placement. This
is, this is the cost of our
current employees. A lot of, a
lot of, a lot of uh people ask
about, well, you're hiring new
people, but how are you paying
the, the current people? And so
based on our, our model which we
attached in here, a spreadsheet,
um, we are, uh, uh, uh, we, we
ran the numbers and $90,000
would help us, um, right size
our agency for appropriate
placement to ensure that they
are being paid appropriately and
aligned by the job
classification and their job
responsibilities, uh.
$84,000 is for that software um
that representative Baca uh
asked about along with the
certifications that go along
with um implementing a
market-based um uh uh uh.
Uh, model for compensation.
We're asking for an additional
$5000 to fund language access
guidelines, we again have have
great uh training uh tools
available at the state personnel
office 144 in the catalog, only
two of which are required, civil
rights and a manager course for
incoming managers. And so, uh,
individuals ask for
accommodations including sign
language interpreting for these,
um, and that number is going up
and that's great, but that is a
cost that we um bear and are and
are willing to bear.
but we'd like some support, um,
with that. Um, and then, so
that's, that's really our budget
request generally. I think I, I,
I'm not gonna hide the ball that
is, um, although it's a million
dollars, it is about a 24%
increase of, of our budget
generally, um, and again, most
of it is about um trying to get
up to 44 positions. Um, we were
only funded to support 36
employees. We have one,
Um, we've outlined what we'd use
that staff for and each one is,
is, is to, to um uh uh uh uh
deal with the
This would not um
Help the uh exempt uh uh uh uh.
I guess salaries um um employees
like myself, um, but we could
use that for, you know, to help
a DFA manage that process as
well. Um, you know, uh, the, the
6 positions really are a deputy
director, an HR coordinator, um,
position. We also provide HR,
um, services to certain agencies
that um don't want to pay for
their own HR, um, HR individual
costs about $90,000 and so the
recommendation is you have one
HR person for uh for 100
employees.
FTE and so some are small, so we
have about, it fluctuates but
about 13 to 15 shared services,
um, Indian Affairs, um, state
records and archives, we're
currently helping the Secretary
of State's office, um, uh, a
higher ed. And so, um, this,
this will help us continue to
support, um, uh, that person,
but then also recruiting. I know
it was talking about recruiting.
We also have a detailed logic
model for how we're going to
implement uh recruiting to
actually go actually source and
go find applicants instead of.
I'm waiting to come to New
Mexico or look for our website,
right? So there's a plan in
place for that, um, program, you
know, as well. And again, trying
to get a state unified message
of, of what we do and the great
things that we do in Mexico. One
of the key things that we found
in the study was we have a
problem with communication,
right? So for instance,
Representative Baca, we have a
skills-based hiring process
already in place in New Mexico,
and we need to do a better job
explaining it. Right now we have
substitution language for almost
80% of our classifications that
may be high.
I don't want to undersell it. So
what that means is you don't
need a degree to do these
positions. Of course, there are
certain uh uh classifications
you need a degree like a nurse,
like a, like a social worker,
but in most other cases, you
don't need it and you can
substitute an education and we
need to do a better job
communicating that and that's
where one of the other
positions, um, is for. So that
is our budget request and again,
the last page will be our um
appropriate placement
spreadsheet, how we used um
years of experience and
education to determine uh how
much people
Should be paid in our, in our
office uh currently. And so this
is um uh for, for to support our
current staff with their um uh
with their salary increases. And
so that's, that's our, that's
our budget request, um, and
thank you. Great. Thank you very
much. Uh, OK, I think we've,
we've done both. Are there any
additional budget questions?
I don't see any. Thank you all
very much and thank you for the
diligent work and great to see
the team here.
OK. Let's go forward, uh, for
the mortgage Finance Authority.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman.
You OK with me getting started?
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee, uh
thank you for the opportunity to
present to you today, uh, with
me today, I have some folks that
will assist me with any uh
questions that may come up that
I cannot address or sitting uh
behind me here. We have our
chief housing Officer Dana
Maestas debris.
Uh, we have our chief finance
officer, or Dottie Bowes.
We also have Chief lending
Officer Jeff Payne.
Our senior planning and uh
housing uh or policy and
planning director Robin Powell,
and then our policy and planning
assistant director San Ya Rao,
and then we also have our
consultant, uh, John Anderson.
Uh, you should have a hard copy
of the packet in front of you.
I'm not sure if I'm gonna do a
good job of uh
Kind of keeping up on the slides
here. I'll, I'll try to do that
or, uh, may I ask, uh, Robin to
come and help me do that if she,
if she doesn't mind. The uh
presentation in front of you. I,
I'll go through that, uh, behind
the prison you're not gonna go
through every single slide. No,
no, sir, not going through every
single slide.
I'll, I'll make it pretty quick,
uh, there's some appendices
behind the numbered slides and
the, the numbers are on the
slides there, uh, in there,
you'll, we're gonna focus a
little bit on the housing trust
fund, so I'll go through some of
those details. Uh, there is a
budget, uh, slide or two, in the
appendices, uh, our budget, uh,
is forecasted to be flat this
year. We are projecting a $2.4
million net revenue uh
projected.
Behind tab 2 are the available
programs that I won't go into
details, but uh they're, they're
available for you. There's also
a housing needs assessment.
Uh, that is available for you to
also go through.
You'll notice that uh we have
rebranded to housing New Mexico.
Uh, we feel that it better
describes what we do as an
organization, so you'll see that
throughout the documents.
Not going into uh behind tab
one, which is the only tab all
cover, you'll see the uh
A cover slide there, then you go
uh to the next slide is our
content slide. You'll notice the
page numbers are on the bottom
right-hand side on that gold or
yellow strip at the bottom.
Uh, I'll be referring to that.
So that is the, the agenda.
The next page is uh tells you a
little bit about uh housing in
New Mexico. Uh, you'll notice
that we're created in 1975.
We're approaching our 50th
anniversary next year in June.
So looking forward to having a
big celebration and inviting a
lot of you to help us celebrate
that.
Uh, we do provide the full
spectrum of our housing uh
opportunities for folks across
the state, you'll notice some
examples that we give here on
the MFA, uh, the
The resources that we provide is
build affordable rental
communities.
Finance construction of new
homes for ownership.
Rehabilitate aging homes, uh,
some down payment assistance,
emergency shelter, and then
administer rental assistance and
subsidies. More details on all
of those programs and there's
about 40 of them are behind tab
2.
Uh, we can go to the next page.
You'll see the oversight and
accountability that we have at
the house in uh New Mexico. We
have a board of directors
composed of 7 members.
Or those are appointed by the
governor and then the other 3
elected officials that you all
know very well.
On the right-hand side, you'll
notice, uh, our oversight
committee as well. I believe
this year we have 19 members,
some of which are on this
committee as well, um, and then
we have, uh, in the very middle
there, we're very proud to
inform you that we have 3
decades of uh clean audits at
the organization, 30 plus years.
Our oversight committee will
have its last meeting of the
interim on the 14th of November,
uh, and we're hopeful that
they'll, uh, consider some
legislation to endorse that
would be coming to you in the
January time frame.
The next page, uh, goes into the
development and program capacity
that we have, we have 125
employees at hous in New Mexico.
Uh, we function with a, uh, a
very strong network of providers
across the state to deliver the
services at the local level. We
have about 350 partners across
the state that range from uh
local governments, tribal
governments, uh, for profits,
nonprofits, uh, homeless
shelters, realtors, lenders, uh,
developers, etc.
Uh, right there on the
right-hand side towards the
bottom, uh, it's just a
depiction of four of the
development or for the
departments we have in the
organization, we have a total of
12 departments. These are kind
of the production departments if
you will, uh, so that kind of
gives you a clue of uh what they
do there. Um.
The next light uh goes into the
impact that we had, uh, just
this last uh year or uh fiscal
year starts in October and ends
in September. So this is data
from our year that just recently
ended, we're able to assist
close to 22 or a little over
22,000 families with the various
programs that we have, whether
it's homes that were created or
loans that were provided to
various loans across the state.
Uh, so you'll see a map there,
uh, MSA to inform you and report
to you that there was one county
that we did not uh serve this
year or provide a program, and
that is Harding County, but that
is on the top of our list for
this next year to make sure that
we are able to uh provide some
services in that particular
county.
The next slide, we'll go into
the uh housing trust and
actually the next few slides
will focus a little bit on the
New Mexico housing Trust Fund.
You'll notice there on the far
left hand side at the top, uh,
with over 17 years of uh
allocations to the uh housing
trust fund were about $61
million so that's an average of
a little over $3 million a year.
In the very middle there you'll
notice that we've received a
total of 183 million into that
housing trust fund, 122 million
of that has become available to
us, uh, here very recently in
the last 16 months. Uh, so
that's 67% of the funds, uh,
we've had for a very short
period of time.
Uh, you'll notice also there on
the right-hand side at the top,
uh, the beginning in July of
2024, we received our second
installment of the recurring
funds, severance tax bonds,
2.5%. That was $34 million.
Uh, then kind of going down to
the bottom there, uh, we also
received, I think, uh, thank all
of you for your support, uh, and
Senator Rodriguez for carrying
the bill for us. The largest uh
allocation to the housing Trust
Fund happened just this last
year of $50 million that became
available to us in July, so just
a couple of months ago.
Historically, most of these
funds have been used exclusively
for housing development, but in
2021, uh, you approved some
legislation uh that changed and
gave us a lot more flexibility
on what those housing trust
funds can be used for.
Next slide, uh, similar type
data here in a graph format, uh,
so you'll see there, uh how much
money we received. You noticed
the spike there in the middle
that includes the $50 million
and the $34 million of severance
tax bonds.
Um, and going past to the right
after that is just projected uh
severance tax monies that would
become available to us based on
projections that we received.
That does not include any uh
hopeful uh direct appropriations
that uh that you may make as a
legislature, uh, to that.
The next slide, also on the
housing trust fund. Uh, and
there's a slide that gives you
some, uh, some additional
details on what the housing
Trust Fund requires, um, but
the, the thing that I'll
highlight here is that the, the
act requires that there's a 3 to
1 leverage, you'll notice here
from this slide that we are, uh,
way ahead of that. We're at 17
to 1 leverage on the housing
trust fund.
And you'll see a little
breakout, uh, based on the
various activities, how much
leverage we've been able to get
to date. We do update this on a
very regular basis as we present
to our board and our oversight
committee.
The next light, uh,
Gives you some performance
metrics on the funds that have
become available to us.
Um, in the last 16 months, uh,
since, uh, we've had, uh, these
funds available to us. Uh,
that's uh $122 million that uh
just became available to us in
the last 16 months.
You'll notice that we've
procured 83% of that, so that's
100 million of the 122 million
have been procured for. We've
awarded 70%, which is the 85
million that you'll see in
future slides, and we've
expended 18%, which is about $23
million. $84 million of that
just became available to us a
couple of months ago, uh, at the
first of July.
The next slide gives you a
breakdown of the awards in a pie
chart format, uh, and then also
a table.
Uh, there's also a lot of
details behind uh uh right
before tab 2, you'll see the
details of each individual award
that was made across the state
to various uh partners out
there.
So this uh indicates that $85
million that have been awarded,
uh, you'll notice, uh, on the
table on the right hand side
there that uh we've assisted
over 46,100 families, 46,000,
4600, I'm sorry, 4600 families,
uh, with about $85 million that
have been made available across
various activities, and again,
the details are right before tab
2.
Um, one of the, uh,
Activities that we've been
focusing on and starting to get
quite a bit of traction on is on
the single family housing
development. Uh, we've made some
recent awards, um, that you'll
see some details on here in a
little bit, uh, and there across
the state, Santa Fe Taos,
Roswell, Las Cruces, and the
Ridoso area.
Next slide, uh.
Talks a little bit about the
permanent supportive housing.
Uh, one of the uh proven
solutions to address the
homeless situation and the
services provided as permanent
supportive housing, uh, we've
made some recent awards with the
approval of our board, um.
That uh get us close to about
100 units of awards that were
recently made. Uh, you'll also
notice on the right-hand side
that uh over the last couple of
years, other developments that
we've funded for permanent
supportive housing, which is not
only providing the housing, but
all the supportive services that
wrap around services that are on
site.
That's close to 150 developments
or units, uh, to add on to the
100 that we recently.
Um, awarded. This does require
some continuous uh uh money to
develop these developments as
they cost a little bit more than
a traditional rental unit.
The next slide uh goes into uh
the development of housing for
ownership. These are the
examples that I gave a little
earlier with single family
development.
Uh, the 3 that you see here have
been awarded by our board in the
last 2 or 3 months, El Toro in
uh Roswell tell us our south in
Taos and then vaal horizons uh
in Donana County with uh our
partner Tierra del Sol there. So
that's uh
Doing the math here, that's
about uh close to 200 units of
single family development. A
couple of that are not indicated
on there would be uh
The awards to Homewise and
another one not to the city or
the village of uh Redoso.
The next slide
Uh, kind of gives you an
indication of our rental. This
is just our rental development
pipeline. We currently have 51
different developments across
the state that in one phase of
construction or another with
close to 4800 units that are
being developed uh in 20
different municipalities in 15
different counties. You'll see
it depicted on the map there
where those are located.
Uh, in addition to the direct
impact of the construction,
there's also obviously some
economic uh impact uh we
estimate 557 million in local
income and about 7600 jobs that
are created with those 51
different developments across
the state.
The next slide, uh,
Kind of gives you a little idea
of the various activities that
we have and uh what's the
estimates are and how much it
cost for those various
activities.
Uh, you'll notice for down
payment assistance, we currently
have a program that provides
$10,000 as a third mortgage that
is repaid back and the rental
development side, how much it
costs per unit of about $310,000
per unit. You see the permanent
supportive housing units at the
bottom that are at about 325.
Those are smaller units and so a
higher cost per square foot
square footage there.
This is just to give you an
indication on if additional
funds are allocated to the
housing Trust Fund, uh, you
know, our board based on the
funding that's available will
then allocate it to the various
activities and then this is how
it would be used in the
projected cost for each of those
activities. Uh, so we could do
some math to kind of uh
Kind of give you an indication
of how many units can be
developed with additional
resources that may be allocated
there.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, uh, I hope
that was quick enough for you
that uh we are open to any
questions that you may have, and
there's a lot of uh more pages
on here with some details, uh,
if you'd like to kind of review
those and some additional tabs
with uh.
You know, the programs that we
have and also a housing needs
assessment that's behind a TA 3.
So with that, we're prepared to
take any questions.
Um, we're thinking about
pointing Senator Rodriguez to
your committee.
Oh, I didn't.
I thought we had this worked
out, Senator
De la Cruz.
Mr. Chairman, Izzy, I appreciate
the work that you're doing. It's
a
Incredibly worthy. Uh, back in
the middle 90s, I was privileged
to attend a discussion with HUD
Secretary Henry Cisneros, who
was under the Clinton
administration and he talked
about that in the new millennium
that there would be a great need
for housing.
Of every type, uh, single family
dwellings, multifamily, and he
said even traitors. And so it's
become quite prophetic.
Is there work that you do to try
to encourage some of our
municipalities, including Burley
County and others that they have
to be open to allowing for new
housing, because sometimes
people balk at that.
Because it's kind of like I got
mine.
Kicked the door shut on
everybody else.
Do you work with is with some of
our local governments to have
them understand that there is a,
a clear ripple effect if you
deny the construction of new
housing, so that then it drives
housing costs through the roof.
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Della Cruz, uh, thank you for
your question. Uh, we need to do
more in that area. We, we do
some or we talk to the uh local
governments and try to emphasize
to them the need for housing,
the tools that we have
available. We also under the
Affordable Housing Act, we
reviewed their housing plans,
uh, and their ordinances that
they implement when they want to
be eligible to use the
Affordable Housing Act as a way
of donating towards affordable
housing, but that is an area
where they're still struggles in
some local governments and uh we
have some work to do in that
area.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It's
just so concerning the uh the
cost of houses in Burley County.
It's not just Burnley County.
Obviously here in this county as
well. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Tenner gumbos.
No? OK.
Representative small.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, thank you, uh, thank you
both. It was great visiting in
Las Cruces briefly, uh, at the,
before, I guess the very
exciting announcement. um, Mr.
Chair, uh,
Director, um
The
Uh
In terms of sort of thinking
about needed units.
And perhaps um how we go after
that.
What would we need if we set a
target of 5000 new units each
year for the rest of the decade.
Just as sort of a starting
point.
It seems like that, that
shouldn't all just be on
Housing New Mexico.
To do that, that we're asking,
asking you to do every single
thing is it seems to me just a
little bit unfair.
Mr. Chairman and uh
Representative small uh. Yes,
thank you for, for meeting with
us and uh allocating some time
to us a couple of weeks ago in
in Las Cruces.
With regard to the, the, what it
would take to do 55,000 units,
uh, it, it, uh,
It depends on uh if it's single
family development or uh if it's
going to be rental units or
permanent supportive housing
units, we can do the math and,
and get you some clear numbers
there if we were to divide those
up with say, uh,
You know, uh, 2000 units for
homeownership, uh, 2000 units
for uh rental development in
another 1000 units of say
permanent supportive housing,
uh, we can probably do some math
here pretty quick for that. I, I
would say that it is uh your uh
accurate in saying that it, it
cannot all be done with the
housing New Mexico, uh, it's,
uh, the other players in this,
uh, obviously in the other
constraints of the local
governments and the entitlement
process to make sure that, uh,
you know, it's a streamlined as
possible so that it's not a
bottleneck.
Uh, there's a labor force, uh,
that needs to be taken into
account to be able to do that.
We do think that uh 5000 units,
uh, if you divide it up into uh
those various categories, uh,
that is something that's doable,
uh.
And the the the cost here uh.
And check my math here. I think
uh we had about, uh, I'll just
go with some round numbers here
for $300,000 a unit on the
single family development site
times 2000, that would be uh
Is that 60 million?
Uh, and we do a similar for
rental, so that's 120 million
and for permanent supportive
housing of uh we do 1000 there,
that's another 30 million or so,
so, uh, we're looking at about
$150 million
to be able to do some of that,
obviously with the other
constraints that are in place
that we'd have to work through.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, and um the other
constraints, do you think that
it's probably time for the state
to take a more active role in
the
As you described, sort of the
entitlements process around
zoning, around some of these
other standards. I know there
are some communities where it
can take years.
And maybe not even be successful
then, which clearly is one of
the biggest drivers of housing
costs.
Uh, and, and supply. So maybe,
maybe it's time to take on both
a partnership role as well as a
policy role there, um, what do
you think about that?
Mr. Chairman, uh, and, uh,
Representative Small, that's uh
a difficult question. I, I
definitely think, uh, there
needs to be uh some improvements
in streamlining in some areas
and, and talking to developers
across the state, uh, the more
constant and, and I won't call
them complaints, but uh maybe
the, the areas where they said
there's more challenging to
develop and go through that
entitlement process which they
be the the larger areas like uh
Albuquerque and Santa Fe.
Surprisingly, we hear that Las
Cruces is, uh, is doing well.
uh some of the rural areas
across the state, but uh I would
say that Albuquerque and Santa
Fe are the more challenging
ones, at least what we hear from
the developers. Great, thank you
very much. Really appreciate
Representative de la Cruz
bringing that point up. And it
really seems to me that um we
have got a, we, we'll hopefully
have a really unique opportunity
to bring a lot of different
partners together to work on
that particular challenge uh in
the upcoming.
session. Um, Mr. Chair, uh, as
it relates to the um
Uh, well, yesterday we had a
great presentation talking with
our state investment council now
led by two really outstanding
alums from LFC, which I think is
just a really exciting story in
and of itself.
Uh, we talked about sort of the
You know, the potential
opportunity to invest in real
estate.
Uh, or at least maybe not talked
about, but I think folks' minds
go to that.
You
As we look at our both our, our
land base.
As well as some of our, uh, you
know, frankly, our permanent
funds at a needed time for
really significant investment.
An opportunity in a sort of an
appreciating asset.
Uh, what do you think about
utilizing
Um, sort of looking to the SIC
as a potential development
partner.
As we go forward.
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Small, I think that is a great
idea and we'll definitely reach
out to the state Investment
council and explore ideas that
they may have and uh we can
share with them, uh, you know,
uh.
Our, our programs and what we do
and uh ideas that they may have
and how we may be able to
collaborate. That's great.
Definitely, good idea. OK, and
um,
Uh, final question on my end,
Mr. Chair. My sense there's,
there's a new housing policy
advisor with the executive.
It seems like there's a more
proactive and sort of uh
stronger, um,
Sort of collaboration.
It's vital that we have sort of
everybody and, and we need more,
right? We need everyone and more
working on this issue. It's that
your sense also that there's
been sort of a stronger
collaborative sense.
With uh with sort of the new
leader there within the
executive.
Mr. Treman and Representative
Small, that would be accurate we
actually uh just as recently as
yesterday had a
a meeting uh with uh
The, the governor's executive
there with Mr. Daniel uh where
with and uh and some other
folks, and we've had
Uh, fairly regular meetings, uh,
throughout the, the, the last uh
year or so. Great, that's
awesome. Thank, thank you very
much. uh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, thank you, Chair. Just, uh,
I guess one or two questions,
um, serve on the as a voting
member of the oversight
committee, and I, we've talked
about this a couple of times,
but the down payment assistance,
Mr. Chair and and um
Izzy and and uh team, the um
$10,000 you know, going to down
payment. I, I, I worry that that
just raises the price of
Housing in the market where it's
available or used, it is, do you
have any data that might say,
gosh, 10,000 versus buying down
interest rate points or
something.
Means more than $10,000 over the
30 year period of the loan, I
mean.
Uh, you want to comment on that
at all, and maybe should we look
at both? Uh, have you done that
analysis yet?
Mr. Chairman and uh Senator
Padilla, thank you for the
question, uh.
I think that to address the,
the, the first point that we
have not seen any data that uh
providing down payment
assistance increases, uh, the
prices of the home. Uh, I think
that's more of a market-driven
uh scenario there in the, when
the houses are put on the
market, uh, the, uh,
Individuals that are selling the
houses do not know what
financing the purchasers are
gonna get if they're gonna have
down payment assistance or not.
We don't have any data, uh,
either locally or nationwide
that indicates that those prices
go up.
With regard to the uh whether
you get more bang for your buck
on on interest rate, uh, buy
down versus uh down payment
assistance. Uh, one of the
things that we've looked at, uh,
and I think you had a similar
question maybe last year at a
very uh another meeting that we
had maybe the interim meeting
that we had.
Uh, with the down payment
assistance, we actually that
money gets repaid back as a 3rd
mortgage that comes back and
creates more program income with
an interest rate buy down, that
money goes directly to the
lender, and if that mortgage
pays off a year or two later,
that money is just gone and
doesn't revert back. Um, I think
it's, uh, it would be fairly
costly uh to buy down uh the
interest rate by even 50 basis
points, um, so it's not
something that we think, uh,
you, you would
Uh, get a whole lot of benefit
from uh or more so than uh down
payment. I thank you, Mr. Chair.
I'm glad you have looked at
that, um, at some point when you
readjust amounts for the down
payment assistance. I hope
you'll keep that top of mind,
because it just seems to me
like, you know, yeah, one of our
goals is to repay the fund and
or or the dollars and have it
for other um, you know, um.
Options for others, but also for
the consumer themselves over a
30-year period, what does that
truly mean to them? Um, so maybe
there's a balance we can strike
there. Thank you, Chair.
Representative Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um
Sorry.
quite the mess over here. Um,
Could, um,
Mr. Chair, um, and Mr.
Hernandez, um, could you remind
me how much money is currently
available.
Um
To be spent
With the um recent
appropriations.
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Dixon, uh.
If you look at page 9 of the
slides.
Uh, we had $122 million that
recently became available or
during the last 16 months, 100%
of that has actually been uh
procured. We've awarded 85
million, so uh.
The difference between the 85
million and 122, so that's 15
and 20, so about $37 million in
rough math is what uh is
available in various programs to
be awarded to agencies.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, um, Mr. Hernandez. So
on page 10.
So how does, so the funding
awarded it.
For the pie chart is 85.7
million.
Um, and for down payment
assistance, it's 31 million. So
does that mean
That
I'm just trying to clarify, make
sure I'm following correctly.
That money is out the door
already, or that that money is
allocated to down payment, Mr.
Chairman and Representative
Dixon, uh, in, it varies by
activity a little bit, uh, in
some cases, the money is out the
door with most of the activities
with down payment assistance.
It's a pot of money that is set
aside there and we've let all
the lenders and the realtors
across the state now, so that
money is there and being
reserved on on a daily basis,
they reserve against those
funds. Uh, I could not tell you.
What the current balance is
there on how much we've drawn
down of that uh $31 million and
Robin may be able to help me
here, uh, in a little bit on the
expended uh and what's available
there. And is that the same, uh,
Mr. Chair, uh, Mr. Hernandez, is
that the same then for the
rental housing development.
That it's
The 32.5 million. Some of it is
actually out the door and some
of it is still
Waiting to go out the door.
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Dixon with regard on the rental
side, those are actually awards
that have been made, uh, to
developers out there. I will
say, uh, as you know that with
the, uh,
Especially with rental
development that it's, uh, once
you make the award, it takes a
good 18 to 24 months to put
those units on the ground and we
do not uh give them the money
upfront. It's on a reimbursement
basis so as they have eligible
expenses and they uh submit
their invoices to us and we
reimburse them for those so
it'll take a good 24 months to
draw down the full amount of the
awards that we make. Um, thank
you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Hernandez,
um, what, um, what do you sort
of seeing as the most um ur
or highest priority goals for
MFA in the next 2 years.
Or sorry, housing New Mexico.
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Dixon, uh, the, the priorities
that, that we have and they
happen to line up, uh, we
believe with the, the governor's
office is a single family
development, uh, permanent
supportive housing and uh rental
development. So creating more
units uh for ownership, for
rental, uh, to include the
permanent supportive housing to
help, uh, alleviate the needs on
the, on the homeless side. Those
would be our top 3, I would say.
Thank you. Um, Mr. Mr.
Hernandez, for permanent
supportive housing, um,
Is the money that you're able to
provide for physical
infrastructure, or is it also,
can they use any of that for
operations.
Mr. Treman and Representative
Dixon, uh, it is for physical
infrastructure at this point, we
do not provide any operational
funds for permanent supportive
housing, uh, I will say that uh
the more layers, especially when
you layer it with some federal
funds on the permanent
supportive housing.
We've learned that it's become
very challenging, so, uh, one of
the agencies and it's, uh, I
think one of the uh
Amador crossing that you have on
page 11, they are trying to stay
away from federal funding and
just focus on state funding or
very flexible funding to
eliminate a lot of the uh
requirements that the federal
funds come up with. So we're
gonna see that. I, I believe as
a more of a trend in funding
with more flexible funds and not
using federal funds to make that
uh
Those services uh and the uh
folks that they help a lot
easier than uh when you include
federal funds.
And are you able to help them,
uh, find additional partners,
um, through the process.
Mr. Chairman and our
Representative Dixon, uh, I
would say that uh the majority
of our developers to include on
the permanent supportive housing
site, uh, include more than one
partner, so they, uh, in the
case of Amador crossing as an
example, uh, it's Mesa Valley
Community, I hope, partnering
with the city of Las Cruces
there so uh rarely do you see
one single entity doing
everything. OK, and so, Mr.
Chair, Mr. Hernandez, so that
partnership then would be able
to
Facilitate
Um, efforts to secure more of
the operational funding.
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Dixon, uh, yes, and uh I think
some of these agencies in the
case of Missa Valley Community
of Hope. They have other funding
sources that help them bring in
uh or provide the, the services
as well, but, uh, there, there
is a need for more operational
funds as well. I, I don't want
to say that they have it all
covered because it is a
challenging piece of providing
those services is the funding
for it.
OK. Thank you. Uh, thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Let's see who else do
I have this Senator Gonzalo.
bagels.
Mr. Chairman, thank you. uh, Mr.
Hernandez, thank you for the
presentation. I have a couple of
ideas that may have related.
To uh
Represent Dixon's sponsor
concerns, so, um,
First off, I noticed were Eddie
County is in a dark blue, I
anticipate they're using this,
these programs more often is,
would that be correct?
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Gallego's, uh, yes, Eddy County
uh has uh been using our
programs. Uh, I don't know how
they compare to previous years
and, and their usage, but
they're definitely a good user
of the various programs that we
have. I appreciate that. I've
got Carl's bed to the.
Uh, Texas corner and then up
into Lovington, but, uh, one of
the thoughts I had in talking
about partnership, so we have a
development, the company that I
For for manager, uh, where we
build single family homes. The
city and county both at
occupancy.
Give us $4000 or infrastructure.
And it's reduced off the cost of
the lot.
And that reduces the overall
cost, not uh
Builder site, so we're the
developer, we sell the lots to
builders and they come in and
build these, but it gives the
homeowner
Uh, a cheaper avenue, and I was
just wondering if you have
anything in, in your programs
that do that because I see some
other costs are coming up. If
you look at the department when
they did the uh mandate rule
change on the EB uh conversion
of the charging stations, that's
gonna be a cost and not all
homeowners can afford those rich
people that can't, they, they'll
want it, but those of us that
can't afford it, there's got to
be a mechanism mechanism in
there, but we can help them
with.
I just wondered if there's
anything that you have in your
programs that does anything like
that.
It would help the overall cost.
And, and sort of share the
burden.
Mr. Chairman and uh Senator
Gallego's, uh, I was just at a
meeting down in Carlsbad, uh,
last week. I'm not sure if you
were there that the mayor put
together a Mayor Lopez, I
believe is the name there and uh
Mayor Cobb was a presenter there
as well. I think he mentioned
this program that you may be
referring to.
Uh at uh Housing New Mexico,
what we're able to do, we have a
development financing that can
be very low financing, uh, I
think we've given loans as low
as 1% construction, uh,
construction loans that helps
defray or bring that cost down.
We're not in a position where we
can revert money back or uh give
uh donations if you will, or uh
money back to the developers or
builders at this point, uh, but
it's something that we can
definitely explore with the, the
mayors and what they're doing
and how we can help in that
scenario. Um, so
We're considering even a more
generous subsidy with our, if
they're developing entry level
homes and it's something that uh
we'll explore a little bit more
with our, our board here in the
near future. I appreciate that
because I'm like uh
Represent de la Cruz, we're
gonna need it at every level.
And every opportunity, so I
thank you, thank you for the
presentation. Ms. Carol you.
Thank you Senator Rodriguez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will
be quick and I know we're
running out of time, but I wanna
say good morning to our MFA
director of staff, um, thank
you. It's never enough.
And I'm gonna start off, Mr.
Chairman, by showing these 4
stars, they're red, that Senator
Gonzalez wrote for me now and he
says, and you can tell them I
give them 4 stars, so here they
are. I thought it was kind of
cute, but truly it just uh
attests to the fact that uh that
so many people in New Mexico,
not only the legislature, but so
many people in New Mexico
appreciate your hard work. I
have been privileged to chair
this the um mortgage fund.
Finance Authority and co-chair
it for the last 29 years and not
once have I ever doubted the
hard work, the professionalism,
and ultimately the honesty and
integrity that is needed.
To, um, to forge ahead with such
big issues like housing.
From way back, I remember you
never had any funding, really.
You've, you've, you've worked
with very limited resources
until recently when we passed
the, the bill that I sponsored
and um and uh Chairman Small and
many others, uh.
Supported and co-signed and
helped me with it. And our chair
was right there to uh to put it
forth immediately in taking a
portion of the severance tax
bonding capacity and earmark for
housing because we all
recognized how important that
was and how much need there is
out there. There's at least one
thing, Mr. Chairman, that was
brought up today and by a
Senator Padilla, and I will, uh,
just add a little bit to that.
Thank you, Senator for uh
bringing.
up the potential for looking at
options to help people get into
homes.
I'm all for that. I'm all for
helping people or helping trying
to find options and different
ways to do things, but there is
one thing that is core to this
whole scenario, and that is
first and foremost, people need.
Down payment assistance. That is
what keeps people from getting
into a home. They can't afford
even the beginning steps to be
able to to have to to put that
much funding into their homes so
that the balance of the loan
would be affordable for these
people.
And so
I just wanted to uh to to
mention that. We did do
something that hasn't been
mentioned that I think is very
crucial, Izzy that perhaps we
can at least educate members in,
in the public in that uh
approximately a year ago, maybe
some something like that in the
finance, mortgage finance
Authority, we approved what's
called an increase to the area
median income for people to be
able to qualify more people to
qualify for loans.
And help from MFA.
It used to be 120% of the area
median income was the threshold.
If you made more than 120%, um,
then you just of the, of the
threshold, you wouldn't qualify,
so it threw a lot of people out
of the out of the the scenario
of being able to qualify. Well,
now we increased it to 150% of
that area specific, for example,
Santa Fe is very expensive, so,
um, 150% people would be allowed
to qualify.
Uh, more people, we have to go
to the south, the same thing.
There's different areas with
different scenarios. Now this
accommodates that. However, I
will suggest, Mister Chairman
and um EFA staff that we look at
the possibility of increasing
the area median income to 200%
at least.
Uh, take a look at that because
uh 200% would mean that anyone
making twice as much as they
have in the past that has here
in the in the policies. Um,
would be able to qualify because
that amount was too low. If you
make, if you have 4 members in
the family and you make $50,000
in gross pay. That doesn't leave
you much, even 75,000 nowadays
doesn't leave you much. By the
time you get your net pay, and
so um I thought if we would
increase the area median income
to 200%. That would bring in a
bigger pool of applicants and we
would be able to help more
people, um, still qualify for
the for housing, affordable
housing.
And so, I know we've discussed
that, but that much, Mr.
Chairman, I know it's a lot to
discuss here, but I just wanted
to, to highlight um the, the
fact that you have received, um,
MFA has done a great job. You
have received uh at least uh how
many? 30 years of unmodified um
opinions, audits, and so on,
and, and that's big because
audits can bring out, you know,
things that sometimes may not be
material material problems, but
maybe just things that need to
be improved and so on you.
had a a clean audit for all
these years, and I, um, and I
implore the legislature, this
committee, and the legislature
to continue to support housing
as I leave now at the end of the
year, I will be retiring as most
of you know, if not all, uh, I
will, um, implore you to
continue to support, um, an
agency that is by statute,
statutorily established as the
housing office for New Mexico
and um
To request that you continue to
support it, to continue to do
the great work they're doing.
Um, I thank you on the board for
your hard work, Izzy, and for
everything that you and your,
um, I won't get into any more
than what I have already. Thank
you.
She's gonna be the housing czar
for Senate Finance.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Senator Rodriguez.
Uh, is he, um, how much unspent
capital could you push out on
the market, how much capital do
you have to push out into the
market.
An ideal world of 20 applicants
walked in tomorrow and said,
here's 20 projects.
How much money can you feed
these 20 projects in and get it
out in 30, 60, 90 days.
Mr. uh Chairman, the, uh,
I think if the funding was
available and the developers
came in and requested those
funds, uh, the internal
infrastructure that we have to
process those loans, uh, takes,
uh, internally anywhere from 60
to 90 days depending on the
timing of when we get the
application. So I would say in
90 days if we had 20
applications today and the
funding was available and
they've gone through all their
entitlement process, we could
definitely process those loans
uh within a ninety-day period,
and
Then have contracts signed with
those, uh, developers, uh,
shortly thereafter.
And what dollar limit would that
have? What would you be if you
had all 20 of them, what, what
number could you hit? Uh,
mister, uh, Chairman, I, I think
it'll depend on what type of
developments, but let's just say
as an example, it's uh
Rental developments, 20 rental
developments, uh, maybe 10 of
them are regular, uh, workforce
housing type developments and
another 1N that are for
permanent supportive housing,
uh, and they're at an average of
I'll have somebody help me with
the math here, uh, 100 units
each, which is a little high for
the average that we have, uh, so
you multiply that, uh.
100 times 20, we have uh
What's that 200 million, uh, so
we could
Have applications in place, uh,
review them and we could put
$200 million out the door for
rental development as an
example.
They'll vary a little bit if
it's single family development
or something else like that, but
uh we have the capacity to do
that internally.
So that's moving pretty quick.
I mean, in the real world,
that's moving pretty quick. I
mean, if I go to the bank and
say I'm gonna do this
development, right? It's, it's,
it's a time frame longer than
that in order to design, build,
and then go to the bank and say
I need this money, I mean,
that's pretty quick move and
then it's 18 to 24 months till
they're done building.
That, that's correct, Mr.
Chairman. Uh, the, the
development piece, once they
have the funding available or
allocated to them, uh, as you
know, uh, it takes a while to
get those units on the ground. I
will say that, uh, that assumes
that the applications are
complete, uh, if there's things
missing, we go back and forth to
gather all the documentation and
that could add some time to
that, uh, that was the ideal
scenario that I presented to
you.
So, so then we have the state
has the money in the capital to
get it out.
I mean, you have the processes,
I mean, the application process,
application process, we miss
something, you're not zoning,
that's, that's all just part of
the process.
And that if they're gonna do
that, but I mean, from the time
they have a complete proxy, so
1818 to 24 months after that.
Let's call it 24.
To build and so when people are
saying, oh, we can build
affordable housing, and it's
just gonna pop up like popcorn
now, the popcorn machine. It,
it's not true.
And so when you're thinking
about
Funding these large projects. I
don't in saying no, we're gonna
build these projects and
350,000.
For a unit, right?
I mean
Have you guys ever really done
any hard research and said,
cause everybody loves the word
affordable, right? But what is
that?
What does that look like to put
a person in a home and say,
You know, your income, I think
I've read it in your
presentation, median income in
New Mexico, 58,000, right?
So they're not gonna qualify for
a mortgage over 200.
A rough guess.
And so
You go down from there. So how,
how, what do you, what do you
think you need?
In that
58,000 range, if that's the
majority of the population in
New Mexico that need housing.
I'm just saying this, I don't
know this for a fact.
Mr. Chairman, uh, you know, kind
of going back to the point that
Senator Rodriguez made a little
earlier, uh, and I'll have Jeff
check me on this. I think our,
our average uh mortgage loan,
uh, is hovering right under
300,000, Jeff.
So, uh, and that's, uh,
With some uh federal restraints
on the income limits there at
120% of the area median income.
We have noticed, obviously, the
price is going up and with
interest rates that uh the 150%
that we currently have is a cap,
um, you know, that isn't
sufficient in some areas where
the 200% that the senator is uh
alluding to, uh, in some areas
would be much, uh, much better
and uh be able to capture more
families, uh, you know, the, the
working families and the the
workforce.
housing that we provide is
currently at about 300,000, so I
can see if we increase those
limits up and had the funding
available to provide uh uh the,
the loans, we could definitely,
uh, we're currently doing about
uh a little over 2000 loans a
year for first-time home buyers,
which are under 120% AMI if we
were to increase those limits up
with other funding, and we could
definitely capture some more
families. I don't know how to do
that multiplier, so just say
60,000 and it's 100.
20% of the poverty level.
Mr. explain that so if I got
60,000 I walk into your office
and say, I need to qualify for a
loan and then.
Sherman, I'll, I'll give you
some uh numbers here and uh just
a little bit on what uh the uh
current uh area median income is
and what uh
But 150% of the area median
income is, uh, just so you can
And it's not the poverty level,
it's the area median income,
which is different than the, the
poverty level, and let me find
my document here and I'll be
able to give you some.
Represent Garcia has a question
and answer.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
Mr. Hernandez, thanks for the
presentation. What do you
consider affordable housing?
You know, cause you've been,
you've been around the area
300,000. Everything has been
said in this community right now
is 300,000. Well, what is
affordable to a lot of people.
Mr. uh Chairman and uh
representative uh Garcia.
It's, I think it, it all depends
on the income level. While we
here for, uh, for entry level uh
homes which are being built uh
much and what we're, we're
trying to incentivize the market
to do more of that. The the
builders that we talked to say
anywhere from uh 200 to 250
would be an entry level home and
uh it's uh rare that anybody's
building at that level, uh, or
you can find homes, but we would
say that would be uh
You know, an entry level home
affordability, it depends on uh
You know, the, the income that
you have are generally, uh, you
know, one of the statistics or
the rule of thumbs is that you
shouldn't pay more than 30% of
your income towards uh the
housing payment. Um, so that's,
that's the marker that we use in
the higher you raise that uh the
income limits that we have, the
more people you capture that
would be able to, to afford a
home at the current median
prices, um, that we have in the
state. I, I hope that addresses
your question.
Uh, you, uh, Mr. Chairman, uh,
in refer back to what's in her
Rodriguez said, you know, a lot
of people in depressed areas and
I'm gonna use my own town and
grants.
You know, the, the, the.
Jobs that are there don't pay
that kind of money, so that
leaves everybody in rural New
Mexico.
That is struggling with nothing
to look forward to.
And that's what we need to look
at, you know,
the Abu Ghaiki and Santa Fe been
mentioned here quite a few times
of what they can afford and they
can afford it, but you go to my
community or you go to uh uh
representative Armstrong's
community, people just don't
have the money. So they just
don't completely don't qualify
for what we're doing with all
this money that the state's
giving you, you know, it's not a
fair judgment for everybody.
Around out of the
Ma corridor of New Mexico,
people are just being left out.
That's just a common and a
concern of mine because, you
know.
A person in grants and a person
in Madalena cannot afford a
$300,000 house.
Period.
So how do we address those
issues, Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Chairman, and Representative
Garcia, uh, thank you. I, we, we
agree and I think Robin has a
comment she wants to make. Oh,
yeah, sorry. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and Representative Garcia.
I mean, I think that to your
point, exactly is that
The housing market is driven by
um
You know, one of the things that
our housing city indicated was
there is a lack of affordable
housing for the lowest income
when, when you, to your point,
when your income goes up, you
have more options, right, you
have more um market options. So
really.
Our goal is to focus on
providing deep affordability
that everybody has the
opportunity to be able to
afford.
home, whether it's a rental or
Uh, thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman.
The reason I brought that up is
because every, everything has
been said in here today is
300,000, 300,000. You have not
said anything about $150,000
homes.
You know, and people and some
and 80% of the community in New
Mexico, not a 4 to $300,000
house.
And you know, the money was put
in for the uh projects is
supposed to be for everybody in
New Mexico, not just, uh,
everybody in the main corridor
that those are just my uh
opinions and it's a concern
because if you live out there
and you see it every day.
People can just not afford it.
Thank you, Mr. Sherman.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um, I
just wanna bring up a couple of
things, uh, part of the reason
that I think that some of the,
you know, some of the
contractors aren't building
homes is there's a GRT issue.
When you build a home.
Um, it's, it's, it's a big
issue. And then uh when we talk
about uh rent control.
Um, you know, individuals are
not gonna build uh
Rentals
When rent control is brought
into the uh the faction. So
thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, I do have some
numbers for you and uh I do
wanna also address, uh,
Representative Garcia's, uh, I
mean, one of the things that we
also allow in our programs and
we do a significant amount of
them is also manufactured homes,
which tends to uh be a little
bit uh cheaper in some areas,
uh, so, um, it's something that,
that we, we do as well. As far
as the median incomes that this
is 2023, I, I, I, the sheet that
I have here isn't the, the most
updated, but this should give
you a little bit of an
indication for Cibola County is
an example. The area
The median income is 65,100,
150% is 97,000 and some change,
uh, you come all the way to uh
say Santa Fe, the median income
here is 95,000 and some change,
so 150 is a 143,000
um, the
Here in Santa Fe, the income
that it would take to afford a
median priced house is $172,000
which takes it to about 180%
AMI, um, you can do some of the
high cost areas like we have in
Taos, Los Alamos, and Ridoso and
that AMI definitely surpasses.
The 150% in some cases of 200%
of
AMI, uh, one other example, uh,
just in the southern part of the
state, uh, in Donana County has
actually a lower median income
of 596, and so 150%, there would
be 89,000. That's an area where
housing prices are higher too,
and they probably would need a
higher than 150% uh AMI that
limits there for some of the
median priced homes.
That give you a good indication.
I mean, people are talking
about, well how do we get
somebody in the house, right?
Even with the adjustments,
they're still not meeting the
market.
Right? They can't afford the
house in that market.
With the adjustments in poverty.
And so it's almost unattainable
to get him a house, right?
And so, I mean, that's why I
asked you the number, you know,
if you're making 65,000 inbola
County and
In in the 150%, it brings you to
97, I think you said 90
something.
Right? Their capacity, their
incomes at showing at 97 with
the adjustments.
And they can only buy uh.
What number was that?
What was their value
Loan to value ratio on the on
the grants when they went to 9.
Mr. Chairman, it depends on the,
the loans that are used, but
generally, uh, but, uh, we can
go up to 100% uh.
It's 3% down payment required on
an FHA mortgage, so, uh.
And then with the down payment,
uh assistance that we offer
folks had to come in basically.
With uh, what is it, just $500
Jeff out of their own pocket,
uh, to get into a home, but
finding the home at the right
price, I think we need to work
on that and incentivizing uh
Developers or builders out there
to build entry level homes, um,
you know, that are more in the
200 to 250 range.
And and they're not gonna exist
because the costs are so high
and so.
That's why we're in this
conundrum,
young lady rolling her eyes at
me and shaking her head. I don't
know how to get by that though,
right?
Because if you adjust your
income to 90,000, that means
your mortgage payments are gonna
be $30,000 a year, one third of
your income, right?
With the adjustment and you buy
a $200,000 home. That's right on
the bubble.
Anything happens in life,
health.
Any emergency.
And they're not gonna be able to
do that, I mean.
Have you guys really thought
about
You know, manufacturers a
different route, but then you
have to figure out what you're
going to do mods or HUDs and.
And how you finance them
because.
You're not gonna finance a mod
home at the same rate you're
gonna finance at home.
I praise value.
Have you ever really got into
How do we
by that, so someone making
65,000.
Just making 65,000 and their
payments are gonna be $20,000 a
year, $2000 a month or 1800 a
month.
How we really make that
adjustment to get them into
affordable housing. I mean,
that's the number we've got to
look at because
Um, that's against anti-donation
clause to give it to him.
How do we make those
adjustments?
Try to get there.
Uh, Mr. Chairman is definitely
is a challenge. I will tell you
that uh
You know, and it's, I think our
average over the last uh couple
of years, uh, with the median
prices and the high prices that
there are. We've been making
loans, uh, at about 2000 loans a
year for first-time home buyers,
uh, with the interest rates and
we do not differentiate between
a site-built home and a
manufactured home, they get the
same interest rate. So when they
use our product and our
financing, uh, the interest rate
is the same. We don't, uh,
increase it up for manufactured
homes, but they don't get, they
get, they get the same interest
rate, but when you
buying a home, and it used to be
the American dream, right? Own a
home and buy a home at the end
of the day, they're building
value or equity in something.
And and
A mobile home, uh, on a hud will
depreciate quicker than a mobile
home on a mod or site built
home.
So as we build them, we wanted
to build valuation.
Or equity in their homes, so
they have some equity.
give to their kids if they want
to give it to their house to
their kids. I'd really like you
to take a deep thinking and say,
I mean, how do we
Bridge that gap, right?
I mean, you could incentivize
the builders, but I mean, you,
you're gonna have to do that.
Uh, and, uh, Mr. Chairman, uh,
definitely some, some challenges
that we have talked to some uh
builders uh.
What have I done in the Las
Cruces area that, uh, thinks he
can get down to the about the
the 250 range. Uh, there are
some, uh, I'm not sure if you're
aware of the.
Built wise, it's a, a new uh
modular home uh manufacturer
down in the Roswell area. We
went down and toward them and uh
they're doing a good job at uh
building as well. I think they
need to increase their capacity.
They're working on increasing
their capacity, but uh they can
get down in those uh potentially
those price levels too. Um, it's
what we have to look at
different uh
Options innovative options to
help us get there, but it's not
gonna be easy, as you say, the,
the cost, the labor and
material, um, big contributors
into that cost in the
development cost, cause anytime
if if I go into the Gallup and
say, hey, I want to buy 5 acres,
right? Everybody's ears perked
up and say, oh.
We're gonna sell it to him at
the highest price we can sell it
to him, even though you're
trying to yourself.
I guess we could argue about
that all day, but really be
thinking about how we get that
differentiate, right? Because
we're building the American
dream. One be have the American
dream.
Or what they told us from a long
time ago. I think it's
completely different today, but,
but building that equity and
getting into the home, but then.
How do we make sure they can pay
the property taxes. How can we,
they gotta pay the insurance and
And they gotta have maintenance
and.
That becomes a completely
different any.
tweaks that we can make.
To, to
Really think what affordable is
in order to life happens to
people and they'll choose
mortgage or healthcare.
Food or mortgage, right?
Lights or
Think about that. Let us know.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you. Appreciate your time.
Thank you committee members
Marquita, you're up next and
We're overdue for lunch.
Mr. Chair, this one's just gonna
be there when they don't have a
handout, they can download it
online.
We will have it posted. OK.
When Mary.
Sorry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I'm joined here today by my
deputy director, Fernando
Martinez, and in the audience
with me is John Brooks, our
chief of programs. Um, I'm gonna
go just hit on some very high
level, uh, activity for the
Finance Authority, as you know,
getting to page 3, we operate or
are authorized to operate a
number of programs through a lot
of different acts, so, uh,
currently we're eligible to
operate 25 programs that are
authorized under 13 different
acts, those
projects or programs are listed
on page 3.
Um, I'll just bring you to page
34 moment and show you that on
the left-hand side of that R is
a check mark as to whether or
not that's active. That may mean
that we have existing funding
and can't accept applications,
or it can mean that we're simply
still in the process of
administering outstanding loans.
So there's a, you know, we have
staff time dedicated to that,
um, whether we have funding or
not really goes into that next
column. Um, we have regular
funding for the public project
revolving Fund, which is our
flagship program.
spend a minute today talking to
you about that. We get annual
funding from the federal
government for the drinking
water state revolving loan Fund
Act, um, and that comes in
different amounts depending on
federal authorization. We get
annual funding from the
severance tax bonds and the
water trust fund for the water
project fund, I'll give you just
a brief update on that today.
Um, we have money coming from
the federal government this year
for the economic development
revolving fund, um, and we'll
operate a program.
23 different programs using
those dollars. I'll spend a
minute telling you about that.
Tuck your facility revolving
loan fund. I'm not going to give
you an update on that today, but
I'll note that the legislature
you all appropriated $1.75
million. We have already
approved our first loan for a
childcare center in Tucumerry.
It will be doubling the capacity
of the childcare, um, into to
carry, so, uh, that was a 400,
$550,000 loan, um,
And so while I'm not giving you
an update on that, I'd like you
to know that that money is
moving forward as you had hoped
it would.
Um
It won't be uh really updating
you on behavioral health capital
fund. It's an active program. We
only have $500,000 in that,
that's really not enough money
for most projects to move
forward, uh, but we continue to
look for them.
Um, colonious infrastructure.
Program is one that we get uh
funding for annually, 4.5% of
the severance tax bonds. I don't
have an update for you on that,
but would just be able to answer
questions should you have them.
Um, and then lastly, Mr.
Chairman, I'll spend some time
on uh the venture capital
program, which is a program in
which you've um appropriated $50
million and we're using some of
the federal dollars to also
support that, and on the
opportunity enterprise revolving
fund and its partner program,
the Housing Development
Revolving Fund.
So that'll be the thrust of my
conversation today, uh, with you
and certainly happy to answer
any other questions.
Um, on page 4, I'll just note
really what I told you before,
which is that our program
activity is driven by funding
levels and we only have a, a
public programs are the ones
that have regular access to
funding either through standing
appropriations or federal grants
or through that uh dedication of
governmental gross receipts tax.
Um, the majority of our funding
for through the statewide
Economic Development Finance
Act, which is the 2nd largest
act under which we are um are
authorized to operate.
97% of that to date has come
from federal sources. So it's
primarily driven by those
federal dollars when they're
available and under what
circumstances.
Um, on page 5, for those of you
that don't, don't know about the
public project revolving fund.
It's a program that we have been
authorized to operate since the
inception of the New Mexico
Finance Authority. It receives
an annual dedication of
governmental gross receipts tax,
which this last year came in at
around $38 million. Um, those
dollars are used to back bonds,
and so we're able to make loans
to governmental entities, um, at
our AAA interest rate and then
periodically replenish that.
Fund through bonds that we issue
in the municipal marketplace. We
pass along to your clients, to
your constituents and
communities, the same interest
rate we receive on that day.
There's no fees to access the
program, no closing fees, no
origination fees, no
administrative fees, and we give
you the same rate we would get.
Um, so that is a particularly uh
important program to New Mexico.
It funds all kinds of public
projects including tribal
governments and those sort of
quasi-public.
Like public improvement
districts as well.
Um, I would note on the very
bottom there that this past year
I told you about it last year a
little bit, but at the, uh, last
year we created what we call a
junior lean program within the
public project revolving fund.
It's a technical bond indenture
issue, but I, it really is now a
home for us to uh to make loans
to things like charter schools
and public improvement
districts, non-traditional
public credits without impacting
the loan funds that we use, the
rates that we would normally
give your cities and counties.
So that's a brand new program we
have about $300 million of
capacity in that program until
we have an established lending
record, um, and we expect that
that will then grow over time.
So, um, when we created the
initial public project, uh,
revolving fund. We had very
limited capacity, $8 to $10
million when we, um, increase
that funding in early 2000s to
have an additional bond lien so
that we can use the dollars.
More than once. We basically
doubled our capacity. Over time,
we expect that this junior lean
will um grow that $250 million
capacity to over a billion
dollars. It will take some time,
but it's uh just an effective
leverage of, of that program
that you've given to us.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Opportunity
Enterprise and housing
Development Review Board is one
that's got a lot of activity
these days. We just finished
closing an application where
that so I'll update you on what
I know there, um, but that is a
program that was created in
2022. It was initially created
with one fund, the opportunity
Enterprise revolving Fund, which
does commercial development or
things like speculative building
projects, uh, things that are
really non-owner occupied. It's
governed by a separate board
similar to our waters.
board in our colonia
infrastructure board on page 6
on the left-hand side, you'll
see who our current board
members are.
Um, and on page 7, I'll give you
an update on where we are in
terms of utilizing the money
you've appropriated to date.
Um, the first application for
that commercial development
fund, um, netted 33
applications, many of which were
very small owner occupied, um,
applicants and we clarified the
language in 2020.
4,
Sorry, 2023.
They're all blending together,
Mr. Chairman, all of these
legislative sessions have
blended into one. Let's just say
it was recently amended. Shall
we? Um, it tells you how long
we've been here
it, it does, doesn't it? Um, so
it was changed to, uh, actually,
um be specific that non-owner
occupied facilities.
Um, are the target of the fund.
So if you are a small business
and need to replace your oven,
the opportunity Enterprise
program is not the place to go.
It is intended for those things
that federal dollars don't
cover. Um, most federal programs
support owner-occupied
facilities or facilities that
have common ownership. There is
no fund, state or federal that
we know of outside of this
program.
That allows for non-owner
occupied facilities to move
forward. And so this is a way to
extend um some subsidy to areas
that don't typically get
commercial development, and I
just wanted to clarify that,
that took some legislative
tweaking. This, it was this past
year. Uh, it took some
legislative tweaking, um, but we
have clarified that and as a
result, non-owner occupied
facilities are the only uh
projects that are eligible under
that commercial development
program. But we ran two
application periods first before
that.
law was changed. The first again
was 33 applications, ultimately
none, no projects came from
that. We had a lot of very small
projects that did not, uh,
prioritize highly because the
criteria that's used to
prioritize those is for these
sort of larger spec development,
commercial development projects.
Um, the one that we expected to
fund ended up taking too long,
and we had to bypass it. It was,
it was not going to be able to
construct in the time frame
allowed by the, by the rules.
Um, and the rest of them either
were funded by another NMFA
program or did not meet
underwriting standards or
withdrew.
Uh, we did a 2nd application
period. Uh, we received 12
complete applications and 2 of
those were funded. That was most
recent, um,
7 of those projects have been
prioritized about $19 million is
currently obligated from that
fund.
And then lastly, Mr. Chairman,
uh, last week, the Opportunity
Enterprise and housing
Development revolving fund
applications closed and we
provided 6 weeks for our
applicants to submit those, um,
documents, 11 housing
development revolving fund
applications were received. They
requested a total of $60
million 250 million dollars of
project costs were being
supported with those requests. 6
of them were for workforce
development.
housing and 5 were to support
affordable housing
infrastructure projects, um, and
only 3 of them in rural areas.
Similarly, we've received 12 um
opportunity enterprise projects,
again, that's the commercial
development program, uh, they
requested a total of $97 million
which supported 168 million of
total project costs and 5 of
those, um, applications are in
rural areas. We have not yet
fully vetted those applications.
There's still our staff is still
going through to make sure that
they were complete. Um, there is
a lot of is most commercial
development funding would have
it or housing development.
There's a lot
upfront documentation and we
need to make sure that they um
are able to move forward. Uh,
we're expecting at the end of
November for the opportunity
enterprise and housing
development Review Board to
prioritize those applications so
that NMFA may move forward with
the financing, and from that we
expect those first applications
to be approved um by the end of
January and February.
So Mr. Chairman, that is the
opportunity enterprise, um,
activity, um, the other area
where we expect to see some
significant activity is the
statewide economic Development
Finance Act. That's because some
federal dollars were made
available at the end of um
calendar year 22, um, and that
NMFA has entered into, um, uh, a
memorandum of understanding with
the economic development
department to help administer
those funds NMEDD is keeping a
portion of the funds to operate
its collateral assistance
program and
And then we'll be taking
approximately um
$50 million or so to operate a
loan participation program, a
capital access program, which
will be new to New Mexico. That
program has not been operated
here before, and then also to
support venture capital
projects.
On page 9, several of you have
seen this through other
presentations that we've given.
We constructed both our venture
capital program and the use of
uh these federal SSBCI dollars,
um.
Using some data that became
available through a capital
landscape study,
page 9 just shows you where some
gaps are in the capital
landscape for small businesses,
as we know, New Mexico has a
significant number of small
businesses, um, and so there
needs to be more dollars
directed to those businesses
that are larger than most, um,
community development financial
institutions or micro lenders
fund, and before the banks take
over. So there's this gap which
we call no man's land, um, and
that's what we've been
targeting.
our funding too. You'll see on
page 9, that venture capital
will cover some of that. You'll
see that the SSBCI Capital
Access Program will cover that,
um, and then our loan
participation. Uh, so there'll
be different sizes of projects.
It really is dependent, however,
on the lender which program will
fit us, will fit better.
Page 10 just gives you a
snapshot of the kinds of
projects I won't go through
this. There's a lot of detail
here, but we're happy to answer
questions about the new vehicles
that are being made available as
a result of the funding.
And then, um, page 11, I'll just
end on a really
And then from an update
perspective on our venture
capital program, um,
We received $50 million over the
last 2 years, and we have um
invested the majority of those
funds. We've also been using, as
I mentioned earlier, $15 million
of the federal dollars to help
support that. Um, we have an
investment policy. Uh, we have
an investment staff committee
that vets these things and we
use an outside investment
consultant to help us vet those
transactions. So professional
vetting is done on all these
transactions, um, this, the law
allows
For us to make what we call
differential rate investments.
So we can accept a lower
interest rate or a lower return
rate, um, in exchange for some
kinds of economic development.
Um, Mr. Chairman, I can hear
your stomach's rumbling, so I'll
try to get through this. Page 12
shows you the investments we've
made to date. Um, there's a
combination of New Mexico funds
and federal funds that are
investing in New Mexico, um, and
they are a diversity of kinds of
projects including um
A native owned companies, uh,
early biotech, uh, med tech
companies, um, we have a company
that's
Um, investing in sustainable
building, um, and sustainable
industries, uh, we have created
one program called Advanced New
Mexico that I'll spend a little
bit more time on, um, Tiverton
is an agricultural production,
um, fund, it's looking to do
equity in those projects, um,
Vamos, which invests in
primarily Latinx um owners and
rethink, which is women own um
owners.
I note that next week we're
anticipating bringing another
credit fund for an uh called
perennial fun too to our board
for approval. It's operated by a
group called Mad Capital, and
they, um, so it'll make loans to
them flexible debt, um, and it
will support farms and ranches
that are transitioning from
regenerative and organic farming
practices. So there's a gap of 3
to 5 years as ranches and farms
moved to regenerative and
organic practices, and that will
help.
them fill that gap. So we have a
mix here of both equity and debt
products, both outside investors
and New Mexico investors. And as
I mentioned, I wanted to spend
one more minute on advanced New
Mexico, which is a fund that we
created on the backs of that
capital landscape study to help
fill that no man's land. So it
is a credit program, flexible
debt, um, it is operated by a
group called Mission Driven
Finance, which we chose through
an RFP and then vetted through
our um uh impact.
Or investment capital, uh,
consultant, they will be making
loans of 100,000 to 1.5 million,
they'll partner with lenders in
making those loans to New Mexico
businesses, loan terms of
between 3 and 30 months, they'll
be looking really for events
that, you know, they may not
have collateral now, but if they
can get the seed capital, they
can get uh enough capital from
that project to, to repay the
loan. The interest rate as of
July was + 3, which was 11.5%.
Um, there's a
small application fee, but
there's no prepayment penalties,
no credit scores are required,
so if they are underbanked
businesses, um, they're in a
position to apply. So, Mr.
Chairman, those are our major
initiatives. Um, I would just
note on page 15 that we are
proposing uh to our oversight
committee next in November, for
bills, uh, 5 bills, sorry, a
regular PPRF authorization bill,
which right now has about 150
projects. We're expecting the
Water Trust board next week to
recommend.
84 projects for legislative
authorization, those projects
total is 238 million and we
expect to have about a 165
available.
Um, we propose a PPRF
appropriation bill, um, with
6.25 million going to the
drinking water state revolving
Fund, 2 million to the local
government planning fund and $5
million to the Cultural Affairs
Facility Fund.
Um, we did not last year have a
request from NED and we're not
making a recommendation this
year either, that any of the
PPRF appropriation go to fill
enemy D's, um, state match, we
simply don't have enough those
grants have gotten quite large,
so we would have to cut back in
another area if we were to fund
that state match.
Um, we're asking them to endorse
a drinking water state revolving
Fund Loan Act, cleanup bill just
technical changes, hasn't been
updated in more than 20 years,
and then we are asking, as we
did last year, uh, for
appropriations to those 3 funds,
the $25 million each to the
primary care capital fund and
behavior health capital fund and
10 million to the childcare, uh,
revolving loan fund. And with
that, Mr. Chairman, we're happy
to answer questions. We're
funded underwater.
You have so many funds, right?
Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you to both of you for
your presentation.
Marquita on page 5.
Um, you could just maybe give me
an example how uh
That you create a new junior
lean program, how that would
work?
So, Mr. Chairman, it's a regular
PPRF program, but the way in
which we reimburse it in the
bond market is a little
different. So it has um the
bondholders that buy those bonds
will have a first lien, they'll
get first crack at all the
dollars that come in from loan
repayments made from that 3rd.
That 3rd lean program and then
they'll get any excess revenues
coming down from the other fund.
So it really is a very technical
change, but we have told folks,
uh, for the last 12 years that
we weren't an appropriate place,
the PPRF was not an appropriate
place for things like charter
schools or public improvement
districts because if something
goes sideways there, it could
take years before we're able to
recapture those funds. So by
creating a, a lean that's
different than all the other
loans.
We, um, fund, we're able to give
ourselves some time should
something happen to one of those
credits. So it really is just a
home within our regular PPRF
program. It is respond folks
just sort of a niche thing, um,
but it does allow us greater
capacity for non-traditional
credits, and it's the first time
we've been able to say that.
OK. And uh Mr. Chairman, you
said your capacity is 300.
Um, Mr. Chairman, yes,
initially, if we have no loans
being repaid from that because
of the flow-through coming
through from the PPRF, the
amount of money that is um not
needed to pay debt service.
We're able to um uh have about
$300 million of initial
capacity.
Hello, Mr. Chairman, the last
part is um, so how will the word
get out to this, especially like
the charter schools.
Mr. Chairman, we are, um,
working with the charter school,
New Mexico Charter School group
to let them know about that. We
expect that program will
actually just refinance higher
rate, um,
Charter school lease purchase
agreement, so if they're doing a
lease purchase agreement or 9 or
10%, we could refinance that,
um, and bring their costs down.
That's where we anticipate most
of uh the um capacity will be
spent on charter schools is in
that area.
Yeah
Mr. Chairman, I think this is
really gonna help because um.
I would say maybe like the last
7 years in my area.
You know, uh, more and more
every year I get requests for
kept from.
are charter schools, so.
And I'll work with them.
Trying to get the information to
them too. Thank you. Thank you.
Uh,
Thank you,
Mr. Chair, um, just kind of
quickly, uh, opportunityity
Enterprise Housing Development
Review Board. I just
Um, thought there would be more
diversification. I'm just gonna
make a comment on that. There's,
it's very heavily uh boarded
with members.
Albuquerque.
So I just wanted to
Note that, um, so,
Questioning, I think.
Senator covered my question on
the uh charter school, uh.
Yeah, but could you tell me a
little bit more about the
regenerative farming, um, and
how we're funding and getting
money out to our farmers. So Mr.
Chairman, again, this is a
project that staff is
recommending uh investment that
staff is recommending. Our board
is not yet approved it, so we
don't have it, you know, showing
up as a true investment, um, but
it's one that we're really
excited about. It will um pair
an impact investor, Mad Capital,
who has an arm that does
technical assistance and they
help.
farmers that are interested in
transitioning to organic
practices or and, and ranchers
to regenerative practices. So,
if they want to, you know,
organic uh crops tend to sell at
a higher rate, but it takes a
long time, 3 to 5 years
sometimes before they can start
getting that organic label
before they have, they may need
some equipment or working
capital to make that switch
over. This allows them to do
that. Great. Thank you. And, and
one last question, um,
And uh talking about uh looking
at green bonds and and what is
the NMFA? How are they
supporting or, or investing in
green bonds, Mr. Mr. Chairman,
so the only bonds that we really
issue are the public project
revolving fund bonds, and we
don't go to the extra step of
doing the green bond
certification, but we do tell
folks in our preliminary
offering statements with the
kinds of projects that we're
looking at so they can assess
whether or not they're
supporting the kinds of things
that they're interested in. Um,
we are in
Uh, we are getting ready to
issue our first conduit bond or
an environmental uh facility
improvement bond, and it's a
blue, it'll be a blue bond.
Thank you for that update. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Representative Dixon.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, thank
you, Ms. Russell, uh, for the
presentation. I really, really
like, uh, the chart.
On page 12. Um, I had a
question. I, I am interested um.
In the
Um, funds that the venture
capital program has invested in.
It looks like um the total.
Amount of investments could be
up to close to 50 million or
around the 40, um.
Also, when um when you guys are
selecting the funds.
It appears that a lot are
aligned with the strategic
sectors.
For economic development, but I,
I just want to ask if that's
something that
is being prioritized and
considered.
Um, Mr. Chairman,
Representative, yes, we, we, our
investment policy focuses on the
sectors that have been
identified by the economic
development department and that
are not already funded by the
State Investment council.
Great. Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, uh, uh, Ms.
Russell. Um,
Given the, you know, the amount
of appropriations to the fund
was about 50 million, right? So
there's not a whole lot left if
Um, some of these funds are able
to find the match to go up to,
you know, what, what the
potential is. Um, but you're not
requesting additional
appropriations for either
venture capital fund or
opportunity enterprise
commercial.
Um, and I'm just wondering what
your thoughts are on that.
So, Mr. Chairman, the
opportunity enterprise because
we are administrators to the
board, we would first look for
the opportunity enterprise board
to make that request to us and
they do have a meeting again in
November, but um, you know,
that's not something that the
finance authority takes a stand
on. Um, so if they ask for that
money, then you'll likely see
me, um, requesting that during
the, the interim or during the
legislature session on behalf of
the Opportunity Enterprise
Board. So they're the ones that
really direct the funding
activity.
Um, you bring up an interesting
question about the venture
capital fund, um.
We do have the capacity to add a
lot of value with this program.
Um, one of the things that we're
able to do because we are
dealing with a national network
of impact investors is bring new
kinds of dollars into New
Mexico, um, but if we want a
national fund to dedicate to New
Mexico, we need to be able to
offer them larger block sizes.
You'll see some of our funds
are, you know, we're putting in
$2 million and that represents
1% of the target fund that
they're doing.
So we can't really get their
attention. We can have them and
they, they are obligated to, um,
in their, in our side letter
agreement, just either commit,
um,
Technical assistance, time
spent, um, we have some folks
that are staffed here or officed
here. There are different
request, uh, or requirements
based on our individual
negotiations. But if additional
dollars came through, we'd be
able to put that money to use
pretty quickly now that we have
a well established program. We
expect one more investment
before the end of the year to be
recommended to our board and
then we'd be holding the
remaining capital for follow-on
investments. So that's, it's an
important part for us to be able
to support one or two projects.
that make it to the next fund,
and so we want to be able to
keep some of that capital
available. So we think with this
one and maybe another 3 or $5
million dollar investment that
will be done making
recommendations and we'll save
the rest of the capital for
follow on. But additional
capital would be utilized very
quickly.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. um, and
following up on that, um,
How are you measuring um the
success, the long term success
of
This program.
So, Mr. Chairman, you see on
the, on page 12 that mission and
diversification objectives, we
will be reporting back on those,
uh, the achievement of those
objectives, and so that is
something that we are um
tracking through our investment
consultant, as well as, um,
expected their performance
against expected uh rate of
return. So we are looking at,
you know, the net IRR as we
start it, but obviously we're
not making our decisions on
that. Um, we are making our
decisions on economic
development and sector
diversification, um, and then,
but tracking performance against
what they said they would be
doing, both from a monetary
perspective and an impact
perspective.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And do you
think that um when, when would
you expect sort of to be a
reasonable time to have a first
round of metrics. I mean, you
know, given that you're sort of
just starting to get the money
out the door.
So Mr. Chairman, we have $50
million roughly $40 million
invested 10 $20 million if the
fund next week is approved,
we'll be in credit funds, and
that will have a much faster
turnaround. As I mentioned,
advanced New Mexico is 3 months
to basically 3 years. Um, and so
we'll see early returns and
information on that, similarly,
if we end up investing in the
perennial fund, that's a
flexible debt product, we'll be
able to see early returns on
that. So a
significant portion of our
portfolio will be able to see
fairly early returns, the more
traditional, uh, private equity
venture capital will take longer
and impact investments tend to
take a little longer than your
market rate of return, your J
curve is a little more
elongated. Um, so we won't see
that for a while, but because of
the credit funds where I think
we have a significant, can have
significant impact, um, we will
see early ones, and that money
should that.
Uh, turn over pretty quickly.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I also
really liked um.
You're sort of mapping on page 9
and wanted to ask.
Um, so,
So what, what gap would you
recommend, like, where does the
legislature need to focus, um,
if
You know, if we were to set up
an additional fund or what are
we still missing.
You know, just in
Mr. Chairman, given the number
of very small businesses that
are in New Mexico. Um, we think
one area where you, we could use
some additional assistance is
more impact micro lenders.
Um, because they're, they're
gonna be able to lend below what
a bank is able to lend. It just
isn't efficient given all the
regulations and costs of
overseeing loans for the, for us
to expect that banks are going
to be able to fill a $50,000
gap. Um, frankly, up to 400,000
I think is.
Depending on the bank and, you
know, what they're interested
in, that, that's a tough gap to
fill. Micro lenders tend to go
up to about $100,000. There's a
gap for that medium size. There
are some in here, they're good,
there are a lot of good New
Mexico CDFIs just aren't enough
of them, and they're not
capitalized well enough.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, for
the, the venture.
Sort of the venture capital
component.
Do you feel like between what
NMFA offers and the state
investment council offers we, we
have a pretty good continuum
from seed all the way to, let's
say stage C.
Um, so, Mr. Chairman, I'm not
sure I can answer that. I'd
really require my technical
assistance, Ryan Decker, um, but
I will say that they work very
closely to make sure that
they're not in the same
transactions. There is, there
are clear swim lanes that have
been established. They meet
weekly, um, economic development
department, sometimes as uh the
state business SBIC State
Investment Council and NMFA meet
regularly to talk about where
there are opportunities to
cooperate and to make sure we're
not all chas.
using the same kinds of
projects, because that doesn't
deepen or broaden the the
capital available.
Great. Um, thank you, Mr. Chair.
That would be interesting, um,
if, if your folks do have, um,
you know, a suggestion on other
gaps that, that need to be
looked at, um, would be really
interested in in hearing that.
Um, thank you. That was it.
Thank you. As we wrap this up
and can talk about this on page
12, it's interesting and and
maybe explain this to me and
it's rethink.
4.
And
Uh, using physic technology to
solve the world's biggest
problems that, is that like a
super computing company or? No,
Mr. Chairman, it, it isn't. It
is, it's technology driven but
not a technology company. So
they use um it might be uh
I, I, I would absolutely direct
you to their website because
they have some good options
there, but um it would be things
like uh women and companies that
are providing um more um
Home health aides, um, and
figuring out how to get more
tech um more assistance out in
the needs that exist. I, I was
just interesting to me because I
thought it was more like an AI
super.
Do something like that. Let me
ask you something else. What's
the highest and lowest interest
rates on your loans.
The lowest interest rate, Mr.
Chairman, is 0%, and we have a,
in those instances with water
trusts board Colonnius, um, and
drinking water, we have a small
administrative fee that's paid
to help cover the cost of
servicing. PPRF can be, um,
depending on their median
household income, 0%, there are
no fees attached to that. Our
highest interest rate is
depending on the market
conditions, either the public
project revolving fund with its
AAA interest rates. So it
depends where the municipal
marketplace.
s or umunity Enterprise, it's,
uh,
60% of prime, and that would
just depend on where prime rate
is.
And that's the one you quoted
today about Prime plus.
Mr. Chairman of the venture
capital funds, the venture
capital funds, there's only one
flexible debt program and so
there's only one charging an
interest rate so far and that's
advanced New Mexico. We require
them as part of our side
agreement to be under the SBA 7A
program in terms of their
interest rates. So they're at +
3, in July that was 11.5% right
now, I think it would be 11%.
Um, but that's, that is a fund
that would be through our
venture capital program. Um,
And the other one, I think will
be around uh 5% roughly, I think
again, they're gonna charge
different things depending on
what the collateral is and the
terms are.
Yeah, I mean, I, I was on the
banking call this morning for
Wealth, right, and we were
talking and they were talking
about I forget who the guy was.
We're talking about the, the
feds and the interest rates and
how in '09 when interest rates
hit 78%, the market's not really
slowed.
And the same thing's happening
right now, cause a bank needs 4
points.
Make income.
Whatever prime is, it's 6, you
need 4 points, so you're at 10
to make income off that loan
from the feds.
And you're kind of operating in,
in that same realm, but a lower
return, right? Mr. Chairman,
yes, in a lower base cost of
capital.
Yeah, and, and so the micro
lending deal is a is a big
issue, especially for somebody
starting up something that the 0
to 100,000 depending on their
credit score, if they're in a
commercial, they're not looking
at a credit score, they're
looking at the business model to
do that. I don't know how you
solve that.
Um
Mr. Chairman, I don't either.
I mean, that, that, that's the
biggest kid comes out of college
and has an idea.
Maybe they're gonna
Power wash cars.
Right?
At the car lots and and sell
that. They need 25,000 by 50,000
for a truck and.
And so there's 75 and there's no
way for them to go get that
unless.
They're getting financed through
the Mr. Chairman, we'd be
interested to tell you after
we've got some returns on the
advanced New Mexico and that was
that fund that we had created,
um, how, whether scaling that up
would um provide some of that
gap that you're talking about.
We just don't have enough data
yet. We have a lot of hope, but
we have no real data yet to tell
you. And then, then how do you
market that? That's the hardest
thing, right? So, Mr. Chairman,
in all of the instances on page
12, the investment manager in
this instance, Mission driven
finance is responsible for their
marketing.
And the deal choice, everything.
I mean, it's interesting that
how we do that. On the 0% loans
in the, on, on for this, those
are municipalities and
everything. How much uptake have
you had. So our drinking water
state revolving loan fund, um,
is oversubscribed. So we have
about $38 million more in uh
approvals than we have in Rey
Cash, but obviously as loans
start to get repaid, um, we'll
be able to make those loans and
we get new dollars coming down
from the feds, but we are
oversubscribed.
The environment department told
us about a fund they have that
has a federal fund that has
wastewater and water, and it has
100 million in it.
And nobody's applying.
Mr. Chairman, I, um,
I, I, it's a similar program.
They, they run the clean water
program, which is the, the solid
waste, um, I think we have a
slightly broader base we can
lend to public whether they're
considered public water systems
under the federal definition
that are for-profit, we have
that capacity because we, we
have commercial lenders on staff
and can monitor those. I don't
think they're really staffed to
do that. So I think they have a
smaller market to start with.
So how do we get them both?
Cause I mean we, we have this.
Conundrum, right, where
They have 1% over here or 0%
over there program and how do we
pair those if we get you up to
this limit or you need this
limit, or it's water and
wastewater.
Mr. Chairman, they just do the
wastewater. They don't do water
programs. We have a similar
program. We've met mirrored
their interest rate.
Um, and we've tried to mirror in
every way so that the two
programs are as similar as
possible, just different
administrators. We think that
makes it easier for um the
municipalities out there to
figure out how to get the deals
done, um, but I think we have a
slightly easier because the
water trust board and the
drinking water have similar um
requirements for applications if
they're not successful with the
water trusts board, they can
move themselves right over into
the drinking water program. And
so there are, we just have more
projects ready to go.
they can be shifted over in a
year or so when wastewater is
now eligible under uh the Water
Trust board, a similar thing may
happen. There may be enough uh
folks that are interested and
get themselves ready for the
water trusts board, find
themselves unsuccessful and
would be in a position to then
borrow from that clean water
program.
So think about a number for the
water that we're gonna have to.
backfill until you.
It returns on your income, how
we handle that, right? Cause
that's going to be the biggest
investment. I mean, everybody
wants infrastructure. They want
it for free, but I mean a 0%
loan is pretty much for free.
It's interesting that I'm doing
a project in Carlsbad
and on their infrastructure,
what they'll do is, the
developer pays for the cost of
the infrastructure, and then
they'll come back and reimburse
you.
Up to 150,000.
And so,
That entices developers, saying.
You know what, that's because
you turn over the utilities to
the city or whoever, right? You
turn over the water and the
sewer and and gas goes a gas
company, but you turn those over
to the utilities.
security
And then they're really their
infrastructure in the end. So
how do we develop that, right?
And say, OK, maybe if you guys,
this is new development and you
guys are doing that. It's not
replacement.
You guys are doing that. How do
we develop that, that water
infrastructure, so the, the web
gets wider and, and how does it
get recoup part of the cost. Mr.
Chairman, we actually are
expecting a major portion of
both the housing development
fund and we've certainly seen it
in the opportunity fund for that
very project, um, and, you know,
you can get funding from a bank
for the vertical construction,
it's very difficult to get um
funding alone against the
infrastructure because you can't
take a lien on it, because it's
gonna get turned over. Um, so
that is one place where we
expect to have a significant
amount of interest in those
commercial development and
housing development funds.
Similarly, the PPRF can those,
um, you can have developer
driven.
quasi-public entities called
public Improvement Districts,
and um the PPRF with this
creation of that new bond lean.
Uh, we're in a position to start
buying more of those kinds of
bonds. It's a fairly lengthy
process, takes developers about
a year to become a public
improvement district and then
about another year to get the
legislative authorization, but
once that happens, we have not
untapped capacity will we have
untapped capacity but not
unlimited capacity in that
public project revolving fun 3
lead. So that is one.
place where we could really um
uh increase the, the amount of
capital that flows down for core
infrastructure projects.
Uh, and so how do we shorten the
time frame? I mean, I mean, we
just turn to build a house MFA I
don't know you were in the room,
right? 18 to 24 months, and then
you're 2 years out to lay the
infrastructure and get money to,
to lay the infrastructure, so
you're on a 4-year project. They
usually go south by then
developers moved off to the to
the easiest.
Hath of least resistance to get
things done and so I, I.
You're gonna have to shorten
your timeline, cause, you know,
me as a developer, my, my
biggest deal is going into the
city hall and saying, OK, what
do I gotta do, right?
And even projects are exam
project that was approved 2
years ago, right? And that, that
got put on hold.
Coming back in and re-permitting
that.
That project
It
That's our biggest time frame.
Everything's there. The plans
are there, everything's,
nothing's changed and and we're
sitting there for six months
saying, OK, when are you gonna
get a permit
and you guys are 2 years out. I
mean that, that's timeline for
for builders, developers,
contractors, commercialists, got
to shorten. Mr. Chairman, we
agree entirely. We're not
actually responsible for how the
public improvement districts get
formed, but we can't ask for
legislative authorization until
they've been formed, because you
can only authorize eligible
entities, which include the, so
you can't do.
to be formed public
infrastructure district. And so
the combination of those two
things, the time it takes under
the public Improvement District
law. We've looked at it, we have
some recommendations. So do you
want to go that direction? Um,
time it takes to get that
developed, and then the time,
and then they can't get onto a
legislative authorization list
until they're actually a public
entity. So those are the two
situations, you know, we, we
have some suggestions. I don't
know what the appetite of the
legislature is, but we certainly
have suggestions on how you
could use more.
of the Public Project revolving
fund for those kinds of projects
that you're describing. And, and
then I think we may throw one
more thing, because that's part
of the part of the, the whole
piece that we're not seeing
together, right?
And I always use Mesa del Sol,
for example. They need water,
they need sewer, and they need
power, right? And the utilities
are not investing in the
transformers, right? The cities
are not investing in the
utilities to for the
development. So how do we, how
do we put that all together in
one thing and and we'll have to
look at the that we that we
gather that all at one time, we
have a problem with community
solar, right, tied into the grid
and and microgrids, you can take
Mesa del Sol and say, OK.
We're gonna give you a PU
district and you're gonna get
this option to do utilities, and
then if we throw in the
electrification and say, OK,
we're going to put a mini or
micro substation in there and
service, and we pretty much
service that whole community in
one way, shape or form in the
developer's not chasing power,
water, sewer, right, Mr.
Chairman, we couldn't agree
more. Might I mention again my
deputy director Fernando
Martinez in his space of
experience really lends well to
these conversations, and we're
really
Very excited to have him on
board for the reasons you're
describing. Yeah, something's
got to give because if you're 18
to 24 months.
In MFA
And you're 2 years in NMFA.
I mean, that, that's a 5 year
timeline in, and you're not
gonna get there, Mr. Chairman.
We have some suggestions should
you want them. So let's look at
that and especially in the
electrification portion too,
because that's all gonna be tied
together. Um.
And, and I think that, I don't
know, you're gonna have to give
us some numbers and, and figure
it out. We can't fix the pud
districts in the cities in
control and.
We'll just get our head in the
vice if we start messing with
it. I think um
It's interesting to see how much
MS.
Mr. Chairman, we are expected to
move into our new building in
the first quarter of this next
calendar year with your
Mr. Chairman, we are expected to
move into our new building in
the first quarter of this next
calendar year. What you doing
with your,
uh, it's, we don't own it. We've
been leasing, um, so this is the
best thing we could have done,
that we will, um,
We, we have to hold off on
expansion positions that are
board authorized, so we're
authorized for 77 FTEs this
year. We don't have space for
them, and so we're waiting until
we get to that new building so
that we can bring those folks
on, but we're really excited. We
can make that the new.
No, it's Mara. No, no, we're not
moving her out. She's moving out
voluntarily. We're crushed for
space over here too, and we're,
we've talked about $100 million
building and we don't know if we
can get it built in 24 years, so
we got, you got nothing on us,
Mr. Chairman. It's a lovely
view. We could recommend it
highly. All right, I don't see
any other questions, so thank
you for your time. Appreciate
it.
We're gonna wrap up, just
remember in the next month or
two as we do the budget cycling
and start wrapping up in
November to get the budget
approved from the
Committee in December.
Um
Me and top of stuff. We have
another round of small.
Agencies next month, Charles.
Uh, it will be in the courts and
the DA's or.
OK.
Um
4 day meeting.
Oh yeah.
4 day meeting, so make sure
you're in touch with the LFC or
something's caught you in
meetings, make sure you're
touched, especially with
The, the big play in the budget
is gonna be the non-reoccurring.
Numbers in how we figure that
out. Something's caught your
eye, make sure you.
Keep them in tune in.
I think that's it. Everybody be
safe.
I'm glad everybody's home on
Fridays instead of us driving
