Oh, and, uh, before we do that,
uh, the director reminds me, can
we, uh, recognize, uh, Miss
Renee really quickly, please.
Renee, if you wouldn't mind
standing up and come on.
Uh, we wanna, uh, we're so proud
and the director, uh, made sure
that we would recognize, uh,
Renee for uh her graduation from
New Mexico State University. So
if we could give.
Thank you and congratulations.
OK, thank you and thank you for
acknowledging her and
acknowledging our
Our people. I'm just gonna try
to make sure that I'm not, I
don't have reverberation so can,
can everybody hear me? All
right, great. um, so thank you,
um, Mr. Chair and members of the
committee for having us. Uh, I'm
pretty excited to be here, uh,
and especially I'm pretty
excited to have uh both doctors
Lilly White and uh uh Bo and
present on our agricultural
experiment stations and on our
cooperative education services.
I, I think, uh
You know, I, I just want to say
a couple of things, uh when I
became president, even before I
started, I actually, uh,
undertook a trip around the
state to see some of these
centers and uh I was amazed by
the kind of work that they do. I
met with the, the, the faculty
there and I met with the
extension officers that came
from not only from the, the
counties where uh where the
stations are, but even
surrounding counties and one of
the things that I found very
puzzling was when I was told
that
was the first president in 20
years to have visited or
something like that, and to me
that that was uh not how the the
land grant mission should
function and so part of my goal
this, this, this year is really
to understand what we do and how
we do it at these in these
places and as I said, I'm very
proud and I will say 3 things
about them. One is that in my
view, uh, and I was just talking
with Connor about this, but, um,
we have not operated as a
system.
And the fact that presidents
haven't been visiting these
places is an acknowledgement
that we have and and so you will
be, I think you already have
these little bags and some of
you need a, a different bag
coming, um, we have, uh, we are
going to be undertaking what we
call the impact tour 2025, which
is a visit to all extension
offices in the 33 counties of
the state. Um, I will be doing
that with a number.
of our regents, a number of the
executive level administrators
that are with me because as a
university we need to understand
what happens around the state.
So to me that's a, it's a great
moment, and, uh, I hope that if
any of you are available, you
can actually meet us when we
come and visit your county. Um,
so the other thing that I wanna
say, and, uh, this is just as a
means of introduction. I will,
uh, I think we want to use maybe
40, 45 minutes to do our
presentations and
then allow people to ask
questions with regards to the uh
ag A research centers.
This is, uh, a place where, in
fact, I see the coming together
of many different uh uh uh
interest that the state has both
as a land grant university, uh,
with regards to research
innovation and the production of
the kind of research and work
that promotes the economic
well-being and welfare, well,
uh, and well, health, good
health of the state. uh, when I
visited, uh, some of the stuff
that they're doing is
exactly in the areas such as,
you know, clean energy, water
management, uh, uh, advanced
computing with AI, uh, and, uh,
also clearly bioscience and bio
biotechnology, and I'll let uh
Jay talked more about it, but,
uh, a lot of it is
collaborative, uh, even here in
Tucumari, one of the things that
I found out, right, is that
there's a collaboration between
the center and the city where
the water waste comes through,
gets.
cleaned up and then gets used
for other purposes by the center
in in some of its operations,
things like that or you know,
in, in Corona, uh, the advances
that they've been doing in
collaboration with our campus on
the virtual fencing, but also
they are utilizing some of their
land to you know develop a wind
turbines that actually produce
energy even though right now
it's with Los Angeles company
and we just get some of the
funding back in, so it is a new
fund revenue fund stream that
we're finding out of some of
these things. So, being active
and being, being uh modern is
what we're doing. I mean, it's
not your old agriculture
ranching waterways, fisheries, a
lot of the collaborations that
we do are advancing exactly the
the areas that the state is
looking to continue to modernize
and with regards to the
extensions to me, uh, again,
when I saw that, uh, they were
not
connected with the university,
uh, one of the first things that
I said is we have here an
opportunity to be a to be truly
uh the land grant that provides
the public service that uh
Lang grants missions tell us
about, uh, so now, for example,
we are integrating our extension
services with our enrollment
management and they're
collaborating with enrollment
management as well as with NMSU
Global, for example, in creating
between the campus and all of
the counties so that we can
really produce the kind of
education that brings both
traditional age students, but
also adults into into the fold
to continue to increase the kind
of things that we want our
citizenry to be advanced in, so
I will stop and I will let the
two of them do their
presentations. I know that you
have some of their presentations
with you and uh and then we will
be open for questions and I'm
happy to also answer questions
about
The university as a whole.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee, thank you for
the opportunity to be with you
this morning, uh, uh, to discuss
the cooperative extension
service at New Mexico State
University, uh, you should have
a, a slide deck and I, I'm just
gonna work off of those slides.
Uh, what I'd like to do in the
next few minutes is, is, uh, uh,
do a real brief overview of our
structure and our mission, uh,
then highlight just a couple of
our program impacts over this
past year, and then as the
agenda from the LFC uh has, I, I
would like to speak more
directly to the progress we've
made on 10 of the
recommendations from the 2018
LSC program review for the
cooperative extension service
that we really found very
helpful and, and really, uh,
setting some goals and
directions, uh, even though it's
been 7 years ago, it's amazing
how
As time goes, but the impacts
that that has had, uh, so on the
second slide, uh, as many of
y'all know, we really do view
the cooperative extension
service as the education arm of
New Mexico State University, and
that's primarily through our
presence in all 33 counties. Uh,
we are formed from a really
unique state, federal, and
county, uh, collaborative back
in, uh, 1914 with the Smith
Leaver Act and where statutory
program in the state of New
Mexico, uh, we've kept our
mission tried and
over the years. It's basically
to provide research-based
information and programs to
improve the lives of New
Mexicans, um, that's really
served us well over the many
years that we've been here, but
I will say that we've had to
evolve and adjust, of course,
our programs through cooperative
extension service. To me, the
stakeholder and clientele needs
of the state. So really that,
that comes down to balancing
those traditional agricultural
programs that many of our, our
clientele are so dependent upon,
but also being able to pivot in
new
innovation such as the president
said AI technologies and
agriculture, uh, climate
resiliency, uh, and even
behavioral health, that's been a
real focus for us the last
number of years, and I'll go
over those in more detail. Uh,
if you go to slide 3, just a
general overview of our overall
budget. We operate on about $33
million annually. Uh, you can
see in that, uh, pie chart that
the state appropriations make up
about 53% of our overall budget
and we're able to
every state appropriations at a
ratio of about 1 to 1 with
county appropriations, federal
appropriations, and, of course,
grants and contracts, and I'll
go over the grants and contracts
in more detail here in a minute.
Um, if you'll move to slide 4,
just from a structural
standpoint, as I've mentioned,
we have faculty and staff in all
33 counties uh with our county
extension offices. I do want to
highlight, really thankful for
our county partners. They
provide those offices for us and
also pay 1/3 of the salary for
faculty and staff.
In those county offices and all
our extension folks are in one
of 9 extension departments in
the College of Agriculture,
Consumer and Environmental
Sciences at New Mexico State
University. Um, our programs on
slide 5, probably what we're
most well known for, of course,
is our 4H program, as you all
know, 4H program is the largest
positive use development program
in the United States reaching
about 6 million youth in the
state of New Mexico, we reach
between 43 to 46,000 youth, uh,
on an annual basis.
Of course, agriculture and
natural resources, those are uh
what brought us to the dance and
and what continues to be a real
focus for us, uh, along with
family consumer science programs
which have really evolved over
the last 10 to 15 years dealing
more with, with important health
topics for the state of New
Mexico and our citizens, and
then of course community
economic development,
particularly rural development,
is a real focus. I do want to
point to an important component
of our budget. Uh, it's really
thanks to the capacity funds we
get through USD.
and our state appropriations
that allows us some flexibility
to pivot when real issues come
to the forefront in the state of
New Mexico, I guess one of the
best examples I can get is the
wildfires, um, as many of y'all
know, um, extension played a
critical role. They're embedded
in those communities and working
with first responders to be able
to articulate what the community
needs are during those fires,
both the, the Hermit's Peak, uh,
Calf Canyon fire and more
recently last year, uh, the
South Fork fire.
uh in Riodoso, but I will say
probably more importantly, it's
the extension programs that were
put in place following the fires
on how to deal with flood
control, how to deal with
livestock management needs after
the fires, and of course
behavioral health and mental
health, uh, were, were big
issues for the community
following the stresses of that.
Um, other areas is financial
mediation, public officials,
workforce training that we do
through our county college in uh
New Mexico Edge program and then
as I mentioned before,
Over the past decade,
particularly after COVID,
there's been a real need for
extension to form new
partnerships addressing mental
health needs in in uh
communities across the state,
um, slide 6 is our, uh,
quantitative performance, uh,
measures. I just wanted to
highlight two rows here. Uh, the
first row is clientele contacts
and the last is competitive
funding. Um, we reached our
all-time low of the number of
contacts we reached an extension
in 20.
We reached 330,000 New Mexicans.
Um, that was largely due to the
pivot we had to make from COVID
when we lost our face to face
programming, but I think the
important thing to note is we
made a pivot, put a lot of our
programs online modalities, um,
as COVID, we, we came out of
COVID, we were able to re-engage
face to face programming. We now
have really a hybrid approach.
Much of our programming is back
to face to face, but we're
reaching new audiences that we
never reached before with some
of our online.
Programming, and that's why
we're really working hard to
collaborate with NMSU Global.
But you'll notice now we're
reaching over 600,000 New
Mexicans on an annual basis with
that, with that hybrid model, so
I think that's a model that
we'll we'll continue to strive
for. Um, slide 7, I just wanted
to, to highlight a couple of
programs and then I'll get into
the, the, the, uh, LFC program
review. Um, I'd be remiss not to
flag for each again. We reach
again 43,000 youth through 4H,
uh, really
teaching critical life skills,
um, I think you all are familiar
with the metrics, uh, these are
national metrics, but we know 4H
youth in general, uh, or 2 times
more likely to participate in
STEM activities. Um, half as
likely to be involved in drugs
and alcohol and those type of
things. And, uh, one that I, I
know our president is certainly
providing focus on is our, our
4H youth are 5 times more likely
to graduate from college. So
again, that's uh an intentional
recruitment opportunity, uh,
with our 4H folks.
Uh, I wanted to highlight our
forage extension programs, um,
we've really come a long way in
technology to increase
profitability by reducing
fertilizer costs, uh, decreasing
water use by up to 30% and
overall increasing, uh, uh,
overall, uh, production and
yield, so increasing the
profitability for the producers
we serve. Uh, and then, uh, as
the president mentioned, I, I
did want to flag our virtual
fencing program, uh, that we had
in our extension animal.
it's natural resources
department working with our
experiment station, but
following the hea fires, a lot
of that country lost the fencing
needed to operate a livestock
operation, and it's going to
take time to put that
infrastructure back in, so they
put in place a virtual fencing
that uses a GPS collar and some
other technology so they could
get the cattle back on, onto the
range as they rebuild those
fences. So, again, using
technology to our advantage to
get folks back on the land and
back in production. Um, the next
slide.
Uh, on highlight slide number 8,
wanted to highlight our
behavioral health and wellness
system, uh, and, and team. I
think a lot of times folks don't
recognize extension as being a
player in the area of health.
And, and I think probably for
extension to be relevant in the
next 20 to 30 years, we have to
be at the table to help, help
deal with critical health needs,
uh, across the, across the state
and across the nation, uh, and
just an example, our extension
family consumer sciences.
programs that I highlighted
there, uh, do programming on
parenting, nutrition, diabetes
education, etc. Uh, we're
estimating that saves the state
about $10 million in deferred
healthcare costs from those
preventative programs uh to
teach folks good nutrition, uh,
and, uh, parenting, etc. Um, so
I'm gonna switch gears a little
bit on slide 9, as the agenda
and, in my understanding speak
directly to the 28, 18 LFC
program review.
I'm gonna highlight 10
recommendations and just update
you on the progress we've made.
I, I first want to say though,
we found this program review
back in 2018, very helpful, and
it was allowed us to, to really
think, rethink some of our
strategic directions and
movements forward. Um, the first
one was to strengthen
relationships between extension
and other colleges outside of
the College of Agriculture,
Consumer Environmental Sciences
to improve outreach. Um, really
happy to report. We've done a
great job strengthening some
wonderful relationships.
with other colleges, including
our College of Engineering, uh,
College of, uh, Health
Education, Social
Transformation, arts and science
and business. Um, also in 2018,
we got the LSC review in 2019,
you'll recall NMSU launched its
new strategic plan, leads 2025
at that time. Um, I, I will say
I was really happy that our new
strategic plan has had goal
number 3 as amplify extension
and outreach, not just in the
College of Ag, but across the
system.
And so as chair of that
committee, we've really put some
things in place to, to be able
to get faculty and staff in
other colleges outside the AG to
better network and utilize the
network we have an extension
across the university. And I
will say, uh, uh, very clearly
as soon as President Fermi came
on board, he certainly has
emphasized the need to continue
to look for ways to integrate
the cooperative extension
service across the NMSU, uh,
system in order to help the
state of
New Mexico and the citizens that
we serve, and I do want to say
we really appreciate President
Fermi's vision and support, and
one of, again, thank him for
taking time out to visit all 33
county officess to, to really,
it means a lot to our faculty
and staff, but also our
constituents, I think, to see
central ministry uh team out
around the state to see what
work is being done. So we're
very appreciative of that. Um,
the next slide, slide 10 is the
second recommendation was
considered.
centralizing administrative
functions at a regional or
statewide level to bring our
administrative ratios closer to
the universities. I will say we
continue to really strive to uh
to evaluate our staffing needs
and efficiencies to make sure
we're continuing to meet the
mission of the cooperative
extension service, but as I said
to, to continue to better
integrate, integrate extension
across the NMSU, um, system. I
will say we have a very similar
structure in the state of New
Mexico for extension to
Many of our peer institutions
and I listed them on the slide,
uh, Utah State University,
University of Idaho, for
example, uh, Washington State
University and Oklahoma State
University, but we continue to
evaluate those efficiencies. Um,
I, I mentioned it earlier. I, I
do think it's important to, to
thank our, our county and
federal partners also they do
cover 2/3 of the costs related
to our county faculty and our uh
administrative staff. And then I
did want to take this
opportunity just to, to, to.
again recognize that many of the
programs and extension are
conducted at a regional or
statewide level, such as our
master gardener program, our
ideas for cooking and nutrition
Snaped program or just a couple
of examples. Uh, the next slide,
uh, slide 11, uh, the, uh,
review indicated to increase the
use of web-based learning and
other tools to extend the reach
of extension programming. I
think in 2018, the LSC was very
fortuitous, uh, because boy, the
next.
A year and a half later, we hit
COVID. And so we were, we had to
move quick on making this
adjustment. Um, as I mentioned
earlier, we now have a hybrid
programming. We've had some
great success, uh, uh, using a
number of uh online platforms,
but there's opportunity for
continued growth. That last but
it I think is really important
working with uh NMSU Global to
continue to put more of our
extension programs in an
asynchronous mode on, on the, on
the uh.
but also, uh, we're exploring
this now launching some new
extension microlearning courses
in collaboration with an MSU
Global. Uh, on slide 12, the,
uh, 4th recommendation I wanted
to highlight was to develop more
rigorous needs assessment tools
to gauge current and emerging
needs at the county level. Um, I
do want to thank the
legislature, um, we took this
and uh we're we're successful in
acquiring funding to hire a new
program.
and evaluation specialists, the
first one we've ever had for the
cooperative extension service in
2019. And uh we really needed
that FTE there to really build
out our needs assessment for all
of our county offices and our
state specialists and, and build
in development tools. So we've
had some great success since
2019 with that new edition. And
then we also revised our uh uh
county bylaws for our advisory
boards to make sure there's term
limits and make sure we have a
mix of traditional.
A representation along with
non-traditional representation.
Uh, slide 13, uh, the 5th
recommendation in the LSC report
was to develop outreach
strategies to reach
underrepresented groups. Uh, I
will say our, our real focus the
past couple of years working
with a number of partners is was
to provide some workshops, uh,
across the state of New Mexico
to all of our county faculty and
our state specialists with the
goal of developing best
management practices to reach
all New Mexicans. We know folks
that no extension love
extension. My challenge is
making sure more people know
about and utilize extension. Um,
I included some data on our
clientele contacts there just as
reference. We have seen a bit of
an increase in reaching Hispanic
producers and tribal, uh, uh,
folks. Uh, we still have work to
do in this area, so it will
continue to be a focus for us.
And of course as a Hispanic
serving institution, a state
that has 23 federally recognized
tribes.
Um, we continue to try to
diversify our tribal programs
through our tribal extension
program and also, uh, certainly
reaching our Hispanic uh
producers across the state.
Um, slide
Number 14, uh, recommendation 6
was consider hiring agents with
expertise in community and
economic development. Um, uh, we
thought this was an excellent
recommendation from the LSC, um,
we appreciated working with you
all. We did secure funding in
2022 to hire three statewide
community economic development
agents. So they have
responsibility of helping our
agents and all 33 counties work
on community and rural economic
development.
Programs. And so we, we have
built some real capacity in that
area, uh, the, uh, slide 15, uh,
the recommendation was the
College of ACE's administrators
should provide new outcome-based
metrics in their annual funding
request. I, I did want to
emphasize that both the
experiment station and
cooperative extension service
are funded through the RPSP
process. We certainly follow
those funding requests and
protocol. But what we did learn
through this review is we had to
enhance
describing what are our impacts
both quantitative and
qualitative. So in 2018
following the LSC report, I
started requiring all faculty
within the cooperative extension
service to provide an impact
statement.
In their annual performance
review process. That way we can
evaluate the effectiveness of
their, of their programs. So
those impact statements include
describing what is the problem
we're trying to help the
community or individual address.
What kind of extension program
was put in place to address that
problem and then what were some
quantitative impacts of that
program. What's the public value
of your program to the
community, the county, the
region, the state, etc. and so
uh we've been really kind of fun
to see.
There's a national impact
database for extension, and
we're noticing the national
impact database is picking up
more and more of our impacts
that we're doing in the state of
New Mexico. So I just want to
thank the faculty and staff for
all their work and doing that,
but it provides us a better
measure of, of what our
successes are. Um, the, the, uh,
8th recommendation on slide 16
was to conduct a feasibility
study on potential fees for 4H
and other extension programs.
Um, I, I will
we have grown and diversified
our annual revenues by charging
a fee for specific extension
programs. Um, I provided a
number of examples there, such
as our master gardener program,
pesticide training, uh, program,
um, our New Mexico Edge program
with our, our county elected
officials, but I do want to
emphasize that, that we have
not, and don't plan to implement
a fee for 4H and some of our
basic extension programs that so
many clientele are dependent
upon.
My main rationale for that is I
want to make sure there's equal
access. I want, want everybody
to be able to, to be engaged in
those particular programs. Uh,
so again, we're looking for ways
to diversify, but finding that
balance that, that extension
programs are available to
everyone that wants to
participate. Um, the 9th
recommendation out of 10 is on,
uh, slide 17, consider
rebalancing specialist levels
over time to align with state
population needs and county
needs. Um, we
are continuing to try to build
capacity in all of our subject
areas across cooperative
extension service, but I do want
to emphasize that uh the past
number of years we're really
promoting innovations and, and
really trying to make some
strategic investments in areas
that we know are going to be
more and more important for the
state of New Mexico. Uh, my
highlighted on this slide a
number of program areas that are
relatively new for us that we're
going to continue to, to make
some strategic investments in.
That's including mental health.
I, I think that's here to.
probably for a while, uh, rural
economic development, um, I, I
think it's critical for us to
stay engaged in that STEM
education, want, want to thank
the legislature for support for
a new STEM you specialist for
our 4H program. And then as we
mentioned earlier, artificial
intelligence and agriculture and
workforce development. Those are
gonna continue to be an area
that extension is going to need
to, to stay focused on. And then
the, the last recommendation I
wanted to, to highlight, uh, was
in 20.
was considered removing the
requirement for agents to have a
master's degree, uh, where
appropriate. Um, really, this
recommendation came out because
we were having, and we continue
to have a bit of a challenge
getting qualified applicant
pools for our county faculty
positions. Um, but we do require
a master's degree for a tenure
or non-tenure track position.
There's an, there's an
expectation that they're experts
in their field. Um, but I will
say, uh, and I appreciated the
support at the time and 2
20, we were able to develop a
process we call an underfill
process where we can hire
somebody with their bachelor's
degree with the understanding
that you have 5 years, and we're
gonna support you to continue
your education. You have 5 years
to get your master's degree.
This is really working pretty
well for us now that we have
more and more master's degrees
that can be done online. So
folks can continue being, doing
their ag agent position, their
family consumer science agent or
the 4H agent position, while
they have a bachelor's degree,
they get to
5 years and they get that
master's degree, they're locked
in and, and we're, and we're
moving forward, so, uh, that's
all my formal, look forward to
any questions you all might
have, and I'll pass it over to
my colleague, if that's OK, Mr.
Chair, Doctor Jay Lilly.
Chairs and committee, thank you
for allowing me to be here
today.
And to present about the
importance of agricultural
research and the innovative
research that's going on in New
Mexico State University in our
um uh experiment station. I'm
the associate dean for research
in the College of ACEs and the
director of the AA
experimentation, and I've had
that role for about a year, so,
uh, still working through the,
the ropes and, and understanding
the, the process.
I will tell you, I'm, I'm an
economist by training. So if
you'll bear with me for just a
minute, I want to talk about the
importance of agriculture, the
importance of the food and fiber
supply chain and research, and
then I'll get into some details
about the work that we're doing.
So on slide 2 of my slides, and
I apologize a lot of my slides
are pitchers, so yeah, you just
have to kind of listen to me as
I, as I talk through them. New
Mexico's agriculture or New
Mexico's food and fiber supply
chain from input suppliers to
final consumers, uh, has an
output.
of nearly $21 billion annually.
If you include the other
industries that support the
supply chains. So for example,
transportation and storage, that
number increases to $45 billion
per year.
Um, the economic output, which
you might think of as sales
adjusted for inventory.
The employment side of that is
just as impressive, so the
direct employment for the food
and fiber supply chain is 144
million people in New Mexico if
you expand that again to those
industries that support the
chain and that the chain
supports them. That number
increases to more than 250
million people.
If you look, I'm sorry, 250,000.
I have something called Deer in
the headlight syndrome. So
sometimes I'll say stuff, you
just call me on it. Uh, 250,000
jobs. If you look at the total
jobs in the state about 1.2
million, more than 20% of the
jobs are associated with the
food and fiber supply chain. If
you take out government jobs,
that number increases to above
25%.
So it's a very important
industry for our state.
On site slide 3, I will mention
the agriculture has a
significant challenge ahead of
it.
Feeding and clothing a growing
population with existing
resources. That's a huge
challenge that we have in, in
front of us. The way we do that
is through 3 rolls. One is
increasing productivity.
The other is increasing inputs,
and the third is a shock and
external shock to the system.
Growth in, in agricultural
output is affected by one of
those 3 mechanisms. Agricultural
research, the research that
we're doing at New Mexico State
University in the
experimentation increases
agricultural productivity.
On the next slide.
Uh, slide 4.
I think that's a very impressive
slide. So if you look at that
slide,
Our agricultural output year
over year growth has increased
1.6% per year.
We've done that, keeping our
inputs constant and that in fact
they've actually gone down just
slightly.
So the inputs that we have
increased, this is for the US,
but they're similar for New
Mexico.
The inputs, the output that
we've seen in agriculture is a
function of increased
productivity.
We're getting more out of the
same resources that we've used
in the past. And again, that
comes from the agricultural
research that we're doing, uh,
across the country, but
specifically in the agricultural
experimentation.
I will say that in terms of
agricultural research and it's,
it's returns again, I'm an
economist, so bear with me. Um,
the returns to the research are
significant. Economists have
estimated that the benefit cost
ratio for agricultural research
couldn't be as high as 56, so
for every dollar invested in
agricultural research, the
returns to society could be as
high as $56. That's a huge
number, um, and again, I'll just
emphasize that the research that
we're doing increases
productivity and improves the
the
economies of our communities.
On site 5, talk a little, I'm
going to talk a little bit about
the experiment station, um, we
are the research arm for the
College of Agricultural,
Consumer and Environmental
Sciences. We were established
under the Hatch Act of 1887 and
constitutionally mandated in New
Mexico in 1915.
Um, this experiment station
consists of people, faculty,
staff, and students located on
the main campus in Las Cruces
and in 12 science centers
located throughout the state.
Those science centers allow us
to account for agriculture in
different growing conditions and
different climatic conditions
and different types of
agriculture. So we have 3
science centers that focus on
livestock and grazing. Um, we
have, uh, one that focuses on
forestry.
And we have the remaining that
focus on different parts of crop
production, row crops and and uh
field crops.
One to take just a minute to to
share 3 examples on I'm on slide
6 now and again I apologize for
just the pictures.
Uh, 3 examples of the research
that we're doing in the, the
types of impacts that it's
having on the state of New
Mexico.
I wish I could.
Share these with the same
passion that you would see if I
had the researcher sitting here
with me. They are extremely
passionate about the work
they're doing and the impacts
that it's having.
Uh, CalAF operations, as you
know, is a significant part of
New Mexico's agriculture. Doctor
Santiago Isami and his team of
researchers are working with the
virtual fencing technology that
Doctor Bourne talked about,
inserting sensors into the
collars and then connecting that
to computer technology such that
they can track where the cows
are, the animals.
Doesn't have to be just cows,
where the cows are, and they can
track when there's anomalies
very quickly. This is all real
time so they can see information
about movement, they can see
information about forage,
information about water use and
when there's a problem, then
they can go out and check on the
animals to make sure
everything's OK, um.
They have attracted uh in their
program now, they have more than
500,000 acres.
Uh, across 4 states and 8
ranches that are demonstrating
this technology and using this
for demonstration purposes.
Uh
The ranchers that they're
working with have reported that
uh they saved 25% on labor, and
they've increased their
gathering efficiency by 10%.
So it's again, increasing the
profitability for our, for our
ranchers in this example, um.
They've been able to obtain an
additional $2.5 million in
external funding, non-N New
Mexico state or non state of New
Mexico funding for this project.
On slide 7, you see a pecan
orchard. Pecans are an important
part of our agriculture in New
Mexico. They are leading crop at
$190 million per year are
leading crop, not animal but
crops.
Um
The
Pecans take a significant amount
of water, we know that.
Um, and we're working on how to
increase water efficiency, Dr.
Richard Herima and his students
are conducting experiments to
characterize water use
efficiency in 12 pecan cultivar
and rootstock combinations.
When he's done, they will be
able to identify cultivars, uh,
varieties that are better in in
water use efficiency, um, and,
and, uh, be able to breed better
trees in in their use of water.
Other research includes looking
at soil amendments, looking at
genetics, and looking at
irrigation technologies to
improve water use efficiency. We
know we have to work. We need to
maintain agricultural
productivity, but at the same
time conserve those water
resources.
On slide 8,
Uh, crops including nuts,
grains, and legumes, so many of
the crops that we produce here
in the state often are
contaminated with microtoxins
such as aflatoxin.
Afflatoxins are uh extremely
toxic to humans and animals, and
so they're very much regulated
in the United States and in the
world, FDA regulates aflatoxins.
It is estimated that 25% of the
total of the world's total food
crops across 120 countries are
affected by aflatoxin.
Um, the cost of the of
aflatoxins is estimated to be
$1.6 billion per year.
It's extremely troublesome
problem that we have in the food
and fiber uh system.
Current aflatoxin testing, um,
has several problems. Number
one, it's destructive.
So you have to pull a sample and
you, you destroy the sample and
the testing, um, often when you
pull that sample, you'll get
false readings because you're
doing a random sample, um, and
so there's a problem there.
There's also a problem in the
fact that sampling often takes
place at the end of processing,
so you've added a bunch of value
to the product, and then you
have to throw it away.
Um
All of those are troublesome,
but Doctor, uh, Jennifer Randall
and her colleagues in the
department of biochemistry have
come up and patented, coming up
with the technology and patent
that technology that is
non-destructive.
So they don't lose uh products
through random sampling, um, it,
it is real time. They can put it
in a conveyor or in a in a
grain, uh,
elevator, it will detect the
afflatoxin, set off an alarm
when the afflatoxin level is too
high and it will open up gates
to shoot the bad, uh, grain out
and allow the good grain to go
through.
Um, this is a huge, I think in
my mind a huge technology, uh,
gain. I'm, I'm very excited to
see where it's gonna go, um, and
as I said, it was patented and
they're working on the process
now with the private producer,
um, to implement this and get
it, uh, running in commercially.
On slide 9 I'll, I'll kind of
step into some of the, the
details, Doctor Bourne talked
about the report. I've tried to
tie many of the findings that we
had for the AA experiment
station into my report and then
happy to answer questions
afterwards.
We understand the importance of
leveraging state funds with
external funds, um, and then the
graph that you see on, uh, slide
9 shows that, uh, we received
about $20 million from state
funds we received an additional
2.5 million from federal funds,
capacity funds.
We matched that on a $1 per
dollar basis, so total capacity
funds is is matched with uh
grants and contract funds. So
you see the fifty-fifty there.
That's an increase from 2000
where we had uh 55% came from
state and almost 2/3 came from
our capacity funding. So we're
doing a better job in reaching
out and getting those external
grants and contracts. Some of
that is coming from private
industry.
Um, private industry is a little
bit harder given the diversity
of our industry. In some cases
they're relatively small, but we
are working with them and, and
um can provide some examples,
uh, later on.
We understand that just as
Doctor Bourne mentioned that
The impacts of our research,
it's important that we share
those so that people understand
what they are, especially the
economic side, so.
I'm, I'm proud to say that we've
been able to increase the
economic capacity within the,
the college, so today we have 17
faculty members, uh, Doctor
Bourne talked about some of the
additions they had on the
extension side. We had some
additions on the academic side
as well.
17 faculty members who can help
work with other researchers to
make sure that economics is
being incorporated into their
research. Um,
As Doctor Bourne mentioned on
the, on the research side, we
also conduct uh.
Impact statements. We also have
researchers write impact
statements and where possible,
we try to quantify that with
economic dollar values.
Um,
since 2018 we've conducted two
economic studies to show the
value of research in general,
uh, for the experiment station
and for Ag research. So there
was one done in 2018 and one
that we did in 2020.
Um, value-added research, we
know and on slide 11 we know and
respect the traditional uh
Um, agricultural industries in
the state we want to support
them. We want to help them and
we mentioned with the livestock
calls and being able to help
ranchers, but we also want to
look for innovative new crops,
new, new products that can
support agriculture producers in
the state.
So some examples in a Calde we
have researchers who are looking
at hemp.
In a multi-state, so they're
working with other researchers
across several different states
on producing hemp and can we do
that profitably? I'll mention
that we had a private uh private
producer provide a he implement
a harvester, uh, to the science
center to support that work. So
that was an in-kind
contribution.
Um, additionally, researchers in
Ecalde and in um Los Lunas are
looking at saffron and can we
produce saffron in this state,
um, saffron is a very, uh, high
intensity crop, but the values
are very high. It's estimated
that the gross receipts to
Saffron per acre could be as
high as $100,000.
So that's a, that's a huge uh
potential for us.
Additionally, we're looking at
research that incorporates
artificial intelligence and
machine learning into the supply
chain, um, these technologies
will offer potential for
increased efficiencies and cost
savings as well.
On slide 12, just want to
illustrate that we're, we want
to make sure that this
information is getting out to
our stakeholders and so we have
many opportunities for
stakeholders to learn more about
the research we're doing and um
how it can impact their lives,
so, uh, avenues include annual
reports, every science center
produces an annual report
experiment station as a whole
has an annual report. We have
field days and we invite the
public to the to our field days
and I know many of you have come
to the field days and you're
always welcome.
to be there.
Um, we have other events held at
the science center, so in some
cases we have schools come in,
um, I know a couple of them have
pumpkin patches where they
invite school, school children
to come in and learn more about
agriculture and the importance
of agriculture and research in
their lives.
Um, and then we have the impact
statements that we talked about
available online so individuals
can go look at them and see the
type of work that we're doing.
We have a number of challenges
in agriculture, labor
availability, water
availability.
Fluctuating markets, all of
those affect our producers and
at some level affect us at the
experiment station. One in
particular is labor and
identifying skilled labor to
work, uh, specifically in our
science centers, um, we're
appreciative of the legislature
and the administration in
helping us to be able to raise
salaries so that we can get
qualified individuals at the
science centers. It's still a
challenge. We're still working
on it, but we are getting, uh,
additional individuals to work
at the science centers.
On slide 14, I have a picture of
a manufactured home. One of our
goals is to better utilize the
site centers across the state.
That's difficult sometimes.
They're far away from main
campus where we have our
students, um, tech technology is
allowing us to, to, uh, mediate
that a little bit through Zoom
and other, uh, distance
technologies we can conduct
courses in long distance and in
some cases we have students who
are doing research, for example,
in Clayton at the feedlot and,
and can participate in.
courses or communications with
their, with their instructors on
the main campus.
We've also put these mobile
homes or these manufactured
homes on site so that faculty,
staff and students can use them
and more easily uh stay at the
science centers. We have 7 that
went in this year, um.
We just barely got them put in
and I, there are two of them are
full, um, with visiting
professors and, and, and
students, so we're very excited
that they're going to get used.
We know they're gonna get used
well.
And we have an additional, I
should mention we have an
additional 7 that will go in
next year as we, as the funding
comes in.
Um
The last thing I'll, I'll
mention is capital improvement,
capital improvements, um, we're
very appreciative of the support
that we've received from the
legislature and from our upper
administration, um, to provide
funding for us to maintain the
facilities that we have around
the state.
These are important learning
laboratories for our students,
living laboratories, um, as the
students participate there,
their expertise grows, their
knowledge grows, they're going
to be able to have, they're
going to be able to get jobs
more easily and get high paying
jobs. So we're very appreciative
of, of the, of the support that
we've received.
And I just mentioned 16 is just
my contact information. I'm
always welcome, uh, always happy
to, to visit. I want to thank
you all for, for your support. I
hope you know you're welcome
anytime to come out and visit
any of our facilities on main
campus in any of our science
centers. We'd love to show you
the research that we're doing.
I, it's hard for me to do an
adequate job to show you the
kind of work that's going on,
the passion that's going on with
our researchers, but they're
making a difference and we would
love to show that with uh show.
that to you when you have time.
So thank you.
Excellent. Uh, thank you very
much, President, uh, and thank
you, Doctor Bourne and Doctor
Liu. I, we're gonna go straight
to questions. We're gonna start
with Representative Baca, uh,
and then some down and go from
there.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for your presentation.
Um, huge supporter of this, uh,
my county, my district, and me
personally have benefited from
the type of services that you
guys have provided. So my
question, Mr. Chairman, very
briefly is what my interest
really is, is the K-12
cooperation articulation, um.
really as far as, as we talk
about the 4H and we talk about
opportunities, right? We talk
about our biggest.
Advertising, our biggest
supporters are those families
that we serve and so it's
important to me.
To get out into those classrooms
and as we start talking about
this, Mr. Chairman, do we have
in some of these centers, do we
have like
Plots of land that are
designated specifically for
schools for like a learning lab
because as we look at, like in
my county.
4H kids, many of them.
Land is at a premium in Valencia
County right now, so have we, or
is it possible to designate some
land for them, and it grows as
we talk about CT is
certificates, Mr. Chairman, I
see that as, as young kids we
talk about planting seeds and
and learning about, you know, so
you know those types of things,
soil and watering and as they
progress through with the CTE
with the SIM.
When they get to middle school,
they may go out there and they
may actually begin to kind of
work it and is our high school
kids.
Students
In their junior senior year,
we're looking at internships,
and we're looking at, you're
talking about labor, we have.
These students, these that would
be able to perform some of the
duties of these agents, and I
think that that's, that's where
he wanted to, uh, as I say many
times, we want to give the kids
a reason to go to school.
We have to give them
opportunities and there's no,
you know, we're talking about
life science. We're talking
about these types of things in
the classroom.
That doesn't really have the
impact and it doesn't see it in
until we actually go out there
and we apply that.
So just briefly, um, can we talk
about that one, what kind of
things are we doing? Do we have
learning lab or land that could
be set aside for schools to, um,
you know, as far as to work with
this, I could really see and I,
I look at Senator Perdil all the
time and I really, in one of his
districts, the middle school,
his school they actually grow
food that is then goes back to
the school site and it goes back
to their community to address
some of the hunger issues, so.
If you could brief briefly tell
me that, I would be very
appreciative.
Mr. Chair and uh Representative
Baca, thank you so much for the
question and, uh, uh, I'll, I'll
defer to Jay probably a little
bit on, on opportunities at this
ag science centers, but, but,
but yeah, a short answer to that
question is yes. I think there's
wonderful opportunity. I, I, uh,
will, will let Jay talk in more
detail, but I know, uh, Doctor
Mark Marsalis there at the Los
Lunaagic Science Center. Thanks
to your leadership and and
conversations that you've
connected us with some of the
public school systems there is
now
working to have students on, on
the science center. I, I won't
take Jay's thunder, but, uh, I
think we could probably look at
that model, at some other
science centers. I, I will speak
more directly for cooperative
extension, um, is we have got to
continue striving to get our uh
uh extension program, not just
for each, but in general, uh,
into the public schools and uh I
I guess I just highlight two
things that come to mind. One is
our Aggie's Next Step program,
uh, that, that's funded through.
Extension actually partly
through the provost office when
we, when we developed that, and
that was a college and career
preparedness program teaching a
lot of the soft skills that you
might not get in the, in the
structured school system.
And so, uh, I, we have that in
13 counties now, and that's
getting, uh, to work with kids
when they're out of school, uh,
and teach them about
agriculture, but, but more
importantly, just life skills in
general, um, and I think we
really need to, and that's
something that I've charged her
for each, uh, new department
head with is how do we scale
that up because that fits very
much and, and I'll defer, of
course, to the president and our
recruitment, um, expectations
and hopes for extension to help
support the university and its
recruitment efforts.
But I, I did want to highlight
the, the memorial Middle School
program where we have Doctor
Peter Skelton, uh, that stinks
to, uh, Senator Campos back in
the day, right when I started in
202008 as director of extension,
uh, but we, the vision there was
let's house a cooperative
extension service, agricultural
expert in a in a middle school,
and let's let them develop a
combined K through 12 and higher
ed through extension program and
uh
I would be glad represent Baca
to get you some information,
maybe uh it'd be great if we
could take you up to see that
program, but Peter Skelton's
been in the Memorial Middle
School, uh, for, since 2008, uh,
they developed a greenhouse.
They produce, uh, fruits and
vegetables and things of that
nature that are then used for
the school cafeteria and those,
those school kids, they, they
learn wonderful STEM tools, STEM
education through agriculture,
um, but it's been, uh, actually
a pipeline.
also for us getting some, some
new students to the College of
Agriculture, Consumer
Environmental Sciences, I think
it's the only model I know in
the United States like that
where higher ed public ed are
actually joined and, uh, I, I,
if I can find some other funding
avenues, I think there's great
opportunity to replicate that
model in other other potential
school districts, uh, within the
state, but, but it's really
getting higher ed and public ed
to, to leverage for the
betterment of those youth, uh,
so.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
we talked about it. I have
14,000 students in my, in my
district in my 3 school
districts and charter schools,
and I think as we, as we enter
the classrooms and we start out
with the projects there that's
the way you're gonna get more
contact and the touch points as
far as through the extension and
also for the recruitment and
also the interest into the field
of agriculture, as you said,
we've gotten better at, you
know, using the same amount of
resources, land, and otherwise.
But the, the next.
Set of challenges is going to be
fixed by the students that are
in classrooms today, so why
don't we go out there and let
them be a part of that process
to prepare us for the next.
You know
Decade or so so.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you very much,
Representative Baca. Next we
have Representative Dow, then
Representative Herndon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. uh, good
to see you, President. It's
Is it Fred May? How do, how do
you say your name? I wanna.
One more time.
Fermi
Fermi. OK, thank you.
President Fermi, it's good to
see you both, um, my first
questions are for John regarding
the extension office. When you
said that there are 33 county
extensions, but 52 sites. Are
you talking about these portable
buildings around the state.
Mr. Chair, and, uh,
uh, rips down now, thank you for
the question. Uh, what I'm
referring to is our actual 33
county extension offices, uh,
there again, uh, funded and
provided through county, uh,
government, and generally those
offices are, are paired with
the, uh, uh,
Within the uh county government
complex, if you will. We do have
some offices where the county
has invested in and built a
standalone office for
cooperative extension. So it
kind of varies across the state.
Um, I would say we probably have
10 offices that are kind of on
their own that are supported by
the county, and then, uh, the
rest of the offices are, are
with along with where they have
emergency management, um, etc.
county government facilities.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you for that, John. But where
are the extra 21 sites?
Because it said there's 54 sites
that's counting, uh, that's
counting all the sites on, on,
that's including main campus
within those different
departments and then we do have
a couple of satellite sites,
particularly with our tribal
extension program, for example.
So if you look at all, and then
we also, uh, actually have a
couple of offices at CNM, uh,
there in Albuquerque is actually
where we house our New Mexico
edge program and our ideas for
cooking and nutrition programs
since it's statewide, which one
of them centrally located in
Albuqu
Turkey area.
Thank, thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you for that, John. Um,
the, how old is the Aces
building. I don't know if that's
what you call it, but
The, the building in Las Cruces,
um, when was that built? We were
4H and FFA are housed.
Mr. Chair, I'm going to defer to
my colleagues for the exact
year. I, I do want to go on
record that it was there when I
got there in 1996, so but I
don't know. I, it's been there a
while. I don't know, but I can
get you that information,
representative,
it is in very bad condition.
It's completely inadequate for a
program that's this important,
um, I, you know, I, some of, we,
we had a discussion yesterday
about capital outlay and, and
we're, they're building some new
buildings where
The prior buildings were
perfectly fine in my opinion.
They, they were great and
functioning and, and recognized
uh as a.
functioning buildings by the
industry or by construction
industry division or their their
licensing agency, but in this
case, that
That building's, it's, it's,
it's pretty bad shape. Is there
any plans to replace it?
Well, so we do have some plans
for capital outlay that actually
require us to re-envision one of
the problems that we have is we
have uh many, many smaller
buildings around the campus, and
that was, I don't know how that
was conceived, so we are
thinking more of sort of a
centralized big, big buildings
and actually starting to think
about how we might demolish some
of the smaller buildings and
concentrate our efforts because
even from the
The standpoint of facilities,
uh, it is a huge dis uh, I mean,
it, it cost us a lot more to
maintain a lot of buildings and
actually maintain a few fewer
buildings where we concentrate,
so we do have a number of
buildings like the building that
you're talking about that are in
bad condition, so we are trying
to think about both the
prioritization of the
restructuring of the university,
uh, and, and it's sort of
interesting because it's also a
metaphor of where I want to
bring the university, right,
working as a system.
Working actually to um make us
work together maybe in in some
bigger buildings and get rid of
some of the outlayers, uh,
outliers, and then really think
about how do we repurpose our,
but, but yes, I, I can't tell
you where on the list it is, but
it is high on the list of things
that need to be done with
regards to um deferred
maintenance at this point. We
have a lot of deferred
maintenance. Thank you. Thank
you, Mr. President. I, I would
say I got 1963, that's when the
building was built.
OK. Thank, thank you, Mr.
Chairman and thank you,
President, for that, and I, I,
I'm not suggesting it should be
rebuilt, but I, I relocated, you
know, something more adequate
and or something that represents
the importance of the school of
ACEs at the university would be
great. Um, and, and on the um
I saw an article and I've, I
really like the Albuquerque Sign
Language Academy, and I think
it's a great program in
Bertollio County and now that
they're they're building a new
location and, and I think
they're sharing space with the
county. I think the, the
extension office is also moving
on that campus and they're
doing, can you tell us a little
bit more about the program that
they're doing and how they're
integrating agriculture in that
that charter school, Mr.
Chairman and Representative Doo,
I, I don't know all the, the
Pacific details, but I do, I do
know we're in the process. My,
uh, uh,
lk s in that county office along
with the district department
head, Christina Turner for for
that northern district, uh, or
coordinating with, uh, the
county government there to be
integrated and to be provided
new facility. I know the Indian
Cultural Center there is going
to expand their footprint where
our current office is, and I, I
just want to flag the, the
wonderful support we've had with
Bernal Leo, uh, County, uh, to
really upgrade our facility and,
uh, uh, we're really excited
about launching that new
facility.
understanding is that should be
moving forward, breaking ground
and, and etc. uh, by this
summer, uh, through this summer.
I don't have a good sense of
when the actual transition will
occur.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for that. And then,
um,
On the, the master's programs,
it at least in Sierra, we've,
we've had really good luck with
our agents, but, um, I was
surprised to hear about the pay.
So you have to have a master's
degree and what is the pay for
an extension agent? Yes, um, I,
our, uh, tenure track or
non-tenure track county faculty
or our county agents are
required to have a master's
degree. Um, we did start an
underfill, uh, um, process where
we could
hire someone with a bachelor's
degree with an understanding
that they would, would get their
master's degree within 5 years,
and we've had some real great
success with that. Um, we've had
a number of, of county, uh, ag
agents and 4H agents and FCS
agents that we've hired with a
bachelor's degree, and, and they
uh did achieve their, their
master's degree, which also
bumps their, their salary from
an underfield to an actual
agent, uh, position. We have
increased our, our agents
salaries.
As starting right at about 65 to
68,000. Um, and once they become
a fo professor, uh, they're
approaching in the high 90s, uh,
to be a bit, and really it's,
it's, uh, to be competitive with
the school systems, um, a lot
of, that's where there's,
there's some, some give and
take, I think between both
public school system and
extension agent positions, um,
but, but I don't wanna miss we
still have.
challenges with qualified pools,
I think in in like many
operations, um, so we've really,
uh, how we're addressing that,
if, if I might, uh, we started,
uh, an internship program where
cooperative extension service
funds summer interns for
undergraduates, not just in our
college, but across the
institution to really start
working at growing our own. Get
them out into an extension
experience in office while
they're undergraduates and
hopefully we can hire them with
underfield opportunity or
they'll go ahead and get their
ma.
and come, come to our positions,
uh.
Thank you, thank you, Mr.
Chairman and thank you for that,
John. That's a lot higher pay
than what I was hearing. I, I, I
don't, maybe I, maybe our
current agent doesn't have their
masters and they're on that 5
year track, um, but they were
significantly lower than 65%,
but that sounds a lot better.
And I know at least in the rural
counties, if you're an extension
agent and you're a 4H and
you're, you're dealing with 4H
kids. That is a 7 day a week
job, 12 months out of the year,
if someone needs you to check on
an animal on a Sunday.
afternoon, our agents are there.
The fair is might as well be
24/7 a day. I mean, they're,
they're on site at those fairs
and in counties where ag is a
big deal and we're trying to
make sure we're raising up the
next generation. They're going
to state fair, Southern Fair,
County Fair. I mean, they,
they're doing jackpots. I mean,
these guys, they are putting in
time. And so I, I'm glad to hear
that pace sounds a little more
competitive. What do we need to
do? Is it a is it a university
policy or what do we need to do?
To allow the flexibility on
masters versus bachelor's. I
can't imagine being an agent.
Also getting a master's program
dealing with hundreds and
hundreds of 4H students.
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative, I
did just double verify my, my,
make sure my numbers are right
that I gave you, but yes, with
the master's degree just
startings around 60,000. And
then, uh, uh, once they become a
full professor, we're looking in
the uh
high 80s, low, low 90s, so back
to your point on master's
degree, you know, what, what I
think is really important as an
institution of higher learning,
um, I want to make sure our
cooperative extension faculty
are on the same.
Bar, if you will, or seen the
same way as our teaching faculty
and our research faculty.
Um, so again, they go through
the promotion and tenure or
promotion process just like our
research faculty do and our, uh,
teaching faculty. Now our
extension specialists are
required to have a PhD, but I
think it's important that the
faculty we have in the counties
have a obtained their master's
degree, so they really are
qualified and have that
educational background to speak,
you know, to, to really be a
leader on these, on these topics
that are important.
at the county level, um, but I
do think that I appreciated the
flexibility, the higher as a
bachelor, um, and, and quite
honestly, as you noted,
extension is not for everyone.
It's a, it's a, it's a way of
life. And, and you got to have
that pack what we always used to
call extension bones. You, you
gotta want to help to serve
people, make a difference, and
it takes it it's time consuming
and and I really appreciate the,
the words you had as a 4H agent
and what it takes.
Um, but, but I do think it's
important that, that we, we try
to have them to to be on the
same bar with the rest of our
faculty at the institution, uh,
to have that terminal degree.
So and the representative Doo, I
think you raise a very
interesting uh question, two
things that I would say, uh.
Masters are a little bit easier
to achieve these days because of
the availability of some degrees
online and I do know that in
fact the college is working with
NMSU Global to
Create a couple of programs that
will in fact fulfill that, which
doesn't solve the problem right
about someone who is working
really, really hard and then
having to try to take courses,
which I think is, is, you know,
as you know, it's a double
whammy trying to like work 12
hours a day, 13 to 14 hours, and
then coming home and asking,
having to do work, but the other
thing that I think um.
As we evolve, we need to
consider, and this is something
that I've been exposed to is the
impact of experiential learning
onto our sort of certification
and degrees, and that's
something that we are starting
to explore where in fact someone
who has worked, let's say for a
number of years in these areas
could in fact be given credit
for some of that so that in
fact, even getting to a master
is not going to take the same
amount of work. So I, I think
you, you highlight.
One of the challenges that is
precisely the overworking of
someone and doing it in a field
possibly without the degree and
not getting credit for actually
doing the actual work. So
working together, we are working
on getting experiential learning
credit. I think that's the next
phase of the learning
experience, so, uh, I think
that's an excellent point that
you make. Thank you. um, thank
you, Mr. Chairman. And then, uh,
when you talk about putting them
on par with tenure, um,
Then that agent regardless of
their effectiveness and
Whether kids like him, parents
like them, whatever, then they
are tenured.
I'm sorry, Mr. Chair, can you
ask that question again? I
didn't quite catch you Mr.
Chairman, I think I was hearing
you say, John, that if they're
on the same par with uh with
other professors, then they can
obtain tenure.
So whether that's an effective
agent or not, whether students
like them, whether parents like
them, whether they're effective
in their role as an extension
agent, then they're tenured.
It's, this is kind of a tricky
question. Let me, let me, uh,
there was a time period that all
of our county extension faculty
were on, on tenure track, uh.
Um
pathways and then, uh, a number
of years ago, uh, the decision
was made that county faculty
would still be faculty, same
salary as tenure track, but they
would be college rank, not
tenure track. So we have a
mixture within our system of
those, the older agents, if you
will, are on tenure track and
our newer hires are on
non-tenure track college drink,
uh, but I do want to emphasize
that that we have kept the the
salaries the same.
And they all still have to go
through the promotion process of
submitting their annual
evaluation or promotion
documentation, it still goes
through the college promotion
and tenure committee.
Thank, thank you, Mr. Chairman,
and I know I've been on the
interview process when we've
been choosing an agent in, in
partnership with you guys and
when the agent was the best of
the options of the applications
we receive, but not the right
fit for the community. So I'm
glad that there's that
flexibility. Um, I think my
questions are for Doctor Lily
White and, um, I think. So uh
can you tell us a little bit
about mechanically harvesting
chili and what does NMSU have a
role in that? If not, we don't
have to discuss it, but I'm just
curious.
Mr. Chair and Representative, we
do, uh, Stephanie Walker, who's
a, uh, extension specialist has
been working on that process for
many years. It's, it's difficult
if you think back to like
Tomato harvesting. It took many
years for them to, to develop
the machinery, but also you have
to, to develop the varieties
that can handle the, the
machinery itself. And so we have
machines now that are, uh, I
think she told me 95% efficient
in harvesting green chili, um,
and she has been working on
varieties. She recently released
a new one that is better suited
for mechanical harvesting in
terms of its the plant's arch
uh.
you call it, structure and and
the the pod design, um.
So it is making progress.
They're, they're very close.
There are some people who are
harvesting green chili with
machines.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you for that, Doctor Lulu
White, because I, I, if you need
help with that, I would be
interested in finding, I want to
make sure that that's funded
well because we've gone, we've
got less than 9000 acres of
chili that we're now harvesting
in New Mexico. It's almost
become an urgent as, I mean,
that's our, that's our sort of
specialty crop and it's
extremely important. So if you
need more resources for that, I
would like to advocate. I think
most of us would advocate for
that when we've gone from 30,000
acres to less than 10. That's
not good, um, and then, um.
I just have two more questions.
Uh, do you, when did you guys
stop doing soil testing and why?
Mr. Chair and Representative, I
don't know that was before my,
certainly before my time in this
role, um, I think some of the
problems were, um, the ability
to cover the expenses.
Um, so you have a fairly
expensive lab and unable to get
enough volume to cover the
expenses. That's my guess. I, I
won't, please don't quote me on
that, but OK, thank you, Mr.
Chair. I just, I just find it
ironic that soil health is so
important in New Mexico that
we've.
And we're shipping, I think our,
we do our testing in Colorado.
OK,
um, and then the last one is
just can you just give us an
update on the USDA, uh, the
funds that we're going to
provide to support USDA
processing plants and what are
they telling you that they need
those resources for.
Mr. Chair and Representative, I
have not had specific
discussions with meat processors
about the equipment they need.
Um, I suspect most of it is to
modernize their, their
facilities so they can meet the
new state inspection
requirements, even though it's a
state inspection program, it
still has to meet the
requirements of USDA federal
inspections and so in some
cases, I think that's where the,
the
hurdle is, is getting that
equipment to the, to the level
it needs to be in order to be
federally or state inspected.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. My last
question for the president, and
it is in regards to
certificates, um, some, are you
guys looking at any non-degree
programs and specially around
like the, the, I think forestry
and NMDA are partnering together
on this sort of
paraprofessional, um, it's not.
A pair of professional
certification for the
archaeological survey, but as
far as like conservation mapping
or conservation plans are you
guys looking at other
certification programs where we
can get some boots on the ground
for these pretty critical, um,
recovery from fires and
preventing fires
and representative Doo.
Uh, that's a broader
conversation, but it, yeah, so
the, the immediate answer is
yes, we're looking at developing
new certificates. 2, the
question is where they're going
to be. And one of the things
that I think is is really
important for us to assess is
the state's needs and so what
you're saying is precisely the
kind of thing that we need to
think about, OK, because we need
to do two things with regards to
certificates. One is figure out
the best way to deliver them,
and a lot of times, uh,
especially in the contemporary.
educational panorama that will
be either a hybrid or online
format because typically what
you want is people who are maybe
on their jobs who are trying to
get the extra certification to
get to the next level. So in
those conversations are
happening between NMSU Global
and the colleges, so I don't
know specifically that that is
happening with ACEs, but it is a
good thing that we will be
looking right now structurally,
as I said, I'm, I'm working on
creating a systemic way of
looking at
are impact as land grant
institutions, so one of the
things that we want to do is
provide services that promote
the, the wealth and the health
of the state. So, uh, looking
and making sure that uh we are
fulfilling those duties is
really important, uh, and uh
certificates are growing in the
university and we certainly will
keep in mind what ACEs can do to
help some of the areas where we
have challenges or where we have
opportunities. It really is
about opportunities more than
anything else, um, so yes.
Thank you, thank you, Mr.
Chairman, and, and, and again, I
just want to say thank you for
being available. I know I've
brought up some issues that
probably aren't comfortable, and
I'll keep doing that, but um I
do appreciate you being
available and willing to listen
to my opinion. Thank you. Thank
you. Uh, we have 7 more folks on
the list. We're gonna go to
Representative Herndon and then
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you all for an excellent, uh,
informative presentation. uh,
Doctor Bo and, I'd like to go
with to you first, and
specifically you talked a lot
about mental health and how you
were working on that at the
school. I'm not sure how that is
being carried out. I just want
to let you know I appreciate how
you're involved with students
and the students at the New
Mexico Academy for the Media
Arts actually created a
documentary about their mental
health coming out of COVID.
So when you talk about mental
health at the school now, what
is exactly what is it that you
exactly are doing?
Uh, Mr. Chair, representing,
thank you so much for the, for
the question. Um, we, we've
really started focusing on
really building capacity, so we,
we, uh, following COVID pulled
together.
Current faculty that we had that
had some expertise in behavioral
health and wellness, and, and we
coined that the behavioral
health and wellness team. Um, we
didn't have really any
specialists in that area. So as
a result of that team, we
started looking at a number of
programs that are, that are
conducted nationally that that
help address mental health
awareness, um, and so we started
developing some new partnerships
both on campus and also with the
uh uh UNM Health Science.
uh, we've had conversations with
Burrell, a medical school to
really in, in a number of
faculty in our health,
education, social transformation
college. So again, this was an
opportunity for extension to
build some new partnerships that
we, we haven't had before
because before COVID, uh, we
really didn't have a whole lot
of focus on mental health and
wellness. It was more on
nutrition education, um,
physical fitness, things of this
nature, um, so our agents have,
have been getting
Certified, more and more of our
particularly family consumer
science agents, uh, have been
getting certified to, to conduct
uh different types of mental
health programs in the
communities that they serve,
but, but I do want to flag and
and thank the legislature, uh,
year before last providing
funding and we're currently
doing a search for a mental
health and wellness, uh,
specialist, uh, that'll be
housed on main campus and, and
help support our cooperative
extension service agents.
Administer different types of,
of programs to support clientele
that need mental health and
wellness support. Um, I, I guess
one example I, I would provide
and it kind of varies by
counting on what the needs are,
um, but I know following the
rheodoso fire, we, we got a call
from, from the state and I know
they were mobilizing experts
from the state to get to Riodoso
to help provide support, um, but
those first responders, many of
them that were fighting those
fires at the same time were
losing their own homes, um, and
You can imagine the, the
challenges that that causes
you're, you're trying to, to
help the community and save the
community at the same time
dealing with uh the loss of my
own home, and so they did reach
out and and we were able to
mobilize extension faculty that
have some expertise in mental
health and wellness along with
some, some faculty in our uh Hes
College, and we got them to
Riodoso just to listen to those
and try to support those first
responders that were also
dealing with personal losses, so
I think it varies across the
state. Um, I know we, we do have
a center, uh, within the
college, uh, and that both uh
extension and experiment station
work with uh to, to deal with
emerging natural disaster or, or
otherwise, um, threats, um, and,
and through that, they, uh,
developed a video, um, working
with a lot of our producers, uh,
across the state to really
seeing producers talk.
about the importance of mental
health and wellness, and there's
ways to reach out and who to
reach out to if you need
support, um, so, so again, uh,
you know, the, the farm bureau
has identified mental health as
one of their primary, um,
important areas that we need to
provide focus on, so I think as
an extension we're traditional
in agriculture, but we need to
pivot and make sure we're
addressing these issues that are
high priority, not only for the
ag community, but the New
Mexicans in general.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Doctor Warren. So just, uh, two
other quick questions for you
and uh with respect to your STEM
education programs for students.
Do you conduct a, uh, you have
to cut off your microphone.
Do you conduct a um a summer
program, a, a camp, for example,
for these students. People are
listening and I want to make
sure that they're utilizing that
service if you do have it.
Mr. Chairman, representing,
thank you for the, for the
question. Um, yes, we, we have
STEM education really tied into
a lot of our base programs with
4H. For example, we have a, a 4H
robotics uh program that really
focuses on, on math, science,
engineering and technology, um,
so we have a lot of different
programs within 4H that that in
for youth education in schools
that are tied to the STEM
sciences and fields. Um, we are
in the process.
Of of hiring a new uh STEM
specialists in our state 4H
department, uh, that my
expectation for that position is
to help provide support to all
of our county 4H agents across
the state on different types of
STEM programs, camps, activities
that we can better integrate
into our youth programming
through 4H.
And, and Mr. Chair and Mrs.
Doctor Bourne, just to clarify,
students can attend these camps
with for no cost.
The, uh, a couple of these camps
do require minimal cost just to
to cover some of the, the food
and, and, uh, uh, travel, um,
but we do also, uh, we work hard
to get sponsorships to defer
some of those costs so that
they're available for everyone,
so yes, we, we wanna make sure
that 4H is welcoming to all
youths in New Mexico. And if
there's a cost barrier to that,
I would appreciate hearing about
that and having a conversation
because I think we can be.
even think, and we do not charge
in the state of New Mexico a fee
to be N4H. Uh, so again, if, if
you really want to be introduced
to some of our STEM programs, I
would encourage them to really
look at joining, uh, the 4H
program, but at the same time,
we realized that that to reach
more youth, we've also got to do
after school programs and in
school programs outside of 4H,
but that is our 4H agents that
are leading those programs
within those school or after
school programs.
And Mr. Chair, uh, Doctor Bore,
with respect to the 5 year
program that you have uh for for
underfilling individuals. You
want to move them toward their
masters and you said that you
support them. What does that
mean? Do they get to attend
classes for no cost uh just
exactly what does support mean?
uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
great question. Yes, as, as an
NMSU employee, there, there is a
savings on the enrollment fees,
um, and so that is a benefit.
But, but what I was really
referring to is as an
administration, we have to be
very supportive of any of our
faculty that want a further
education that not only benefits
them and their family, but it
also benefits us as an
organization. And so, uh, you
know, as uh Representative Dow
mentioned, the 4H agent, that's
a, well, that's a, that's a not
an 8 to 5 job and there's a lot
of weekend hours. And so when
they do sign on and they want,
and they committed to going on
for a master's degree from the
mini s t r ative standpoint,
we've got to look for ways to be
flexible and be supportive of
them to pursue their master's
degree. And in fact, we have a
couple of agents now that are,
um, moving on and and would like
to pursue their PhD and
hopefully be a, a, a specialist
for extension and I certainly
want to make sure our
administrative team is very
supportive of that. You know,
it, it's hard to hire good
folks, but my gosh, when we get
good folks, we got to make sure
we retain them, and I think this
is a pathway to do that.
Thank you, thank you very much
and and Mr. Chair, if I may just
ask two quick questions. I, I
would like to ask Doctor, uh,
let me see Doctor Lilly White.
So we on page 8 of the
presentation that you had. We
talked, you talked about
afrotoxins and you showed this
picture of corn and it had these
black I uh I guess coloring
inside. So my question is this,
we have purchased corn from my
grocery stores. Sometimes when
you boil it, it starts turning.
Black. Does that mean it has
afrotoxins in it.
Mr. Chair and, and
Representative, I, I'll just
preface my comments here. I'm an
economist,
so.
Uh, don't, don't, uh,
Take this with a grain of salt,
I guess. I do not believe that
is afetoxin, primarily it's
ingrained corn, so, um, not, not
the corn that we eat, it could
be in the corn that we eat, but
it primarily ingrained corn that
we're looking at and that that
was the picture you're seeing is
Grain Corp.
Um
It's, it's widespread. It's when
it gets too, too high that we
have problems and it's very much
tested by FDA and other
agencies.
Thank you. And I just want to
make sure we weren't eating it.
And then just one final comment.
I do really want to thank you
for the way in which you're
using manufactured homes. I mean
that is a big industry within
our state. We have a whole
department in regulation and
licensing focused on that. So,
uh, the, the more that you're
using that, the more it helps
the economy in other ways that
you may not even realize. Thank
you, Mr. Chair and thank you
very much. Thank you,
Representative, and next we have
Representative Chatfield.
Good morning. Glad to come here
and see a couple of my favorite
folks, uh, as everybody was
talking, I was, uh, about the
things that you do. I was
thinking about a lot of the
things that you don't, that many
people don't know about that you
do do. So one of the first times
that I worked with Doctor Bore
was that wildlife camp up in the
Vis Caldera, and we cooked for
wildlife camp, and that's one of
the few places where high school
kids get to go.
lighting
and, uh, so they would uh learn
about wildlife all during the
day and at night, they would go
out in the spotlight and
identify what they saw out there
and, and I know, I think it was
during Rachca Wildlife camp. We
were there and they were waiting
to go spotlighting and they were
on their phones and they were
talking and, and, uh, my wife
just helped nudge me and we
looked behind us and there was a
big old black bear walk right
past everybody and nobody saw
it, so those kids.
they're learning how to, to open
their eyes and look at the world
around them and understand that
world and, and it's a great
experience.
And then after that,
We cooked for 8 years for ranch
camp. And at Rach Kemp, they
divide the bias Caldera and
ranches.
In each, the kids, they divide
up into teams and each team, uh,
draws a, a paper for their
ranch.
And they decide how they could
make a living on that ranch. You
know, some of them might have
got a trout stream, and they
could supplement their cattle
grazing with fishing. Another
one maybe got over there in the
timber a little bit and they
could, uh, you know, thin the
forest, reduce fire liability,
and they could sell some timber,
some, some lumber or something.
So they do, they work on that
for about a week, I think, and
then there are judges come in
from outside that have never
I don't know anything about it.
They give their presentation.
And uh they give an award to the
group of kids that, so these are
high school kids that are being
taught by doctorate-level
college professors, and they're
very carefully chosen from, from
a lot of
You know
Pretty superstar high school,
uh, applicants, and so that's uh
something that you all do to
educate our kids. So, uh,
whenever I was very honored and
proud on Tuesday to be able to
show this group pictures of
The Canadian River, riparian
restoration project, project.
And I will tell you that when we
started that project, there was
like opposition. Oh, you can't
go in there and uh so there was
a, a lot of pressure to show,
show results of what we were
doing, and I said in meeting
after meeting, uh, at the
governor's interagency Task
Force, and these people from
other projects would come in and
I'm doctor so and so and this is
what I found.
And they would just chew them
up.
rattle them up and throw them
out the window. And I thought,
man, this is kind of rough. And
I thought, who will I get to
monitor my project, and I
thought, hm, maybe the people
that passed out them doctorates,
so, so talk to these guys, got
the range of improvement task
force, uh, to come and, and, uh,
Monitor the project, Doctor Bore
was
Got a head that up, uh, so,
I learned a lot over 20 years
working with people, doctorate
level people. We had a professor
that his challenge was to show
him anything, any plant, native
plant that he could not
identify. So we learned a lot
and there was, we were always
testing them out a little bit.
Uh, so that's some of the things
that, that these guys do, we, we
got into when we begin to
monitor the monitor the project.
We thought, well, we've got all
these doctorate-level people
here with, they're monitoring
and, you know, when they begin
to monitor what we were doing, I
changed my management pro
practices because I thought,
man, this, we need to move this
way or that way. So we went to
the schools and we built, we got
the, the high school kids and we
built.
Monitoring kits, so each child
had a
Hoop to throw, uh, these guys
taught them how to clip forage,
dry forage in a little paper
bag, weigh it, identify plants,
so, uh, we put on a monitoring
workshop for each of the high
schools in the, along the
Canadian River where we were
monitoring. So that's some of
the things that uh that I've
done with Doctor Born and and
his group, uh, Mr. Lily White,
uh, uh, came in to the range.
I mean, to the, uh, uh, ag
science centers, uh, how long,
how long you've been there now?
One year. So I've enjoyed
working with him. We, we, we had
some things we needed to do up
at, at Clayton. We had a, a feed
meal that, uh, was just, uh,
needed some help and I think
this group for putting up some
funding to fix that feed bill,
get it up and running. Uh, we
put in a new meats lab down at
down at New Mexico State, there
was the question asked, who are
we going to put into these, all
of these processing plants.
that we're trying to, you know,
in state beef is, you guys have
heard the, heard my, my spiel,
right? Who are we gonna put in
there? We have a new meats lab
to train those kids at New
Mexico State University. I hope
that we can get a little tour of
that whenever we're gonna meet
down there at Fris, right? Be
wonderful to be able to go and
tour that lab and, and see, see
some of the results, see some of
the kids are training in it. And
uh so that, that you guys are
training the kids to meet the
needs.
needs of the, of the future. Uh,
What is your need? This is for
Doctor Lilly White, uh, in
Clayton in the meats lab, uh,
something that I don't know
about.
Uh, to can carry, we're, we're,
we're working on a shop, the
shop in Tucum Carry was so small
that the modern equipment
wouldn't even go in it. Uh, it
was made back whenever it was
little stuff. And now, now farm
equipment's big stuff, and they
couldn't even, their machinery
wouldn't even go in an old shop
that was almost falling down. I
think they're beginning to
rebuild that.
How can we help you?
Chair and representative, first
of all, thank you for your
support in the past, um, and,
and many of you on this
committee and in the
legislature, um,
In terms of immediate needs, we
had a water tank go out, I think
I mentioned that to you a couple
of weeks ago, um, we've replaced
that with a temporary tank and
we're working on the process now
of uh looking at ways to do that
efficiently and effectively.
For better or worse, I think of
everything in dollars and cents
and and trying to do it
efficiently and effectively. Um,
I, I feel that's a important
responsibility. So we're looking
at the potential of drilling a
new well there, um, so we have a
separate water system for the,
the.
The office and the and the
homestead there and then one for
the livestock. So we have some
redundancy and it will be
cheaper than putting in a large
tank like we had.
Um, so that's one that we're
working on and, and we're, we're
working to get through that, um,
using existing funds. Um, I'm
happy to say at Tupan Carri,
we've started on the shop.
Uh, rebuilt, so that's going
forward. Um, I'm very
appreciative of in, in the terms
of the, the needs that we have,
we restructured prior to my time
restructured the Aggie
experimentation, so we have a
director of, of land and
resources who helps make sure
that we're staying on top of
this. And then we have a
director of research who helps
me on the research side, so.
We're making progress. The
capital improvements that will
be coming through the
university, um,
Ask, um, will help us to
continue that.
Thank you. Um, I would like to
know what the cost is in
Clayton.
Uh, to, to finish that up.
And, uh, one other thing that I,
that I didn't mention just a
minute ago. These guys in Tucum
carry, they have a system that
whenever the, when we do a bull
test here, it's one of the,
what's the biggest that I know
of. It's very successful, but
there's a system that when that
bull calf comes in to eat, it
weighs how much food that it
identifies the animal and weighs
how much food he eats. When he
comes in,
and gets a drink, it identifies
the animal in weighs how much
water.
Uh, he drinks. Then they, they
figure out how much weight he
gained, so you're looking at
feed efficiency, which is
everything in the ranching
world. You need, you need
genetics that, that give you
efficiency, uh, so many pounds
of, of feed for so many pounds
of gain. And uh this is the top
of the line, uh, I see Doctor
Leonard Lorio, the superstar of
this place, and uh and uh this
guy cranks out more.
technical papers in the, they
probably have a lot, a lot of,
it would take 2 or 3 professors
to keep up with, with his
writing skills. I promise you on
alfalfa on everything and, and,
uh, he is, he is good at that.
Thank you for coming today. Um,
So
Yes, I, I would appreciate it
just know how, uh give me some
dollars so I, I can tell these
people what we need to do to get
water up there.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
the initial estimates we had
were of the upward of $400,000
but with the, the will that
we're talking about and we're in
the process of looking at that,
we can cut that cost down
significantly, but I'll, I'll
get that information we're
actually working on it right
now.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much,
Representative Chatfield. We
have uh, Representative Lenty
then Senator Woods.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good
morning, gentlemen. Thank you
for the presentation this
morning, uh, my question really
is for uh doctor uh Lily White,
but before I get there, and
it's, it's in regards to the
virtual fence whoever presented
on that before I get there, I
wanna, uh, just thank you all
for the extension agency offices
that you have throughout the
state, um, I, I, I come from the
middle part, Middle Rio Grande
Valley, and where we produce,
um, alfalfa.
And uh I am a member of the
Sandia Pueblo, and I know that
there are many pueblos dotted
throughout the uh middle valley
there in New Mexico and for many
of them, they rely on these
extension agents to come out to
the pueblos to look at their
soil to test their soil, to look
at the crops to figure out
what's going on with perhaps
pest infestation or whatever
might be going on and and I say
this because my father is 80
years old and it reminds me, um,
That that he learned how to farm
from his father and his
grandfather and the line goes on
centuries old practices were
even today I'm farming land
that, uh, my great great great
great great grandfather and
grandmother probably farmed, uh,
back in before um people came uh
to the southwest part of the,
of, of the, of the world and so,
uh, it reminds me of, of when I
have questions in regards to.
pest infestation or or soil or
whatever it might be. I'll, I'll
ask my dad because he's, he's 80
years old and he, he's learned
from, from the best and uh he
always asks me, did you call the
extension agent? And I never do.
I, I never do. And he always
calls me, he's like, well, you
don't know everything. You need
to call the extension agent
cause they'll tell you what's
going on and, and I just got to
give you guys a shout out
because you guys always have,
uh, the, the helpful uh manner
in regards to coming out to the
pueblo or to wherever to help us
figure out what's what's the
best practice in moving.
using science-based uh plans and
so we, we can always appreciate
that, but as we move forward,
uh, into, I guess the 21st
century, the, the virtual fence,
uh, in regards to the virtual
fence, is that to
Is that to just help locate your
cattle? Are you talking about
creating a, a geo fence and then
are you using a shock collar to
keep those cows in? What's
what's going on?
Mr. Chair and Representative, it
is uh it is a geo fence. You can
move the cattle and that's part
of the experiments they're doing
now is, it's, it's like you have
a fence for dogs and that was
popular a few years back, where
they have a caller and they'll
hear a tone as they get closer
to the virtual fence, and they
learned very quickly, um, cows
are specifically bulls are a
little bit more troublesome, um,
as they are in lots of different
ways.
But,
but, uh, you can actually learn,
they'll they'll learn the system
and you can move them from
pasture to pasture. I think the
other interesting thing is you
can move them, you can keep them
out of sensitive areas. So if
you have a, a riparian area that
you need to keep them out of,
you can set up the fence to do
that. Um, so it's, it's that in
addition to what Doctor Isami is
doing in terms of monitoring
their behavior so you can see
them. He, he has on his tablet,
uh, and a producer can have that
where he can see each individual
cow where they're moving.
Um, he can tell, for example,
when one is getting ready to
calf because they're, they're
travel behaviors change.
And so they know that maybe I
need to get out there and check
on this particular cow. She
hasn't moved very much the last
day or two, so it's very
exciting, um, and I will say
he's working on potentially some
patentable
um technology there so that we
can make it available more
broadly.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So is
that technology, uh, something
that, that you invented there at
the college or something that
that was already invented in
your perfecting it.
Mr. Chair Representative, I
believe it was already out
there. There are some companies
that have it, uh, we're working
on, on improving some of the
structure and then the
monitoring side of it, um, but I
believe that the actual systems
are available, um.
Got it. And so Mr. Chairman, and
to follow up then because I,
I've seen ads for this type of
of um virtual fence for cattle,
um, but in regards to how maybe
you're looking for maybe
participants to help.
You know, define, uh, or, or
perfect what you're trying to do
there at the college. I mean,
uh, I'd love to follow up with
you so that maybe we can get
some producers out here and uh
you, you can help us out as
well.
Mr. Chair, Representative,
absolutely to business with you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you very much,
Representative Lente. Senator
Woods, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I know we're running real long
on time here. This is important.
This is great. The, uh
I know that there's a
A heat rule that's coming before
the EIB.
And I know that, you know, it's
a scientific group there that
they're supposed to
Look at the science on this and
and
I, I, I would like
I would like for you to
Do some kind of research
yourself.
And see the cost benefits.
Of that
Because
It's going to have a major
effect on agriculture.
All outside workers are talking
about uh you know, after it gets
so warm that it's supposed to
alternate in and out of work
and, and different things and
We don't have a whole lot of uh
Field labor
Taking today, a lot of it's
mechanical, but still we have
that.
down in, in dimming and
In Las Cruces there's still some
men picked vegetables.
And
I fear that we're going to run
all of that out of country.
I fear that that these rules are
going to take
Those crops out of the United
States or out of New Mexico at
least where this rule is in
place.
And so I would like for you to
do two things I would like for
you to look in at the cost
efficiency of that, uh, uh, uh.
Benefit, the health benefits
versus the cost.
And the other thing, if this
rule does come into place, I
would like for you to be sure
and disseminate.
What that rule is to our
agriculture producers.
Because I worry immensely about
the liabilities that's going to
happen.
through lawsuits with this rule.
Uh
These people around this table
is already tired of me talking
about it because I brought it up
2 or 3 times already.
But
That's going to affect
agriculture, and we need to uh
get the information out to
producers if it comes into
effect.
And it would be nice to have uh
some kind of study done on it to
know uh exactly what it's going
to cost of production in New
Mexico. Uh, if we're strictly
adhered to the rule.
Mr. Chair and Senator, I'll,
I'll, if you're willing, I'll
visit with you after and get
some details and
work with you.
And, and, and the other thing,
um,
The meat lab.
On campus.
Have we started that facility
up, have we started
Uh, processing any animals in
that meat lab yet. I know that
we were looking for an operator
for that.
Who's looking for a contractor
to come in there at one time.
Are we making any progress on
that front.
So if I may, Mr. Chair and
Senator, um, we have 3 buildings
and the one that you're talking
about is the meat processing.
One of the problems with the
meat processing is that when it
was built, a couple of parts of
that and we are talking
specifically about the carcass
moving the mechanical part was
installed the wrong way. The
other problem was that there was
uh some there, there still is
some challenge with regards to
the temperature.
And uh so rather than starting
it up and just, you know,
figuring we want to be safe in
terms of what we do. So I just
in fact thinking that this was
going to be a question I did ask
back to our facilities, what is
the timeline, uh, I would, you
know, we are, we are one of the
problems is when it was built,
we did not have someone who was
an expert in how to set these
things up, so what we're trying
to do now is obviously recover
on that part, but I've been told
I'm, my hope
is that by the time this group
comes to Las Cruces in August,
we will be able to do a tour of
it that actually shows the
operations as well.
And the other question is, uh,
Mr. Chair, is about the feed
meal there in Las Cruces, or we
have we got it in functioning
order so that we can start.
producing some kind of feed and,
and use that in our
Our research or in our education
part and animal science to teach
these kids.
Things that the feed meal.
Mr. Chair and Senator, my
understanding is that it is
working. We have some additional
equipment needs to be installed.
And we're working on getting
that installed, but it is, it is
functioning now. We are, we are
producing feed, but there's some
additional modern, modern, more
modern equipment. It's a modern
building anyway, but we, we've
got some more um equipment that
needs to be installed and we're
working on that right now.
OK.
One of my last questions, Mr.
Chair.
is that we, we're doing a lot of
research down in southern New
Mexico on the top of cattle
they're running down there. The,
the ones that have the more ear
cattle they call them, and they,
they put them down there because
of the heat factor down there.
And
You know, for years when we've
tried to sell those re across
cattle, uh, you take those into
the sale barn and they
havematically started
discounting cattle. The same
with the longhorn cattle, just a
little color on that hide and
they went to discount and all
together. And I know that uh one
of our local producers here in
And uh
Qua County
Of the said was
They're using that Longhorn
cross.
Animal and their grass feeding
those animals, and they're
having a lot of success keeping
those animals on grass for a
longer period of time and
getting the, the tenderness that
That we
The
consumer wants.
And so
I'm assuming.
The cattle we got down south in
your research, uh,
Ranchers down there, the college
ranch, I guess is where they're
at. Uh,
Or the hornada, I don't know
which which one it is, uh.
We are doing that research to
see about the tenderness in the
grass fed on that end also.
Mr. Chairman and Senator, we do
have Brahma cattle, um, and
crosses in the college ranch,
um, we pulled those off for now
because of the drought and, and
concerns there, but we also have
the Corona ranch where we're
seeing where we're using more
kind of the traditional cattle
that maybe you're thinking of
Angus and Angus crosses, and
then also at Clayton with the
feedlot, you're seeing some of
those. That's one of the
importances having those science
centers located throughout the
state so that we can look at
specific needs of that part of
the state because we're so very
from the climatic climate uh
situation and environment
situation. Um, we're very happy
with our meat science program
is, is coming online. We have
the new meat facilities. We have
a new uh meat scientist uh on
campus, a new meat manager for
the lab that will allow us to do
some of the research that you're
talking about. So we've done it
in the past, but the facilities
there, the old meat science
facility was so wore out that
we've, you know, we're
demolishing that and and have
the new facilities.
So looking forward to some
really productive work there
going forward.
Well, I was, I was once
appointed to the Cattlemen's
Beef Board.
And I, one of the things that I
remember on that time I was
there.
was the two factors that the
consumer wanted more than
anything was tenderness and
taste.
That was the two main factors.
Now you can influence taste with
seasoning.
The tenderness you can
mechanically tenderize, but if
you want a nice fruity steak,
you want it just to be
tender every time. And, and one
of the problems of consumer was
having was they were afraid to
bite steak at a very pricey
steak because they didn't know
whether they, that was a tender
steak or not. So they was, they
was literallyluctance from
backyard barbecues, uh, uh,
buying, buying.
mistake because they wasn't sure
they're going to buy value and,
and tenderness. And so I always
found that kind of interesting.
And I know there's been a world
of research done in that.
And there's actually, they tried
to figure out if there was a
tenderness gene.
In the cattle and try to, to
read for that tenderness gene.
So there's a huge amount of
research has been done already.
And the last thing I'd like to
do, to say
Yes, Mr. Chair.
Leonard Lenhart is, is going to
retire very soon.
And he's sitting back here let
her stand up.
Now he has been a long time
researcher
here in
in Texas.
And he's been a, a, a lifetime
nearly here. And
As, as Jack was saying,
He turns out a lot of research
papers and he's personally done
a lot of research that I've
asked for, and, and you, we've
got this uh uh
niche brewing industry in the
state of New Mexico.
And I've been thinking, you
know, how can, how can the
farmer get in on that? How can
he raise the barley and what
kind of barley would be suitable
for this area and, and
And that kind of stuff and
that's what Leonard, he, he did
some research on that.
We also right over here in, in
Sent home
We have got a blue corn.
A facility that handles nearly
all the blue corn.
In the state of New Mexico.
And they, there's some niche
distillers.
They make their alcohol with
that blue cord.
And the blue corn pancakes are
the very best pancakes you can
get, so
now we know.
That's right.
They're saying these guys do a
lot of good stuff for us. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you very
much, Senator Woods, and thank
you and congratulations on it.
No, we're, we're still going. I
just a congratulations on the
career and about to retire. Uh,
we're gonna go next to Vice
Chair Munoz and then Senator
Padilla, and we'll conclude with
Representative Vedetta. I know.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good to
see you, Mr. President. Uh, a
few questions. I know the LFC,
you mentioned in your
presentation, they had 18
recommendations over an 8-year
period, you got 8 of them done.
You still have 10.
Left. Why is it taking so long
and what are the balance of
those?
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator, can
you, I, I didn't quite catch the
last of your question. I
apologize. You, you, in the
beginning of the presentation,
you said that LFC sent you,
you're gonna have to turn off
your mic, since you, uh, I think
18 recommendations in 2018.
You completed 8 of the 18.
Recommendations over the
eight-year period, and I don't
know what the total 18
recommendations were and why is
it taking so long to get the
other 10 recommendations done. I
mean, are they not possible or
they don't fit, and there could
be lots of reasons. I just wanna
know why.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, thank you
for the question. I highlighted,
I, for my presentation, I just
highlighted 10 of them, um,
we've actually had, from my
perspective, have achieved
success on all of the
recommendations that were made
in that, but due to time
constraint, I didn't, I, I
didn't go through every
recommendation. We could
certainly follow up with you,
that's good. I, I just, if you
complete and you feel that you
complete and I, I'm good with
that. I just wanted to know
because 18 recommendations over
an 8-year period and you only
got 8 of them done, it seems to
be
strenuous or not completing your
projects. The other thing is,
you know, um, you can be a giant
and then let me quote Senator
Rodriguez, you can be a jack of
all trades and good at none,
and, you know, your cooperative
extension agencies' mission is
just so wide now that you talked
everything from economic
development to mental health,
to, to everything.
I, I don't know how efficient
you can be in that. I mean,
The extension agents can only
handle so much. They can only do
so much when they're dealing
with, you know, 10 kids at a
time in a class or CPR. And so,
I mean, I, I, you can't do
economic development and do
behavioral health. Those are
To worlds of difference and,
and, and I just don't know how
you're gonna expect your
cooperative extension agents to
complete those things. I mean,
your, your mission oriented
extension service group, right?
And I don't know what your
mission statement says, but your
mission statement that you
stated today, just start at the
beginning of a of the alphabet
and where somewhere around S or
Z.
And, and you can't do that. I
just don't see success when you
have, you know,
Everything in the barrel and
nothing gets done, right? I know
that kids are different
nowadays. I, I completely agree
we need to do a lot of different
stuff, but I, I don't know if
that's your mission. I, I, I, do
you know what your mission is in
the beginning and what it
continues to be today.
Yes, Mr. Chairman, Senator, our
mission is, is to provide
research-based knowledge and
programs to improve the lives of
New Mexicans and the communities
that we serve. And so I think
your point is, is really well
taken. It, it's really finding
that balance for what are the
community needs which vary
across the state as, as, as you
well know, um, and so I'm not
suggesting that in every
community, we can do all of the
different diversity of programs,
uh, but it's, we've got to be in
tune with our.
on the advisory boards and
getting input on what does, what
does the community rank as the
top priorities for extension in
partnership with the community,
try to, try to resolve and and
deal with um agriculture and
natural resources and 4H youth
education are always gonna be,
you know, our focus and
mainstay, um, but I was just
bringing up the, the mental
health, uh, as an example of
where, you know, after COVID, we
had a couple of counties that
were, were saying, hey, we need
more support in this particular.
area and so really to to build
capacity in that, it's gonna be
really difficult, uh, from a
county agent standpoint, like
you said, they've got to cover
everything from master gardeners
for each education, um, but we
can build and we, we tried to
build capacity at the specialist
level to help support those
counties when there's, when
there's opportunity for
community rural development or
mental health needs, um, but
again, you know, our mainstay is
certainly agricultural and
natural resources, but even
those areas are evolving pretty.
Quickly with technology, etc.
so, you know, we're gonna have
to continue to make sure for us
to be relevant, we've got to be
addressing the issues that are
important at the community
level. And uh I think we're
seeing a diversity of, of
challenges that communities are
facing, so that's, you know, put
us in a position that happened
to diversify our specialists,
but also how do we build new
partnerships to leverage with
other folks that have expertise
in some of those areas. Mr.
Chair, Senator Munoz, I think
what you're pointing out is
precisely the problem that I
was.
Highlighting at the beginning of
working as a system, so, uh, as
I said when I first started my
tours and met with extension
officers. I asked them, you
know, what is happening, what's
going on. A lot of it was
disengaged from what was
happening on the main campus. So
from the perspective that I have
on all of this, it's integrating
the, the services that we want
our extension officers to
provide with what is happening
also on the main campus, so that
in fact, to a certain degree,
they become a funnel.
For all the information that
needs to sort of, it needs to
flow back and forth. So when
they have a need, they bring it
back. We figure out where the
support and the expertises and
we can send it back. So that's
part of what I think we need,
we're working towards.
Yeah, I, you just got to link
them to whatever program you
have available and not try to
service them, right? I, I don't
know.
That's gonna be up to you guys,
but I just.
Um
Doctor Lilia White. You
mentioned, uh, uh, uh, the crop
testing stuff, and you said it
was gonna go to a market. I
can't remember the name of it, I
probably couldn't see it if he
did. I work test and if it had
mold or something in the corn
and, and it separated. Could you
tell me that name again, please.
It's Mr. Chair and Senator
Aflatoxin. It's, it's a fungus.
Mold, yeah, yeah, and so was
that technology created MSU by
an MSU student who was at
technology.
You give me a little more
background.
Yeah, that technology Doctor Jen
Randall and, and the professor
in biochemistry developed that
technology. I've seen the, the
prototype of it. Um, it has been
patented today and and again,
I'm an economist, so I
apologize. I'm, I have a hard
time saying the word too, but um
it using chemical analysis, it
can do it in real time
continuously and so are we
giving that person the
opportunity and the technology
once they already have a patent,
right, to go to market with
that, are we?
Are we leading
That pattern, which I don't know
if the school owns, I think.
I'm trying to think what Adrian
told me, you know, you create
these patterns and you create
these processes to detect this
stuff at the universities, then
the university, they get a
patent for it, and then is a
university now gonna go into
that market and derive income
from that, which they should. I
don't see a problem with that.
Or is a professor that developed
that on, on the patent and the
technology, and now it can take
it to the market and, and
because these are the things
that need to happen in
universities. You develop
something that's gonna test for
something, you know what, how
it's gonna work. It's patented.
Now we needed to get to market.
How do we take that step from
that patent to get it to the
market, and I don't know who's
going to own it. Anybody can own
it, just say the university owns
it, and I don't just say that.
And the university can now take
that to the market and do we
have, I think in the uh
one of the funds we have for IRN
for technology to test the test
fund, take that to the.
Teflon and then fund that to get
it out into the open market and
to and to get it is that
technology being developed that
way or we developing that
pattern that way.
Mr. Chair and, and Senator, I,
it can vary, I think the
university owns the patent is my
understanding, and, and there is
some incentives for the faculty
members. We want them to
incentivize them to do this
work. Let me give you a
different example that may
illustrate it, we recently had a
professor in our plant
environmental science who
patented a new 3 new varieties
of alfalfa that are drought
tolerant developed for our
region and parts of Arizona and,
and.
Colorado and California. And so
he patented it. We've, we had a
an offering and we had a private
industry come in and buy that
patent, buy the seeds, the
rights to the seeds, they are
now producing the seeds will be
available to producers in the
state next year, uh, according
to our partners in, in private
industry, um, the funding will
come through the university
through uh Arrowhead Center
helps us with the IP. We'll come
through the center, the
university keeps um to continue
the
research that we're doing to, to
help that. It does go to the
department and to the faculty at
some level. So they're
incentivized to to do this work
and, and from my perspective,
that's an important thing that
we want to do is get this
information. It doesn't do us
any good if we're just writing
papers and never sharing it with
People on the ground, and
that's, and that's what we're
trying to do.
No, I get that. I appreciate
that. That's what we want to
see, right? In in the TEF fund
should give you the money to
develop that or to market that
so you can go to that first
round of a deal and then sell it
to the deal and so that's,
that's why I'm asking that
question on, on the, the corn
product for the mold, um.
That's what
But that's what we shouldn't and
so, uh, thank you, thank you for
your time today. I appreciate
it. Thank you. Thank you very
much. Uh, we have Senator
Padilla and then.
Oh, OK, Verrera.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
gentlemen, for your great
presentation and um I just wanna
do a shout out to Ria Riba, uh,
to Donald Martinez and his team
in the alcalde station, um, they
really are embedded in our
community, you should know that
and uh and I just want to tell
you it's a new legislator, my
background wasn't an egg and it
wasn't in water, and you know
that's about.
30 million in our district alone
in District 41 and um and that's
just the aboveground economy
that I'm talking about, OK, I,
um, um, and so when I first
entered office, he called me up
and, you know, I had known him,
but, you know, I, I'm not an egg
person and, and, um, he called
me up and he said, Susan, I want
you to meet with some people. I,
I think you need to know some
stuff about what's going on with
agriculture and water and I
just, and so he got members of
The Livestock Board together, a
lot of, yeah, I think there are
12 people at this meeting and we
spent kind of a whole afternoon
together. I had not yet entered
the office, and he was just kind
of teaching me about the world
of Ag and Ria Riva County and
what it meant and I, I had never
heard of a livestock board. I've
been, I really wasn't involved
in that community at all. It was
really foundation background and
education. That's where it was
my expertise when I came. So I
just want you to know, I, I'm
I don't think anybody told him
to do this. Maybe they did, but
I think he just saw a need for
to educate me about kind of what
agriculture means to not only in
the North, certainly our
district, but the state as a
whole. And um and I think that's
what extension agents do, you
should know he's on my phone. I
call him regularly when I'm in
session and I don't understand
the bill. I'll call him up and
say, hey, read this and tell me
what you think.
Uh, I want to know what the
problems are and what you think
and how is this gonna affect my
county, so I just, I just want
you to know, um, Donald and his
team are a big part of, of my,
you know, back pocket team when
it comes to issues facing the
legislature and, and I, again,
that's probably not on his uh on
his uh job description, uh, but,
but he makes things happen. Uh,
I had a cottonwood tree, a huge,
beautiful.
But
I don't know, 100 ft cottonwood
tree just fall over one day in
my yard. I live on a river and
it was a perfectly healthy tree
and I called him up and I said,
our cottonwood trees just
falling, we're, you know, we're
in a drought, he said, yeah, I
said, will you?
Can you tell me, is this tree
disease because it looked
perfectly healthy. He came out
within the week, and he brought
an arborist with them, uh, not
on the team, but just a local
arborists. They came out and
they said it's drought.
Cottonwood roots for those of
you who don't know that they
don't go deep, they spread out
and because of the drought and
because there was no water, it
just fell over what looked like
a perfectly beautiful, healthy.
100 ft tree and um since I have
a lot of cottonwood trees on, on
my, on my uh on my little acre
of land, I, I, I was really
worried that, you know, we were
gonna have something happening,
so I just want to compliment
kind of the role that these
extension agents play in a
community and you know, the same
is here. It's true here, but
it's also true throughout the
state, I think, and I, I just
want to compliment you on that
and um and I guess I also
to say kudos for the study on
pecans, you know, water rules
were made in 1938, and all the
surface water in Rio Riba. I, I,
I had the, I had the Rio Grande
and the charm in my district,
all that surface water goes to
the south.
And uh when I have wells drying
up in uh in the northern part of
the state and I hear pecan trees
using 6 acres of water feed. I
get, I get a little perturbed. I
get that it's, I get that it's a
big product and it costs a lot
of water to grow pecans, but,
uh, you know, when we look at
the state as a whole, uh, if
you're looking at ways to help
that, um,
Industry
Save water, it's very important
to the whole state as a whole,
and I just wanna remind
everybody of that and then I
guess I, a lot of my questions
have been asked by um
Senator Woods and others and uh
I, I guess my last question is
for President Fermi, and I'm
interested to know how is this
president's um
Attack. I'm just gonna say it
that way on higher ed affecting
uh your college, and I, I hope
he's, they're not going to the
Langren commu uh colleges, but
I, I think some of these cuts
are devastating for everybody,
and I'd just like for you to
comment on that.
Yeah, thank you, uh, Chair, Mr.
Chair, and, uh, uh,
representative Herrera, um, we
have seen an impact. I mean, I
could, I could actually just uh
tell you off, I mean, we have
had a reduction of $25 million
in federal grants at this point
at the university, probably not
as big as some others, in part
because our um NIH is not as big
as some other, some other
universities. So it certainly
has impacted us.
And we are trying to figure out
how uh at least uh to support
some of the sort of the the the
staff that is on soft money. One
of the things that we've been
able to uh ensure is that at
least for this fiscal year, our
graduate students that are on
these monies as well as the
staff that is on uh IDC within
the colleges are covered, uh,
you know, so in the meantime,
we're trying to figure out other
ways of support.
the operations of the PIs, the,
the, the, the, the researchers
that are doing the research and
the see, in fact, many of their
much of their work kind of
either halted or impeded at this
point. Um, I think the big
challenge is not, I mean, $25
million is significant, um,
we're still on track to to get
to $190 million of research,
which is more than last year's.
So we were still able to do
that. The big challenge, I
think, is not this year is in
the coming years because the
next round of submissions will
be probably affected by the
decision to lower the indirect
cost recovery from some of the
levels where it's now like at
45% in many of our grants to
15%. So, um,
That's where the challenge is
and the challenge that, that I
think we face as a university
is, and I, I'm not clear on
this, but my understanding is
that a lot of research cannot be
on ING money. A lot of it is
actually supported by IDC
indirect cost recovery, so the
majority of our staff is on soft
money. So if we see a reduction
of that of those indirect costs
which support that staff, we
will have a challenge and
making sure that we continue to
have a viable office of
research, uh, we have had this
conversation, uh, with the other
two research universities about
where the impact would be most
felt and the place where it's
most felt is the Office of
Research because of the fact
that the people who are in those
offices are typically the one
that help with the pre pre-award
uh writing, the post award, uh,
distribution of funds and so we
want to ensure that we don't
shrink that.
Because in fact, what we need to
do is make sure that they're
solid because in order to get
the same amount of monies, we
will have to get a lot more
awards. Uh, I mean, if, uh, if
you go from 45% to 15%, you have
to grow the number of awards,
you have to be more successful
in bigger awards. Uh, it also
will require, and this I think
is, is uh exciting to me and
maybe it's exciting to members
of this committee is
to start thinking outside of the
typically, typical funding, um,
you know, or at least the
funding that we have been
working on recently, which, you
know, a lot of the NSF, a lot
of, I mean, we, we, we know
USDA, um, some department of
energy, but actually, it's like
a portfolio, so we need to
figure out which area of the
portfolio will continue to be
supported. I think we're lucky.
We have the PSL which does a lot
of Department of Defense that is
not.
Going to have major cuts, so we
need to figure out how we're
going to get some of our
researchers to think in those
terms of switching some of their
research focus on things that
can actually help the Department
of Defense, which is a lot more
varied than people think. It's
not just, you know, technology
and arms, it's a lot of other,
other fields, so thinking in
those terms can help us and the
other part of it is uh really
partnering with industry. So
starting to think more about the
partnership between public and
private.
Uh, even in, you know, the
example that just was given
right now, how do we create
opportunities and viability for
IP, uh, thinking about how uh
industry can maybe support some
of the research that they want,
and if that is going to help us,
then, you know, get more funds
that, you know, even if, you
know, we always talk about
You know, there with, with the
industry and private interests,
a lot of our researchers feel,
well, you know, I don't know
that I want to go in certain
areas, but I think we need to be
more agile and, and think in
those terms and uh we are in the
process of hiring a new vice
president for research and some
of the candidates have brought
some really interesting ideas.
I'm very excited about the
candidates that we have seen
and and so hopefully, once we
make that hire, that person can
be integrated in a strategy for
how to move the.
forward.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, President, and I did, I, I
was foundation director at
Northern, so I understand, uh,
the impact of a reducing an
indirect cost rate from 45% to
15%. We were a small college and
that would have been a big hit,
a huge hit, so, uh, uh, thanks
for, uh, thinking ahead, uh, as
this committee, one of our
responsibilities to see what
we're gonna do with all these
federal cuts and how we're gonna
try and make things as fair as
we can and even as we can, so,
uh, I
appreciate that answer. Thank
you.
Thank you. Uh, thank you all
very much for being here today.
Uh, we'll look forward to seeing
you again in August, if not
before that. And uh uh
appreciate the committee's
detailed and in-depth questions.
Great. Thank you. Thanks.
OK, uh, we're gonna ask, uh, Ms.
Carswell to come up now and
thank you very much for being
able to switch.
time around, we're gonna be
losing some members I know as
folks have to hit the road, so
feel free to, as folks have to
go out.
Um, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee will be we'll we'll
ask folks to uh let Miss
Carswell dive right in any
conversations.
Should be taken outside.
Great. Go ahead, Mr. Chair,
we'll be presenting from the big
packet that's coming around to
you, mostly from the memo on
top, um, Antonio will start and
then I will, uh, pick up.
After he's done.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Uh, my
name's Antonio Ortega, and I'm a
fiscal analyst for the LFC, uh,
today, Kelly and I will be
providing a brief overview on
the status of capital
appropriations in the state, and
we'll discuss recent progress
that the legislature has made to
improve the capital outlay
system.
Um, if you'll first take a look
at attachment A, the million and
greater report.
Yes.
Yeah, we, we, we, we went over
by about a 30, 45 minutes. So
we're gonna dive right into this
presentation now.
Great. Go ahead. Thank you.
Mr.
Chair,
the million and greater report
provides updates on 717 projects
with appropriations totaling
$4.3 billion.
Uh, I'll briefly describe what
the report shows. It gives a
rating based on the original
fiscal year.
As well as the appropriation
amount, total expenditures and
balances. It describes the
current phase that projects are
in, as well as brief comments on
the status of the projects that
give a little bit more detail.
Uh, the overall figure includes
40 blue rated appropriations
that have been fully expended or
completed, and 228 red rated
appropriations indicating no
activity, significant obstacles
or delays, recent
reauthorization or no reporting.
Mr. Chair, you can also find
some detail on these projects on
page 7 of your memo.
And now, Mr. Chair, members, uh,
if you go through the report,
you'll see that there are
summaries on the status of
tribal infrastructure, colonius,
and water Trust Board projects,
as well as projects administered
by the mortgage Finance
Authority and funded through the
Housing Trust Fund. Housing
Trust Fund balance updates are
new to our report and can be
found on pages 34, lines 590
through 592.
A more detailed summary on the
status of all earmark funds can
be found under attachments B
through E.
I'd also like to mention that
sponsor reports will be going
out uh by the end of this week,
and they're similar to our
million in greater report, but
broken out per member by
district.
And with that, Mr. Chair,
members, if you'll please turn
your attention to page one of
the memo.
Talking big picture at the end
of the 3rd quarter of FY 25,
outstanding balances totaled
approximately $5.4 billion
across more than 4700 active
projects.
I'd like to note that this
estimate does not yet include
2025 projects, nor does it
include 2024 general obligation
bond projects.
The largest amount or the
largest majority of unspent
funds includes $3 billion from
projects authorized by the
legislature.
However
As I mentioned at the beginning
of the presentation, the
legislature has made recent
progress to improve the capital
outlay system as a whole. But
I'll now pass it over to Kelly,
who can discuss more
opportunities to build on that
success during this interim.
Thank you.
Um, Mr. Chair, remember, so if
you'll flip to page 2 of the
memo. Um, I won't go into a lot
of detail here, but, um, on page
2 in the top of page 3, you can
see a summary of uh capital
outlay appropriations from the
most recent session, and I would
say the upshot of this is that
there's another big slug of
money going into capital
projects and infrastructure both
through the capital bill and um
through kind of capital and
infrastruc
structure related special
appropriations in HB 2,
which are summarized in the
second paragraph here and total
over, over roughly $500 million
so there's, you know, there's a
lot more money going in to meet
these needs across the state.
As has been the case the past
several years. Um, another cut a
couple important things to keep
in mind is that within that we
saw a similar trends that we've
seen in the past that present
challenges to these projects
getting done and to in uh to
addressing some of the larger
infrastructure related needs we
have around the state.
So we saw similar levels of um
piecemeal or partial funding
appropriated to local projects,
especially, um, these trends
are, these kind of numbers are
really consistent year to year
where we see somewhere between
40 and 50% of the local projects
in the bill receiving 50% or
less of the um funds that they
requested.
And then if you'll turn to page
3, another kind of very
consistent trend, uh, that we
want to start thinking about how
to address with local projects.
is not only do they often
receive partial funding, um, but
they received relatively small
amounts of funding. Um,
So if you look in chart 3 on
this page, you can see the
number of projects, number of
general fund projects in the
bill broken out by the level of
funding that they received, and
you can see the majority of
those.
776 received $250,000 or less. A
very, very small minority
received over $10 million only 5
projects, uh, only about a dozen
over $5 million.
And even when you go down to a
million dollars and over, we're
only looking at a bit over 100
projects in total funded at that
level.
Table one on page 3, shows you
all of the local projects funded
over $3 million. There's, I
think.
Little more than 25, around 25
of those. And I wanted to kind
of point out a couple important
things here. Um, one is many of
you know and participated in,
uh, this session, a team of
House and Senate members held
back some capacity, um, and used
that to try to complete funding
for projects that either other
legislators or the governor
funded, um, before the bill went
through both chambers, um.
that did allow legislators to
fund some group of projects at a
higher level than normal, and
you can see in this table.
In the far right column here,
um, we noted sponsorship of
these projects. So the takeaway
here is that projects that local
projects that receive
multi-million dollar
appropriations are almost
exclusively those sponsored by
the governor. Sometimes with
participation by legislators as
well. Um, although usually at
smaller levels,
Uh, projects that have that HS
notation, uh, means that they
were also sponsored by that
House and Senate group that
added money to projects towards
the end of the process, and
there are only 2 projects on
this list that were not
sponsored either by that group
or by the governor.
So that just kind of sets up uh
one of the challenges that we
have, particularly in using
these funds to address, uh, sort
of bigger local priorities, um,
and I think it kind of poses two
questions that we might want to
think about this interim. One,
how do we identify bigger local
projects that are important, um,
that both provide local benefits
and perhaps that sort of serves
some kind of statewide policy.
priority. And then 2, once we
can identify those projects and
especially um identify those
that are ready. How do we better
use capital outlay to fund or
complete funding for those
projects.
So if you'll turn to page 4,
Um, the rest of the memo,
essentially outlines, um, some
areas of focus that you all have
pre previously identified, um,
and signaled some interest in,
in terms of additional areas
where, um,
We could implement some changes
to improve the success of
projects and address some of
those questions that I just
outlined. So, uh, we wanted to
use this quarterly report to
essentially resurface, um, some
of those ideas for you and kind
of tie them to some specific
interim priorities, uh, and then
start to get direction from the
committee, um, a little bit
earlier this interim, in terms
of, you know, which of these you
would like us to develop more.
Um, you know, whether you would
like to have a group of members
kind of dive into this more
deeply, this interim, etc.
So I will try to run through
some of these, um, pretty
quickly. So starting on page 4,
under the use of the Capital
Development Program Fund. Um, so
for those of you who may not be
familiar with this. Um, uh, last
session, uh, we created
essentially a new trust fund
for uh capital outlay, uh, that
is already spinning off
distributions at, uh, spinoff
the first spun off the first
distribution this.
year of about $24 million and
the statute that created this
fund, um, specifies the uses as
well, uh, these funds are
available for planning and
design.
And for cash financing of
projects of $5 million or less
at this point. So, um, the, this
fund had a couple of goals. Uh,
one was to diversify revenue
sources for the capital program,
which is largely dependent on
severance tax bonds, um, and,
you know, unlike the general
fund before this bill, we
essentially had no backup plan,
um, in the event of an oil and
gas downturn for our capital
program. And it was also to
continue to try to
lift the capital uh program to a
more cash-based system,
especially for smaller projects,
um, until the last few years
when we've been using a lot of
general fund for capital, you
know that.
That majority of projects in the
capital bill I spoke of that are
$250,000 or less. We were using
debt for even that very small
stuff, um, which is very
atypical among states and not a
best practice.
So that was kind of what this
fund was originally designed
for. Um, it does provide you all
with some additional
opportunities beyond those basic
goals though. One, you now have
a specific mechanism for funding
planning and design, which we
have not had had in the past.
Um, 2, it also provides you with
an opportunity to think about
and maybe start experimenting
with some new ways of
appropriating to local projects
kind of outside of
individual member governor
sponsorship process. So this
year, um, you all appropriated
that first distribution to DFA,
uh, to administer for this year,
a grant program for project
completion for existing capital
projects?
Uh, they're in the process of
developing policies and an
application for that program,
um, and I think it should be
ready to go when the funds
become available at the
beginning of the fiscal year.
So, um, the interim priority
tied to these funds are
essentially just to think about
and identify your preferred
short and long-term uses of
these funds and then incorporate
that into the budget development
process in the fall. So, you
know, a couple of different
options just to give you some
ideas, um, you know, you could
continue appropriating those
funds to an agency like DFA to
administer that kind of grant
program, as well as potentially,
you know,
expanding it to include
something like planning and
design.
Alternatively, uh, you could do
something similar, but through a
committee-based process, um,
possibly with some
recommendations coming from the
executive, you know, lists of
projects for you to consider to
put together as a package that
could then be rolled into the
statewide framework.
Um, the second area of focus is
vetting and prioritization. So
this year you all implemented an
earlier deadline for local
capital outlay requests, uh,
that was intended to give
members and staff more time.
To consider and vet requests,
um, so for next session,
essentially the thing to think
about is, um, essentially, do
you want an even earlier
deadline, uh, especially
considering that we'll be in a
30 day session this year. Um,
and what additional information
associated with requests might
you um and your district staff
find useful, if any, um, there
were, we could also think about
modifying the request.
system in certain ways.
For instance, to better identify
projects that are specifically
seeking planning and design
funding, um, versus construction
funding to kind of separate,
separate out minor repair and
building renewal type requests
with major new construction, um,
you know, we could separate out
certain project types if you are
interested in special funding
packages. There's all sorts of
stuff that we could do. Um, and
you'll see the interim
priorities if you turn to page
5, associated with.
Uh, vetting and prioritization
outlined there.
Um, the third area of focus has
to do with uh reauthorizations
and um whether you want to
consider restricting
reauthorizations. So here you
can see, um, again, a summary of
what kind of went on in the
Rioth bill this year. Um, I will
tell you that the number of
reauth requests was massive this
year, um, a big jump over the
previous years, which themselves
were like a doubling um over
what
came before.
So there's a lot of them out
there, um.
Some of the potential limits,
uh, that you all have discussed
so far include only allowing one
time extension per project and
limiting that time extension to
one year. I think those would
kind of be reasonable limits
that you could put around them.
Um, the governor's vetoes have
also, I think, sort of set that
up, um, the vetoes on the reauth
bill were substantial this year,
um, and focused on vetoing uh
real.
ization s where uh the projects
had showed no spending to date.
For example, um, and also
vetoing projects that had been
reauthorized multiple times.
Um, you know, the last thing I
want to say about
reauthorizations is to kind of
frame why putting these limits
on them could be useful, uh, for
the capital process overall and
help to address some of the
chronic problems that impede the
successor projects and, you
know, essentially, if, if the
reauth process isn't just
open-ended and kind of endless.
It provides a pretty strong
incentive, uh, for projects to
be.
more developed and more ready to
go before they ask you for
funding.
Um, all right. Towards the
bottom of page 5, also wanted to
highlight special grant
programs. Um, this is a strategy
that you all um have already
started pursuing, and that's
essentially kind of making
additional investments or
continued investments in special
grant programs, in particular
areas of focus that have been
successful and in many cases are
more successful than capital
outlay. So that includes the
additional infusions.
You've put um to the water trust
board in recent years, a very
significant levels to address
funding gaps, um, another
example is this year, you put
some additional funding into the
transportation project fund and,
um, then kind of outside of
those programs that address
things like local roads, local
water and wastewater systems
that have dedicated sources of
revenue. You've also created
some new grant programs in, um,
other priority investment areas.
like recreation, quality of life
projects, uh, outdoor trail
infrastructure or things like
that.
So, um, this is a strategy you
could continue to pursue through
special appropriations and the
interim priority I wanted to
highlight is just that, uh, we
have on our work plan to do some
additional reporting on and
analysis on some of those
programs that we haven't looked
at through previous LFC
evaluations. So we've done a lot
of work on um the water
infrastructure finance system
already, um, we've never done
any, any real evaluation of the
transportation project fund.
For example, um, which, you
know, kind of we think it's been
pretty successful for local
roads, um, but it's something
we'd like to dive into more, um,
as well as looking at some of
those new special grant programs
that we haven't looked at yet.
Um, lastly, on local projects, I
wanted to highlight capacity
building, um, you guys have also
the last few years, um, sought
to make additional investments
in capacity building, um, a lack
of capacity at the local level,
staff turnover, um, is one of
the very, very common
impediments to projects being
successful and to funds that you
have appropriated moving, um,
even when they are sufficient.
So, another thing we'd like to
do is, um, do some uh additional
reporting and analysis beyond
what we've done in the past on
how those capacity efforts are
going, um, you know, try to
identify what's being
successful, that we can build
on, um, and again, kind of roll
that into the budget process.
And then lastly here we also
highlighted some issues related
to statewide projects. So those
are state agency and higher
education projects. Since we
talked about that quite a bit
yesterday, um, I won't go into
that again. And I think we can
stand for questions. Excellent.
Thank you very much, uh, and
thank you both. We'll start with
chair, uh, with Lenty, uh,
Senator Munoz, and then Sabaca.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want
to thank Kelly and Antonio for
your continued work and advocacy
in regards to capital outlay,
the team that you have there,
uh, I, I continue to appreciate
and I think I speak for anyone
that's sitting around this table
and the entire legislature in
regards to your ability to uh
find the answers or find, help
us uh to better understand the
process that that you've
inherited, uh, over the past
several years that you've been a
part of this part of this team
in in LFC and when we talk
about the capital outlay
process, um, it's far from
perfect. We all, we all know
that it's, it's represented by
the amount of money that's still
left in the bank from unused
capitality projects, but I wanna
just highlight that in regards
to the steps that are being
taken in regards to modernizing
capital outlay, um, from your
staff and what you've done in
terms of setting up different
mechanisms to ensure that
there's a practice and a
process uh to whether it's uh uh
an earlier deadline, right?
or whether it's passing
legislation to um
have that, uh, capital
development fund that we talked
about earlier, um, or better
vetting, right? I mean there's
processes now that are put into
place, but all these things are,
are a work in progress, and I
think when we talk about things
uh on a larger scale with our,
with our colleagues that are not
in this room today or maybe not
be a part of LFC altogether that
it's, it's one that's difficult
for them to understand that when
you've inherited a process
that's been in practice for
decades, right? And, and
You have a, a community out
there that in some cases this is
the only amount of money they
receive for the entire year for
the projects that they have in
their communities, um.
You want them to spend it and
when they can't spend it, then
they're they're they're
penalized or they're, they're
harped on and when they're when
they're threatened with uh
taking the money away, then it's
tough to do that, right? But I
think there's gonna be a point
in time that we've tried to do
this in a way this past year to
to to provide that tough love
and, and that tough love is hard
to come by it, it really is, um,
but I think in, in terms of
this, we need to be able to
provide uh a a better mechanism
in terms of definitions of how
reauthorization is going to work
from now.
from this point in the future,
is that a reauthorization for
one year, can they only do it
once or twice or how many times
should they be able to do it,
those types of things that
people understand that this is,
this is the rule now, um, not
only just that, but just making
sure that
When we have um
Those communities that that that
come to us and, and, and, and
want the help that we can
provide that assistance, and I
know that we've gotten better in
regards to the office that we
set up in DFA to help them with
the infrastructure funds and
stuff like that, and I think
that's very helpful. But when we
talk about um trying to do
things and, and that's why I
look at your staff as being
really the brains behind this
operation because you can
provide a lot of opportunities
for us to develop ideas and
thinking outside the box so that
we can develop these ideas and
support them here around this
table because.
they will continue to be again.
One of the, in many cases, the
only way that many of our
communities can get that funding
throughout any one year to
provide any type of meaningful
infrastructure for that
community and the practice that
we took this past year in
regards to holding back a little
bit of capacity, um, that, that
didn't come easy, that did not
come easy. I mean those of us
that sat around that table with
the governor's office knew how
upset they were that we didn't
allow them to have that entire
capacity and it comes back to us
to say, well, you wanna play
that game then.
We showed our hands this year,
so next year they will be extra
ready to make sure that they we
don't provide that anymore there
that that we don't give that
capacity to us anymore, so, uh,
be mindful of that and in
regards to just oil and gas,
right, and, and, and what type
of money we may have as we move
forward. It may be last year may
have been the, the last year
we've had any type of capacity
to have any kind of meaningful
big dollars for capital Alley,
so, um, I think if we can set
parameters and set expectations
up for not only just this this.
This little meeting here but for
all of our colleagues to expect
in terms of what they can expect
as we move forward, that's gonna
be helpful too to um harnessing
those expectations. So thank
you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
Kelly, thank you, Antonio.
Uh, thank you very much and
thank you for your work and
leadership, uh, in the area
next, uh, Cer Munoz.
Thank you, Kelly and Antonio,
thanks for all your hard work.
Good to see you standing today,
Antonio.
Uh
Kelly, in order for us to make
changes, it's not statutory. So
do we need to go in front of
council to make changes, uh,
through the legislative process.
Guide me through that process.
Um, Mr. Chair, I think
Mr. Chair, Mr. Vice Chair, um, I
think it's sort of depends which
changes we're talking about
things like putting limits on
reauthorizations, you know, that
could be done through statute.
It could be done through House
and Senate rules, um, it
could be done through
legislative counsel. That's
something we've
discussed before, um, you know,
it could be done through
policies, uh, that.
Senate Finance and the House Tax
Committee, um, adopt jointly,
uh, so I think there's a number
of different options and, you
know, that is also something
that we need direction from you
all.
Uh, from an earlier the better.
Well, you're about to get it.
So, uh, figure it out because I
mean, I don't know if it's
cleaner for us to go in front of
council and say, we want counsel
to adopt these, these rules for
capital Alley. Then it's a clear
policy, then you, you don't have
two committees saying this is
the way we're going to do it and
nobody knows, and this is the
way I, I think.
They need to know or whoever's
applying for capital out he
needs to know. They know the
process. Now they need to know
the rules.
And I don't know if we need to
do that in council as a whole to
figure it out because it's
statutory change uh could pass.
It could not pass, right? Um,
there's a lot of wiggle room in
there, but we need to figure out
these guidelines that we're
going to put in into rules, I
mean
me him hard and played around
with him a little bit this year
and got a little bit, right, but
then we got capital as early as
we ever got. And then counsel.
didn't do their job. I mean,
2 days before we needed to bill
drafted, they were still messing
around with Rios and everything
else and, and they got it.
2 months earlier than that, 2
months, right? 1 month, month
and a half earlier than they
ever got it before.
And, and then they didn't get it
done.
And in the 30 day,
They can get it done in 2 weeks,
but in a 60 day, it took him
almost.
2.5 months, uh, to get it done
and, and it didn't make sense to
me. So I don't know.
If, if, well, you tell me.
Counsel, I think counsel for me
would be the cleanest way.
And then everybody would know
that councils adopted that and
then, and then council services
would have to abide by that
because they would say one thing
to us and then do the opposite
of what they said they were
going to do. I mean, there were
still Rios and.
And we're still working on Rios
and some capital the day the
bills were drafted if I, is that
right? Remember that?
Um, Mr. Chair, Mr. Vice Chair,
yes, I think that was true. So I
think with things like putting
limits on reauthorizations, if
that's something you all want to
pursue, that would be a good
thing to put through legislative
counsel. Um, as far as, you
know, if you want to formalize
any sort of guidelines for
Local capital appropriations as
well that would again be
something it would be useful to
put through a legislative
council, you know, one of the
problems with, um, bill drafting
that leads to that stuff getting
done late is just that there's a
lot of late requests that come
in. Um, so the extent that you
want to kind of like
Get a handle on that, um, again,
you know, having some sort of
formal policy that went through
legislative council could be
useful. Some of the other things
like the use of the capital
development funds, you know,
special grant programs, um,
capacity building strategies are
things that can kind of go
through the budget process and
go through LFC, um, probably
more informally at this point.
Well, I think we need to
formalize everything. So maybe
Mr. Chairman and Charles, if, if
you could start working on the
draft outline so we get.
Began to maybe adopt this early
in the committee and try to get
counsel to adopt it maybe.
Sooner rather than later.
But and then setting the
timelines for council services
cause they had timelines before
that they were hard, hard
timelines, and there was no hard
timeline this year and it was
just.
Messy
And so I, I'd like to see you,
um, give us guidelines to adopt
those and maybe other people
discuss them, but like we all
think for only one time, right?
For one, you only get one Rioth
in one year, and if not, it goes
away.
I mean, we can give Antonio the
winning lottery ticket and he
can say I'm gonna go buy dance
lessons and if you can't find a
dance instructor, then he's not
going to spend his money.
And that's pretty much what
happening with Cale Alley. I
mean, we're giving them a
winning lottery ticket. They say
they want the project, they
can't find the engineers, they
can't find.
The contractors, they struggle,
their projects come in over and,
and then it never moves, but
I think we need to clarify that
the share in representative
Lindy, I mean, you, you
negotiate with the exact and
then everybody's cutting deals
to get their stuff in and, and
additional deals and so I think
we got to clarify how we're
gonna handle cap well and how
we're gonna hand it really
cleanly. Um, and, and the
guidelines, but we have to get
those done as soon as possible
and try to see if we can get on
board and see if it'll go
through council or if it fails.
If it fails, it fails, it's on
them.
But I think we need to clean it
up and, and so if you could get
me those guidelines and then.
Do that, and then the other
thing is, you know.
I don't even have to look for
the names of the projects. I
just looked at the end of the
page and I can tell which one
mine because they're all red.
And the Navajo Nation is trying
to help themselves, but I don't
know if we'll succeed in in
getting that done.
I'd like you to reach out to
Indian Affairs and see that if
that on some of the tribal
projects, if they could be the
fiduciary agent in saying, OK,
if it can buy us a vehicle, one
of them had a vehicle for 6
years they never bought.
Can you process vehicles, but
maybe not construction stuff,
but.
You know, maybe slight
convention struck stuff fencing,
and can we handle that
contracting through Indian
Affairs. They have, they have
the staff.
They have the ability, they,
they always return money, uh,
and so reach out to them and see
if they can.
Sign a what's agreement the.
Like an IGA IGA between them and
I'll just say like chita chapter
house to buy miniman for 55,000
with their capA instead of them
waiting 5 years to get it
through the Namo nation.
Some of those easier things we
could maybe begin to push.
The other thing is, is we can't
control.
turnover in, in the cities and
counties, right? And in Gallipo
we gave him $8 million for a
water system, which was lead
pipes.
And they couldn't even figure
out how to buy pipe.
I mean, I, I, I just don't know
if we're.
have to make them go through the
process of the water trust board
through NMFA and apply and then
us allocate after they've
approved the projects, but maybe
separating those water projects
completely out of the system.
And maybe keeping this in the
guidelines too and saying your
projects have to now apply
through.
Water trusts board.
And the water trust board
approves them in.
Decides they want to award you
money and you get award of
money, but, but those water
projects are just, I mean, I'm
gonna go through the same thing
with grants and you give them
money and they say, oh yeah, we
can spend it a year and then
they called.
Yesterday and say, oh, I can't
spend this money.
I mean
I don't know how we're gonna get
them. We're not gonna get them
the technical help.
All we can furnish is the funds.
And if they can't realize what
their future is gonna look like
with or without money. That's on
them.
But we gotta, we gotta kind of
force this.
I mean
General Padilla used to be
infamous for giving everybody
$25,000 and, and 5000, 5000, OK.
And, and the, I don't think that
even turned on the sprinkler
that might have bought the hose,
but and and nothing got green,
but I mean, uh,
Setting the limits and putting
that limit at a certain level to
um is gonna have to have to
happen, I mean.
Some nonprofit will want 25,000
for some projects and only want
25,000, right? Senator Rodriguez
was the smartest person in Kappa
Outlay I ever met because if
they wanted 25,000, she'd tell
him, I'll give you 100, or I'll
give you the limit, and then
they'd spend the 25 and then
she'd reauthorize the balance
for something else, and so she
had it figured out. She didn't
let anybody on to then to that
till she retired, but she had
cap LA figured pretty well
figured out. But we're gonna
have to figure out what's the
limits and what's the class.
And if so, the other thing I'd
like for you to do is to
classify stuff between, you
know, water, uh, utilities.
Um
You can do infrastructure, but
maybe uh low grade
infrastructure and and above
grade. So whether it's
construction and, and, and
utilities and then see what
other falls in the other
classification is that vehicles,
is it music instruments, is it?
Other stuff and, and maybe
classify them so we can.
We can take a good look and and
see where.
What we're really spending our
money because I have, I have no
idea you can look through this
thing and read all day and
you'll never be able to split
up. If you can begin to look at
that and get some classification
breakouts, but I think
Um, Mr. Chairman and in Charles,
I think that if we can go to
council with with changes that
we'd like to see that we
Kind of made during the session
and codify those and then begin
to change capital outlay, um.
If we can get more efficient
because the money's gonna
tighten.
And we're all gonna be looking
at this cap outley that didn't
get spent to move it and spend
it somewhere else.
Uh, and they're going to want to
reauthorize it and if you
couldn't get it done the first
time, what makes you think
you're gonna get it done the
second time, so if you could do
that for me.
Chairman, thank you. Thank you
very much. Uh, next, we're gonna
go to uh represent Baca and then
Senator Tobiasa.
He was chairman. Thank you,
Kelly. I will be brief. First of
all, thank you for the reports,
both the detailed report and
also our local reports, uh, that
helps us to as far as
accountability, go back to our
districts, um, my first thing,
Mr. Chairman, is not a question
but a comment. I support the
idea of us looking about the
process for allocations or these
requests that are made for us,
right? Whether you call them
shovel-ready projects,
feasibility completion.
We know that we have to screen
to make sure that these
requests, these local entities
have not only the capacity but
the plan to ensure that success
take place. Many folks that come
out there, they make a request,
they get the money and then they
is is Senator Munoz said they
have.
The, um,
They don't have the capacity to
spend it and get it completed
and then it drags out over 8
years, they come back to us and
they're requesting so much more
money on the request that we've
already allocated, so I do
support that, um.
As far as looking at a process
that would screen these
projects, uh, Mr. Chair, my, my
other thing about it, and this
is more just for you guys to
take a look at his local
requests, especially for large
requests and, uh, Mr. Chairman
Calley, like I looked at my
district and we're looking at a
that bridge in Las Sonos, so $50
million request, but that's on
our capital, they're, they're
saying that they needed to put
that on their capital requests
so that they make them eligible
for federal grants.
We can put everybody's money
together at this table, we
wouldn't come up with $50
million.
They also have, uh, Mr.
Chairman, um, said that
We as local um appropriators
that their as well how, what is
your local legislator given
towards that request. So that
may be part of the problem why
we have these, you know,
$100,000 sitting on a $10
million request. So that may be
something that this body takes a
look at. And then finally, Mr.
Mr. Chairman, and it was
highlighted yesterday and I, I
was going to comment about when
we look at like the design and
planning phase, and then we come
back and we're paying.
Or there's a huge gap in what
was initially
Kind of contracted or agreed
upon and the actual cost when it
came down to the project and so
I do think that, you know, the
word accountability or oversight
needs to be um somewhere in this
equation.
Because as appropriators and as,
as folks are here providing
these funds with good intentions
of helping our citizens, it's
not getting done. And I think
that's when we're talking about
billions of dollars that are
sitting there in a bank or have
been appropriated.
It really, that could be given
to our community members and to
our citizens, so I think those
are things that through this
work process and through this
plan, I would like to see us
kind of address and with that,
Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Thank you very much for Baca.
Next we have Senator Tobiasson,
then Senator Woods.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Kelly, and, um, I agree with
what you're saying, Senator
Munoz, and, and I had an
additional idea with Capital
Outlay from the legislator's
perspective. I loved that live
active spreadsheet that we all
got, and I used it and I mean,
it was complicated, but once I
figured it out, I was like, OK,
this is a really great tool, but
I had the idea of maybe we have
a deadline because so many
legislators did not use it or
did not, maybe they used it, but
they didn't plug in what they
were putting
s and projects. So what if there
was a deadline of, OK, by, by
this date, every legislator,
you're required to put your
money and where you're
allocating it onto that live
spreadsheet and then you give us
an additional maybe 48 hours to
go to the appropriate
legislators and say, hey, um,
Senator Padilla, I know you had
indicated you were gonna put
100,000 towards this project and
that would help complete it, but
it doesn't look like you're
doing it and I've put all this
money in and so that we can talk
and make sure because once I did
all my capital outlay, I ended
up being completely blind. And
there were projects that I did
put money towards that other
people didn't and they had
indicated they would, and it was
just too late. So, I mean, if
I know, but if, if we're gonna
hold the end user, you know, the
awardee, um, accountable to
spend money within a year.
And I say, hey, we're gonna,
we're gonna tow the line and
we're not, we're not gonna
reassess this money. Why don't
we hold the legislature
accountable too. Um, it would
make the process a lot easier
and maybe we could actually get
through funding projects and I
mean, I know my project in my
district is notorious, the North
Domingo Baca Olympic swimming
pool. It's huge actually for the
state, not just the district,
and the can keeps getting kicked
down the road and down the road,
and every year, the pot of money
is shrinking, but the costs are
elevating, and I think if we
held ourselves accountable.
Somehow with that process, it,
it would be more effective. It'd
go hand in hand.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, Senator
Tobiasson. Next, uh, Senator
Woods. Uh, the first thing on
these reo, that, when they gave
me my list of what you gave me
my list. We went in and checked
them. I had my
District staff check them called
the counties.
And or whoever it was.
And I ended up out of those 6
just to have one.
That wasn't done.
And some of them they had
already turned in the, the final
paycheck, everything was done.
So, and I think those came out
of DFA.
That said, you know, these,
these projects aren't complete,
so
There's a, there's a delay in
there somewhere.
And how you cure that delay, I
don't know.
It's, it's a staffing deal.
The other thing
If we're going to fund for plan
and design.
That needs to be put on there.
This is a $50 million project.
We need X amount of money for
plan to decide, and if it
doesn't get that money.
And it automatically rejects.
Because if you can't, if you, if
a legislator is not going to
fund enough for plan and design.
Then the project needs to be
kicked out altogether.
We was getting some of those
projects was funded at 3%.
Uh, 3% might be planning and
design on some project.
But I doubt it.
Legislators
Our gifts
Spreading that money out like
peanut butter.
Trying to cover a whole lot of
projects.
And that's not accomplished in
anything. We've got to get
enough money, and I don't know
it's got to be designated plan
and design and put enough, put
that figure in there, what it
would take to do that.
And if it's not funded through,
I don't care how many
legislators, and I thought
That if we could get the
software available.
Have it interactive and when
that project, when you typed in
that project number.
As legislators are feeding that
money into that.
You will see what the, what the
number is for that project.
Yeah. And once that green light
comes on, then that's a, that's
a positive project that will be
funded.
Anything below that.
It automatically wipes out.
And there'll always be someone
say, oh, I wished.
That I would have known. Well,
Somebody's going to have to do
that and make those cuts on the
front.
80% funding of the toll project.
Again, if it's not plan and
design money.
Then the other cutoff is 80%.
If you don't fund 80% of that
project are a combination of
people.
Then it should be knocked back
to.
You've got to have enough money
in there for the go out for a
bit.
And if it's not 80%, how can you
possibly bid that project.
And I personally think.
You are to take
A percent
50% is my mind.
Mandatory backfield projects
that aren't.
Every year, take 50% of the
capped outlay money and
mandatory backfill.
Keos projects up or get them
off, get them off the books, one
or the other.
You get two choices, you catch
them up or you get them off the
bush. Other than that, I, I'm
just cured your problems. So
what else?
That's, it's a good finale right
there.
Uh, OK, I think that, uh, that
concludes, uh, the folk center
uh Representative Duncan,
please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I
like, uh, Representative Linte,
um, I think we're gonna see a
little bit different uh flavor
this year, uh, when we get ready
to do some of this, um, and, and
I like what was said about the
time frame, I think Senator
Munoz, uh, talked about because
The
We've got projects that have
been on the books for a long,
long time, and so we need help
saying this is it, this is fine.
Uh, we're not going to
reauthorize these and we can use
those funds for other things.
Our county does something
unique. We get together as
legislators and we fund projects
and we complete those projects,
and that's really, really
helpful for our county. So, but
I think there's got to be some
guidelines here and there's
gotta be a deadline. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, thank you,
thank you very much,
Representative Duncan.
Representative. I just wanted to
ask one question. So as we talk
about these projects and
listening to uh Senator Woods
and it's all getting to uh we
must fund the the plan and
design, but how do we get all
together in one room at one time
to talk about who's gonna
support a project, and that's
been the big issue all along. So
if you could help us resolve
that issue, I think we could
resolve the other issues about
the money being available.
Great. Uh, thank,
you for that, Representative
Herndon. Uh, uh, Ms. Carswell,
um, and, uh, Mr. Ortega, uh,
thank you very much for your
great work, um,
uh, I think the great questions
from members, great to have
suggestions, sort of a look
ahead, we're gonna be forming
subcommittees, um, and capital
outlay will, will absolutely be
one of those. We'll look to
Chair Lee, great to represent
Duncan, I thank you for being
here.
Because I know you're heavily
involved on the house side as
well, uh, along with others.
This will be one of the big
areas of focus for us and
appreciate very much the really
good ideas, uh, the leadership
and the thoughts from Vice Chair
Munoz, uh, this will be
something that we engage very
robustly through the, through
the interim on uh with that
subcommittee. We'll have
additional subcommittees, uh,
we'll, we'll send those out. I
know folks need to get on the
road now. um, and wanna uh
engage with uh
voting members and also uh
designees or other members who
are uh who are engaged, uh, we
want more ideas and more uh work
is always better. Um, I think
that's gonna conclude us for
this meeting. I want to say a
big thanks first of all to uh
City of Tucumerry, the village
of Mosquito, uh, T4 Ranch, and
so many others who made this an
incredible visit. Give them a
big hand.
Um
uh, you know, we'll, we'll be
working to fine tune this before
everybody goes. I do wanna ask,
uh, if, uh, wanna again
recognize Sharon and then can we
ask uh Miss Janae to stand up as
well.
Uh, a, a, a, uh, unnamed source
has informed us that uh this
will likely be Janay's final
meeting as well, staffing the
interim with LFC. She's going to
be uh retiring after an
extraordinary 19+ years, your
work, uh, Janay has been
exemplary as it is with Sharon,
uh, and so we just want to give
you a big round of applause.
Thank you and
Um, OK, uh, with that, um, we're
gonna, we'll, we'll, uh,
conclude the meeting. Uh, please
drive home safe, everybody, and
a big thanks to our staff. We're
adjourned.
