And, um, because we have seen
him in in in your requests for
each agency, and if there are
any questions, then that is why
we have someone from each uh
each board here to answer any
questions, otherwise, uh, we
won't have any further
presentations. OK. Thank you.
Um, very much. We're gonna move
on then and we've got, uh, what
is your name from LFC, I always
forget our staff if I see new
Noah, Noah, thank you, Noah. I
don't know that I've met you.
to see, I probably have. I think
you were here last time. Ah yes,
I was good. Thank you. You're
gonna be our LSC staff uh
presenter here, appreciate you.
OK. We're gonna be moving pretty
quickly here so we can move on
ahead to other things. We have
the board of barbers and
cosmetology, and this is with
the regulation and licensing
department, so NOAA will let you
start off with that, and these
are all to renew the their
sunsetting, and so the amount of
years that they are
Um, approved by the legislature
to exist and be aboard
eventually, as many of you, not
all of you know, they do sunset
and so now it's time to renew
them again and or not renew
them, but it seems like it's
going to be great to get
renewals. Thank you. Yes, so
we're gonna go to tab F.
F like Frank and um
There we go. Alrighty, so Noah,
you are it, and this nice lady,
who are you again? Mary of the
board of.
Awesome. Thank you, Mary Anne.
Appreciate you coming. All
right.
Sure. All right.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. Uh, my
name is Noel Montagno, as she
mentioned, and I'll be talking
about the board of barbers and
cosmetologists.
Uh, the board of barber, uh, the
board of barbers and
cosmetologists regulates the
following license types.
Uh, barbers, cosmetologists,
aestheticians, electrologists,
hairdressers, uh, Anicurus,
pedicurus, establishments, and
barbers and cosmetologist
schools.
Uh, the primary source for uh
the board of barbers and
cosmetologists, uh, is full
licensure applications and your
renewal fees, and other fees.
Um, the board and of barbers and
Commons cosmetologists, I'm just
going to call them the BBC.
Uh, they don't have any FTEs,
uh, in 2015, the legislature
authorized the regulation and
licensing department, uh, the
boards and commissions division
under that to use one P code for
all their FTEs. So by doing
this, the division now has the
flexibility to assign personnel
to different boards and
commissions when needed.
Uh, for the, the BBC fee
revenue.
In their application for
licensure and initial
registration fees, uh, they
combine for a million dollars in
fee revenue.
And for other fees, it was
101,000.
Uh, currently, the BBC only has
3 members appointed, and there
are 4 vacant positions.
Uh
That's it for the boards of
barbers and cosmetologists,
moving on.
Is that it, Noah, for that, OK,
thank you very much. I need to
get the name of this nice
gentleman.
I'm chairman of Kevin Graham,
general counsel for the
regulation and licensing
department and if anyone was
looking for someone in a white
cowboy hat that would have been
my boss, Superintendent Clay
Bailey, uh, Superintendent
Bailey's out taking care of some
personal issues for a little
while, so I'm standing in for
him for purposes of uh being an
acting superintendent. I will do
my best to answer any questions
you have. Thank you. Thank you
very much, Kevin. Appreciate you
and Marianne both being here and
any more staff that you have
here today. All righty. I am
surprised that you
3 people, I shouldn't say
surprised, I guess I am. I
didn't expect that you only have
3 people on the board and you
have 44 vacancies. Oh my
goodness. OK. Well, I appreciate
your extra work you have to do
to keep things going. All
righty, um, we're gonna move
quickly here, so, um, I don't
have any questions myself, but
there are any questions from the
board and from the committee.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. Just very quickly in
terms of the 4 vacancies, can
anyone tell me how long those
vacancies have been there.
I'm sure Senator Capos, I
believe I can come up with that
information for you. It was one
of the things that I had asked
as well.
Um,
like just a moment.
Yes, here we go, um, there are
currently 2 vacant public
members. Uh, one has been vacant
since July 25th of 2022. The
other public members were vacant
since July 16th of 2024, fairly
recently, uh, there is a vacant
professional member. It's been
vacant since the end of June
2024 and another vacant
professional member that's
required to be a hair stylist.
For some reason, that position's
never actually been filled.
I don't know if we just don't
have applicants or, or what the
reason for that is, but it's
never been.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, those are all the
questions that I have, and
whenever you're ready for a
motion, I'm ready to make one.
Thank you. Thank you very much
for that information and um
Senator Campos, if there's no
other questions, we were going
to make, thank you very much,
Madam Chair. I move, uh, uh, my
motion would be to extend the
sunset period, and I believe
with this one, we're
recommending for an additional 6
years, is that correct?
The number of years is this 5 or
6, Charles, I have 6 years.
You're correct, Senator. So
that's, that's the motion, Madam
Chair. OK, there's motion on the
floor, and we have a
second.ember Saranana, any
objection?
All right, Pa. You got your do
pass and emotion here. So thank
you very much and we're gonna
move on to the next one. We're
fast here, so, uh, there we go.
Thank you. We're gonna go to
Board of Landscape Architects.
No, are you here for all of
these?
All right, thank you. There we
go. So regulation and licensing
again, um, let's move with it.
No, you wanna start? Tell me
first the names of these two
individuals, and then you can
start.
I already can know Kevin here,
but what's, what's your name?
Rob chair of the board of
landscape architects.
OK
OK, got it. Yes.
Rob, did you say Rob F T I S OK.
Thank you, Rob. All righty,
Noah.
All right. So the next board is
the board of landscape
architects, uh, the Board of
Landscape architects or the BLA
regulates landscape architects
who research, design and prepare
drawings and specifications to
preserve or enhance land use and
natural features, design trails,
plantings and landscape
irrigation.
Much like the board of barbers
and cosmetologists, they don't
have any uh constant uh FTEs,
and they all use one P code
under the boards and commissions
division.
For feed revenue, there's 2
different types of feed revenue.
The first one is trade and
professional licenses.
And that uh combined for
$43,900.
And for other fees was $400.
Uh, currently, the board of
Landscape architects is
comprised of 5 members, uh, 3
licensed professionals and 2
public members, and the board
has no vacancies.
Um, yes, and the, the board
typically meets 3 times a year.
That is all. Thank you, Noah.
All right. Any questions from
the committee. OK. Uh, I do have
one question just to clarify the
number of years to make sure
we're on the right track and on
the same page. All right, 5
years for this one also, or is
it 66, OK.
Thank you very much. So, there
we go, um, Senator Campos, you
had a question on this one,
thank you very much, Madam
Chair. In terms of that, I know
that uh with the board of
landscape architects, uh, their
board is filled, they continue
to go ahead and do the work, but
I was concerned about uh the 6
years is there any discussion
regarding the possibility of
going into a 10-year extension.
I'm sure Kevin Graham, I would
actually refer that one off to,
uh, board chairman Lofts. Uh, we
met this morning and discussed
that matter and I know that the,
the board does have an interest
in extending that to 10 years
and so your permission I have
him address that.
Uh, thank you, uh, Madam Chair,
and, uh, Senator Campos. Um,
The board of landscape
architects has existed since I
think 1974. In that time, the,
the growth of our profession has
been exponential. A landscape
architects, they're leading
large scale public outdoor
projects leading the design of
those uh things like uh college
campuses, parks, athletic
facilities, trail facilities,
um, places that the public, uh,
visits, you know, thousands of
people a day, um, where the, the
protection of health, safety and
welfare, um, is, you know,
direct connection. Uh, the
sunset period is always uh
causes a disruption uh to our
profession and preparing, um,
there's been a long-term
historical misunderstanding of
what we do as landscape
architects and um that always
causes a threat to the, the
profession, the New Mexico
chapter, the American Society of
Landscape Architects actually
approached the board with asking
if that sense.
that period could be extended,
uh, just so we can spend more
time focused on the work we do
for the citizens of New Mexico
unless wondering if we were, uh,
our licensure is under threat.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair.
So, um, is that your question,
uh, Senator, with that it does
respond to the question and,
and, uh, my recommendation would
be that we consider the 10 year
extension in the rationale for
that. Uh, this is a growing
industry and in that it also uh
would give the support, if you
will, as we move forward so that
more people that go into this
particular profession, know that
uh this is something that we
take serious here in the state
of New Mexico, and I know it's,
it's, it's a growing profession,
so hopefully the uh
subcommittee would at least
consider that and we'll see
where it goes, but uh my, my uh
recommendation then would be a
motion to uh extend the sunset
for 10 years.
Thank you very much, and
Senator, um, I was going over
this again because you and I
spoke um earlier in the finance
committee as you recall about
this and, and while this seems
to have very legitimate
rationale behind your
recommendation. I think that it
is incumbent upon us to be fair
with everyone else and having
all the boards that we have here
today and and other times and
not giving that them an
opportunity to have an extension
for their boards to, um, we, we
just have
at that at this point, but let
me just say this that because we
recommend the usual 6 years
doesn't mean that it can't be
changed. You can make that
recommendation and change it
after we get a chance to look at
everything. There may be other
boards that we approve here
today or recommend that may want
an extension too between now and
the session, so maybe we can do
that, Senator, if that's all
right with you understood, Madam
Chair, and if I may, uh, in
around 1974, 1975, I did work
with
Baker Morrow, who is a landscape
architect, and with that over
the years I've noticed the
continuity, the consistency, and
the importance of this
particular board and and
commission, so as we, we move
forward, uh, I respectfully then
uh withdraw that recommendation,
and I would go ahead and uh make
a substitute recommendation,
which would be to go then with
the uh recommended 6 years, uh,
but at some point I would like
to go ahead and revisit this.
Thank you. And I think it's
very, very well.
intended, and I, I would agree
with that, yes, I think that,
uh, thank you, Senator, for a
second here. Yes, 2 for
discussion. I think that I even
6 years, 5 years, I've seen 5
before too. Um, it's too short.
Time goes by really fast and and
we it's work for everybody. If
you're doing fine and great as
you are, then we should just
extend it, but for now, because
this is what we came prepared
for, we're gonna proceed as it
is. Thank you, Rob. Did you have
something to say? We're under a
motion a second for discussion,
so he has to
very quickly, so we really
appreciate that, um, uh, Madam
Chair and Senator Campos. Uh,
we're also looking at other
changes, uh, to move to a more
uniform standard to match other
states, so reciprocity is easier
and also open up some
alternative pathways uh to the
profession. So perhaps as we
approach those changes that
could dovetail nicely with an
extension of the sunset period.
Thank you. I think that's a
perfect opportunity. That's what
I meant when I said we haven't
vetted it and maybe
Perhaps we can work a little
longer on this to, to be fair to
everyone and, and give you more
time too. Thank you very much.
Do, um, all right, is any
opposed to this motion, the
second. All right, then you've
got your, your extension for 6
years. Thank you very much.
OK, um, next one, we're gonna
move on to the board of nursing
homes, and that is also
regulation and licensing, and of
course, Kevin, you're at it
again and Noah. So Noah, can you
start with that again?
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, yes,
I can. So the board of nursing
home administrators was created
to protect the health, safety,
and welfare of the public by
providing laws and regulations
to govern the practice of
nursing home administration and
protect the citizens of New
Mexico.
Um, the primary source for the
board and um I'm gonna just call
it the BNHA, uh, the primary
sources for the BNHA revenue,
our applications, initial
licensing and renewal fees.
Um
The total amount they made for
application and examination fees
is $8090 and for other penalty
fees, it's 25,208.
Uh, at capacity, the board
comprises 7 members, 4 licensed
professional nursing home
administrators, and 3 public
members. Uh, currently the board
has 3 vacant members out of 7
total positions.
The board met 3 times in 2024
and has met 4 times every year
since 2021.
Uh, the draft, the committee
recommends that the board fills
the 3 vacant position positions,
and to also extend the sunset
date of the New Mexico Board of
Nursing Home Administrators by 6
years.
OK. Thank you, Noah. And this
nice lady, I didn't get your
name.
Uh, my name is Jolene Green. I'm
the board chair for the nursing
home administrators. And your
first name? Jolene. Jolene.
Thank you, Jolene. All right.
Very good. Um, any questions
from the committee or any
comments?
Oh, I guess you're gonna be
fine. Nobody's gonna ask
anything. So it's a 6 year again
extension. Do we have a motion,
please? Yes, we have
Representative Chatfield making
the motion. Do we have a second?
And second by Representative
Gallegos and the opposition.
All right, passed. You got this
all done and quick. Thank you so
much for your work, really, very
important boards. Thank you. I'm
chairs of the committee.
Uh, cold surface mining
commission energy, minerals and
natural resources. So Kevin,
thank you for your work. I,
you're not on on these last two.
Thank you. All right. There's
this gentleman here, I remember
meeting you back. Good
afternoon, Rodriguez and members
of the committee. My name is
Albert Chang. I'm the director
for the Mining and Minerals
division, uh, at the Energy,
Minerals and Natural Resources
Department.
And uh we're gonna have Noah
Star and then we move back to
this nice gentleman, so proceed,
Noah.
Uh, thank you, Madam Cha. So the
cold surface Mining commission
adopts and files regulations
necessary to implement and
uphold the surface Mining Act.
Which governs coal mining
operations. The commission
oversees the coal mine
reclamation program, which was
created in the early 1980s.
Uh, the agency's budget has a
federally funded budget, and
they see him, as he said, is
attached to the energy, minerals
and natural resources
department.
Uh, the cold surface Mining
commission does not collect any
fees or other forms of revenue.
Uh, the board is comprised of 9
members, 7 statutory members,
and 2 governor appointed
members. Currently, there is one
governor appointed a vacant
position that it was supposed to
be a representative from the
industry.
Uh, the committee recommends,
uh, extending the New Mexico's
coal surface mining commission
by 6 years.
Thank you, know, a good job.
You're just fast and to the
point. It's a great.
All righty. Any questions from
the committee?
Yes, Senator, thank you very
much, Madam Chair. Just one
quick question in terms of the
uh uh one member that should be
appointed from the industry is
that position been vacant for
some time, or is that a recent
vacancy.
there.
Uh
Madam Chair and, uh, members of
the committee, that's a
relatively recent, uh, vacancy,
the uh appointed member earlier
this year, moved out of state,
and we have already recommended
a replacement, um, actually
though, I reached out to the
mining association to recommend
somebody because it's an
industry seat and so uh the
mining association has provided
names for the governor's
consideration.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you very much for that. OK,
Senator Gonzalez has made a
motion and a second by
Representative Saraana. Any
objection to the motion. You've
got your 6 year extension. Thank
you.
Thank you, thank you very much.
quality, water quality control
commission, New Mexico
Environment Department.
Oh yeah, Secretary Kenny, I saw
you back there. I wasn't
thinking about this last one,
but happy to see you. OK.
We're gonna move.
This is moving pretty quickly,
so.
All right, yes. And let me get
the names, of course, I know uh
any of Chris James and this
gentleman here.
Chair of the commission, Bruce,
thank you, Bruce. OK, great. So,
and this gentleman.
right
Oh Bill. Oh yes, of course.
Thank you, Bill.
All righty. No, let's get
started. Thank you. Uh, thank
you, madam.
Uh, the water quality control
commission was created to manage
water quality in New Mexico
through the Water Quality Act.
The duties and powers of the
water quality commission include
managing a comprehensive water
quality management program, the
administration of loans and
grants from the federal
government, the adoption of
water quality standards and the
adoption of regulations to
prevent or abate water
pollution.
Uh, the agency's budget covers
expenses related to many
rulemaking bodies.
Um, the budget is not broken
down to identify work done for
or by the various rulemaking
bodies.
The water quality control
commission does not collect any
fees or other forms of revenue.
And at capacity, it's comprised
of 15 members, but currently
only has 13 members.
The municipal and county
representative positions have
been vacant since July 2023.
Uh, the committee recommends
extending the water quality
control commission sunset date
by 6 years.
Thank you, Noah. OK, any
questions or comments from the
committee?
No, I think Representative
Saana, did you have a motion?
And she, you made a motion.
Thank you. There's a motion on
the floor. Do we have a second
for an extension? And a 2 by
Representative Chatfield, all
right? I think we're, we can
move on with your six years. No
questions for you or for uh Bill
or for Bruce, so we're good.
Yes, and we're gonna. I said no
objection by anybody, so it's
voted on. Thank you. All righty.
So we're, we're done. You have a
great afternoon. Are we finished
with everything? Is this like
too quick. I just thought maybe
something's missing here. OK.
I'm sorry.
Oh no, now we have the child
welfare subcommittee, but I'm
not chairing that one, so I'll
stay job, madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator. Thank you.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee.
Yes.
Carolyn Burkha, good to see you.
We're going to join this
subcommittee, it's for recess
