Um, have joined us this spring.
Uh, first as we'd like to
welcome back, uh, Rian Esquibel.
Mm.
When she heard that we were
gonna be hiring for health and
human services analyst, um, that
the Legislature provided to LFC.
I'm able to fill all those
positions even though they
technically were funded for next
fiscal year. I'm able to fill
them now. And, uh, we asked Ruby
Ann to come back and help us,
uh, with that effort, uh, so
she's coming out of retirement
to come back to work for you.
Uh Felix Chavez is our new
analyst for the judicial bloc.
Um
He has a business degree, and
it's a native from Albuquerque
and actually ran the business
during Covid as well, Um
Uh, reas. Erna is
Joined us from the Economic
Development Department.
She has a a masters from, uh, un
and M and she will be working on
evaluating capital outlay
projects. So so she'll be
working with, uh, Callie's team.
As we go through, Um, the work
plans. I'll have staff raise
their hand when I call out their
different section like for
public education. Mr. Sonny Liu
be heading that up. Um, this
interim
And I'll try to remember to keep
up on the
Work plans with that, Mr
Chairman. I'll go through maybe
a couple of pages at a time and
then stop. Uh T a tab B, sir.
And then stop for any feedback
or questions. Does that work for
OK?
So on on public education, the
two top two issues are are
continuing work on teacher
quality as well as learning
time.
Um, you'll get an evaluation in
May on student absenteeism and
student attendance. Um, but
monitoring those particular
issues, particularly with how
the Legislature has expanded
learning time and monitoring the
implementation of the
controversial new, Um
180 day rule.
And then the next couple of
pages. Um, I'd like to highlight
like on Page five.
Um, following up and and
tracking the investments that
you all been making in career
technical education.
Um, as well as understanding
that base operating costs that
exist out in the public school
districts.
Stop right there in education
questions.
I don't see any Let let me ask
you really quick on on the
operational cost how we're gonna
calculate those for this year. I
mean, I was talking to my school
district and so
This is their comment.
The impact a money that they
receive now went to all
construction costs from
everything went from 300 a foot
to 1000, a foot
And how we're gonna make those
Well for impact Day. Those are
their federal revenues, which
the state no longer takes credit
against them.
What
OK, um
And it's their choice on whether
to use it for operating cost or
or capital outlay.
Um, So you know, those are
Those are areas where in capital
we're getting pinched, uh,
through public school capital A
as well, Um
Running the risk of
Not being able to buy more and
better but just paying more for
the same.
This particular, um, work item
is taking a look at the some of
the issues that represent a BCA
brought up earlier. Where you
all had an an estimate, an
assumption that you built into
the budget for things like
insurance costs.
In the public school insurance
authority outside of the budget
process when an increased
insurance rates well above and
beyond, Uh, what you had assumed
to the point that some employees
may not see any salary increases
as a result, so this is setting
up understanding what those base
cost needs are and possibly
setting some potential
recommendations for limits on
the ability to to to do that
around the budget process.
OK?
Right?
Just kind of throw you great,
Just trying to jump in. Jump
right in. Thanks, Mr Chair.
Thank you. Um, uh, two sort of
pieces, one with continuing our
focus on the app. Do you see the
at risk index fitting into this?
the sort of really large
increase in optimizing how
districts
And, frankly, maybe
standardizing how they utilize
the increased funds. Number two
is you mentioned this, Uh, this
morning? Um
We had a lot of below the line,
Some related to the cliff. How
we get sort of right sized and
more of that.
But I would say that, um, for
some of that it would be covered
under the, um governance and
accountability. Um, work item
where you've made significant
investments in at risk funding.
Not a lot of visibility into
like exactly how those are being
used. Um, you've you've given
pretty broad parameters to
districts on how to use it, but
we don't have good insight.
On on how they are using it
along with a number of different
targeted initiatives that you've
made, Um, for those particular
students, a heavy dose of staff
work this interim
I foresee is really oversight of
the billions of dollars you made
available, particularly in non
recurring special
appropriations. It's
Count them up the other day and
and Section five alone. I think
there is 234 separate projects
that were funded.
I was surprised you actually
reduced the number from the
previous year by about two, but
then you look at a whole section
of, you know, nine of the bill
and the crow. And there's a
whole bunch you know more to to
keep on top of, so just getting
a handle on all those different
appropriations and and what's
going on, including in
education, Charles is the at
risk calculated the SCG, though
that part of that calculation
and they're gonna do the SCG
this year. Correct that is part
of the calculation. The LES C is
has had
A task force that they've been
working with just to re
evaluate. Um, components of the
funding formula that that we've
been participating in.
Um, there is a possibility that
Um folks could call for another
enhancement of that, Um, I know
the the plaintiffs in the school
finance lawsuit thought that
that waiting factor should be a
little bit higher and calculated
a little bit differently. Um, so
that would be something that
will be monitoring
OK?
Moving on to higher education
Connor Jorgensen will be heading
up this work. Uh, this interim
Um
Couple of key appropriations
that you've been making for non
credit. Basically, industry, um,
recognized credentials for
certificate programs and
monitoring the roll out and the
implementation of that.
As well as, um
You may hear briefly on the
funding formula Study, but at
the key component of, uh
Connor's work this interim is
looking at
You know, are very low, uh,
graduation levels and output
relative to our very high
investment We're making as a
state and figuring out ways to
better match those two things
up.
Um, through things like student
support on Page seven.
Um
And then also doing uh, with
time permitting a deeper dive
into career services. Uh, how
our institutions helping connect
Um potential graduates or recent
graduates to employment and
what's the connection going on
if it had any between higher
education institutes and
economic development, you know,
we often hear this chicken or
egg kind of thing. And do we
have the workforce or not? And
in some cases, we're producing
the workforce that the economy
needs. But the economy is not
ready for them. And so they're
ending up in Dallas, Austin,
Phoenix and Denver. Um and so,
needing to, um, investigate,
that would be a part.
Connor's work this
And finally, um, again, those
targeted higher education
appropriations of almost
dizzying array of different
initiatives and funding items
that are out there and keeping
track of those
Any questions on
A
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Um
I'm just I'm curious about the,
uh
The free college education.
Are we losing them after a year
after two years?
When are they dropping off?
Because the initial enrollment
As opposed to the graduation
rates are horrible.
And I think an investment of
that magnitude.
Would have been better used if
we targeted
Maybe career paths.
And made that affordable.
But giving free college
education to everybody.
I don't know that we're getting
the return on the investment.
Um
Is there a plan that to look at
that or we
Open to change that.
Not looking at changing it at
the moment, but we're certainly
evaluating the the impact of the
free tuition and it it's
certainly had an impact at the
outset of helping induce, um
greater enrollment.
But we want that to translate
into completion.
And it's still too early to say
whether those completion rates
are going to improve. We do
monitor the retention year over
year. Um and you're losing about
25% out of the first year's
cohort aren't coming back to
second year and then another.
25% the second year and then it
starts stabilizing and then they
they stay until they graduate.
Maybe lose a couple more in in
six years. The four year
graduation rates as you saw from
a
The earlier presentation.
Um
Are quite low, UN. And Ms uh,
come up quite a bit from about
13% in 2010 to 38% N MSU, still
sitting at one out of four
students are graduating, Um, on
time in the community colleges
and in the regionals are much
lower than that.
And that's where
You're putting in
You know?
Top 10 maybe top five in terms
of resource allocation.
Particularly when we start
counting the, um
The financial aid investments,
But your return is 50th in the
country in terms of those
graduation rates.
And Mr Chair, Miss Sally, Um
those that are are
Been retained.
Do we know are they
Are we tracking them by
Specific career tracks, Uh,
degree tracks or
Is it across the board that
You know 50% are staying into
the third year.
Mr. UM, Chairman,
representative. The first two
years are usually spent on
general education. And there
might be some people who
declared majors, but it it not
necessarily, uh, true that
that's where they're gonna end
up. So it's hard to, um from a
career tracking standpoint, say
whether one or one or the other
is working.
Aptitude in high school is a
pretty strong predictor of how
well they're going to do, uh, in
post secondary education, and
that's why you see a heavy
emphasis on student support
services for those students that
may need additional assistance,
uh, to make sure that they get
it, um, so that they are
successful.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Right?
Any other questions.
Great.
Um
Health in communities. So this
is, uh Eric Shiner Kelly K.
Rachel Mercer Garcia.
Um
Allegra Hernandez is a evaluator
that has moved over to work on
the HHS. Uh, team.
Um, as well as Nathan Ekberg.
And then I've introduced, uh,
Ruby and Esquivel.
Major emphasis. Um, for this
work plan we've done like I said
earlier, a good job in terms of
like coverage of care and
covering more new Mexicans with
some form of health insurance.
But access to that coverage and
care is like a number one issue
facing us all. Not just for
those on Medicaid. But even in
in the private sector, you've
been making big investments on
the theory that that will help
improve access. There's a number
of different policy levers that
will be investigated to see if
Um, those can be those can help
out as well, including, um,
investing in workforce
development that you can see on
the next page.
I think the whole punch punch
didn't help but Page 10.
Behavioral health would be, Um,
uh, have a major emphasis as
well. Um, this will be in
support of HHS as well. We've
developed a work plan.
And work product. Uh, list
To help support both the LFC and
the Legislative Health and Human
Services Committee and their
work during the interim, and
that focuses on um behavioral
health is a key aspect as well
as child welfare and and
Medicaid, which is all
encompassing service. Everything
from DD waiver to acute care to
Um, infant maternal care.
And with behavioral health. What
we're proposing in in our work
with both committees is we have
to have a better handle on a
baseline of what services are in
the plan. What? How much are we
paying for them?
What is, um, our network look
like in terms of who's providing
what services and where.
And then where do we wanna be?
Three years from now.
Basically, it's a basic needs
and gaps. Analysis, which the
executive statutorily supposed
to be producing through the
Behavioral Health Collaborative
on a regular basis, It's hard to
continue recommendations for
investing in behavioral health
without knowing where we're at.
In a good way. Um today and that
will be an emphasis. I think
even on, um
The physical health, uh, portion
of Medicaid. Um as well as well
as, uh, the next item three
healthcare workforce.
Who do we have working in what
areas and where do we have
shortages and what are options
to close the gap?
Some of those could be
expanding.
Are higher educational offerings
like we've been investing in
expanding nursing programs. It
could be that the gaps are so
big that that pipeline
Maybe needed to be imported. To
be honest with you. There's you
know, our surrounding states are
growing at such a rapid pace or
higher education institutions
are pumping out so many more
graduates that that might be,
uh, one strategy that we may
deep dive into, Um
Health care spending both
through Medicaid, Our public
employee, um, healthcare
benefits as well as the
Um, health insurance and then on
the next page, um
Pharmaceutical costs are a major
cost driver within the system
outside of where you've been the
primary cost driver by
increasing rates, um so getting
a handle on how we procure
pharmaceutical
Um
Uh,
Goods.
Um and options to, um
Can, uh, cost containment around
those
Then item six.
What I worry about with the
health care authority, just in
its name only we're not talking
about all the additional human
services that are part of the
old Human Services department.
Including. Uh TANF.
Um, food stamps or snap child
support. Uh, there's a range of
different, uh, programs that
are, uh, benefit that are
designed to benefit through an
income support mechanism. Low
income new Mexicans, and you
just heard a report that one of
them the TANF program is simply
not working at getting people
off the sidelines and into the
the labor force and the ones
that are getting in. It's a very
high cost per per job, so
You all expanded, Um, snap
benefits using state money this
last year in the budget.
Um, for people that didn't
otherwise qualify for an
expanded, um, benefit under the
federal regulation, so
monitoring the implementation of
that, and that the potential
implications of starting to
supplement um federal spending
in these in these programs
Page 13.
Um, our state health facilities
again. I think since I started
at the LFC in 2005, it seems
like at least every other year.
They need a supplemental.
There's some financing issue
with them.
Uh, it started. It seems to be
like when we gave them the
flexibility as a
Department where you used to
budget for each facility
separately, and House Bill two.
And then they give more
flexibility. You collapse them
all into one and ever since
we've had trouble with who's
short and who's overfed, Um, for
those very important services,
public health, um, a new
strategy. One public health, I
think.
In the era of of vastly expanded
Um, health care coverage.
We've been asking, you know
what's their modern day? Um,
role of public health. Um
And they're wanting to move into
actually providing direct health
care services and you gave them
some money.
Um, to start doing that that
could tie into
Um some other strategies, um,
out of the health care
affordability fund.
Going forward to certain
communities that don't qualify
for any other health insurance
Page nine and 10 follow up on a
a new program that's funded
through the grow called New
Mexico.
And then continuing to monitor
the roll out and the elimination
of the waiting list for, um DD
waiver services and again
network adequacy for people to
We're gonna bring them off the
waiting list. Are they gonna be
able to access the services They
need, um, to thrive in our our
communities.
I'll stop right there. That's a
lot of items before skipping
over.
Uh, child, well being
Hey, represent a small
Mr Chair. Thank you, Charles. Um
The this it was both for and the
health care side and also on the
education side. Uh, the violence
intervention programs. You know,
we've had an uptick all across
the state in violence at
schools. Um
And also, of course in
communities, Uh, the DOH
administers or in the past,
administered the violence
intervention program money.
If we could add that and also
look at that. Thank you, Mr
Chair.
OK, just so people know this is
our work plan. So if you're
wanting to add stuff
Um
Jerry Senator Ortiz.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. And
thank you, Charles. Just two
quick, three quick things.
Um, are you gonna be taking a
look at the behavioral Health
Collaborative?
And the fact that it seems to be
nonfunctioning.
Yes.
Because I mean, we've for years
we've looked to them. Mr
Chairman, as as to give us
guidance about how we best
Orient our funding and our
programmatic activity for
behavioral health.
And there's nothing coming out
the other end. That's correct.
Mr Chairman, Senator, Uh, second
thing you gave him in the budget
last year $20 million to the
behavioral Health Services
division.
To expand behavioral health and
innovative and creative ways.
I know of several programs that
have asked for that money. None
of it has gotten out as far as I
know.
That's that's correct, Senator
That was a major, um, oversight.
Um, activity. Um, this past
interim of the LFC and working
with the departments. We've
We've seen plans, but some of
the plans don't involve actually
expanding services and the
healthcare authority had turned
the money over to to CYFD to
take the lead on and, um
That appropriation was
reauthorized, Um in House Bill
two, because the money didn't
look like it was gonna be spent
by the end of the fiscal year.
And it's been broken up into
two.
$10 million chunks one
specifically for the healthcare
authority to focus on
Behavioral health expansion and
the other for, uh CYFD to focus
on child welfare. Um, expansion,
uh, services that would then
both of them would then be able
to have services that would be
billable to Medicaid or the
family and the final thing.
Mister chairman
at the
At the, um may
Seven and eight. I think it's
seventh and eight or six and
seventh meeting
Of the
Um
Organizational meeting for the
Legislative Health and Human
Services Interim Committee.
We're gonna get a report from
HED.
Where they make their
recommendations. We we were
hoping it would come in before
The last session.
But it didn't. Uh uh, for how
best to go about making graduate
programs in behavioral health.
More financially accessible so
we can start replenishing our
workforce. They promised that
they would have recommendations
at that which may involve things
like expanding the Op
opportunity Scholarship to
include
Counseling, social work
psychology, psychiatric nursing.
But may also be some other way
of doing it. Uh, like they do
with the stem, tie it to a
specific scholarship, uh to an
individual, and then they can
track it more, but we'll get
their recommendation in May. And
of course you will. And Mr
Chairman, you all appropriated
Um, funding to basically endow
financial aid.
Um, payments for graduate social
workers, um, will be following
up on the implement strategy as
well.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and, um, Mr
Ali, I just have two questions
for clarification with respect
to the snap benefits. There have
been too many people in my
district who have been saying
that it's taking too long for
those snap benefits to get out
to individuals. Will your team
be looking at what's causing
those delays? And why is it more
than 30 days to get those
benefits out? Yes, we do track
that and report on it on a
quarterly basis. There are
performance metrics that, um,
they fall in
Quite behind. Um, in some of
those, I think having
Resource constraints as they
were dealing with, Um
The vast number of people they
needed to re-establish
eligibility for Medicaid was
causing their snap. Um,
timeliness to fall behind where
it needed to be.
But we are finding a way to fix
it.
That you suggested. That's what
we'll be working with the
department to see what their
action plan is to fix it.
And then the second thing is Mr
Chair, and, uh, Mr Sly, looking
at the number of of individuals
that we have in foster care.
Uh, based on Medicaid and and
what I'm seeing on C MS. They
should be able to stay on
Medicaid until they're age 26
without regard to income. And so
I'm running into people who are
having that problem and having
that implementation applied. So
can you tell me? Are you seeing
that as an issue And what are we
doing about it? I think that was
a if I'm not mistaken.
There were some, um, new policy
changes through an executive
order where that may be new, but
certainly through age 21.
Folks were supposed to be able
to stay on.
But, uh, we can follow up on
that There's there's not very
many that fall into that, um,
bucket where they're exiting
foster care as as you age out of
foster care, so I'll, uh,
provide your staff with a copy
of C MS rules that show that it
is supposed to be applicable and
thank you for looking into that.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Charles. Before we switch
subjects real quickly, could you
run down? We we have three
analysts on the health side
That's under LLC that will be
helping to work with
The health and
They'll be expanding our team of
existing analysts, and that's uh
Ruby Ann.
Uh, Allegra and Nathan
And so then they will not.
They're not staffers. They'll
just be analysts at that
committee.
Under LLC correct.
Well, they'll be working for
LFC, and they'll be providing
work products and support for L
HHS as well. So really staffing
for both committees. I see it as
force multiplication where
you've got, you know six FTE,
now dedicated to health and
human. How did we get to six
because we had three existing
staff doing
Um, budgets for
You know, Kelly, Um, Eric and
Rachel were are are responsible
for the
Uh, doing the budget
recommendations for health and
human services agencies. So the
three that are coming in
There will be staffing. They're
not gonna be staffing, but
they're gonna be at the at the
health and human services. Yes,
we will have staff available at
those committees. And when those
committees want reports back
then we'll build the reports
with the team at six or the team
at three.
And we've we've met with the
chairs. Um
To propose a work plan that's
contained in here as well as the
work products, and we'll work
with Council service who
statutorily supports that
committee on making available
agenda items and coordinating
with them on either our staff
presenting or helping, um, find
presenters. So in some cases, we
don't present what you get a
staff brief.
Uh, background information that
we can produce, if if somebody
else presenting that L HHS would
have access to that the
legislative counsel services
will remain the same. They'll
still be setting the agenda
setting the presenter, setting
up the staff for those I just
wanna make sure that's clear.
Yep. Go ahead, Charles.
I'm gonna skip over.
15 because we'll come back to
that.
Um
But on the next page
Home visiting, uh, continuing to
Monitor the implementation,
particularly the
Um
Being able to leverage. Federal,
uh, Medicaid funds for that, Um
Monitoring the implementation
and the quality initiatives
around child care assistance.
And then secondary issues.
Um
You know, our Medicaid
management information system is
about a decade in on
Redoing that.
Over $300 million so continuing
to monitor when we're gonna
implement that system of systems
as well as working on the
Medicaid budget projections and
getting a deeper understanding
about the hospital, uh, cost
data.
Child welfare will be one of the
other major focuses during the
interim.
Um
Uh, you'll hear a proposal, uh,
to form a a child welfare
subcomittee.
Um
So
There's also a Senate Memorial
five called for LFC to staff a
task force on child welfare.
There have been
There was a series of
Um, appointing authorities
whether it was the governor, Um
Pro TEM or speaker, uh, to make
appointees to that task force,
were almost have all of those,
uh back And then there was a
number of appointees for the LFC
to make, um that we're waiting
to confirm one or two more, Uh,
potential candidates and bring
that back to you.
Uh, tomorrow.
But what we envision is staff.
Is making sure that that task
force and its work that's FC
staff are gonna support.
To get a lot of, uh, any Casey
is also reached out to help. Uh,
support that task force that
they are able to do a real deep
dive and that information that
they're getting also feeds into
both Health and Human Services
Committee and the LLC.
Uh, during the interim, so
you've got kind of three tracks,
all getting, uh, common
Uh, information about what to do
at the front end of of child
welfare system.
Workforce. Um, and those things,
uh, to be able to hopefully
coalesce around recommendations,
um, later on this fall.
And part of that would focus on
the opportunities that the
federal government has made
available for investing in
Evidence-based.
Um, services for Children and
families. Um, before you need to
remove the child for foster care
Um as one of the the key
components.
The second would be
The implementation of the
statute that you passed a number
of years ago to come up with a
Uh, multilevel response to
Um, dealing with families that
come to the attention of child
welfare system. Um, very low
risk cases can be diverted into
more of a a case management and
make sure they get access to
services, whereas other cases
may need a full investigation
and so we'll dig deeper into
that as well as, um
I tell every new Cabinet
secretary that comes into CYFD
that your mission critical
funding is not in all in your
agency.
A big component of it's gonna be
in Medicaid and that's where
behavioral health services not
only for Children, but as
importantly for their their
parents, Uh, dealing with
primarily substance use, Um
Issues.
And then finally
Um as a third big plank is, uh,
professionalizing the the
workforce for child welfare.
You've been making
appropriations to help kickstart
that, Um, for the department.
Those haven't been spent. You've
reauthorized them and really
tighten down the requirements.
Uh, so taking a a deeper dive
into, uh what it would take to,
um, both expand.
Um, the types of services that
are available to Children and
families as well as that, Um
And then finally
System, oversight,
accountability and structure are
there leading best practices
around the country for
Um
Transparency in a child
protective services area. They
produce a lot of data. Um,
that's already publicly
available. Um, but are there
other kinds of things? Um,
That we should be reviewing to,
um, help CYFD do what it needs
to do.
Rachel will also be working on,
uh, oversight. Um, for the the
roll out of the office of Family
Representation and advocacy Ofra
They did receive money from the
grove to expand. Um, how they
work with respondent parents,
uh through case management and
and social work services with
the intent of shortening the
time to permanency.
And then continuing to monitor
Really what has been, um, a best
practice a series of best
practices nationally is our
juvenile justice system, which
Used to have, you know, over 500
youth incarcerated on any given
day, or jails for youth were
bursting at the seams. I think
we're below 80 now, um, and have
different different challenges.
Um, as a result of being able to
divert, um
Uh, juveniles who don't need
into the system, uh to other
services.
And then the final two.
Um
Couple of areas I'll touch on
for Rachel and Vu include, uh
continued work on workforce
participation.
Uh, you heard a report on that
as well. And then the workforce
training programs that you've
made available, including the
apprenticeships, um, and the
youth employment.
With that. I'll stop. And, um,
ask for any. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. And thank you,
Charles. Um so this this is the
working plan, and this is what
you're hoping so I'm looking at
the Kara implement.
V.
And so
This is just something that, um
I'm reading.
What? What? They're talking What
you're talking about the
families and the the infants
born exposed and still not
getting the the, uh
The services and treatment they
need. And so what? We're just
gonna be working on that in this
working plan, or do you have
ideas or have you worked with
CYFD to to come up with
solutions or what? Can you
explain a little more? Well, um,
Mr Chairman, we did do a deep
dive evaluation on that, Um,
policy and implementation
challenges and did have a series
of recommendations that will
continue to see if the
administration
Will change its view to
implement or not, um, that could
be a source of potential
legislation that, um
The committee or individual
members want to look at
But we've gone from a system I,
I say from one extreme to
another from the the previous
way of doing business if a a
baby was detected with
substances, illegal substances
in their system CY if you would
go and automatically remove them
to foster care.
And then the state and
nationally, the move was to
switch to more of a public
health model. But the public
health model is that we've
implemented as a state is so
diffuse in who's responsible for
what? That nobody's responsible
for anything. So you have
people.
And the kids that are, um, have
been exposed. Maybe somebody
agrees to a plan in the
hospital. But then there's no
point person for follow up, and
there's been a number of
different
Um, ideas about how to deal with
that ours.
Is to leverage Medicaid and have
people on the ground in those
communities and the very handful
of hospitals where there's the
vast majority of these cases be
able to do the hand holding
that's necessary to make sure
that they get access to those
drug treatment service. Um, care
and and again if it's not
happening, that may be
legislation at the Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
T Woods.
Mr Chair and
On page 27.
Uh, you weren't there yet.
We're not there yet.
On the workforce training.
I went over it real quick. OK,
go ahead.
I don't turn my pages quick, I.
I just
Of all the people in the whole
dang room.
Chair and and Charles
I'm the most literate and and
In language and spelling.
And the whole deal.
But I've got a a question when
about
The circuit sent the legislator
intend to target these programs
to disengage youth.
Wouldn't that be G juice, so
we're gonna have well the the
point of the appropriation is to
identify youth that are not
engaged in school or in work. So
we're describing the the they
are disengaged from anything.
they idle hands and and that's
the That's the targeted
population. Um, that's intended
for those appropriations to
bring them into something
constructive. Either work or you
training for work or or
apprenticeships.
As opposed to like a high school
kid that it's it's a right
So among the noun and still
OK, got it.
Uh, the the, uh, right above
that on issue one
I When we talk about the the law
that we passed the development
and apprenticeship fund, So are
we going to, uh
You say inventory of career
development and workforce
trading programs and
expenditures, So we're going to
get some actual numbers in that.
That's correct. And we won't
have. We won't have numbers, but
we'll have expectations. That's
correct. Mr Chairman, which
programs which of these
certificate, Uh, programs will
the community colleges be making
investments in? How many people
do you think you're gonna enroll
in them?
When would they be able to
complete? Um all of those types
of things, general oversight.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you.
Um, we're gonna move on. Just so
members know that there was a
memorial last year for CYFDT.
You don't get to pick the
OK, Mr Chairman, So for the
justice, public safety, um block
for Scott Sanchez and Felix, you
know, Paro revocations account
for about a third.
Of do of admissions into our
prison system.
And the vast majority of those
parole revocations come for
technical violations, and we've
when we've done a deep dive into
a virtually all of them are
related to substance abuse
issues.
Um
So the prisons aren't a great
treatment option. If that's the
if that's the problem, so there
was legislation in the past that
didn't make it through.
And that to try to
Uh, reform the technical
probation violation process and
we're going to be studying
revisiting that or coming up
with with other ideas, but a big
emphasis this for Scott on
reentry.
Be proposing a A program
evaluation also do a deep dive
on that for both the prisons and
the jails on how are they
connecting people to resources
so that they're not needing to
That they don't end up
reoffending or getting technical
violations that send them back
to jail or prison.
Which gets us to the next, um,
issue of our recidivism rates.
This session. You, um extracted
a a fair amount of savings out
of their general fund budget for
corrections At the same time
you've been making big
reinvestments of savings and
Corrections department because
our population is down and doing
justice, reinvestment in and
evidence based programming.
What's the status?
Of those investments. Are they
working? Um or not? We're not
seeing AAA movement in some of
the, um, performance data that
we've seen but needing to
develop a more robust
performance metrics around those
specific, um, interventions.
On page 31.
Wanting to work with the
district attorneys to get it
better, Uh, metrics around their
work for their, uh, workload.
uh, metrics to understand their
wildly different in terms of
number of cases her attorney
that different offices have
The types of cases that they
have can vary in and and impact
workload from a very complicated
felony versus a a minor
misdemeanors. That could be a
lot so really wanted to dig in
to work with the DAS to get a
better understanding about that.
Uh, continuing with oversight.
Um
As secondary issues of public
safety.
Um, the criminal justice. Uh,
overall, we've been making
criminal justice reform
recommendations for more than a
decade. Um, those, you know, we
can revisit and summarize for
you before you come back here in
July, If you like, Um
And then also, uh, continuing to
monitor any more savings that
could be had from the, um the
significant reduction in the
number of offenders
incarcerated.
Finally
The last secondary item is
I think it's been three years
that corrections had contracted
for a classification study. We
had done an evaluation that
found
That they were classifying
offenders at a higher level.
Just so happens to be in where
they would be in a private
prison.
Then their own class
classification system would call
for and they had contracted
with.
Um, some folks at UN M to go in
and do a deep dive study and
come up with a
Any adjustments that need to be
released to our knowledge, so
continuing to follow up on that
it has big fiscal implications
on at what level of security you
need to
I'll stop there, Mr Chairman,
Senator Neville.
Thank you, Mr Chair, Charles.
Back when I was counting one of
the battles that the counties
would always has with the state
where reimbursement for state
prisoners
It's still on there. Uh,
priority list every single year.
I guess. Why can't we come up
with a system where it's ex on
these?
Uh, get paid back for whatever.
You know if it's probation,
parole violator and instead of
the them coming in and arguing
for a make a noise, but, uh
It. It just seems like we why do
we fight this battle? I come in
and ask for $5 Million or some
amount, which isn't enough and
they
Why does it have to be an
ongoing issue? Why can't we just
get a a formula? That's my
understanding? Mr. Chairman, is
there
There's an appropriation that
you make every year to D FA.
It's in a recurring, um, budget
for this particular, um, issue
and my understanding is there is
a formula that goes out.
Um and how they distribute that,
but I'll follow up. The
sentencing commission helps
Um, with determining the the
need.
The amount
For
You know jails. I can't say
whether it's enough or not, but
we can follow up with the rate
should be $100 a day or $50 a
day. I don't know what it is,
but there ought to be some
system where
If he if you have a probation
violator, and he's there 20
days, you get X dollars and
system in the counties shouldn't
be having tears and ask for
another handout for they ought
to be just paid for what they
do.
Yes, sir. And we'll follow up on
that with you. All right. Thank
you.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you. Troll the the issue. I. I
wanted to raise is
The Legislature gave some of the
opioid settlement money.
Last year, and I believe again
this year to the Department of
Corrections.
Or medication assisted
treatment.
One of the ways in which we
could reduce recidivism.
Would be to begin treating
people for their drug.
Addiction while they're in
Prisons and then just continue
them when they get out.
Lot easier to do it that way.
My understanding was they didn't
spend any of that money last
year, or they had one person
receiving medication assisted
treatment in all the prisons in
New Mexico.
Are we gonna be following up on
that? Is that something you
could look at?
Why aren't they doing it?
Yes, they haven't.
They haven't fully set up the
program that was called for in
in the bill that you sponsored
They argued pretty
Hard in HFC against the
significant increase in funding,
including using the opioid, uh,
money.
Um, and so that was put to
another use in Medicaid.
Um, instead, but yes, that would
be following up on uh, that
reentry as well as the
recidivism. That would be part
of that. Yeah. I mean, I. I
understand that they would argue
vehemently against having to do
some extra work. But if they
don't do that work, we're just
playing games with sending
people to prison and they come
out there just as addicted as
when they went in right and and
we'll be following up on that,
for sure in the evaluation,
particularly at the jails.
Where there's actually a really
good opportunity. Now that UN M
is going to be providing the
health care and the jail to have
a full continuum of services as
people re-enter the community to
make sure that they can start on
that if they're incarcerated and
continue it when they get out.
Um, that hasn't come to fruition
yet, but that's something that's
on our radar.
So for for parole and
revocation, I think you know, we
hire pros, but sometimes they're
testing times, right?
Give a guy scheduled for a test
at 10 and leaves for a job at
six or seven and he's got leave
and come back. And sometimes
you're 3040 miles from there. I
mean, they need to make some
adjustments. So those guys work
full time in and they can do
them four hours after hours and
try to work with them, cause
that
That frustrates the
To death. Some of those
employees, right?
They wanna check. They want
paychecks. They wanna take him
home. All I gotta leave today,
cause I gotta go.
Go and pee in a cup and and do
my testing me my parole officer.
So if you really wanna keep in
the workforce and
I think they're gonna have to
make work right? Are there
policies that are making it even
harder for somebody? That's, uh,
trying to do the right thing?
Yeah.
I think we're good.
OK, um, page 35 the natural
resources. So Austin Davidson
slides over from the judicial,
uh, block in the natural
resources. Um and then Helen
also has a couple of agencies,
the land office and and game and
fish.
Um
Again heavy dose of oversight.
This interim with all the
different appropriations. You've
been making huge appropriation
increases for natural resources
agencies, including, uh, non
recurring
Uh, such as the, uh, work for
the
Middle and lower Rio Grande.
At the state engineers on
continuing to monitor and when
my activity report comes out,
Uh, this week, there's a a
vacancy in the
A female office on the calf
canyon. Uh, reimbursement.
That's
Causing, uh more delays over
there. So monitoring that 100
million that you set aside but
also the recovery efforts.
Um, for the the folks in that
area of the state. Um
For the Hermit's Pete CAF Canyon
fire recovery.
Environment Department, um,
looking at their vacancy rates
and ability to hire as well as
the state engineer.
And then working with the state
engineer to
Try to revamp their performance
Metrics. Uh, we had pretty good
success working with the
Environment Department number a
number of years ago.
Um, probably some work to do
there and then five, monitoring
the implementation of that
appropriate placement strategy
for salaries at the Environment
Department.
Um, for those those employees
There's a number of secondary
items for, uh, monitoring as
well.
Mr Chairman, And with that, I'd
be happy to answer any
questions.
Mhm.
Let me ask you, the the the
exact water plan. I think we
need to add that in there under
the Environment department,
we'll we'll cover that for the
work for the proposed work plan
for the subcomittee.
OK, later on and then, um
Uh, and the game and fish in
Today's D Day. I looked at the
draw, but
I I My phone is gonna be ringing
tonight when all my buddies say
I didn't draw shit.
OK?
Mhm.
Mhm.
Any other questions, OK?
Economic development. Um
Julissa.
Number one thing is continuing
our work looking at the
different business incentives.
Um
Including Lita the
implementation of the
Opportunity Enterprise Revolving
fund. We've got lots of
different targeted tax credits.
Um how are they working? What's
the cost per job?
Um
Are we investing in areas of the
state geographically that are
distressed that need investment,
Or are we simply steering all of
our money to areas that are
already performing well and and
giving them a leg up? Uh,
potentially at the expense of
other areas.
Looking at continuing to work on
the economic development
strategic plan, Uh, and their
targeted industries and how they
gonna be rolling out, uh,
working with them.
And then three. Just monitoring
Um, the patient's compensation
fund when we look in the cash
balance report
You'll see on a cash basis.
That fund is flush.
On an actuarial basis where
they're projecting out what
their potential liabilities is
going to be.
Um is the reason why the
patient's compensation fund rate
increases are going so high I? I
don't anticipate necessarily
recommendations coming out of
this other than just monitoring
it. Um, because it it has been
having budget implications as
you've continued to put money
into the patient's compensation
fund.
Um
For the last couple of years.
Same thing with monitoring the,
um O SI and, uh,
Significant increase. You
provided the health care
affordability fund. Um, our
projections I think starting
next fiscal year will it will
start with about $300 million
balance.
Um
And went to potential uses of
that are going forward.
monitoring the clean energy
initiatives under the ETA.
As well as the Energy Grid
Modernization Act.
And then, uh, the investment in
the Santa Teresa border zone
through Lita and other capital
projects with that I'd stop and
ask.
Answer any questions?
Uh, under the superintendent
insurance. We're gonna need to
dive into insurance costs cause
I mean
I. I live. I have a property in
the middle of Gallup and I was
denied because I was in a wild
land.
Forest fire for commercial
property that was
100 and 50 ft from a hydrant.
And so I mean, these insurances
are just kind of raking us over
the coals.
And everybody's pain,
especially, I think a lot of
people's house is just either
denials or skyrocketing costs
with not the number of claims.
In that area may be spread
around, but
Um
Uh, we may dwell into that
pretty hard. I mean, even with
health care premiums, I think
Blue Cross blue Shield just sent
me a six across the board.
And then when you have 25
employees and I on that blue
cross blue
She'll plan. I mean, they the
You're splitting that right? And
so we're gonna have to really
look hard on on what insurance
companies are are doing to us
here.
OK, OK, we can have that.
Theres.
Yes, but who pays? Is it kind of
the question? There's been some
federal I think grants that have
come through, Uh, the state, but
that's something for us to the
ratepayers recover that or if
there's additional subsidies
that would be needed and what
exactly grid modernization looks
like That's
Um, those are things for us to
study.
Yes, sir. Mr Chairman.
Dixon.
Thank you. Mr Chair. On that
point about grid modernization.
Um
In discussions with the PRC. Um
it would also be useful to know
if there are changes, Um, to
statute that we should be
looking at to support build out.
Um, of some of the electric
infrastructure, um so that we
can increase transmission lines,
um, to support economic
development.
Hey, Keep rolling. Charles. We
got
You might have to go a little
bit quicker. Just
Uh, this is just general
oversight of a general
government, um, for ginger.
Uh, page 47.
Let's see Emily.
You could stand up. Emily is a a
new analyst that started
Right in the
Tail end of the F CS work and
and during the session, and
she's gonna be she's working on
AD FA as well as doing all of
our a T, um, oversight work.
So
One of her main tasks. This
interim is to continue the work
that we did last Inter I getting
a better understanding of local
government financing.
Um, as it continues to be, we
need to have a better
understanding of that, as you're
considering tax policy changes,
particularly gross receipts,
taxes, understanding the role
of, um property taxes that are
not necessarily a a state issue
outside of, um some geo bonding,
um, and what important role that
plays for local governments,
But, uh, and how that plays into
your capital outlay system as
well.
Major focus on, um, the Medicaid
management information system
oversight as well as the Health
Department's All payer claims
database.
She'll be doing the quarterly
reports for all the different IT
projects and monitoring, uh,
implementation of the secretary
of state's new authority to be
able to draw money, um, for
elections out of the General
fund, independent of an
appropriation.
As well as, uh, monitoring the
implementation of all the
broadband appropriations.
Is he a Taurus? Um
He, um
We'll be focusing on the, uh
G DPC S waitlist for
guardianship services as a key
and then working with the state
auditor's office. He'll also be
assisting Scott Sanchez on the,
um
Criminal justice block as force
multiplication because he's got
a lot of small agencies that
there's not a lot of things
during the interim going on, so
we're gonna shift him over to
help us do research and analysis
and in those public safety
agency.
Page 53 Joey Simon. He has the
Transportation Department as
well as the
Um insurance agencies and spo.
Um so again heavy oversight on
all the different
appropriations, um, that you've
made for correct for DOT and
road projects they tend to have
get going in about three years.
So you make an appropriation,
and it's gonna sit kind of idle
there for a couple of years
before it.
Its going so working with the
department to figure out lining
up Peter Money to be shovel.
ready? Um, going forward would
be one of the key things he'll
look at.
Facilities. Management, Um
Including the what's gonna
happen with the Executive office
building? Um, if anything you
saw the city of Santa Fe, the
historic review board.
Um
Denied that project. Uh, to tear
down the casitas. There is a
statute that allows for a state
local, Uh, Historical review
board to try to come to some
agreement, but that that's a
stalled project as long as those
casitas are there, and they did
approve tearing down the
country. Ortiz, um, building
Um, and a little building behind
it.
Uh, Joey's been working hard
with our contractor on the
review of, um the salaries and
benefits for state employees,
and you'll get a report on that
in May. Charles represents
Thank you very much. Mr Chair on
the office of Broadband, Um
Helpful to understand, uh, the
sort of the nuanced fate
strategy there, particularly
around Middle mile.
Um, I It's been a while since
we've sort of
Heard that that was a couple of
me. It would be neat. It would
be good to have that.
And then as it regards, the DOT,
Um
Including the public transit
side and how they interface and
what they're not only
implementation of the large
amounts of new funding. We've
given the great bonding package
that but what they're thinking
about in your time frames around
emissions. OK, we can add that
we were going. We were
Kicking around the idea of doing
a follow up. Uh, study on the
rail runner. Please Don't
Senator Padilla. Thank you.
Chair and thank you, vice chair
for the comment on the
broadband. Um, also is it is
cybersecurity somewhere in here?
Uh,
Oh, boy, That's just gonna keep
whacking us right in the face
Every every time we turn, I'll
have to look for it. If it's
not, it will be on there. I
think it should. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. One quick question.
Is there somewhere that we could
put in this report about? Uh I
in broadband and
DOT the amount of studies and
and
Different permits that we have
to do before we can even
Start digging A, uh any dirt
whatsoever and and give us a a
chance to figure out how much
Uh,
Free time we need before we can
do something. Shovel. Yes, sir.
Mr. Chairman. We'll
We've been working on a an
update to a broadband report
that covers some of those. You
know, we've gotten a huge flood
of federal funds.
That from what it appears they
had an expectation that we would
be ready.
So there is a very finite
window.
To be able to do a massive build
out. Um and there's some
question whether there's
The enough capacity, um, at the
ISP level in order to
Do that in places that need it
the most, But we're we're
actually
Oh, let's go back to TOT. I
mean, I wanna tighten up some of
their numbers. I really don't
haven't got my heads around how
they budget money, right?
I mean that we understand their
maintenance money. Money's
budget, but
Everywhere I go. It's all about
potholes. And you just heard
representative Alison talk about
potholes and maintenance.
But it seems like they have a
squishy budget that they can
just all of a sudden move money
around and fix Santa Fe. And
then where did that money that
was appropriated for? That
project get pulled from and when
they putting that back in the
next project, and
And so it just seems like
They don't really budget their
money every single penny and say
these are where we're gonna
spend it for this year.
And then they just
Move it over here and move it
over there.
I mean, there are some issues
with our BC transfers that was
federal money and
I really wanna see how they how
they're really managing that.
Yes, we're proposing doing a a
deeper dive into that aspect of
their, um, budget. Um, which
often gets overlooked because
it's other state funds. They
also from the standpoint of just
End up doing like heavy
maintenance. Part of it is that
they've got a revenue stream
that hasn't kept pace pace over
the last 30 years with
Um what they're expected to do
so that revenue stream issue you
know is not going away. Um as we
move number of electric
vehicles, which I'm told are
often heavier than what you're,
um gasoline powered.
Cars are you know what the
implications of that will have
from revenue as well as a wear
and tear, um, standard.
OK?
Represent my sorry about that.
That's OK. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. I don't know where
this falls, but I just see
general government. Um I've had
a lot of of, uh, counties reach
out to me about Iro requests.
And I don't know if this falls
if it can fall in here anywhere,
but I really think we need to
take a look at the cost. I mean,
in statute, they have to
To, uh, provide those, um and
it's costing like my little
county of cat, my large county
of Katherine, with very few
people, tons of money.
And so I don't know if that
falls in here anywhere.
We can add it as a secondary
item because it does have
physical implications Agencies.
Uh, complain about the the raft
of I request. One answer to that
is make more information
available on the Web.
Um, but there's a lot of you
can't make everything.
But you know what's the what's
the right balance for people to
get access to information about
their government they're paying
for, but in a way that maybe it
doesn't overburden an agency.
Thank you.
Um for the Economist, Mr
Chairman, um, following up on
the the raft of new earmarks
that are coming forward each
year and the implications of
that on our general fund revenue
and stability.
Um
Following up on a volatility
analysis of our revenue streams
from what we did in 2019.
Continuing to look at the
opportunity costs for, uh, cash
financing capital outlay. We may
be in a position to continue
doing that, Uh, next next
session, and what that means for
Um
Those other revenues that we
wouldn't need to be bonding for.
I already mentioned the property
tax.
Um, study.
But then also, um Brendan would
lead the way on this for
conducting an analysis of, uh,
our business makeup in New
Mexico.
Our economic diversity and the
kinds of industry clusters that
we already have. Are we building
on our strengths, um, or
training to build something, Uh,
new from scratch.
And secondary issues are really
helping continue to build our
capacity for the consensus
revenue, estimating
Uh, process.
No, I'm just making sure I'm on
your page.
Capital outlay.
Um, again, Heavy dose of
Oversight. With all the
different things you've
appropriated, you'll get a
capital outlay report later this
afternoon.
Um, you know,
We had close to
Uh, 5 billion in the pipeline
coming out of the session, You
added another 2 billion to that,
Um,
Demand for capital outlay
continues to exceed the even the
vast sums that you're putting
into it. Um
Continuing to focus on the
capital outlay process and how
we can, uh, get projects
completed rather than starting
new, half funded ones.
Continuing the goal of
Uh, greater oversight on
reauthorization, um and then
continuing to monitor
construction cost and the
implications on our ability to
like I said, buy more and
better.
Then Helen has a communications
plan to help support you all in
the office.
And an interest of time.
Michaela quickly go through the
program evaluation. This work
plan gets updated every month
for you all, Um
So the current projects we've
got in the pipeline are are
getting started on that
corrections reentry.
Um, you'll get
Uh, doing a program evaluation
on the higher ed certificates
and the workforce credentials.
Um, going out and kicking the
tires on state funded water
projects.
And we've got what we call
policy spotlights, uh, that will
be coming on student attendance
and quality of life projects.
Uh, that will be issued in in Mr
Chairman. Um, page 71 is what
we're proposing for hearing
topics for the child welfare.
uh, subcomittee and and when
those might occur
Again. They're focusing on
I kicking off?
Maybe in June with just a
landscape understanding of the
child welfare system.
Uh, incorporating legist that
And then what works when it
comes to prevention and early
intervention services.
Having another subcomittee in
September.
Continuing to build on those
that work, including the child
welfare system workforce.
And then by November, uh,
anticipating receiving the
Senate Memorial five
recommendations and then CYFT
budget, Uh, hearing and legis
that would be in December.
I'll stop there before going to
the water subcomittee.
Representative Garrett.
You, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Charles so much. I have a
question. Where does artificial
uh, intelligence? A I is anybody
looking at that? I mean, it's
permeating every single
government.
Area.
It. It's something Mister
chairman if you like we can add
to the general government. It is
on our radar.
What it is.
A little bit unclear right now
and what its implications are. I
know the federal government's
been doing a lot of work, we can
look to those
Best practices, but I think
you're right. So the next one Mr
Chairman was
The water subcomittee.
Um, focusing on two major
issues. One the strategic water
supply. Um, proposal that
Uh, didn't pass this last
session, but it's probably not
going away getting a deeper
understanding of what that looks
like.
As well as, um
Understanding the state of oil
and gas regulations and impact
of any potential.
Um, set back, uh, policies and
what it might have both on
Um from a health standpoint, as
well as
We propose having those
And, uh, June and September
along with the child welfare.
And then the final one. These
are included in all of the other
staff.
But just to have a stand alone
legis that schedule. Uh, this is
what we're proposing for how to
roll those out. Um
The new editions would be, uh,
transportation swapping out, um
instead of the environment
department.
Uh, the rest would be a Medicaid
would be, uh, focused on
behavioral health.
And basically, what are we doing
to expand the circuit? A regular
update on that?
And
With that.
That's a lot of work that we
anticipate doing, um, happy to
answer any other questions about
the subcommittees and legis that
Any other questions. I mean,
this is the draft outline of
what we're gonna be working on.
So
We know that the July meeting is
gonna change session July 18th
I don't know if it's worth to
come two days and then I have to
stay and how long it's gonna be
planned. So July LC may change a
little bit.
Soon as we can figure out if
it's
Questions and we moved the
capital to Gallup. It would be
better.
Representative Syria. Thank you,
Mr Chairman. Are we not having
any kind of
Yeah, And we just talked about
that.
Water water, which which date is
it?
That would be
Yes, that's a subcomittee. Yes.
Those will be proposed hearing.
Topics that, um are up for, you
know, revision of the
subcomittee or Dixon?
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um,
Charles, I apologize. I did not
flag this when we were
discussing public safety. Um,
but one of the things that, um
I've been interested in and I
reached out to LFC about is the
money that new Mexico is leaving
on the table. Uh, from, uh, the
legislative change in 2015
regarding civil asset forfeiture
and the federal sharing
secondary bullet somewhere, but
it would be helpful. Uh, I think
for members to have an
understanding of the
Um
Amount of money that
We are not
Any other questions.
This is a draft. We'll try to
Wrap it up, maybe in gallop. And
then that way they can work on
the plan, since we don't know
what's gonna happen in July, and
so we're gonna have to make some
adjustments. I think we're good
Then. Charles, Right? Sounds
good. Yes, sir. Mister Chairman.
We're ready for PE D next.
You're up, Mr. Secretary. I
Madam Secretary to uh
Sunny will tell us
Sonny, who's gonna start a shoe
or, uh, which
Whoever wants to go first.
Thank you, mister. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Thank you for having us
here today. I'm here, Uh,
joining with some of my fellow
education secretaries. Uh, we're
here today to give you an update
on our summer literacy programs
and some of the supports you
have around the risky uh,
Initiatives that we have going
on across the state.
So just to put this, uh,
conversation in context. Uh, Mr
Mr Chair and members of the
committee. Uh, I. I do wanna
thank you all for being very
supportive of these efforts, uh,
Over the last few years, we've
been able to really provide some
headway when it comes to
literacy across the state of New
Mexico to bring that back, Uh,
really Starting with the science
of reading, this has had a
tremendous impact on classrooms
across New Mexico. We continue
to see those impacts in a
positive way to this day, also
to remind everyone of the
supports we
That around dyslexia screeners.
This has been a tremendous
support for students across New
Mexico to make sure that they're
getting the specific
Uh, resources they need and
supports. They need moving
forward.
And also specifically the
letters. Training letters.
Training has been influential in
providing, uh, teachers across
New Mexico with the skills, the
tools and the curriculum, they
need to be able to be
successful. Uh, I've been doing
this job for for quite a while
now and I, I think back to my
days, uh, graduating with my
elementary degree, uh, coming
into my first classrooms as a,
uh, as a third grade teacher,
and I'll tell you what? I didn't
know how to be a reading
teacher. It took me some time to
be able
Figure that out, and we actually
learned that, um as I was a
classroom teacher we we're able
to do now is do two things. One
is that we're able to support
teachers across New Mexico with,
uh, structure, literacy
training. We see dramatic
increases and, uh, positive, uh,
support for students that are
currently in the classroom and
currently with, uh, New Mexico
teachers or we'll also making a
wonderful impact with our
teacher. Uh, our our, um, pre
pre service teachers, those that
are in with our universities
now.
We're building in structure
literacy curriculum into that,
so that when they graduate, they
will be much better, uh,
prepared to be able to become be
reading teachers in their
classrooms.
We're also, uh, very excited
about the model schools that
we've been able to build across
New Mexico. We and I'll be out
this, uh, talk a little bit of
more more about that. Um, but
those specific classrooms that
we've added additional
resources, uh, to be able to
support those, uh, those
classrooms, those students even
more.
So again through hospital two
through the General approach
Appropriation Act of 2024.
We have been able to train
currently, uh, at three letters
training. Of course, this goes
back years, We're able to train
our kinder 1st 2nd 3rd and now
our fourth grade teachers this
year we have 7533 333 teachers
can't talk this this afternoon.
I apologize. Um, in letters,
training, uh, with the
appropriations that we got
through house Bill two. We were
gonna be able to continue that
training next year to round that
out with our fifth grade
teachers and also any other
incoming teachers. We have K
through five, which is
Thus far, we've been able to
train over 13,000 teachers
across New Mexico and this is
really an important piece
because this would helps us
really implement these into the
classrooms is over 696
administrators. This includes
principles, superintendents and
in some cases, even school board
members very excited about that.
Of course, uh, we have been able
to stairs Step the training
Kinder 1st, 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and
very excited with your support.
We're gonna be able to take a
big leap forward this next year
with a $5 million budget to be
able to support all of our
middle school teachers, So we're
gonna be able to jump in with
our 6th, 7th and 8th grade
teachers and a very excited
about that work. We are very
much moving away from the notion
of that we first we learn to
read and then we read to learn
the truth is that we're always
learning how to become better
readers even as adults.
About the types of texts that
you've kind of gone through, Uh,
through books that you read over
time. You kind of try to
introduce yourself to new
genres. This is exactly what I
wanna do, Uh, especially in
secondary schools, middle and
high schools is to be able to
continue to expose them to
different types of literature
and make them be better readers
so that they're prepared as they
graduate for us. I wanted to
just, uh, point out a couple of
schools that I'm really excited
about that. We saw some really
wonderful gains. Um, over this
last year. Uh, we're gonna go to
Belen. This is where I grew up.
Uh,
Excited about Lauper, Musset
Elementary in 2022 24%
proficient 2023. We're looking
at 35.5% proficient. That's an
increase of 11.9%.
Also going to Carlos Elementary
in a PS.
We have in 2022 19.9% proficient
2023 34.3% proficient. That's a
14.4% gain in proficiency and
they are using structured
literacy to be able to help make
these games.
We were gonna switch it. You're
so kind.
So this next slide really gets
into a breakdown of what it
looks like across New Mexico
with all students and then also
the sub groups and there's a
couple of things I just want to
point out here when you look at
all students, this is where
you've been able to hear me talk
before the average gains we have
across the state of New Mexico
last year where 4% gains in
reading, that's good. That's a
positive move forward if we can
continue to have 4% gains year
after year after year, we're
going to
In a much better place.
Not good enough for us, though
we wanna be able to have much
faster gains. Much quicker
gains. Um, and to do that, we're
gonna continue to push forward
with the initiatives that we
have, uh, really invested in. I
do want to point out the native
American? Uh, uh, column or row
going across where we have 4.6%
gains.
This is huge. To be able to hold
on to. This is an area where
we're seeing, uh, Native
American gains outpacing the all
but this is also an area where
we don't usually see those types
of positive gains in that
community. So we're very excited
about that. We want to see that
continue.
I know you've all heard of the
Mississippi Miracle. The state
of Mississippi. They went from a
place where we're at now to, uh,
having some dra dramatic changes
and improvements, uh, over
really over a decade time frame.
And so I want to point that out
that it was not something that
happened overnight. It was
something that was very
intentional and very planned to
be able to see those games. But
I very I feel very optimistic
that we are going to be able to
absolutely see those games, but
we're gonna see it faster
because we have a much more
comprehensive system to be able
to do that, and we've been able
to see how it's done before
we're gonna talk a little bit.
About where, uh, where we
started with this with this
journey and, uh, where we're at
now.
Uh, just to, uh, just to talk a
little bit about Mississippi,
though. We know that this works
because we've seen it in other
places. Uh, we know this works
because in Mississippi, this
this these efforts saw the
greatest gains in that state
that they've ever seen before.
Uh, with those investments that
they've made, and I'll tell you
we're making more investments
than they are, and that's where
it comes to, to our plan of
being much more comprehensive in
our timelines. Uh, we know that
this is gonna be a positive, uh,
positive move forward for us.
Uh, again. Uh, we are not only
going to, uh outpace, uh,
Mississippi. We're gonna do it
faster. We're gonna do it
better, and we're gonna do it in
a way that we're gonna see and
continue those games moving
forward.
Last slide here is you heard me
talk about the eight structure,
Literacy model schools, Um as
really exemplars that we have in
the state. This is really what
we think of as our model schools
that we wanna be able that have
some additional resources that
go into that some of those
resources are really are around,
uh, really providing on site
coaching, providing grants to be
able to help support their
initiatives moving forward, uh,
and through additional training,
uh and really supporting those
individual schools to make sure
they're getting everything that
Need. I do want to point out
what those schools are Those a
model schools we have in
Albuquerque. We've got mountain
mahogany, Uh, international
school and Whitter Elementary.
We in Clovis. We've got, uh, the
arts academy at Bella Vista in
Gaston. We have vato Elementary
and Loma Linda Elementary in
Tier. C. We have TRC Elementary
Las Vegas. We have Los Ninos
Elementary.
Uh And then, of course, the next
step here is we've got 66
structured literacy support
schools. That's kind of our next
tier in in in supports that we
have around the state of New
Mexico to to provide additional
supports around coaching and
making sure that they have the
tools they need to be able to be
successful.
Again, I. I do want to point out
a few of those schools that, uh,
follow under our our literacy
support schools. I'm gonna need
my glasses for this one.
Uh, we've got, uh, Carlos
Elementary. I talked about
earlier. We got our Artesia. Uh,
Middle school. We've got Hill
Rise Elementary in Las Cruces in
Chat Hills Elementary in Rio,
Rancho. Uh, we've got double,
uh, Eagle Elementary in
Albuquerque, Uh, Country Club
Elementary in Farmington. Uh,
Mesa V Elementary in grants.
These are just some of the
schools that have all seen
double digit growth in their
literacy scores because they're
using structured literacy in a
very effective and efficient
way. So we want to be able to
continue to see those types of
Games and to do that.
We wanna be able to talk to you
about what's gonna come next.
And you've heard me talk a lot
about this, but, uh, really
around the efforts, we have
moving forward and what's gonna
happen this summer. So with
that, I'm gonna turn it over to
my partner, Uh, Mariana Padilla
to talk a little bit. About
what? You're gonna start seeing
very, very soon and the work is
happening right now.
Thank you, Mr Secretary. Thank
you, mr chairs and members of
the committee.
Um, I appreciate you asking us
to come today to talk about our
efforts around structured
literacy. Um, I really think
it's important to hear from
Secretary Romero share that
we're building at this point
with our summer reading program
we're building on comprehensive
investments in literacy in this
state that we've seen over the
last several years and just
really want to reiterate to you
that we are seeing improved
educational gains as a result.
Oh,
So where together?
The three education agencies, um
and the governor's office are
really excited to be rolling out
the New Mexico Summer reading
program.
I wanna start my first thinking
all of you for your support in
funding this reading program. We
could not do this without you.
You all came out early and were
very vocal, particularly the
Senate Finance Committee. Very
vocal in your support for this
reading program. I want to thank
you for that partnership. Um,
together we are able to
implement first ever programs
like this in New Mexico.
So this summer reading program
will be statewide. It's intended
to provide instruction and
intervention and literacy to
approximately 10,000 students
from kindergarten to eighth
grade our objectives for this
program and I'm sorry, my audio.
Is it weird for you all? Does it
sound OK?
Our objectives for this program
are simple.
That we want to see effort for
every participating student that
they have improved literacy
outcomes.
We want to measure those
improved outcomes by assessing
them both at the beginning and
at the end
And we wanna build their
confidence and their competence
in literacy cause we know of
kids don't feel good about their
ability to read and be
successful in school. It affects
so many other things, not just
in EL A but in all subjects and
in in their attendance in school
in general.
So this program model
Was informed by many other
literacy programs that we have
visited and researched from
around the state.
We have gone out and visited
many programs. Some of those
programs include the Kansas
Reading program at Pittsburgh
State University, the Ames
Academy and Institute in
Pennsylvania. Barksdale Reading
Center and in Mississippi. We've
met with the Mount Saint Joseph
University. They have a reading
center there. We've learned from
all of these different programs
as well as highly effective
programs here in New Mexico.
That have been very effective in
implementing this same model.
this very focused and in-depth
instruction.
And in all of these different
programs, they've all seen
significant gains for their
students that have have
participated. So I wanted you
all to know that we really spent
a lot of time being thoughtful
about this model.
We also know that, um many
states are doing this education
experts around the country are
really saying these types of
investments make a difference,
including from the US Department
of Education.
So next line. So what the model
looks like.
So this this model is intended
to be small groups. So we're
looking at 4 to 1 student to
instructor ratios, In-depth so
extensive time so four hours a
day for a 4 to 6 Week program.
Um, we are designing these with
the local partners. So our local
LEAS or organizations that are
hosting our program sites, and
they'll vary based on academic
calendars are all different or
on the needs of the community.
But we're we're really working
to make sure that that we're or
um they're following this model,
but that also reflect the needs
of the local community.
I had mentioned that, uh, we're
doing pre and post assessments
for all of our students, and
we're taking the time to really
do thorough. Um, trainings of
our literacy instructors.
So currently where we're at with
our registration of program
sites today we have 62 sites
have signed up to host the
reading program, and that number
is growing every day we are
doing personally making phone
calls to superintendents and
organizations saying, Hey, this
is an opportunity. This is a
state funded program that's
effective. It's an opportunity
for your students in your
community. Let us work with you
to establish a program site.
Um, we're recruiting
instructors. We obviously would
prefer licensed teachers and
many of our our schools are
saying yes. Our teachers want to
sign up, but it does not have to
be licensed teachers. We're
working with our educator prep
programs to get pre service
teachers to to also participate.
another other folks that are
really interested so far we have
222 instructors that have
applied to the state. We have
270 student.
Patients and with the
commitments that we have so far
from our partners were almost to
that 10,000 student goal, um
In order to further promote
this. We have a campaign where
we'll be promoting through
social media through billboards,
radio, particularly in rural
parts of the state, to make sure
that we're we're reaching
everyone and letting them know
that the state Legislature, the
state of New Mexico is investing
in this program for them.
Um, we're also asking the LEAS
to identify students directly
for them to say we're referring
students that could benefit from
this program. Just slide that
mic just a little bit further
away, OK?
That be
OK, thank you.
Um
Where am I? At?
We're also having meetings with
our tribal education departments
with other community partners to
make sure that we're having we
have really access everywhere.
Um and really designing once
again those programs locally
next slide, So this is just, um
A screenshot of our website that
we created for this summer
program. So this on this
website people can go to learn
about the program to learn about
our overall efforts in literacy
to register their child or
Children to participate. An
individual can apply to be
illiteracy instructor on this
website and then also, program
sites can also register on this
website. So we really encourage
you to not only
Visit it yourself, but also send
it out to your constituents. Let
them know that this is something
that's available to their
Children.
And then the next slide is about
the capital investment. So
Secretary Rodriguez and as many
of you know, because of your
efforts, $30 million was
appropriated to the New Mexico
Higher Education Department for
the New Mexico Literacy
Institute. And some of you may
be wondering why the higher
Education Department will out of
these three education agencies
are department actually
administers capital outlay to
our higher education
institutions, So we already know
how to do capital outlay and the
knowledge to do that, so that's
why it sits with us, But we
Are partnering with early
childhood education and care
department, the Public Education
Department, the Office of the
Secretary. I'm sorry, the office
of the governor and then, of
course, the General Services
Department to deploy an RSP so
that we can go ahead and engage
who is interested in being a a
potential site for the New
Mexico Literacy Institute or
building a new Institute for the
state of New Mexico.
Now It's also really important
to note that the institute will
include instruction and
interventions for Children and
adults in the state of New
Mexico. As you know, there are
25 29% of new Mexicans who are
not proficient readers, so it's
really critical to not only do
touch points with our students
but also their families to
ensure that they are able to
read proficiently and can read
to their students at home. We're
also doing educator,
professional development
coaching, mentoring and breast
best practices. We are also
doing
System assessments and
diagnostics to ensure early
education of dyslexia and other
learning needs. And I think I
may be stumbling over my words
more than you, Mister secretary
today I apologize. And then of
course, we are enhancing the
science of reading and all of
our education preparation
programs across the state of New
Mexico, which is a partnership
of all three education agencies
moving into the fall, 2024
semester. And then of course, we
are working really hard to
ensure students and their
families.
And get proficiency gains
through the New Mexico Literacy
Institute. And, of course, those
summer programs and then I also
think it's critical to note that
Over the summer last summer when
I was very pregnant, these
education secretaries actually
went to the places that Mariana
mentioned and we saw facilities
We saw what worked. We saw
places that needed improvements,
so we generally have a really
fantastic idea of how these
spaces need to look and be
designed in order to meet the
need of our students and our
families across the state of New
Mexico.
So with that, Mr Chair, we stand
for any questions, OK?
Dixon.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Uh, could we go? Uh, Mr
Secretary, could we go back to,
um, slide? Um six if that's OK.
Um my questions, Mr Chair and
Secretary.
Deal exclusively with the summer
reading program. Um, I'm very,
uh, excited about the literacy
efforts that the state's making.
I think those will be very
impactful, but with regard to
the, UM, summer program
And actually, um
Miss. And I, uh sorry. Pia.
Might, um be in a better spot to
answer this? I don't know, but
Could I get a little bit more
elaboration on the difference
between 270 student applications
and the anticipated Stu student
enrollment and what anticipated?
uh, specifically means
Mr. Chair, Representative Dixon.
Thank you for that question.
Yes. Uh, so to kind of put that
in perspective, Uh, the website
just launched within the last
few days. We are now working
with, uh with superintendents
and LE A and charter leaders
across the state to start to
build this number up. So in
those conversations, we've had
that We've got commitments from
we That's where we get the the
larger number closer to 10,000.
the 220. I'm sorry. The, uh 270
student applications that's
who's filled out so far. Um
Anticipate that we're going to
see that number. Uh, increase
very rapidly over the next few
days and over the next couple of
weeks. So again, these just
rolled out over the last few
days, uh, with the registration
links and making sure that we
are communicating both with LEAS
charters are our tribal
education communities and so
again if I had, if I could see
you in a couple weeks, I would
be happy to give you some
updated numbers.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Secretary. That would actually
be really helpful. If if you
could keep us posted I. I mean,
I know that my Children's summer
plans have been set since, uh,
February, Um and so I'm really
interested to see
How that 9000
Comes about, um
Along along those lines with
regard to the students. Um are
we
And if so, how are we
prioritizing? Um, the students
that are most in need of these
services. Mr. Chair
Representative. Absolutely.
We're having those conversations
with both, uh superintendents
and charter leaders about who
these students should be. We're
looking at wanting to recruit
those students that are in need,
uh, those that are falling
behind when it comes to reading
and literacy, uh, in their
schools right now, again, we are
looking at incoming
kindergartners through outgoing
eighth graders. So having those
very specific conversations
about
That means, um, in that we're
looking at some of the
assessments that they're taking,
Uh, like a I station as an
indicator of what that could be,
Uh, we do have beginning of the
year middle of the year score so
we can see growth and that is
the conversations that we have
to help recruit those families
and those students in that, but
also having the same
conversations with families,
too. Uh, families that feel that
they need that extra support to
be able to move forward again.
Only 38% of our students across
New Mexico are proficient. So
the majority of students are
gonna need this. This and so,
uh, in in those conversations
with superintendents and
cheerleaders, uh, they don't see
a hardship in trying to find who
they are, and that's where we
get that commitment of that
9377. And so we will continue to
be working with our partners
Education partners to to to
build that number up.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Secretary. Um, the 62 current
program sites. Um, are those
existing schools? Are they? What
are those program sites? Thank
you, Mister. Chair
representative. Yes, Those are
existing schools right now. Um,
so again, we're looking at
partnering with individual
schools. Uh, through those LE, a
with individual charters. We're
also looking at out of school
time partners. We're also
working with municipalities and
counties with some of their
summer school programs. So
again, the
That's 62 is a little bit of a
mix of some of those. But again,
I do. Uh, I'm very optimistic. I
know that That number is gonna
jump very high very quick as
we're having those
conversations, uh, really about
some of the details about how
they are are gonna be able to
partner with us. So once we have
those conversations, we're
they're they're kind of really
just want to know how to one
sign up as a site next how to
sign up instructors and the next
how to sign up? Uh, those
students and those are those are
all happening right now as we
speak,
and Mr
Chair, Madam vice chair. If you
go to literacy.nm.gov, you can
actually see those 62 program
sites already identified on that
website.
Great. Um, thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you, Secretary. Mr Chair.
I'm sorry, Representative Dixon.
We will eventually have a map
that will show every single
state
That is signed up because we
don't actually have, um, signed
up yet officially, um, we don't
have the map up yet And so
again, it's a difference between
Um, the school saying we're
committing? Yes, we wanna do
this. We think we can have this
Many of our students
participate, but we just haven't
officially signed them up.
Great. Um, thank you, Mr Chair,
And thank you, Um, so I noticed.
So the program is four hours a
day. Um
And, uh, 4 to 6. Weeks in
duration. Um
Is there. I mean, given the age
of these students, are we
providing food and what is the
transportation structure? Thank
you. Yes. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chair Representative.
Absolutely. We're thinking of
the the entire picture. So with
that, uh, we're looking at a
four hour a day commitment. 4 to
6 weeks, The 4 to 6 weeks really
comes into play with what
individual communities may have
with their summer. Um some are
some some are actually starting
a little bit early, so that
we're we're trying to be
accommodated into that. But with
that, I think this is also an
important point that you bring
up
That they will be able to take a
part in this, uh, Preser lunch
programs, and so we will make
sure that they have access to
those breakfast and lunches and
but also building in. Um, uh,
transportation for many of those
communities, so there is a
transportation allocation for
districts so they can build in
bus routes to that Also
Thank you, mister. Chair. Thank
you, Secretary. So, um so the
state will support the
transportation costs, Mr. Chair
Representative. Absolutely that
as part of that $30 million
allocation from the Legislature,
Uh, portion of that will be
budgeted for transportation and
Mr Chair and Secretary and food.
The food you mentioned is also
covered by the state. So that's
not going to be borne by the
program sites. Is that correct
federal programs, Mr. Chair,
Representative Dixon just to
clarify. We have
Summer mill programs that our
schools are available. Those are
federally funded programs. And
so, um, what we are doing is
again working with the local
school to design what already
works. Some of them already have
summer programming, and they're
just building this in to their
existing program, so there are
already transporting kids to
school. They already have their
meals worked out. And so this is
just a component of a full day
option. Which really, we know
works for families is
A full day program. We're doing
that as much as possible.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and thank
you, Miss P. That's great to
hear. I really appreciate. Uh,
not reinventing the wheel. Um or
creating something new. So I'm
very appreciative. Um, that you
guys are integrating to, um
existing, um, programs. Um
The last question that I had is,
um how the true the tutors are
being trained. Mister Chair, Uh,
Representative Dixon? Yes, We
are actually, uh, going to be
partnering with an outside
contractor to provide the
professional development in
structure. Literacy. Uh, we have
an RFPO. Right now. We will be,
uh, finalizing that RP here
soon announcing those
contractors. I anticipate that
we may have more than one
contractor to be able to, uh,
spread the the the support
across the state of New Mexico.
Uh
One of the things that
contractors will be doing is
providing that professional
development that'll happen
around the last week of May, Uh,
we're looking at a 40 hour
training program. Uh, over five
days.
Uh, to be able to do that, Uh,
it it may be a combination of in
person and virtual training for
that, and this will be a great
opportunity for those that have
already been, uh, letters
trained to get an additional
structure. Li training,
structured literacy training and
also any of, uh, anybody that
has not been trained. This will
be a great opportunity for them
to get that. Thank you so much.
Thanks for the, uh, additional
information. Thank you, Mr
Chair.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I
appreciate it. Um And you know,
I'm gonna I'm gonna ask
questions from the perspective
of of a parent in, uh of a 10
year old, fourth grader, public
schools, and so I'm I'm gonna
build upon what? Um
Representative Dixon was talking
about in the program model in
the four D model.
Um, so schools right now are
recommending 30 days reading,
Uh, time for 30 an hour to to 30
minutes at least reading time
for at home with parents or when
they're doing that. So instruct
in a four hour day, I'd like to
have some some more perspective
on that. Because and I, I
understand you're gonna put this
into the programs that are
already in our our schools like
for Santa Fe District. We have
the after the summer programs
that a majority at school
locations So are you gonna like
I mean, I we This will take more
time. And I want you to be brief
on this, But I'm looking at the
feasibility of a four hour day
literacy program. So it was the
So, um, Mr Chair, Representative
Lujan again. We've seen other
program models like this. So the
four hour time is not, um
Uh, a complete four hours of
instruction. It will look kind
of like a
A school day. In a way they'll
come in. They'll have
opportunity to kind of get
oriented. They'll have breaks
right. It's not gonna be, um, a
complete four hours without any
sort of other
Break or fun time, so that will
kind of be built into that four
hour period, But the majority of
it will be focused on on
instruction. Direct instruction.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I
appreciate that and and our
after school programs and summer
programs, Uh, this is gonna go
to LC. Um, What was that amount
of money that we totally put
into the budget, and there was a
There was a
Some missing language during the
session that didn't accompany
for all different types of
programs or or this such
And I. I just wanted to follow
up on that Mr Chair.
Mr Chair and representative, I
believe you're talking about the
15 million
As appropriate for out of school
time programs. There was also an
earmark.
For about 8.5 million of that to
be used for high dosage
tutoring. I appreciate that, uh,
that follow up with that, Uh,
that's a lot of money that we're
investing and III. I feel
assured that we are moving in
the right direction. But I I
want to follow up on how we're
going to with our after school
programs, too, And if we're
going to integrate the the
literacy programs in the next,
uh, school year, and what's
going on there? Thank you,
mister Chair for the time.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. And
thank you for your presentation.
I was curious with the four
hours daily. Are you mandating
days?
Mr. Chair, representative. So,
uh, in this, this will be again.
A, uh, The intent is to start,
Uh, early in June to go. Maybe,
uh, midway through July,
depending on, uh, summer school.
Uh, I'm sorry. Summer. Um, uh,
schedules it'll be between a 4
to 6 week program.
And is that five days a week
it'll be five days a week, four
hours a day.
So you're all you a RE mandating
days, OK and then on your
website. It says that one of the
frequently asked questions is
will food be provided for my
child? And it says districts and
charter schools are encouraged
to provide breakfast, lunch and
or snacks during the summer
reading program. For more
information, Please contact your
local site.
Uh, it says the same thing with
the transportation. So are Are
you saying that
You're going to provide schools
additional money if they want to
provide transportation, or is
this coming out of their budget?
Mr. Chair, Representative. Uh,
yes. So when it comes to, uh,
the food, uh, both this will be
part of the summer lunch
programs that are federally. Um,
uh, provided so again. What we
want to do is be able to partner
with schools with programs that
they already have in place.
Those are some of the
conversations we're having with
superintendents about where to
specifically provide those those
sites and that's part of that
conversation again. We do have
budget for, uh some
transportation. And so we have
those conversations with
Uh, with districts that that
could be made available to them,
But again, we want to try to
provide an opportunity for
existing summer programs so that
we can be as efficient as
possible area is so would a
school mister chairman and and
secretary what a school be
denied at any point in time if
they wanted to do this if they
didn't have an existing program,
or would you go to existing
programs first and then
secondary.
For schools that don't have an
extra chair representative. It
would be my intent to, uh, try
to work and make sure that we
provide, uh the site that would
be best best serve those
students, So I in working with
those superintendents and local
charter leaders will do
everything possible to make sure
that we can We can make that
happen. OK, thank you for that,
and I looked on the website and
I couldn't find
Uh, a list of the 62 sites.
Uh, anywhere on the website. Um,
uh, Representative Sarinana was
so kind to pull up her computer.
Um, but we can't find it so I'd
really like to to get the list
of where the sites are because I
wanna see if it's you know if
there's 52 of them in at a PS or
if there's if they're spread
across the state, so I would
really like to be able to
To get a copy of that some way
somehow.
Um, go ahead, Mr. Chair. Rep.
Armstrong will absolutely do
that. We do have a map that
we're tracking. Um, but we
didn't wanna put up a map
prematurely because say, we know
a PS has committed X number of
sites. They haven't been fully
established yet, so we don't
want to misinform parents and
think. Oh, well, there's not a
program in my area because it's
not yet on the map.
However, we can send you, um
regular updates cause every day
we're adding new sites. New
students sort of registrants and
we can keep you updated on all
of that, as this moves forward,
Yeah, I would just, uh,
ultimately just like to know the
sites and if they're really, uh,
across the state of New Mexico
if they're really, uh,
concentrated in one area that
maybe is not very rural New
Mexico where I represent
That is, you know, kids riding
buses for an hour and a half.
one way to get to school, So I
don't think that this is
And really be utilized in rural
New Mexico, possibly if there's
kids that live in town, uh, that
they could utilize that, But I'm
I'm gonna be curious to see the
map and see what schools um
actually
Uh, do that. And so I just had
heard Secretary Romero say that
there was a list.
00 was it. You OK? Somebody said
there was a list and I don't see
a list. It was going to be on in
week. We thought it was a
little. It was a little
premature to post that on the so
we're just saying right now it's
statewide because we're all
we're still establishing those
sites. But like I said earlier,
we are doing direct outreach to
every single LE A around the
state. Um and really trying to
be creative and and and working
through the model at their
specific site, cause we want
every every
They have access. Of course, the
funding only goes so far, but,
um, we're trying to make sure
that it is the intent has always
been the statewide and we're
gonna work hard with every
community to try and make it
work. I will say there are some
communities who are saying we
already have our own literacy
program planned for this summer.
We're good this summer. Thank
you so much. And so there is
some of that. Well, that thank
you for that, Mr Chairman. I was
just, you know, I was going to
click on it to try to register a
child and my cookies won't allow
it.
I just wanted to see if I could
if I could really register one
of my grandkids in Magdalena,
you know, and I have kids. I
have grandkids that are
homeschooled that are in charter
schools, private schools and
public schools. So I just
Wanted to to get. Uh all that
out there. Uh, Mr Chairman and
Secretary Omero. I just wanted
to bring up the fact and you
don't have to answer me now, but
I had sent you a letter asking
you to go on a bus ride in Ker
County, and I haven't gotten a
response. And so I would really
like a response to that. Not
now. You can do it offline
because there's a lot of people
with questions. The other thing
that I'd really like a response
to is, Um every rep, uh,
Republican House member and
every Republican Senate member
Sent you a letter asking you to
delay the implementation of the
180 days and we've not received
a response on that, either. And,
um
I my phone. I would love for you
to be the reciprocant of my
phone calls.
In my area.
Who are there? I mean, I think
you will be met with pitchforks
and shovels. Um, because it's
It's a very serious in Catron
County specifically.
Um, every one of those schools
I was on the phone yesterday
with a lady that her
27 year old twins or 11, year
old son and her 15 year old son.
Ride the bus an hour and a half
one way.
To school daily.
So thank you. Thank you,
Representative Thompson.
So I just wanna bring us back to
page three.
And look at the outlier there.
Students with disabilities is
really an outlier, um, and has
been for the 40 years that I've
been working in that system and
and I will say that I met with
these folks yesterday and I'm
very feeling very positive that
as I told them, I feel like for
40 years I've been banging my
head against the rock, and we
finally finally found the
tunnel. We don't see the light
at the end of the tunnel, but
now we found the
So I'm just saying this to
encourage you all to really,
really pay attention to special
Ed. That's one of the groups in
Yazi Martinez and if we don't
start paying attention to them,
we'll never get out from under
that. So support special ed
changes. Thank you.
Representative Baca.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you. Panel.
Um, I'm gonna turn your
attention to the same side
slide. Three, please.
Um
One of the things Mr Chairman
and Mr and panel is as far as we
have a total picture of overall
proficiency. What about the
great bands and what assessment
was being used to, um calculate
these proficiencies?
Thank you, Mr. Chair,
Representative Baca for these
calculations for proficiency,
the Nemaha was used.
Thank you, Mr Chairman and for
the public What? What grades?
Are you using The S.
338 thank you.
So, um, thank you, Mr Chairman.
And thank you so
One of the A. As for those of us
that sit on both appropriations
and LES C
When we're talking about looking
at the SCG, and we're looking at
targeted monies towards school
reform.
It would be helpful in the
future to to have some of those.
What is the impact of
Of the early childhood
investment that we made which I
support.
What is the impact that we have,
Uh, with middle school, which I
do think is pro. So in in
future, I think that would be
helpful because
Our high schools as we've seen
the graduation rates for others.
But many of the problems are
actually compounded in our early
grades. So, um, Mr Chairman, the
O the other thing I want to
bring up
Is the, uh, Institute and I keep
bringing this up. Um
My my question. Uh, to you, Mr
Chairman and panel.
Is a $30 million. That's been,
um, proposed for this.
Uh, one of the, uh, concerns I
have is being a central
location.
Will not provide access and Mr
Chairman in panel
I think that there is a
mechanism. The R ECS for smaller
rural districts may be a way so
rather than build a building.
We could actually support some
of these region. Uh, regional
cooperators that already support
small communities. So that is a
a concern With that, Um
And again you don't have to
respond. But I I do or do Would
you like to respond to that
Mister Chair representative?
Absolutely. So we will have a
centralized location for the
institute. But I think it's
really important to say that we
will have satellite locations as
well in rural frontier and
tribal communities throughout
the state, and that will be
determined through the RFP
process.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. And
thank you for that. The the
question I have is a follow up
to that.
Madam secretary is how many
permanent FTES are we looking at
Employing through this
institute, this $30 Million
Institute at
the institute itself and, uh
throughout the state.
Mister T. That's a fantastic
question. That's something that
has to be determined. So we are
working with our partners to
determine that, but I'll give
you an example in higher
education for one of our
programs. So the school of
Nursing is a program that has
classrooms labs, Um and other
facilities for their students.
Right now we have approximately
25 FTE that are dedicated to
teaching on that site, and then
we have an additional 20 support
staff related to the school of
nursing. Once again, I
apologize. I'm using higher
education as an example.
But that is a center that is
very similar to the education of
and and thank you, Mr Chairman
and thank you panel. The one
when we're looking at permanent
FTS. That's a reoccurring cost
and I. I have to emphasize that
if we're looking at 50 FTEs
Uh, with benefits and everything
else that that does become a A
reoccurring cost of a
Pretty substantial, uh, number.
Uh, my last thing, Mr Chairman.
Is regarding the summer
Institute. Um
And Mr Chairman I. I
I been in education, 31 years
and many years ago, we actually
had summer school and we had
support and money given to
summer schools.
Uh, my my question really is
If the transportation how How do
we correlate
Capital dollars. And how is that
gonna flow through through the
school districts or those
entities that will be providing
those services many times? It's
flown through the SEG.
But with this one we're we're
kind of talking about almost
apples to oranges. So any any
thoughts on that?
I mean, Miss Mister Chair and
representing my response would
be is this isn't um, a required
program for everyone say we were
to say across the board. Every
single school will provide a
summer reading program or summer
school program. That's not the
design of this program this
year. It may be that the
Legislature decides to look at
something that does happen
reoccurring every summer, and it
would flow through the SG, but
that's not the design.
Of of the program at this point,
and thank you and just a quick
follow up to that Mr Chairman
and panel
We're talking about, Um
Transportation. But what our
parents are that providing
transportation to and from are
there are they can also be
compensated for driving their
kid to these institutes or
For some of those costs.
I secretary if you like to
answer, I mean, my my response
would be as a parent who, just
like many of you are looking for
some programming for for my kids
every summer. I sign them up for
a program and I drive them
there. I don't get
transportation. Um, this this
program is being done in
partnership with our LEAS. But
it's it's still seen as a summer
program. We do have
opportunities through the
appropriation to sub in areas
where it's necessary. But, you
know,
I. I think this will function
like most every summer program
that we as parents and thank
you, Mr Chairman. I have further
questions. But out of respect
for my colleagues, I will stop
there. Senator Woods.
Just a quick comment, Mr Chair
All my questions have been
answered, but it reminds me of a
fact of the
A conversation they had years
ago with one of my friends from
Las Vegas and
He said when he was in grade
school.
One of the guys asking whether
He, uh uh, brought his lunch or
went home to eat.
And that illustrates the fact
that
The kids that were from out of
town brought their lunch.
And the kids that were in town.
Got to eat at home.
But I'm worried about this
program.
Is your kids?
Way up in the rural areas. It's
not gonna do anything for them.
They're not gonna be able to get
to school, I realized that it is
a existing programs that you're
centered around.
And, uh,
I'd be anxious to see the 66
schools that signed up and see
how many of them are in the
rural areas and how many of
those buses go out.
To get those kids to bring them
in.
For for our five day a week.
Study.
I hope they do.
But it's very expensive to do.
So thank you, Mr Chair.
You know, I I'm I'm glad the
program's gonna kick off, right.
Let's see what we get caught up
this summer, but in rural areas
and just I mean technology
driven right. Those kids. Let's
see. Maybe
There's six or seven maybe their
eighth graders now right during
Covid learn how to do everything
online. Some schools still have
online.
Are they gonna offer this right
through an online course for
four hours with a one on one.
You may not get them. You want
them one on one in hand in
person, right? But sometimes is
that's not gonna work. I mean,
is there gonna be an online
learning center that's gonna
allow access.
I mean, kids have made the
transfer to electronic
education.
And how
We keep moving that forward,
especially
Uh, in this program, Is there
gonna be AAA program to do that,
where a teacher has four kids in
their online at the same time?
Mr Chair. Thank you for that,
Uh, absolutely. Our gold
standard is gonna be face to
face. That's always the best
best environment where you got
the students in front of the
teachers to be able to provide
that kind of environment, But,
uh, we are anticipating that
there could be a need. Uh uh,
for a virtual option, especially
in those communities. That may,
uh are very rural. We wanna make
sure that we provide some kind
of option for every student in
New Mexico. So we are
anticipating that being a
possibility in a very limited.
Uh uh I just I don't wanna see
you handcuff.
For this program because I do
the math, right? It's gonna take
22,000 teachers. 12,000 teacher
270 million to get this fully
implemented. That's a large
chunk of money, right?
I mean, not every kid is gonna
participate. Eighth graders are
going through puberty. They're
just count them out, right?
They're not gonna participate
because they got other things
they want to do during the
summer, right? That's a required
to go to summer school.
And so how are you gonna get
those?
Those eighth graders to
participate when you need the
the second through.
Sixth grader. I mean,
Technology has to drive.
I mean, a I and technologies.
It's just driving every single
kid. I don't know any parent
that I see nowadays doesn't have
their toddler that knows how to
operate an iPad, right? And they
put that iPad in front of them,
and they sit there and they
watch the movies and they know
how to click, and they know how
to to do that. In a
Just don't handcuff yourself
because
Our brains have changed.
And while there's some kids that
need to be hands on and and and
have them in the classroom
Just don't handcuff the rest of
them when we can get them at a
quicker easier.
Less costly resource. So
And then I think you have plenty
of money because I think the SEG
you only you only gave out 3%
out of the 5%.
Mr Chairman. Yes. I think it's
3.2% and we budgeted 5%. So
there's some implement that
program, OK?
Thank Senator Gonzalez.
Mr Chairman, I I'll be very
quick, so
Uh, just a couple of things and,
uh, we really want the program
to be
Beyond successful.
And, uh, but I guess after
sitting with a
Late L. You were enough for so
many years.
Is so how are you gonna work the
accountability?
That's going to be the part that
we would bring back.
Have it next year.
And the safeguards.
And then the other part of when
you were talking about
transportation.
Well, if you follow the same,
um, transportation is
categorical.
So it doesn't
It's a separate funding.
But if you follow that
Then, Uh, maybe there is
something that came out today.
Is that, uh,
For example, on the very rural
areas.
If you have four or five
families that live close by
Maybe you can establish a feed
around or a parent does get
reimbursed.
You know, so there's that
options on one group versus
another. So, uh, those are some
of the things the other part
that, um
In the summers. I know that that
was very popular in our part is
using our library. I think that
could go a long ways because
there's already
Infrastructure there.
So, um, just that kind and
Again, You know, I. I just
really wanted to be a very
successful but we don't want to
come up.
Back to her. Something did go
way wrong and not having the
foresight.
Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you guys for
your presentation. Appreciate
your time.
Yeah. O. Sorry. Represent
Garrett. Did you have a she had
a question?
You have to sit back down for
thank you. Thank you, Mr Chair.
I know they were waiting eagerly
for me to ask my questions. I do
have a couple of questions. How
How do you maintain the actual
site selection? A here? You're
talking about schools and
districts, But it seems like
it's open why the eye could have
one. A library could have one.
What are do you decide? Do you
approve them?
Uh, Mr Chair, Representative
Garrett? I absolutely I mean, I
think it's obvious in some ways
to say OK, we we wanna be able
to use our existing classrooms,
both at the local LE and
charters, but, uh, actually,
we're having conversations with
tribes, Nations and pueblos as
an example. Um, just, uh, back
to the conversation we just had
about having some of these sites
at local libraries. Um, there is
there is no one way to do this
when we're able to talk to
either to communities to to, uh,
municipalities or counties. Um,
any outside, uh, out of school
time learning
Partners. We're open to anything
we can do to make sure that we
can spread this out so that we
have that resource as locally to
the home of of those students as
possible. So, yes. So we're
starting to get a lot of great
ideas about where we can do
that. And we're open to all
those things. Thank you And Mr
Chair. What about the
supervision of a given site? Are
there budgeting Can people
budget? I mean, if you have it
at a school, you need somebody
overseeing the structure of
principle. A coordinator
Custodians. I mean, there's a
lot of
Things or they submitting a
budget for this. How does that
work? Mr. Chair? Representative
Garrett? Yes, Absolutely. Those
are all necessities when you
have a summer school program, So
first, the answer to that is we
again want to partner with
existing programs so we can take
advantage of of some of those
resources so we're more
efficient. But again, we will be
working with local contractors.
Those local contractors will, uh
one support the fidelity of the
program, making sure that they
are sticking to, uh, the
structured literacy curriculum
throughout the day. We're also
going to be able to have site um
Kind of a site leader there or a
lead teacher to be able to have
me be that person. That's kind.
That's the the initial contact
to local principals and school
districts, but also that that
connection to the contractor, we
will also be having coaches, uh,
on a regular basis at each of
those sites to be able to
support what's happening there.
So, uh, again, we do want to
take advantage of existing
summer lunch programs, existing
programs where they all be
counselors. Uh, even nurses,
even, uh, custodians may not
happen.
Every site, but we wanna be able
to take advantage of that when
we can thank you. And Mr Chair
is $35 an hour So whether I'm a
level three teacher doing it
I've never taught in my life. We
all get paid $35 an hour.
That would that would be
correct.
Thank you. And then my final
question is the issue of equity.
The kids who most need it often
are the kids that can't do it.
They don't have parents that can
drive them. They don't have that
kind of personal support system,
So I think that's a huge issue.
And then the other question is
in in, uh, sending out the RSP
for trainers are those trainers
responsible to hire the coaches?
And every supervisors who hires
That
Capacity. Mr. Chair,
Representative Garrett? Yes, it
would be part of the
responsibility of the
contractors that we are working
with to be able to, Uh, one
provide the professional
development. Also the coaches
and be able to provide the
support to the fidelity of the
program.
OK, thank you. Um, I wanna see
it succeed. But I also feel like
we're building the plane as we
fly it. Thank you.
You don't wanna do that
nowadays. Thank you guys
Appreciate your presentation.
Ellen, your next, right? Yep.
There you are.
Good afternoon.
OK, we're not using
Good afternoon. Oh, good
afternoon. I'm Helen Gow. I'm an
analyst for LFC. I'm here this
afternoon to talk about the, um
quarterly report cards. These
are the report cards for the
period that ended in December.
Um, you'll be seeing the next
set. Um, probably in a couple of
months.
What time
What's that? What T.
Oh, I'm sorry. Tab D.
Um, I'm gonna direct your
attention first to the very last
page in the packet. It's a
table of, uh, ratings from Q one
and Q two and a comparison. If
looking at that particular
table.
That little farther away.
Looking at that particular
table. You can see that more
programs are showing signs of
improvement than those that are
losing ground, and just seven
programs are rated red. However,
only a third of the 66 programs
that we have rated are in the
green, which means that most
programs are in the great
middling yellow. The yellow
rating indicates that, um they
slightly missed their, um, uh,
target or they are, Um, uh, on
track for missing an
Target. Uh, so it's not
It's It's a good thing to not
have them in the red, but it
would be better if we saw more
greens.
Now I'm gonna take you to page
um six, which is the public
education section. Uh, the
public education performance
measures are, um, generally on
an annual basis because they
involve an annual testing and
and and student achievement
data. So, uh, the but the data
does show some other
interesting, uh, aspects of
what's happening in the public
schools. Uh, there is an
increased enrollment in the
ninth grade in the 2021 2022
school year. This
Just that students didn't earn
enough credits to be classified
as 10th graders and the state
aligns with information we have
on chronic absenteeism among the
ninth and 10th graders in 2021.
This is concerning to us,
because it means that they are
not on track and graduating on
time, and if they are not on
track, they are at greater risk
for dropping out.
Um, The report card also
includes a short discussion of
the 180 Day school year rule.
Um, the rule includes some
exceptions for schools with high
performing or improving reading
programs. And if you look at
2023 a student achievement data,
um we would have six districts
and 13 charters who would have
qualified for that exception.
And finally, one of the measures
I wanna point out. Is that the,
Um PE has recently increased its
staffing. This is important
because the Martinez Yazzie
lawsuit one of their issues was
bringing up, Po, uh, centralized
oversight and, uh for public
education and public schools,
Um, Page eight, is on the higher
education institutions like
public schools. Higher education
performance data tends to be on
an annual basis. Um, but it is
Worth pointing out that while
graduation rates um as we were
just discussing, um the work
plans are, um
They lag national rates. They
are improving at a faster rate
than national rates. Um
The other issue. Uh, look at
that's worth noting in the
higher education section is
that, uh, tuition, which you'll
be discussing at greater length.
tomorrow is increasing. But
despite the the increases on
both the, uh for you the rates
the tuition rates for four year
schools and the root tuition
rates for two year schools are,
um, very low compared to
national levels. This is
probably likely to the high
subsidies that the state
provides to higher education.
But
It's worth noting that New
Mexico is based on Pell Grant
Awards. New Mexico students tend
to be poorer than those in the
region.
On page 10 we have on the early
childhood education and care
department. There has been
strong performance in this
department with some critical
exceptions. One of the first
critical exceptions is that the,
UM, number of families enrolled
in the Medicaid home visiting
program is both under the
target and, uh, lower than it
was last year. Um, and also in
the home visiting program. We
have, uh, a lot of families
joining the program and doing
well in the program and then not
Finishing the program, which
means that they are not getting
the full value of the program or
any of the payoff that we expect
to see. With home visiting.
Also in, um
Early childhood on page 12,
You'll see that the percent of
enrolled families in the
childcare program the families
under 100 and 25% of the poverty
level, which is about $32,000
for a family of three is at 43%.
The target is 65%. This is
important because that means
that more families in that
program or at the higher income
limits the top of that the
income limits in that program is
100 and $3000 for a family of
On page 14 under Children, Youth
and Families Department. Uh, I'm
actually going to jump you all
the way over to page 16 where
you'll see that even though that
they've improved their ratings
overall from the first quarter,
they are still in, uh,
performing poorly on, um
Children who are subject to
maltreatment. This has been a a
chronic problem in the
department at 14%. They are
under the national rate. And
they are, um, I'm sorry at 9%.
They
No sorry. 4 14%.
Got confused for a minute. They
are under their national rate.
And they are, uh, far exceeding
the 9%. That is their target.
Also in this area, you'll see
that, um you in foster care, um,
that we are still seeing high
rates of youth in foster care.
It's not at the same rate it was
in September when they when it
peaked, but it is still higher
than it was in December, and,
uh, it is likely that continued
high vacancy rates and turnover
among protective services staff
is contributing to the longer
stays, you'll see.
That that issue the The issue of
permanency is reflected in a
number of the of the ratings
for, um Children, youth and
families.
Moving on to the health care
authority. Uh, the medical
assistance division has got a
yellow rating overall, but quite
like in the first quarter. They
have a quite a few red, uh,
ratings.
Um
The, uh you've invested heavily,
uh in Medicaid over the last
decade, including hundreds of
millions of dollars for, um
Uh, provide a rate increases,
however.
In the, uh past because of
managed care process and the
need in many cases to
renegotiate provider agreements.
These rate adjustments have not
always resulted in higher
payments to providers. Uh we are
still seeing the impacts of the
of the more recent rate
increases, so it's hard to
predict now what will happen,
but we'll be watching that
carefully.
Um, also in the health care
authority. Uh, there is some
poor performance in the income
supports program with one of the
measures in the red and the
program overall in the red. This
is a concern because the agency
is still under consent Decree in
Hatton Gonzalez to improve their
performance as you heard earlier
during the work plan discussions
There are, um, anecdotal
evidence that people are not
giving the getting their
benefits in a timely manner.
This is partially due to as
Charles mentioned an increase in
the number of pro of
applications had to be processed
because of the Medicaid
rollback.
Under the behavioral health.
Collaborative. Um
There is always a caveat that
comes with the behavioral health
report card because it only
looks at, uh
Uh, General Fund did General
fund funded care? This means
that any data on the Medicaid
funded care which is the much
bigger share of what happens
with medic with behavioral
health in the state is not
included in this data.
Uh, Nevertheless, we do see
some, um, disturbing trends in
behavioral health with overdose
rates. Overdose deaths, Uh,
tripling between 2002, 13 and
2021.
And um, a third of New Mexico. A
Kaiser studies found that a
third of adults in New Mexico
are reporting anxiety or
depressive disorder, and a third
of those are not in care. Um in,
uh, in any type of care. Any
type of, uh uh, therapy. The, um
New New Mexico continues to have
the highest suicide, the fourth
highest suicide rate in the
nation.
Um The good news in this area is
that we did see an increase in
providers of 556, which we
should improve, um, access to
care.
Um, quite like the, uh, how
substance use disorder and
behavioral health is affecting,
Um, performance in that in the
prohibit health field we are
seeing it affect, Uh,
performance in the Department of
Health, which is on page 26
State health indicators,
especially those related to
substance use disorders
contribute to overall declines
in the health of at risk
populations in the state, um,
also of concern in the
Department of Health is that the
occupancy of licensed beds
State facilities. Statewise
continues to fall well below
targeted performance. And
despite the low senses, the
department is reporting higher
costs because of increased over
cont. Uh
Increased over time and
contracted care.
Moving on to
Uh, aging and long term services
on page 30.
Um, they have reported some
improvements in performance
during the second quarter. The
aging network is on track to
meet targeted performance for
the hours of caregiver support.
Um and the department reported
the number of hours of caregiver
support was up.
In economic development, it
continues to show strong
performance. Um
Although the film program is
still suffering from the the, uh
Strikes so you'll see. Um
A lot of greens and economic
development. A lot of green
ratings in it Come on with
development on page 34. And then
when you go over to page 35, and
you're looking at the film
program, you'll see a big drop.
Tourism department is also
performed, continues to perform
well with greens almost across
the board.
The workforce develop solutions
Department on Page 38.
Uh, you heard a a lot of
information this morning about
the labor force participation
rates. Um so we won't spend any
time I won't spend any time
talking about that in detail.
um, under employment services,
while several job related
outcomes associated with
employment services have
improved the number of
individuals accessing services
is lower than prepa levels.
And UN unemployment insurance
insurance there. Most of those
rate most of those, uh,
performance measures are focused
on timeliness. But it is
important to note that while
employment rates are up and jobs
are up, these are primarily in
specific areas of the state and
the state as a whole is not
seeing the same types of
increases in jobs. Um, they the
High performers are Los Alamos,
Berno. Leo and Dona Ana.
Uh, moving on to the department
of Public Safety. Um
I always feel like I need to
point out that and page 44 and
45. I always feel like I need to
point out that you will not see
a lot of ratings in the
Department of public safety
because they are explanatory,
And that means that they are not
rated, Um, explanatory readings
allow, uh, agencies to report on
issues that, uh, maybe are
slightly out of control out of
their control. Something like,
um, alcoholism might not be
something that we would have a
rating for, but it does make it
hard for us to figure out how
things are.
Going in that department because
of the lack of ratings. I will,
however, draw your attention to,
uh, two charts on page 45 1 of
them has state police force
strength, and we're showing it
as as being on an upward trend,
which is a good thing and one is
percent of forensic cases
completed. They are exceeding
100%, which means that they are
cutting
Under the corrections
Department. Um there's mixed
results. The reduced there are
reduced vacancy rates and
turnover among correctional
officers, But there was an
increase in recidivism for
participants in the drug abuse
programming.
Um
And their agency continues the
trend of improving the
percentage of people in prison
participating in education
programming. However, varying
rates of completion and other
programs signal signal a need
for improvement.
Um
On page. Uh, this is page 50 of
the Corrections Department
report card. Um, you'll see
Estimated number of release
eligible inmates incarcerated
past the release date by
quarter.
You can see that number coming
down. That's a good thing.
That's a good trend for us.
Excuse me, because the more
often you have people serving,
it's cheaper for us to have
people serving their parole on
the outside. It's better for the
inmates for them to becoming
acclimated to the outside, then
serving inside. Um if they
finish pale and inside,
Obviously, they come out without
any supervision.
I'm gonna jump right over court
and justice.
And head into the natural
resources block on page 56.
You'll see energy, minerals and
natural resources. They have
seen an improvement in
performance, mostly driven by
the fact that they've seen an
increase in state and federal
funding. That's allowed them to
do a lot more than they've been.
Um, in the state engineer's
office of the state engineer.
They have made progress towards
the, um industry stream
compliance debts.
Excuse me just a minute.
And, um, the Dam Safety bureau
continued to address its backlog
but is constrained by staff
shortages. You'll see the same
issue coming up in the
Environment Department, where
the regulatory programs are
struggling to meet targets. Um
possibly because they are
challenged by hiring the
technical staff. They need to,
uh, do those inspections, but
you'll see that issue reflected
throughout their report card and
inspections of, UH, surface
water permits in the
inspections of ground water.
Committees and the inspections
of hazardous waste facilities
inspections of ionizing and non
ionizing radiation sources
inspected Don't know what that
means. I'm sorry, but the and
inspections of air emitting
sources and all of those cases
these are inspections and they
need a technical staff. And
they, uh, are finding issues
with hiring those that that
technical staff
And the General Services
Department. The, um the
Most, uh, outstanding feature of
their report cards is the
struggles they are having with
keeping their funds, keeping
them their risk Funds. Um,
taking care of the, uh
In the first half of the fiscal
year, the risk management
division reported a total. This
is being driven quite a bit by
their, uh,
Public liability fund, which is
the fund that pays for a lot of
the lawsuits against the state
that have to do with personnel
actions in the first half of the
fiscal year, the risk management
division of the department
reported total settlements of
28.3 million, including 11.8
million paid on behalf of the
Children, Youth and Families
Department. 6.8 million paid for
the University of New Mexico
Health Sciences Center and 3.4
Million paid by the correction
for the On behalf of the
Corrections Department. Um,
there is some updated numbers
and
In the second to the last page
of the packet that focus
specifically on risk management
funds, and the newsletter this
month had a nice table and chart
talking about
Uh, in the I'm gonna jump right
to the back.
On a performance, the investment
performance.
Um, that's on page 91. 1 year
returns were strong for all
funds, a not improvement from
the challenging environment
through FY 23, the state's risk
averse investments generally
performed worse than pure funds
in the quarter in one per year
period amid strong markets, but
in the three year and five year
period start state investments
largely for better than peers.
Um, and that pretty much wraps
up my presentation. There are a
number of analysts here today
who can probably answer any
questions you have. Um and
Charles
So thank you.
Thank you, Senator Woods. You
have a question
Just real quick on the risk
management funds.
Uh, general Services.
Are we
I don't even know how to phrase
the question. We've been talking
about this for two years.
Uh, at least
And I know they're supposed to
go back and and to the agency
and collect premiums.
Or increase their their supposed
to come out of their budgets.
And
I guess we should. At least
you're showing us which one of
those agencies have settlements
against them.
But, um, is there
In your performance that can you
tell? We're gaining any or or or
what we need to do to
To lower the
The current or is it just? We're
in such a litigious state that
that's the way it's gonna be.
I I'm an
Perhaps Charles has more to say
about this. Um, if you look at
the report card, they do have
their premium rates on there.
And so it is. That is, um at the
second to the last page in your
packet.
Is, um, specifically on risk
management funds, and, um
Oh, yes, there is Li. He was
like, Oh, I'm saying something
That's not true. It is. The
liability premiums are here. It
is possible that there are
agencies that are maybe paying
less than they should. Um,
unfortunately. Uh oh. Joey is
here.
So, um, Mr Chairman. Uh,
Senator. What's uh, so I think
there there's a couple of
different issues going on, Um
The one
It's you know, we've seen across
the board, uh, cost of
settlements and litigations have
just been going up in recent
years, and that's something
we're gonna have to to take a
look at and plan for in the
future. Um, this is something
that both, uh that we've been
working on with D FA and, uh,
the General Services department
to try and make sure we're
getting those numbers, right? Um
That's one of the items that was
on the work plan that, uh, you
all saw earlier today was taking
a good look at risk management
and if we're adequately
assessing the different agencies
for their, uh, liability costs
You also note, uh, from, uh,
from this report Card, one of
the one of the big, uh
A agency is seeing a lot of high
dollar claims as the Children,
Youth and Families Department.
You all are gonna have a
subcomittee looking at some of
those issues and and on the work
plan for that subcomittee is you
know, W. What are these
settlements costing and how do
we avoid those settlements
before?
They have to be paid out. And
and that's what the question I
was trying to ask.
Um
We see that we're
Violating some law.
Because we're getting sued.
What's it gonna take to be in
compliance with those laws?
Or the laws changing so fast
that we can't stay in
compliance.
What's the deal?
But you say we've got a
sub-committee. We're gonna study
it and figure it out. Thank you.
I don't know. There we are.
Yeah, um
So, um, Mr Mr Chairman, Uh,
you're right that you can see
some of these premiums or, uh,
late, so the settlement costs
for some of these agencies are
significantly higher than their
premiums. And that's something,
uh, that's gonna have to be
rectified either. Uh, you all
just appropriated $20 million
from the General fund to the
public liability fund,
essentially
Backfilling those costs from the
general fund. Um
Again.
Uh, you don't see on on this
table because a lot of those
settlements happened after the
the close of the second quarter,
but CYFD in particular has a
total of about $11.8 million in
settlements this year on a
premium 2.5 million. Clearly,
that's not sustainable.
So, uh, the General Services
Department has the ability to
charge premiums. Uh uh, a couple
of different ways. So there's
the regular, uh, agency premium.
That's part of the agency's
operating budget. Then there's
um
A sort of special premium that,
uh GSD can issue
Um
Under their rules.
So, um, that's something. Uh,
GSD has in particular been
considering for agencies like CY
Day Have who've had these really
high high dollar settlement
costs is go is going and
Issuing special premiums that
would bring money into, uh, the
public liability fund. Um
Agencies pay their liability
premiums from the personnel
category. The two hundreds line
because a lot of times this has
to do with
Employment related expenses, so
agencies with significant
vacancy savings could absorb
those costs. But
Either either the agency has to
make adjustments to their
budget or or you have to find
appropriations for agencies, um,
to to make up those costs.
This does not really give us a
picture.
Of
Future settlements. This is just
this is what we know. Right this
moment in time.
Mr Chair and Senator. That's
correct. This is you know, and
we've got. I don't guess it
would help us to know how many
How many of these suits are
ahead of us, Uh, because we
wouldn't know what to claim
would be.
But I just wanted to make the
fact known that
This is just what we know today.
And there's gonna be
Much more ahead of
So, um, Miss Mister Chairman,
Senator just to clarify real
quick. Uh, so on the legal
settlement That is correct. I
will say if you look at the risk
management fund
Actuarial position.
Um, the the agency's actuaries
do attempt to make a good
estimate of what liabilities are
out there. So theoretically,
that's um accounted for in their
actuarial position, which, uh,
is showing us that basically,
they only they only only have
about 7%.
Of the assets needed to pay off
all of those liabilities. Um, so
that's a that's a really low
number. We look for something
more like 50%.
But, uh so that's something to
be aware of.
That that that position is
significantly deteriorated. So
how do we climb back up to? That
is the question.
OK, thank you.
OK, Thank you, Joey.
Any other questions.
Thank you, Helen. That was a lot
to go over pretty quick.
Kelly you up.
Is Leslie joining you? I see
Wesley.
Coming around.
It's It's an electronic, too.
Mr Chair. Members of the
committee. Um, while the
materials are getting handed out
to you all
Go ahead and start with some
introductions. Um so I'm Kelly
Carwell, Uh, Capital Outlay
analyst for C and I'm joined
today by Wesley Billingsley,
director of the local government
division at D. FA. Um I'm gonna
start out by giving you a
quarterly report on outstanding
capital funds as well as kind of
an update on
Um, what you all did related to
capital out a during the session
and a little preview, um, of our
interim work, and then Wesley is
gonna give you a brief
presentation on, um DF A's work
to date on getting the new
infrastructure division that you
all created this session up and
running and kind of give you a
vision for where they hope to go
with it in the next year.
So does everyone have their
handouts now?
All right. Um, I'm gonna start
with the memo that is on top of
your packets.
So outstanding capital funds at
the end of the third quarter of
FY 23. It totaled an estimated
$4.5 billion across about 4600
active projects underway in the
state.
And in the first paragraph on
this memo, you can see how those
funds break down. Um, so this
figure includes projects
authorized by the Legislature
between 2020 2023 at $2.4
billion in balances projects
funded through the severance tax
bond Earmark program, So that's
the Water trust board and the
tribal infrastructure fund at
about $432 million. It includes
the balance in the Public School
Capital Outlay Fund, which is
now
At a whopping $1.4 billion.
Um, and it also includes special
appropriations to capital
projects from the 2021 special
session and the 2022 regular
session that totaled almost a
billion dollars. Um, that we've
been tracking as part of this
report since then.
Um, in the chart chart one on
this first page, you can see how
the various sources that we
track in bringing this number to
every quarter kind of break down
and how they've grown in the
same quarter over the last
fiscal years.
Um, sort of the takeaway here, I
would say is that the growth
growth in our overall
outstanding balances has been
driven. Um one by just more
money being put into the
pipeline from essentially all
the sources that we're tracking,
um, including a significant
increase in legislative
appropriations, um,
significantly larger
distributions to the earmark
funds and then um, a a very
large and I would say quick
growth, um, of the money
available in the
Public School Capital Outlay
fund that is specifically used
for, uh, replacing and, um,
renovating system as well as a
special appropriations, which
kind of fall into the
legislative category, but a
little bit of a different
bucket.
Um, the growth imbalances. In
addition to sort of that big
increase in the amount of money
that's going into the pipeline.
Um, our challenger is related to
Covid that slowed things down.
Um, some of which, you know,
many of which have kind of
subsided, but we're probably
still playing some catch up.
Um, and then related to the big
infusion of money is just that
we've had this very rapid
increase in demand that kind of
all folks involved in taking
this money and turning it into
complete projects both in the
public and private sector. Um,
you know the capacity to use the
money has not kept up as
quickly. Um, and in particular,
you know what we saw in really
delving into this issue last
year, Um
Related to rising construction
costs is that there's just been,
um a really significant increase
in demand for construction in
both the public and private
sectors in our state and a
limited labor pool to keep up
with it.
Um and that is making it more
difficult, um, to complete
projects, and so, um, related to
that moving down to the key
points that are on this first
page. Um, this is this is going
to continue to be a significant
challenge, and, um, over the
next several years, and
particularly in the next year, I
expect that we'll see these
numbers continue to go up.
Um public sector construction
demand is likely to remain
strong. Um, as I'll show you
more and more specifics on the
next page, Um, this legislative
session produced new capital
appropriations totaling almost
$2 billion.
Um and again thinking about
other sources like, um, the
public school capital outlay
funds that have both a lot of
demand and a lot of capacity
right now, um, as far as state
funding for construction is
concerned, there's a lot more
money, um, going into the
pipeline on top of what's
already out there.
Um, of course, we always have
money being spent, and some
projects coming off the books as
they reversion dates pass, So
the second bullet gives you an
idea of the scale of what we're
looking at on that front. Um,
for 2024 reversions. There is
nearly 800 active projects that
are included in our tracking
now, uh, with estimated balances
of close to $270 million that
have 2024 reversion dates.
Um, some of those projects will
be offset, Um, in terms of what
remains active by
reauthorization from the 2024
session, um, about 200 projects
with 2024 reauthorization dates
were, um, reauthorized this
session.
And of course, some of that
money will remain as well.
Um, in the third bullet. I
wanted to give you a sense on
sort of what we've seen in terms
of these balances being spent
down since the first quarter of
this fiscal year, so you can see
those figures from the first
quarter to this quarter. Um, for
all the different categories of
funding in our big picture
number so you can see that, um,
projects authorized by the
Legislature were spent down or
reverted by about $400 million
about $40 million in
Program funds were spent from
the first to the third quarter
about 200 million in those
special appropriations were
spent or encumbered, Um, that is
the kind of one category here
where we're, um, accounting for
encumbrances as well as
spending.
And then the balance in the
public School Capital Outlay
Fund actually went in the
opposite direction, and it
increased, um after some bond
sales.
Um, finally, you know, kind of
another big picture point. I
wanted to talk about that We'll
get into a little bit further.
Later.
Um, is how how the legislative,
Uh, projects and balances break
down, among sort of the three
major categories of projects
that you all appropriate to
through the capital bills, So
those are statewide or state
agency projects, Um, projects at
higher education institutions
and the local projects. The
local projects primarily benefit
local government entities. Um,
and those are the projects that
are funded with discretionary
funds. Um
That each legislator receives as
well as the governor. So in
chart two, you can see how both
the balances and the number of
projects break down among those
three categories.
Um, And essentially, you know
what this is illustrating is one
of the core challenges of
translating these appropriations
into successful projects.
And that applies in particular
to that local category. Um, you
can see there's the most amount
of money.
Um in those projects, but also a
far greater number of projects.
Um versus the state Agency or
higher education projects and
what that means, essentially, is
that that money is spread much,
much more thinly on those
projects, and therefore it's
gonna be and I'll talk a little
bit more about that in a second.
So if you can turn to page two
of the memo
Um, I'll give you a quick recap
of what you all did this session
with respect to capital outlay.
So in chart three, you can see
the total 20 to 24 Capital
Outlay, um, was nearly $2
billion, and you can see how
that breaks down. Uh, the main
capital bill authorized $1.4
billion from the General fund
severance tax bonds and other
state funds, um for state, local
and transportation projects.
The general obligation bond bill
that funds higher education
senior centers, libraries and,
um one statewide agency project
this year, um, totaled a little
under $300 million.
And the servants had I my
earmark, Um, programs will again
this year receive historically
large distributions with about
100 and $24.6 million going to
the water Project fund. Uh, $62
million going to both the
Colonial Infrastructure Fund and
the tribal infrastructure fund
and $34.5 million going to the
housing Trust fund. Um, through
the newest earmark on our
Um
Going back to this issue of, um
How the money kind of gets
spread out among projects.
So one of the core challenges of
the capital program is that
demand for this funding far far
exceeds the funding that's
available and that has remained,
um, true, if not sort of
increased a little bit. Um, in
this time of historic surplus
for the state.
So to give you a more su, uh,
specific sense of that this
year, local entities requested
$3.6 billion in direct
appropriations from house and
Senate members. Um, this does
not account for requests that
went directly to the governor.
Um and
Combining the House, the Senate
and the governor, the funding
that was available to meet these
requests was only $526 million,
or just 15% of what was asked
about. Um, what is this result
in at the end of the day? Um, it
continues to lead to piecemeal
funding of projects. Um, about
45% of 1400 General fund
projects in the capital bill
this year received 50% or less
of requested funds. Um,
Interestingly, this is a
This is a statistic we try to
track every year and it it's
very consistent year to year.
It's right around 40% of
projects, um, that are getting
that 50% or less of requested
funds. Um, and what that means.
at the end of the day is that
you know, ultimately, the
success of these projects is
going to depend on, um local
communities, Willingness and
capacity to go out and leverage
the capital dot outlay dollars
they're receiving
You all, um against other
sources available to them and if
that doesn't happen, um the
result is likely to be that the
money will sit idle longer.
It'll take longer to actually
get these things done put them
into service for the benefit of
your communities. Um, and also
In the world we live in today.
Um, the costs are likely to
continue to go up. So the longer
it takes environment, um the
more difficult and more
expensive uh, it is to
Um, fund them.
Um and then chart for you can
sort of just see another example
of, um the gap.
In a visual way between the
demand for this fund and what's
actually available.
Um, and again here, you can see
that there. There's a larger gap
between the asks
For local projects, um, and
what's actually available to
those projects.
And, you know, just kind of to
reiterate this point. Um
On the one hand, you know it
could make perfect sense that
the state is only providing a
small amount of money to these
projects. Um, because ultimately
they're not the state's
responsibility and the Capitol
outlay in an ideal world would
be just one piece of a larger
funding puzzle.
Um
In reality that only makes sense
if we have a system for
effectively and strategically
leveraging this funding against
all of the other sources are
that are available. Um and we
know we need to do better on
this front and developing a
better approach to coordinating
the funds and help helping
communities to figure out all
these puzzle Pieces. Um, is one
of the tasks of the new
infrastructure division at D.
FA. Um, so I think I'm it's a
It's a very good
It meant that we at least have
kind of a a mechanism and a
Uh, an entity will
Be able to do that. Well, um
With ongoing support.
Uh, if you'll turn now to page
three.
Um Charles already touched on
this this morning, but I kind of
wanted to take a little bit of
time to talk with you about it
again. So in addition to the
major capital outlay,
appropriations bills that you
all passed this year, um you
also pass two significant pieces
of, uh, policy legislation
related to capital outlay. Um,
the first is, uh, the creation
of that infrastructure division
at D FA. Um, that was an LFC
endorsed Bill.
Um, Wesley is gonna get into
more of this, so I won't spend
too much time on it. Um, but the
real basics are that for now,
this new division will absorb
some functions of the local
government division. And, um,
it's it's sort of charges
initially pretty focused and is
likely to expand over time. Um,
and where we're hoping to go is,
um, to task this division with
really making a focused effort
to improve the outcomes of
capital spending. Um
Implementing a streamlined
system for coordinating funding
sources, uh, for administering
capital outlay funds so that you
know the state itself is not a
source of delay. Uh, in getting
these projects done.
And then also in providing
increased support to communities
that have limited capacity to
both develop projects on the
front end, get them fully funded
as quickly as possible, and then
also to, uh, have resources once
they are funded to complete
them.
Um, Secondly, um, you all
passed, um major and very
significant legislation related
to our debt capacity and long
term revenue issues, Um, for the
capital program, so House Bill
253 addressed two major
significant long term risks to
the capital program. The first
is the potential negative
impact, um, that this huge
amount of bonding capacity, um
or in other words, debt capacity
has
State's bond ratings and the
second the second. Uh, problem
was the long term decline of
dedicated capital outlay.
Revenues related to oil and gas.
Um, so essentially what that
bill does. Was it kind of put a
new limit on long term deck
capacity through the severance
tax bond program.
Program that we're utilizing
every year and then it takes
that savings. Um, from that
reduced deck capacity and
redirects it to a new, uh, trust
fund dedicated to capital
outlay.
Um another, uh, quite
significant thing this bill did
was to authorize the board of
Finance, um to capture any
remaining excess cash remaining
in the severance tax bonding
fund at the end of FY 24 and
convert that into a one time
cash infusion into the new fund
at up to $500 million.
And if you'll turn to page four
Um
The chart on this page, which
you also saw this morning is
illustrating, Uh, the estimated
de distributions, uh, that the
Legislature will receive for
appropriation to capital
projects every year from this
new fund. Um and you can see
that, uh, it's gonna take a
little bit of time. As with any
trust fund for these to grow,
Um, but we do expect them to
become quite significant. Um
Over time.
So you can see, uh, in this
chart that around the early, um
20 thirties. Uh, those
distributions could approach and
top $100 million and then by FY
50. We could be looking at, um
somewhere around $400 million in
annual distributions for this
fund, uh, from this fund, sorry
for capital projects. Um, so the
big idea here is essentially
revenue diversification. The
same sort of things you've been
trying to do for the general
funds. Um, this new fund over
time will at least provide a
partial
Replacement source for the
capital program for severance
tat for severance taxes. Um and
also supplement it, Um, with the
result from both both sources
having the potential to make
more money available overall for
capital, then if you all had
done nothing
Um, another kind of thing. I
wanted to just point out on this
bill was, um This was a big
thing that we did quickly. Um,
which is really a credit to this
committee's leadership in
recognizing a big problem
directing staff to study and
work on it and propose
solutions and then having the
wherewithal to act on them
decisively.
Um, I also wanted to say that,
um, both of these bills were
really successful as a result,
um, of really good collaboration
throughout the interim between
FC staff, um and the executive,
um D, FA staff and leadership in
particular, um, were
Critical, um to
Uh, getting good solutions for
all of these problems getting us
all on the same page and then
Um, ultimately getting these
through and getting, um and we
can We plan to continue that
collaboration going forward.
Um
All right. I wanted to quickly,
um, highlight sort of where
we're going big picture with
staff, Interim work and capital
outlay. Um, Charles introduced.
Uh Ria Erna, Who's the new
newest addition to our capital
team, So, uh, we now have a
complete team of three focused
on capital issues. Um, Ria's
charge is a little bit
different. Um, she's
specifically gonna be tasked
with doing, um more evaluative
work.
On a capital programs and
projects.
So we, um hope to be bringing
you sort of an increased level
of insight on not only how the
spending is going, but really
what's resulting from it?
Um, both to give us a better
sense of kind of what's working.
and what's not to, uh
Um, as part of that, we're gonna
start providing you a
spotlights on local projects for
each of your interim meeting
locations. Um, so you should
find those in your materials.
And then, uh, we'll be bringing
those two in the quarterly
reports as well. Um, on those
specific projects and kind of
larger areas of key investment,
um, where we both sort of need
to set some goals for where we
need to go and lay out some
potential road maps. Um
For how we can get there. So,
um, some of those project areas
we intend to focus on are things
like roads, Water housing,
recreation and infrastructure
that might be needed, um, to
help develop, um and push along.
Um strategic economic sectors in
the state.
All right, so I will wrap up
now, Um you all have the Million
and greater report in front of
you. This spreadsheet, uh,
tracks projects funded for a
million dollars or more, Um,
currently it is very long and I
expect it to stay that way.
Um, we tracked this quarter
nearly 800 active or recently
completed projects.
Um
And, uh, we assign them color
code rating. So, uh, Green means
that the project appears to be
pretty much on schedule. B means
the appropriation was recently
closed or the project was
completed. Uh, yellow indicates
that the project is behind
schedule. Um, seems to be
spending money at a slow rate
relative to when it was
appropriated or the reporting
indicates there's confronting
some source of delay. Um, Red
can indicate a number of things
either.
Activity. No reporting on the
project. Bonds weren't sold, uh,
minimal or no expenditure, no
expenditures or sort of more
significant delays or obstacles
to completion. Um, also at the
back of your memo, there are
tables that, um, just summarize
the Blue recently commuted
completed projects and the red
projects that, um, I wanna say
as we talked about, um, last
time and with your sponsor
reports, um, that
The information on this in this
report is based on the best
available information we have
available to us at this time. Um
so the expenditure data is based
on uh, what's available and
share as well as anything? Any
expenditures that entities self
self report through, Um, the
reporting system and then the
project status updates as well
as the project phase updates
that you can see on this sheet.
Um
Are really only as good as what
is Venus is, you know directly
what we get from it.
Um and is dependent on people
providing that information
through the system.
Um, I also wanted to tell you
before I hand it over to Wesley
that, um, we will be sending out
sponsor reports soon. Um, like
last time, they will appear in a
similar format to this again.
Um, we started doing them this
way with the color code at, uh,
the request of some members of
this committee last, uh,
the request of some members of
this committee last quarter and
I think we got a pretty good
response to that. So I hope it's
working for you. Um, And if, um
then the former version of the
report
Um, this will be in the letters
we send out but just to kind of
emphasize while I have you here,
Um, the color codes for your
sponsor. Reports in particular
are gonna be automated and based
only on expenditures. When we do
this report, we try to take a
number of things into account
like the expenditures but also
what they report on construction
but haven't spent much money. We
consider that and how we rate
the project, Um, for the sponsor
reports just due to the volume
of, uh
Projects that we're tracking
there. We really don't have
capacity to do that. So the
color codes will be based only
on expenditures, and they are
really intended to just
Call your attention to things.
Um, that might be things you
wanna pay attention to, not to
sort of make definitive
judgments about what's happening
with those projects. Um
So with that I will turn it over
to Wesley, and then we'll both
be available.
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee. Thank you for having
me. Um, Before I get started I,
I wanted to turn the microphone
over to my cabinet Secretary. Um
Wayne crops. Um, just so he can
say a few words before I get
into the presentation.
I don't really need to sit. But
I will. Anyway, Mr Chairman and
members of the committee, Wayne
props Department of Finance and
Administration. Uh, Wesley is
gonna go through a a brief and
we'll make it even briefer given
the time of the day presentation
on where we are with, uh, but
before he did that I wanted to
say a couple of words. Uh, first
of all, thank you.
Uh, thank you for representative
Dixon for sponsoring allegedly
in both chambers.
Uh, thank you to, uh, Chairman
Small and House Corporations and
Finance Committee for providing
a solid appropriation to get
that division set up. Uh, come
July, 1st.
Again. I hope that the
presentation today gives you
some level of comfort that, uh,
we're not waiting until July,
1st to, uh, start working on
what that division will look
like.
And I also want to assure you as
Kelly indicated that Bill was
really a collaboration between
DF. And you. Uh, what we're
presenting today is in a draft
form. We know we still have some
work to do on it, but, uh,
Again. I do hope it, uh, taking
this very seriously idea whose
time has come and want to get
Come July, 1st. And finally, Mr
Chairman. This will, uh
Become public tomorrow, but I am
happy to announce that I have
chosen the first director
For the new division.
Because it won't be public until
tomorrow.
I probably can't tell you who it
is.
But I'll give you three guesses.
And you don't count.
Oh,
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Members
of the committee Wesley has
agreed to become the first
director of the new
infrastructure.
A division he'll continue in his
role as local government
division director and so we can
find a replacement there, But,
uh, it's very rare that you find
the perfect person for the job.
And I think we probably all
agree that in this case, that's
Wesley so very excited to share
that information with you and
I'll turn it over to Wesley.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
We're clapping for Kelly, since
the press release is not out,
you can be. You can be short and
then come back. And when you're
the director and get your award
if you want,
we would
Uh, thank you, Mr Chairman.
Thank you, Secretary. Um I'm
gonna go ahead and get right
into this. Um
I don't want to spend too much
time on some of the things in
here, but we'll go through it
relatively quickly. Um, you know
house Bill 232 kind of set up
the framework for this new
division. Um, kind of some of
the leg work was done during the
session. And then, of course,
there's lots of work to do now,
um, after the session, but, um,
you know, house Bill 232 created
this division within D FA. Um,
you know, the the goal of this
is to assist with the planning
and navigation, um, of projects
and funds. Um, that's the
primary goal is to to try to
make sure that we have good
projects.
Um, developed through the IC IP
system and then try to help get
those projects. You know,
funding sources, um through the
whether it's federal funds or
other state funds. I'm trying to
get projects fully funded, um,
so that they meet the needs of
the communities, So that is the
primary goal. That's the primary
mission. Um, of this of this
division. Um, moving forward,
Um, you know, we'll look at the
federal funding. We'll look at
what's out there. We'll develop
some of these, um, technical,
um, technical systems so that we
can help track some of these
funds.
Um, and make sure that there the
funds are being distributed
throughout our communities.
So with Page one just wanna go
through, We're gonna be track
spending more accurately ensure
projects are fully funded
appropriately and provide public
facing dashboards.
Um, we're also going to look,
um, for federal funding like I
mentioned before, um, to make
sure that we use all the funding
sources available within our
communities.
Um, Lastly, we're going to
conduct a comprehensive revamp
of the existing digital system
on which our capital lease
system that's used for planning
and expenditures. Um, and we're
gonna streamline it and improve
it and improve how local
entities, state agencies and how
the Legislature participates in
the infrastructure and capital
expenditure process.
Um, the next few slides are
gonna be on the organizational
chart. These are the ones I
don't want to get too much into.
But the first one shows the old
organizational chart, um,
showing everything that's under
the local government division.
Um, the the next slide on Page
four shows what the new chart is
going to look like, um, with the
new infrastructure division and
the different bureaus that are
going to be underneath that
division, the capital planning
and policy, Um, bureau chief,
um, the Capitol Navigation and
funding bureau chief, as well as
the Federal Grants Bureau will
be all under
That new division
Moving on to page five kind of
showing you what? We're going to
be moving around within D FA. Um
some of this is already kind of
started. Um, the role of equity
ombudsman and the IC IP
positions will move from the
local government division. Um,
to this new infrastructure
division, um, the budgeting
functions of the Capital Bureau
will continue to stay under the
state budget Division. Um, that
way all budgeting, um, for these
appropriations are all under one
division. Um, the bill as
signed, Um IP DD, which is the
acronym that we're using for the
The duties of aiding local
governments, Council of
governments, tribal governments
and identifying and accessing
funds. Um, like I mentioned
before
Um we're also going to include
the Federal grants Bureau. I
think they're pivotal in trying
to make sure that we have the
access to those federal funds.
Um, and they're also, um, the
Federal grants Bureau does many
things besides infrastructure.
They'll continue to do those
things throughout this, Um,
throughout the process. Um,
whether whatever kinds of
federal funds are needed for the
state, they'll continue to to
try to get those out there. Um,
the same thing with the rural
inequity. Ombudsman position.
Um, currently, she know goes
throughout the community, trying
to make sure that all the
communities especially
Communities have what they need.
She'll continue to do that in
her role as well as provide the
support for this division.
So moving on to page um, six
again. This is another org
Chart. Don't want to get too
much into it. This org Chart
shows you kind of what the
future of this division could
look like again. Um, like
secretary said. These are kind
of, um, drafts that we have out
here. Um, it kind of shows you
that, you know, In addition to,
you know, doing the the, um,
planning of the projects, the
navigation and federal funding
of the projects also, maybe
looking into some federal
grants, management or some grant
management of the projects as
well as, um, you know,
Financial and fiscal aspects of
that division. So again, those
are future. Um not gonna happen
within the first year, maybe not
even within the first two years,
but kind of where this division
could potentially go in the
future.
Moving on to slide seven kind of
gives you a workflow of the
division. Um, again, we'll work
closely with local entities,
state agencies and the
Legislature to provide planning
and funding assistance. Um,
that's our one of our primary
missions. Um, and again, I think
you know the planning right now.
The way that the planning works
is it's through the IC IP
process as you all are familiar
with, Um, we're gonna try to
enhance that IC IP right now.
It's you know, it's a It's an
access database. Um, similar to
our CP MS system. That's an
access database. We're gonna
Work on getting both of those
systems. Um better. More Cloud
based, Hopefully, um, with you
know exactly what we need. Um,
we're gonna be working with
tally with the communities to
find out. You know what exactly
do we need to have in those
systems? Um is is the data that
we're collecting right now
Appropriate Or do we need to
collect other data to make sure
that we have everything that we
need to try to get the funding
out there for these and so
you'll see with the way the
workflow works. Um the IC IP
staff will work with the
entities to ensure the project.
Um, isn't appropriate priority.
Um, one thing
We are noticing with IC IS is
that the top five projects that
are listed on their IC IP might
not really be their top five
projects. So we want to work
closely with these communities
to make sure that they really
are giving us the best data that
you all can have at your
fingertips. Um so that you know
what they're what their
priorities and needs are, um so
we're gonna provide support and
training. Um, on that we're
going to ensure that the
priority projects are in order,
and then we're going to assist
with any updates that they need
throughout that system. Um,
going forward, you'll see the
second one on there. Um IC IP
staff.
Works with entities to create
lists by project type. I wanna
make sure that we have all the
category information in there
correctly, so that we're we're
looking at water projects. We're
actually looking at all the
water projects, um, when we're
looking at public safety
projects, we're looking at all
the public safety projects. So
we wanna make sure that those
categories are are correct and
accurate, so that whenever we
actually run reports, we can
see, um exactly what's out there
and what the needs are, Um,
hopefully that we can we can do
that by getting better data. Um,
we're going to improve the
system so that we can make sure
we do that better, and we're
gonna have transparent tracking
That system.
Um, the third bullet on there is
the navigation Bureau and the
federal grants Bureau. Um,
they're gonna locate, um,
entities provided technical
assistance to help with the
applications for funding. Um, I
think that's one thing that
we're going to find is that you
know, we can have these funding
sources available. But if the
entities don't know how to
access the funding, um or don't
have the means to access the
funding, it's not gonna help. So
one of our goals is to not only
find the funding but to try to
find a way to help them access
it. Um, you know whether it's
through our own, um, department
or whether it's trying to find
technical
Business providers out there to
help with that, Um, those are
what those are gonna be Some of
our goals. Um, we're gonna help
develop a tracking mechanism,
which is similar to our catalog
of local assistance. Um, that
hasn't been updated in quite
some time. It's really difficult
to update those programs. Um,
within one agency, so we're
gonna try to put something out
there on a, um, whether it's our
website or whether it's a a
governor website. Try to find a
way to, um have all of those
agencies update all the federal
grant opportunities. Um, and
we're also going to keep
That as well, So, um, hopefully
that'll be something that's at
the fingertips. Um, of all these
entities.
Um, we're gonna guide those
entities to those funding
opportunities. Like I said, And
then, like I said, we're gonna
assist with technical
assistance. Um, The fourth
bullet is secure funding for the
projects. Um, either federal or
state, So after we help them
find the funds. We're gonna help
them secure the funds. Um,
that's the The next piece of
this is making sure that not
only they not only do they, um,
you know, find what's out there,
but they actually get those
funds and actually start to use
those funds. Um, and the last
thing on here is, you know,
we're gonna display projects on
a public facing dashboard with
information on funding and
sources so that all of you
Be able to see that publicly.
Um, that way. You don't have a
system that you can't access and
you can't see And we want you to
have that access at your
fingertips so that Callie
doesn't have to run reports for
you guys all the time that you
could actually get onto a system
and see it. Um, I'm sure she'll
continue to run those reports,
but at least you'll have that at
your fingertips.
Um, So those are the goals? Um,
uh, lofty goals of our division.
and hopefully, um, we can get
all of this started within the
first year and hopefully meet
all of those goals.
Um, on the very last live slide
eight again as some of the
future goals that we are looking
at within. Um, this this
division, there's a couple of
bureaus that were looking at
potentially starting in the
future. Um, you know, I think
Secretary said it. You know, we
had some funds available this
year to kind of start this, but
we're gonna need more funding if
we're going to actually meet,
Um, these two future, um,
evolving bureaus within the
division. Um, one of them is to
you know, you know, track the
capital grants and to
Um, those those capital grants
right now, the way that happens
is all the agencies do that
themselves. All the agencies go
out there, and they they, um,
develop these, um these grant
agreements and they are the ones
who issue the grant agreements
and try to execute them. Um, one
of the goals of this division
and in the future again not not
necessarily this year is to try
to bring all of that into one
location. So we have one place
where we're actually, um,
issuing an and executing grants.
Um, and then the last piece of
it is the fiscal and reporting.
Um again, all of
The expenditure data goes
through all of these other
agencies, and so we're having to
sit there and try to, you know,
go through share to kind of get
some of these expenditures or to
try to update some of these
expenditures through these
agencies. Um, one of the goals
is to try to, um, you know, put
all of the expenditures come
come through the the Department
of Finance Administration again.
Um, these are bureaus within
this. This, um this division,
but in order to make it work,
we're gonna have to have
obviously more support. Um,
outside of that division as
well. Um
When all of these pay requests
and all of these, um you know
forms come through our system.
You know, the our AD and our
financial are control division
are gonna need more staff to
help with that as well. So, um,
although we're looking at, you
know, just looking at this
division. For now, there's gonna
be more, um more, You know more
positions needed within
Department of Finance
Administration. Um, but in order
to do all of that, um, we're
gonna have to collaborate with
the other agencies. Um, these
agencies will not be able to do
this without us talking about it
and see and figuring out how we
can do this.
Collectively. Um, I think
there's some things that these
agencies do. Well, um there's
lots of expertise that these
agencies have, um from, you
know, tribal entities to the
Department of Transportation
Road projects to, um, Public
education department projects.
So you know, we don't want to
just kind of streamline this and
and and do this in a vacuum. We
want to make sure that all these
agencies are involved in these
discussions so again, more to
come in the future on that, But
for now, we're working on
You know the IC I the planning
and the navigation and then
we'll go from there.
But that that concludes, could I
mention just one more thing? Um,
tell us you're leaving. It'll be
very quick. Um, so it's in my
memo, but I neglected to say it
out loud. Um, and it sort of
dovetails with what Wesley was
just talking about, Um, another
one of my near term priorities
for interim work. Um, is to kind
of resurface and continue the
discussion that we started. Um,
last year about considering
implementing an earlier dead
Um, earlier Pression deadline
for local capital outlay
requests
Um, I think this is a fairly
simple but kind of foundational
process change that we need to
think about, Um, to even start
to make any of this better. Um,
And it kind of goes into what
Wesley was talking about. With
the, um increased in blue and
improved planning and funding
Coordinations of the new, uh,
funding. Coordinate, Um, as well
as even just kind of some, like
big picture.
Strategies we talked about last
year but are hard to implement
under the current process. Um,
you know, for example,
prioritizing funding for gap
funding for projects that are
already exist before starting
new projects. Um, this this
would not mean that the
Legislature gives up its
discretion to ultimately decide
how to use those capital funds,
But it would provide, um time
and much more capacity to
provide.
All with more information.
Should you want it? Um, that
could inform how you prioritize
those appropriations, um, either
as a body or even on an
individual basis, so just wanted
to kind of put that on your
Then we only have a question.
As quick as you can. Yeah, as
quick as I can, I. I mean, I'm
just gonna dovetail onto what
you're saying, Um, the the two
things that really stood out for
me, Mr Mr Chair or how we are.
Perhaps not leveraging. Um a lot
of our funding. Um and I'd like,
Yeah, I think, uh, Kelly really
hit on that. And, um and then
I'm gonna tie that to the
infrastructure infrastructure
planning and development. Uh,
development Division. How much
money did we end up for that
division in a HB two Mr Chair?
Mr Chairman, $750,000 was our
appropriation.
Out of what was the original
request, Mr Chair, 1.5 million.
OK?
Thank you, Mr Chair, and there
was also an, uh, Matt Grant. Uh,
matching fund as well. Mister
Chair.
Yes, Mr Chairman. It was $75
million for a matching D. We got
the 75 and so
It. Is it my understanding that
that funding is going to be
working within the
infrastructure planning? Uh, and
development Division, Mr. Chair,
Mr. Chairman. We're currently
looking at that to see if we
want to have that come through
the infrastructure division or
if we want to have that go to
the local government division.
Um, we'll we'll probably know
Hopefully by July, 1st and we
are we are. We have started some
some preliminary work with that
$75 million matching fund. Uh,
we've gotten some policies in
place some draft policies with
an application and a webinar.
Happening at sometime in May, so
we still gonna work, work
forward and move forward with
that. But as of where that's
going to land as far as who's
going to administer the 75
million, um we're still working
on on the chair is not my
understanding that those two
divisions are coming together to
work on infrastructure. So why
would it
How are you, Uh, delineating how
it's gonna land.
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee I, I think, um, when
we look at this new division,
um the this division isn't
really laid out to administer
funds. Um, we're looking at more
of trying to find ways to find
different, um, funding sources.
Um, so administering the fund
through this new division, at
least to start. Um, seems like
it'd be difficult with not
having enough. Um FTEs there.
Um, but again, we're still
looking at that because I know
there is, um, a a component. Um,
I think a 3% administrative
component to that fund so we
might
Look at, you know, utilizing
that 3% and try to get some some
FTES there within that division
and and go that route again.
We're still looking at it, but
we're we're trying to see which
way we wanna thank you, Mr
Chair. I'd like we'd like to
know an update as as you're
doing that and planning that to
the last point that Kelly was
making and really bringing the,
um the information. Uh,
together, um
And as you're setting up and
strategizing, um there are other
states that are that are using a
division and function quite
similar to what we're starting
to do here and one of the
resources that they're using
with our general funding their
general funding which we could
use for our general funding is
to look at a carrot type
approach for leveraging dollars
and looking at where those
projects are have already met
and already have grants. Uh, and
approval, Uh, federal grants and
whatnot and then saying when
you're into this program
Then we're going to give you
those federal or the state
dollars to, um, fill in gaps or
to to help in those those those
ways, So I I'd like to know if
you're doing that. We can talk
offline, but I would make a
strong suggestion as we're
strategizing how we are going to
leverage dollars and how we're
going to
Perhaps create a type of carrot
program with our with our
general fund.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I'll be
real quick. Just, uh so I can
quite understand it on the front
page of your deal.
It says 4.5 billion across
roughly 4600 projects.
Uh, is that a combined severance
as well as uh, cash?
Projects that both of Mr Chair
Senator Yes. Do you How much of
that, Uh 4.6, or 4.5? Billion is
severance tax roughly
Um, Mr Chair, Senator Neville.
So the blue bars for FY 22 and
FY 21.
What I believe be not almost all
STV
and then
Yeah, um
Sorry, actually probably FY 23 2
and then FY 24 would be mostly
general funds. Um, yeah, except
for like the Public school
Capital Outlay Fund and the
yours. Those are still coming
out of so out of that the
bonding program. What I'm
getting at is over 3 billion
sever tax, Right? Um
Mister Chair Senator, I think
are those bonds issued?
Um, Mr Chair, Senator? Yes.
And how many of those are red
projects on this chart?
You don't have to. I don't have
that. I know you don't and I
don't want to embarrass you
about it. Ask me that. But what
the point I'm getting at is why
are we borrowing money when we
have projects that aren't going
to be built for a long time.
Because whatever the reasons
good reasons or bad just because
the mayor says I'm ready to go
Let's not go. Let's figure out
another way for a system where
we don't issue the bonds until
the project is really ready.
Then we don't pay whatever the
interest rate, something like
that. Um, Mr Chair, Senator.
Yes and I. I would say, um, both
with you know the General fund
that's been available for
capital projects as well as this
new fund that will have
available as a different source
of financing for capital
projects. We will have more
options, um, to do that kind of
thing, and I think you know,
going back to needing to have an
earlier deadline for these
requests to come in, Um, we
could sort of look at different
financing mechanisms for
planning.
Design versus construction and
sources. Um, if we had
Time and direction to do. The
the capital funds could be
invested and be earning money
until the project's ready. Those
don't bother me, but the ones
that do bother me are the
severance tax bonds that you're
borrowing cash.
Yeah, it's sitting in the
treasurer's office, earning
nothing percent.
But it's not. It's not, uh
You know, And we've I've got a
couple of my district that are
been there for a long time, and
they're red and those bonds have
been issued. It's I don't know
how many millions of dollars
total, but it's uh
I think it's foolish for us not
to have a system where we don't
issue the bonds until some
threshold. That means it's going
to happen in the next year.
There ought to be a system.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
And just to kind of continue.
That conversation doesn't the
Board of Finance only sell the
bonds once the project is listed
as ready by whatever city gal
right the mayor, or whoever
signs off, says I'm ready to go,
but he's not ready to go and
there needs to be a system that
we have to thanks.
Uh, Wesley.
Mr Chairman. Yes, that's
correct. Um, there's a
questionnaire that we that we I
mean that
You know, it's it's maddening.
How many years we sit up here
with capital, Atley and we all
talk about? Oh, yeah, we're
gonna fix K. This year. We're
gonna fix cap alle, and we never
do We just
Keep adding more weight to the
ship until it's gonna sink. Mr
Chairman. We wouldn't be so
worried about uncomplete or
incomplete projects if we
weren't if it's just something
on paper.
When there's money actually
borrowed in sitting out there.
We paying for it. That is a
problem.
And after a certain time frame,
I think there's a federal
penalty that we have to pay the
IRS for those bonds because
really generating income.
I. I mean,
We in your in the in the new,
uh, infrastructure Division. You
don't you have the authority to
to to reject projects or to
score projects and say your
projects are not ready for the
infrastructure.
Vision yet Is there any
authority to do that in inside
there?
Uh, Mr Chairman, we probably
won't. I probably won't have any
authority for that. Um, I think
we'll we'll look at the projects
and we'll work closely with the
LFC and let you guys know which
ones you know, aren't ready to
go and which ones are ready to
go. And then you all would make
that decision on on whether they
would go or not.
But I mean
You know, being in the
construction world, right? You
you, You go to sign a contract
and you say OK, we're gonna pull
a permit within 30 days and And
is that a process that needs to
happen? I mean cities, some
cities and counties don't pull
processes, but somebody's gotta
sign off and say the contractors
on board the materials in stock,
and they're gonna begin
construction in 30 days and just
say it takes some six months.
The Board of Finance still has
time to sell those bonds.
In order to get the the bond
sold in the cash in the bank
that six month period, so when
they submit that
Invoicing month seven. You still
have 30 days to pay it.
And the money. Is there correct?
That is correct and
I don't
You know, Kelly print mine on
red paper.
Because the problem is is we in
the Legislature have a dump
truck load of money.
And we drive into every little
every town, Santa Fe. Whatever
it is, and they say we got K.
What a project do you want,
right? And we dump the dump load
of money and say we're gonna do
these projects and they're like
we don't have the engineers. We
don't have the architects. We
don't have the design. We don't
have planning, zoning approval
and and we just
Dump it there.
And it's that way with the
Navajo Nation it it's that way
everywhere.
I don't know, you know for
16 years I've been hearing about
Cape
and the fixes we need to make. I
mean, we're gonna have to give
some authority to your office.
To say Here's a 10. Here's a 10
checklist. You have to have all
10 of them completed before
you're allowed some way, shape
or form to
The helpless I mean,
Or I mean, we're the ones that
have the problem.
I mean, the legislators are the
ones that have the problem right
where, like The pigs in the
trough are right where we're the
ones that have the problem, And
we just say, OK, we'll help you.
We'll help you. We'll help you,
but it just worsens the problem.
Mr Chairman, I agree, And I
think that's part of the, um You
know the IC IP process and
trying to figure out what we
need to get, Um, for the I and
what we have now and try to make
sure that we align everything
correctly with what you all want
with what LFC wants. Um and what
the governor wants. That way. We
can stop that from happening
That way. We make sure that the
projects are ready to go.
We don't care what the governor
was Chairman, Senator Bell,
but the IC IP is not costing us
any money.
Until you say we're gonna fund
it.
Just being on the list is that's
just a magic list. It didn't
mean anything until we say that
projects a good project. And
then the mayor says We're ready
to go and we write a check or we
get a bond. It's not ready to
go. That's the problem, but they
are reimbursable receipts,
right? They they're not paid.
They're not paid at the start of
the project they have to. They
have to show the contract and
the receipt Chairman that is
correct. And Mr Chairman, I
think I think you know whenever,
whenever we kind of go through
all these pay requests, we just
we have to make sure that
Um, everything is
Has been, you know, reviewed and
and gone through. And so so,
yeah, I think you know that's
one thing that we can do is is
try to do all this on the front,
and I think part of to what
we're looking at is, um some of
the projects that come through
the Legislature, um, aren't on
the IC IP. And so it'd be
interesting to see how many of
them I think it's around half
actually, on an A and and half
of them aren't and so which ones
are actually moving forward. And
which ones aren't I think again.
This is going to be part of the
system that we're gonna look at
to see if if the ones that are
on
C. I are moving forward, then we
don't really have to do too many
different things. But if they're
not on IC IP, and those are the
ones that aren't moving, we need
to. We need to make sure that
the county municipalities, um,
want those projects, but the IC
IP should not even exist
anymore. It should be. There's a
10 priority checklist. Right and
these are completed and now you
can go to your or you can go to
the governor or whoever right
In request funding, but the exec
has to participate in that.
In the process of the roads,
right, the governor and so I I
mean,
What? Wesley? I I'm
congratulations, but not till
tomorrow.
But
I mean, any help we can help you
with I mean
I mean, this is I mean, if we're
gonna really make change, right
the amount of money
We? We know this is gonna
continue slowly for 3 billion
this year, maybe 2.5 billion
next year, right? And as we see
that trickling off
I mean, we have the money to fix
problems. But when you sit here
and say we have six point
Some billion
In capital and we could have
that in the bank generating
5% and minimum.
I mean, we could generate
manually returns and in
And instead of just sitting
there parked it 0.5 or 1%.
Whatever. Wells Fargo is paying
us for overnight deposits.
Um, but any help you need, just
let us know. But I think we got
In our work plan, Charles, I
think we're gonna have to
develop some type of check with
the infrastructure office and
then
Kelly and I have to kind of
coordinate and go through the
checklist. Gotta help us not
Kill projects or make money
move. So as you move forward, I
mean,
I don't
It's gonna be set up in this
next year. I mean, if you're
gonna go for a bar out, creating
efficiencies that you're gonna
need I know you said the deputy
Directy are gonna be critical to
your success. But
If you need things to help you
be successful.
I think that's something
You take pride in and that we
could take pride in
And that
Don't be afraid to do that and
say these are the resources they
need. And and if I don't have
this, then
I'm just handcuffing. Hopefully
it works out to our making. I
just have one other question.
Is your current position in the
position that might happen
tomorrow. Pay more tomorrow.
If not, I'll take Wayne in my
office. I don't think so. Mr.
Chairman. Well, wait, we're
going to meet right after this
meeting.
I was in a small yummy, right.
Thank you, Wesley. Thank you,
Kelly. I think that
That's it, right. Um, we're
gonna try to set up some
subcommittees tomorrow for water
and
In child welfare.
And then we do have that task
force. I think we got all the
names.
Or the Senate Memorial and CYFD.
We'll try to get that and so
kind of think tomorrow what you
It's water and CFD, right,
basically so kind of thinking.
We'll see where we go. Well,
maybe we'll try to meet tonight,
Charles and talk about July. Um
so that way we know we're not
here all week in that we have to
change you just schedule for one
day.
The 18th. We were gonna be in
Silver City on that day.
Well, you had a
So either way in July, we were
not in Santa Fe. We were
somewhere else, So we're gonna
have to rethink that decision
because for us to go for a day
and then quit and come back,
and, yeah,
