Mr. Chair, I will say that
that's really the focus of this
budget. And so, good morning,
um, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, it's a pleasure
to be with you again, as always,
to talk to you about the public
education departments FY 26
public school support budget
requests. Um,
The recommendation we're
presenting for you today.
Um, really reflects a commitment
to equity and excellence in
education. Addressing the needs
of all students, especially
those identified in the Martinez
Yazi ruling.
This proposal seeks to continue
making targeted investments that
enhance.
Instructional quality and and to
improve student outcomes.
Exactly what she requested, uh,
Mr. Chair.
I have shared this budget
request with this committee, um,
several times prior.
Including with staff and um it
was really important to me that
I share this with you early that
I received your feedback.
And that we have conversations
about the things that are
working for our students.
Um, what you have in front of
you is a handout that provides a
high level overview of the major
investments, we ask you to
support in order to continue
seeing the positive outcomes.
We have achieved over the over
the course of this
administration.
Um, the agencies FY 26SSR
represents an overall 4.4%
increase in funding from FY 25
to FY 26. I will note that this
does not include compensation at
this time.
Um, the executive budget is
still um going through the
overall compensation increases
for all public.
Employees and so that is not in
this budget, but I will say that
um we are closely aligned with
the LSC and LESC
recommendations. Um, there's a
recurring general fund increase
of 5%, which is largely due to
the increase in K12+, um,
expansion of universal free
meals and investments in Indian
education.
There's a non-recurring increase
of 58.8 million to the general
fund, which can be accounted for
by the 40 million supplemental
appropriation needed to sustain
the unit value and the 27
million needed for the general
fund for CTE, which was
previously funded by the public
education reform Fund.
In creating this budget, the
agency considered which items
are truly recurring. Well, not
all of the things that should be
recurring. We have moved into
recurring strictly because of
budget. Um, we did make a
concerted effort to do those
things, and the things that you
can see here listed, um, that we
have moved into recurring or
high dosage tutoring, math and
STEM at a school time, community
schools, school safety.
And the learning management
system.
Um
By shifting these programs to
recurring funding, the state
insures ongoing support for
initiatives designed to close
the achievement gap.
And improve student outcomes.
So I just wanna explain the
handout quickly. I didn't want
to give you the same uh
PowerPoint presentation, so this
is a little bit more
straightforward. On the left
hand side, you'll see the total
increase for this category, such
as educator ecosystem, uh, the
middle arrow breaks that down,
including identifying where we
have increases and then uh to
the right, we have some
highlights, uh, that we'd like
to share with you.
So educator ecosystem.
Um, teachers remain the most
important factor in student
learning. However, the state
still has far too many teacher
vacancies.
We want to invest 52.28 million
into our educator ecosystem to
recruit and retain teachers.
Um, this includes 20 million for
the educator Fellows program.
This is a locally grown educator
program that advances
educational assistance and other
staff through an educator prep
program, while remaining in the
classroom with a licensed
teacher.
These educators are more likely
to stay in communities, their
communities, upon graduating,
um, 70 school districts and
charter schools currently
participate in this program, um,
and it's is a very popular among
our rural schools.
We have $20 million for educator
clinical practice. This includes
teacher residencies, um, paid
student teaching and uh our
principal residency program, um,
I just want to, uh, mention that
we have seen an incredible
growth.
Um, in our teacher residency
programs, um, and are now at
about 300.
Educators that are um.
Now moving into classrooms.
We're asking 2.3 million for
educator preparation, induction
and evaluation programs. Um,
this workplaces coordinators at
our educator prep programs in
our higher ed institutions to
recruit students into the
residency program, which we know
is the highest quality
preparation effort.
Um, this also supports our
principal licensure program.
We have $10 million for
professional development, which
goes through our priority
schools bureau, um, they oversee
training for our instructional
coaches like our literacy
coaches, um, our teachers,
principals and also uh
superintendents, and these um
efforts are bringing together
cohorts of educators, um, for a
3 year time frame. These
investments are designed to
strengthen teacher preparation.
Enhanced professional growth
opportunities and ensure
educators have the tools needed
to deliver high quality
instruction.
Um
See, the next is literacy and
STEM. We're asking for 65
million. Um, the budget includes
30 million allocated for the
summer reading program, um, 17.6
million to expand structured
literacy training through
letters.
We're also requesting 12.4
million for math and STEM
initiatives, um, and 5 million
for middle school, um, letters
training and support, including
um expanding our literacy
schools within um middle school.
Uh, these funds will continue to
increase our reading and math
proficiency rates, um, as we've
seen with the 4% statewide
increase in reading proficiency
based on the focus that we've
made there.
So, um, I wanna talk just a
little bit about the summer
reading program. Um, as I've
shared with you prior, we had
117 program sites, statewide,
um, that was providing small
group instruction for students
to one instru instructor, um,
over the course of this last
summer.
Overall, students saw a 5%
average growth towards pre uh
reading proficiency with some
student groups, um, experiencing
far greater. This is in
comparison to their peers, um,
that did not participate in the
program who saw 6% reading loss
or proficiency over the summer.
Um, parents and students and and
our school partners and
community partners have provided
us extremely positive.
feedback for this program and
have really requested more. They
want more this coming summer,
and they want more throughout
the academic year, both during
the school day and, and after
the school day.
Um, we're now planning for
summer 2025.
Um, we are designing um a
program for June.
A 4 week program and another in
July. So schools could opt in to
do both June and July, but right
now with the funding that we
have in this current fiscal
year, we're able to fully um
fund a June program. We're
already recruiting students were
already recruiting sites, we've
identified 43 potential sites
where people have already said
yes, we're interested, we want
to do this, and that's
projecting 6,
900 students were really just in
the beginning of this process in
terms of recruiting students,
but overall based on um what we
uh were able to implement
together this last summer, uh,
people are really excited about
continuing to do this work with
us and we're continuing to um
sign up both sites and students.
Um, we're working, um, this year
to really be um.
Collaborating with our schools
so that they can help refer
students that would most benefit
from this program.
Um
Similar efforts will be
implemented with this funding
for maths, including focus
professional development and
coaching, um, the department
implemented a a a pilot program
called Nidals. Um, there were
two elementary schools in which
teachers receive this type of
training and support, um, and
the results of that have shown
not only an improvement in
students, um,
proficiency, but really a change
in terms of the teachers
competence and strategies and
effectively teaching math
concepts to their students.
Um, let's see, the next page,
special education, we're
requesting 9 million to support
students with disabilities, 4
million will be allocated for
professional development and
training, including the
statewide behavior initiatives
supporting students with autism,
uh, or programming such as Best
Buddies, um, special education
leaders and fellows academy,
parent university, we um held
our first ever parent university
in.
walk in,
um, and had incredible
participation, um, over 500
individuals, um, registered for
that, uh, parent university
representative Luhan, thank you
for participating. Um, again,
parents are looking for support
for information so that they can
best advocate for their students
and how they can support the
overall academic um experiences.
Another uh thing that is funded
with this is an expansion of
the.
and school initiative, um, this
program has been highly
effective in in the schools that
it has been implemented in um
Farmington's, uh, four-year
graduation rates for students
with disabilities went from
32.9% to 63.1 from 2017 to 2022,
and Demings rate went from 42.6
to 74%. Um, with this funding,
we'll be able to expand it to 7.
additional school districts. Um,
we see this as being a highly
effective program.
And uh 5 million will be
allocated to salary
differentials to attract and
retain our educators. We have,
um, at the start of this 360
vacancies in our special
education classrooms.
The next item is graduation. The
budget includes 79.5 million to
improve graduation rates through
programs like Career connected
learning, which bridges
education and workforce
opportunities with 41.5 million
in funding for NextGen CTE
innovation zones and are highly
popular summer internship
program.
The number of summer internships
has been increasing year over
year, um, in 2023 we served
2,0741 students and in 2024,
we're looking at 3,365 students
who are participating in
internship opportunities. And
then I just want to point out
the effectiveness that CTE has
for our students. Um, CTE
concentrators, meaning they take
2 or more courses.
in a particular area of study
have nearly 100% graduation
rate. This is uh clearly a
highly effective program that's
worth continued investment.
Um, we also have a request of 8
million for community schools.
Since 2019, when community
Schools Act was enacted, there's
been a 12% increase in 4-year
graduation rate for students who
um attend community schools.
At a school time learning and
high impact tutoring programs
continue to be effective in
their um approach of frequent
small group tutoring
instruction. We really know this
as a key and accelerating
academic progress.
10 million, uh, for school
improvement and transformation
will support schools designated
in need of improvement. We are
taking a much more um hands-on
and involvement in our schools
designated in need of
improvement, that includes going
in and providing coaching,
looking at student assessment
data with school leaders and
teachers, um, and really
reviewing best practices.
Setting some goals for them and
helping them track that over a
course of a school year.
Um, we're, we're doing that now,
um, with the community schools
Bureau and other key programs in
the agency.
Um, all of these programs are
designed to boost graduation
rates, provide wraparound
services and engage students in
meaningful.
Career pathways. Um, the next
budget item is attendance.
Attendance uh is one of the
biggest hurdle hurdles in the
state, the state is facing um
and seeing significant learning
gains. The agency is requesting
an additional 5 million in
attendance over what we received
in FY 25 to expand the grants
that we make out to our school
districts and charter schools
related to attendance. Um, our
School districts have spent the
funding so far on things like
attendance interventionists,
early warning systems, technical
assistance is provided by the
public ed department, um, an
example of, of something that's
kind of new that the Farmington
School District has done with
their funding is they have
contracted with the company that
provides an AI-based platform
that interacts with students and
families when a student is
absent. And so that platform.
is able to gather information
about why the student is absent,
provides information that may
help remove any barriers,
reminds them to submit their
doctor's note if they're out for
that reason, and uh really then
it gets channeled to a school
employee who can do a lot of
follow up.
Um, school administrators around
the state also continue to um.
Point out and stress that
behavioral health needs are also
a big barrier for student
attendance. The agency is
requesting 3.5 million to
support behavioral health.
And to reduce suspension and
expulsion in schools when it is
possible to avoid that, so that
students again remain in school
learning.
Uh, these strategies that I
shared with you are working.
From the 2022, 23 school year to
the 2023, 24 school year, we saw
um a 10% drop.
From 30, um 9.2 to 29.7, and
chronic absenteeism statewide.
Uh, 10 points, almost 10 points
in a year is significant.
Um, that means that more kids
are in the classroom receiving
the critical education, um,
programs and services that we
want them all to receive. Um, I
would like to highlight uh Santa
Fe Public schools, one of the
districts that have received the
funding, they've been focusing
on attendance, uh, for many
years and have really focused on
hiring staff to do that work
with students and families, and
they saw a 22 point reduction in
in
Um
chronic absenteeism, which is is
significant.
Um, it's important to give them
a shout out when we can for this
great work.
Um, school safety, uh, one of
the top issues that the
department continues to hear
from super superintendents is a
concern related to school
safety.
Um, I've had several meetings
with um superintendents on this
issue, uh, to help better
understand what they're facing
and what we can do to support
them at the department. Uh, the
funding that we're requesting in
the amount of 5 million will
would support their needs. The
things that we're hearing from
them are um a need for, um,
improved communication systems
that address response times for
law enforcement. Our rural
districts are
experiencing um on average 45
minutes to an hour response
times during emergencies. That
is far too long when a school is
dealing with a critical
situation.
Um, they're requesting technical
assistance for threat assessment
plans and and trainings, uh,
they're requesting school safety
equipment. Many of the schools
utilize screening technology for
students or anyone who comes
into the school, um, Rio Rancho
in Las Cruces in particular are
using a system called Evolve
Technology.
Um, they're requesting school
resource officers once again
having staff focused on the
ground on school safety, and
then again mental health
supports are critical to
addressing school safety
concerns. Um, and then I just
want to point out that more and
more schools are choosing to use
the mobile panic button with
more than 700 schools currently
opting into a panic button
system, uh, the panic button has
been utilized 16,213.
1 times since its inception, um,
in New Mexico in 2022.
OK, the next, um, item is
student nutrition. We're
requesting 68.9 million to
ensure students have access to
nutritious meals, which are
critical to learning and
well-being of our students.
And F 22 24/55 million meals
were served through the healthy
universal meals program with the
projected increase to 58 million
meals and school year 2425.
We are seeing more students
participate in breakfast and
lunch. Last school year, we saw
an increase in over 2 million
additional meals served totaling
of 4% increase in both breakfast
and lunch from the prior year.
Based on what we've seen so far,
um, in July through October
claims processed through the
department. We have already
served 834,040 more meals than
the 1st 3 months of the previous
school year.
Our projections for FY 26 also
include a 5% increase in male
participation from the current
year.
Um, an additional 2.3 million
will go toward New Mexico grown
meals to bring
fresh local products from our
local farmers into schools, and
this is really important, the
department is very, very
interested in improving the
quality of meals of our
students. So it's one thing to
expand access. It's another to
make sure that the quality is,
is, um, improved.
Um, that we, that our students
want to eat the meals, we spend
a lot of time sitting with
students talking about meal
quality and um are really eager
to do some uh work with our
school districts around that
piece.
We're, uh, to maintain robust
student assessment programs for
requesting 18.1 million. This
includes 14.8 million for the
assessment and accountability
program, which this year
includes support for the
Panorama survey. This is a
survey that is implemented in
schools with students, with
families, and with staff
regarding school climate,
feelings of safety and um
including um an overall sort of
cold.
of our, of our schools.
This is also for the gifted uh
screener.
Um
There's a request for 1.6
million for student test
assistants for advanced
placement testing.
Um, the IB testing and PSAT
testing, PSAT will be an
addition in this budget request.
17,951 AP exams, um, have been
taken by 10,910 students.
Um, in the 2023, 24 school year.
Um
Um, PED supported almost half of
those exams, the cost of those
exams. These funds will support
the state's ability to measure
and track student achievement,
ensured data-driven decision
making at all levels. Um, the
federal target for participation
and state accountability testing
is 95% and New Mexico is hitting
that mark because of our
investments in student
assessments.
Um, our data systems um request
is a total of 18.3 million, uh,
to enhance critical data
systems.
This includes 2.3 million for
school dashboards and reporting
portals to ensure that schools
have meaningful and secure
access to their to our nova
system.
Um, this is really important,
so, so schools.
On demand, have access to the
data they need to inform their
decision making at the school.
Uh, another 1.7 million to build
an API to bring assessment data
directly in from our SIS
vendors. This is really
important for data quality, um,
we are still wrapping up the
40th day, uh, reporting period.
Ensuring the quality of our data
is incredibly important. The
process to validate all of the
data that comes from every
single one of our school
districts and and charter
schools is extremely time
consuming and is largely manual.
It takes a lot of of time at
both the school and state level.
We're asking 12 million for a
statewide student information
system. This will go a long way
to ensuring a high quality data
and this system will also
include the IEP um statewide
system, which we uh desperately
want for our students with IEPs.
We're asking for 4 million for
an online licensure portal that
will increase security and
efficiency as well as connect to
the national licensure database,
which our system doesn't
currently do. This is really
important if a student's
license, I mean a teacher's
license.
is revoked in another state, we
need to be able to see that
immediately before they come to
our state, um.
We would also like for our um
licensure system to connect to
our student database as well as
our higher ed, um, educator prep
programs. All of these data
systems really need to be
connected.
These investments ensure schools
and educators have secure access
to act to accurate and
actionable data which we all
very much care about.
Next, a student and family
support were requesting 11
million for programs that
directly engage families and
provide additional support to
our most vulnerable students,
including students experiencing
homelessness, students in foster
care, and students being raised
by their grandparents.
These requests will fund
coordinators that work directly
with families, with schools,
with the children, youth and
families department and with
other critical community
organizations that provide uh
supports to our families.
Um, this request also includes
10 million to support the family
income index program, which is
meant to directly support the
students and families in our
most economically disadvantaged
schools. Um, these types of
anti-poverty measures really
improve the lives lives of
students and their families. Um,
we believe that this program,
um, can be incredibly effective
and something that I personally
um will be tackling in.
this next.
Um, fiscal year.
See, next page.
For academic outcomes, uh, to
improve academic achievement
when requesting 65 million,
which includes 60 million for
K-12 plus units to provide
extended learning opportunities
and to expand teacher
preparation time.
60% of school districts in New
Mexico and charter schools have
a minimum of 180 instructional
days.
There are 735 K12 plus schools
in the in the 2024-925 school
year.
Um, this is up from 542 schools
in the previous year.
5 million in funding for
instructional materials to
ensure students have access to
high quality resources is in is
critical, um, to ensure that our
materials are content rich, that
they're culturally relevant and
that they're aligned with state
standards and support are very
diverse student groups in New
Mexico.
And then I'll just note that
we're going into an adoption
year for science and science
instructional materials are
typically more expensive.
Um, our, we're requesting
additional funding for our
Education Acts, including 50
million for the Indian Education
Fund. These recurring funds
would not only support public
schools, uh, they will also
support educational programs and
services for our Native American
students that are implemented by
our pueblo's tribes and nations.
Uh, these will be focused on
improving academic outcomes and
can be utilized for things like
at a school.
full-time opportunities
ancillary services for our
students with disabilities or
our language instructors, um,
and for many other options.
We're asking 7 million for
initiatives under the bilingual
Multicultural Education Act, the
Hispanic Education Act and the
Black Education Act.
The agency received no funding
for this current fiscal year to
implement the bilingual
multicultural act despite the
LFC evaluation requesting an an
increase uh to support um
activities in this area.
These funds are critical to
increasing proficiency rates,
fostering cultural identity and
providing equitable
opportunities for all students.
I will say that in New Mexico,
students are making progress in
regards to the state seal of
bilingualism and biliteracy, uh,
where we have 66% of eligible
English learners, um receiving
those certificates.
Uh, next we have, um, the SCG
shortfall request is $40
million. As you all know, this
is due to a request made by our
school districts and charter
schools, and by the legislature,
uh, for the PED to increase the
unit value this last spring, the
agency did increase it and this
is our current shortfall as a
result.
Um, we expect the units to
increase next school year for
current um
For the current participating
schools who are likely to
increase days.
Um, and then also we have many
schools that are right on the
cusp of 180 days, and so once
they reach that, they can also
take advantage of those K-12
plus units.
Um
135.6 million is being requested
for student transportation,
supporting an average ridership
of 1,240,000 students in FY 25
or 26.
Um, and of course our
transportation ensures safe and
reliable travel for our students
to school.
OK.
Onto the agency budget.
Uh, the public education
department is responsible for
ensuring students in New Mexico
receive a high-quality
education. It is an enormous
responsibility requiring more.
Then 40% of the state's budget.
The agency is responsible for
monitoring and oversight of
funds, professional development,
and technical assistance to
schools on a host of topics and
for ensuring equitable student
learning. However, the agency
budget is quite small.
With an FY 26 budget request of
$27.5 million. Just half of 1%
of the total public school
support budget.
The funds that the agency is
responsible for has grown
incredibly over the last several
years, but the agency staffing
has really not kept pace with
that increase.
Um, let's see, over the last
year, the agency has done an
exceptional job of recruiting
and retaining staff, our current
vacancy rate is 15.8%.
However, our funded vacancy rate
is at 25%. An additional $1
million will reduce that funded
vacancy rate to 19.5.
The agency is also requesting an
increase of $2 million to
support staffing needs for the
Office of Special Education for
all of the important work that
they're doing around the state.
As well as for the agency as a
whole.
Um
Let's see, and our special uh
appropriations requests.
The agency is requesting funding
to pay legal expenses related to
the Martinezali Consolidated
lawsuit. Um, I'll just note that
this is an ongoing expense for
the department.
Um, 3.9 million is being
requested for data quality
initiatives to support our
continued implementation and
improvement of the Nova data
collection system. Um, this is
the new system, um, that we have
in place, the former system
being the star's data system.
This funding will also uh pay
for our software and hardware
expenses, as well as expansion
and maintenance of a.
unified application for federal
applications, federal funds. I'm
sorry.
Um, this application reduces
overall administrative effort of
our school districts and charter
schools. It also helps us to
better track those funds, which
is incredibly important.
Our supplemental and requests,
um, are paying for shortfalls in
the current year. There are Eser
funded positions at the
department, um, that we need to
continue through this fiscal
year and so we're requesting
$250,000 to pay for these
positions that are important to
the work at the department.
The agency is also requesting
$350,000 to maintain our
Albuquerque and Las Cruces
offices. The total amount um of
those office leases are 400,000,
0 wait, that's not right.
Start 350,000.
Um, and then I'll just note that
PED.
Um has never received funding
for our office leases so far.
Um, that is
The presentation. So at this
point, um, I'm happy to answer
any questions, um, Madam
Chairwoman. Yes. Um, of that you
and the committee may have.
Thank you very much, uh, Madam,
uh, Secretary designee, thank
you to you and your staff for
how you work and your
presentation. We got several on
the list, so we are gonna move
on, um, and first we have
Representative Lenthe, and then
we have after that, Senator.
Gonzalez and I'll go on later on
the list. Thank you,
Representative. You're in. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Good morning.
Thank you secretary for your
presentation. Uh, a few
questions and I want to respect
everyone's time this morning.
I heard a number yesterday in
regards to the investment that
New Mexico uh has for uh New
Mexico students. What is your
number for New Mexico's
investment per pupil.
Are you referring to the unit
value representative Lent. What
is?
656553 representative 6553, uh,
I, I was, I was shocked
yesterday when the number was
15,000 that was told to us per
pupil. Is is is there any
reflection about of that or, or
maybe they're discrepancy.
In regards to that
Representative, I'm not sure
where you heard that, so do you,
are you aware? OK. So, no, I'm
not sure where that 15,000 came
from, but I'm assuming what that
was discussing was not just the
unit value, which is just state
funds, but that would include
federal funds and other, and um
And other investments as well,
not just the unit value.
Thank you, Miss Madam Chair and
secretary. So then where does
that rank New Mexico nationally
in regards to for people
spending.
Um, madam Chair Representative
Lente, I don't have that ranking
in front of me, but we certainly
can get that for you and, and
send it.
Right after this, uh.
Hearing
OK, I, uh,
I, I wanted to dig in more about
that in regards to if we can
figure out what we're ranking at
and, and kind of graph it out in
regards to
We have this recurring theme in
this state that our kids
continue to to score the lowest
and and I, I, we're gonna dig
ourselves out of that
eventually, right? But is
spending more money and throwing
dollars at this and investing
more dollars to our students.
The path. And so I, I just
wanted to see where we can get
out of this, this funk, if you
want to call it that, that we're
in currently, so we, we can
expand upon that at a later, at
a later time, but thank you for
answering that. My second
question, Madam Chair and
secretary, is related to the
summer reading program that you
discussed on page one of your
presentation, um.
This last legislative session,
there was $30 million in in the
budget applied to that and then
you talked about sites and and
the success of it. Where were
those sites at this past summer?
Um, I actually, uh, met him
chair and Mr. Representative, I
have um a document that I am
planning to send to you, um, a
little bit later today,
hopefully that will have all of
those locations and so they were
located throughout the state,
um.
I don't have, I can't read all
117 off to you and Madam Chair,
you don't have to read them. I,
I just, my, my question was when
we had approved the budget last
year and approved this money,
that money last year, uh, it was
uncertain on regard in regards
to if the summer reading, I
don't know if we call it an
academy or an institution, was a
brick and mortar facility that
was gonna be put in Santa Fe and
Albuquerque, which I, I thought
that that that defeats the
purpose because we have kids all
over the state. So if these
programs are being deployed
to 100 plus places around the
state, then are they being
administered by our public
school partners, are they, are,
are, are, are they being reached
out to our rural communities and
our tribal communities, uh, are
they online?
Can you help me understand that
better?
Madam chairs, madam chair, um,
representativelante, absolutely.
So there's two different things.
There is, there was a capital
appropriation to build an actual
um literacy institute, which is
underway currently, and then
there was an appropriation for
the actual reading program. And
so the reading program.
Um, again, last summer was in
117 site statewide, uh, most of
those were within schools, but
many of them were also with uh
with tribal entities located in
tribal libraries or or other
locations. We also have some
community partners serve as
program site sponsors including
um City of Albuquerque and their
rec programs is another example
of a partner for those reading
programs.
And so the intent is, is that
those programs would still
continue to be located
throughout the state, um, and
we'd like to expand beyond the
117 that we had this last
summer. Thank you, madam chair
thank you secretary. So if you
say that the 5th, the $30
million institute is still in
progress in terms of planning.
Do you have a site selection or
a community selection where that
may be.
Um, madam, uh, chair represent
Valente, yes, it will be
located. OK, so I think Madam
Chair and secretary that that
burns a lot of our ears uh
around this table simply because
we know that New Mexico is much
more than Albuquerque, and, and
I would just say that if there's
any time and place to talk more
about that in regards to
How do we make this a, a much
larger program for the
betterment of of New Mexico just
versus, you know, we don't all
have access to Albuquerque. Some
don't, I should say some don't
and some do, but, uh, you know,
if we're gonna build an
institute and invest $30 million
in a reading institute. Let's
let's see if we can't make that
uh serving more students in just
the population in and around the
urban center.
And Madam Chair, Mr. uh
Representative Bente, yes, the,
the idea is that it is located
in an area that has very large
uh portion of the state's
population, but it is intended
to serve all students of the
state of New Mexico to provide
free services to literacy
instruction to assessments, a
lot of the diagnostic work that
needs to happen, uh, we'd like
for it to be located near uh UNM
Hospital and all of the medical.
Services that are in that area
that also support uh the people
of the state of New Mexico, uh,
we're really thoughtful about
being located near public
transportation, um, hotels as
well for anyone who would be
coming into the community to
access these programs, um, and
services.
Thank you Madam Chair and
secretary. It seems like we have
some really great higher
education partners that are
across our state that if in fact
we don't have to build an
institute, we could utilize
their. Thank you, their capital
to to to how something like this
all across our state, so we
wouldn't have to build something
from scratch, but just the
thought, um, going then further,
Madam Chair and secretary. I
read in the Mexican on the 8th
of this month that Native
American chronic absenteeism
outpaces New Mexico's average.
s
Did you have a comment on that?
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative Late, I think
overall chronic absenteeism is a
huge challenge for the state as
a whole.
Um, I think, you know.
The rate among our Native
American students is very high,
and that's why we are being so
aggressive with our request for
funding so that we can be much
more focused on strategies, um,
not only for students statewide,
but also for specific student
populations, and I think that
our requests for increased
funding in the Indian Education
Fund is in response to that as
well. Our, our intent is to
provide more um opportunities.
To focus on um student
populations that need some extra
support and programming.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you secretary when I think of
chronic and, and well, let me
take a step back. What's your
definition of of of chronic
absenteeism.
Um, chronic absenteeism is when
they um have, is it 10 or more.
10% or more absences.
Um, within a semester.
is considered panic.
An academic years. Thank you.
Thank you. And, and so when,
when a student misses 10% or
more of the academic year, they
are chronically absent from that
school year, right? And so when
I think about my district, um,
District 65, Sandoval County,
San Juan County, Ri Riba County,
large in part Native American
Mexico. I think a lot about
sometimes the the chapter houses
and how those students, uh,
sometimes can't get to school
because their bus routes are,
are impassable.
display a large part in in
something like that.
Um, Madam Chair
Representativelante, yes,
absolutely. Transportation is a
barrier for some areas and some
students for um attendance, um,
some of the conversations that
we've had with tribal leaders in
our tribal education
departments.
Actually pertain to um
transportation, um, and some of
the funding through the Indian
Education Fund, the increased
funding could be utilized uh for
transportation services to
expand transportation services.
We've also heard that, you know,
additional sort of pickups would
be helpful.
To make sure that that students
get to school, not only to
school, but also to um
programming outside of the the
school day is really important.
Thank you and Madam Chair and
secretary to follow up on that
then might this also be based
on, on cultural days in our
tribal communities.
Madam Chair Representative
Valante, absolutely, and so we
have been very vocal at the
department, encouraging our
school districts and charter
schools to make sure that
they're consulting with our
tribe's public and nations
regarding their academic year. I
will tell you that we have seen
some good, um.
progress in this area. Districts
like Bernalillo have designed
their school calendar to
incorporate cultural days so
that the school is actually at a
session during those uh
designated cultural days and
that is making an impact on
attendance for those students.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
secretary. So then a follow up
to that will be
Is it the charge then of those
local um school boards then to
make those decisions or, or, or
in my mind, I'm a, I'm a product
of the Berley public school
system and and I recall when in
high school.
A lot of my my friends from
other pueblos would would miss
weeks at a time just because of
cultural activities, right? And,
and now today in in this seat.
Can we ever give credit for
those cultural days instead of,
instead of the black guy that
the Santafina Mexican has to
write a paper on to say that
This is an Indian problem that
they should.
They should go to school,
whereas, you know, perhaps we
are in school, but in a cultural
school that should be able to
provide credit versus making the
student pick between a public
school setting and a cultural
setting.
Can we do that legislatively?
Um, Madam Chair Representative
Lente, um, yeah, we could, I
mean, that's absolutely
something that could be done. I,
I will say that the department
is being much more.
Proactive and um.
Ensuring that our school
districts and charter schools
are.
Engaging in consultation with
the tribe's bus and nations on.
And how they're spending their
money, how they're designing
their academic calendars, um,
that needs to be done. It should
be done, um, it should not be,
um, uh, a consequence to the
student because they choose to
engage in a cultural activity
that is incredibly important and
should be supported as opposed
to going to school. So that is
something we're very interested
in, and I'm getting a direction
from the chair that I need to,
and, and so it it almost seems
though that
This, this, this quote unquote
problem, if you want to call it
a problem, could be one that
could be appreciated by,
especially those that are in
rural Mexico or in agricultural
Mexico where in some cases,
roundup happens, right? It's a
week at a time and they have to
choose whether or not to
participate in that or go to
school. And so I think a lot of
things could be, could be be be.
Uh, appreciated by both sides,
and I'm, I'm getting, I'm
getting the act, I see that, but
in, in regards lastly to the
Indian education funding
increase. Uh, I was given a, a
chart in regards to how much
Indian education funding has
increased over the past several
years. In 2019, it was 2.5,
2020, 6 million 2013, uh, 15 to
$20 million and now, uh, there's
an increase or a request for an
increase to uh additional 30
million.
And so my question to you, uh,
secretary, and I've heard you
make a presentation at at forums
with tribal leaders.
What if that increase doesn't
happen, then, then does that,
does that thwart your ability to
continue to make improvements in
tribal communities.
Um, Madam Chair, Representative
Valente, we will do everything
in our power to advocate for
that funding, we feel that it's
needed. We feel that it is um an
incredible uh positive use of
funds and in our deep
consultation that we do at the
state with our uh tribal
leaders, um, were confident that
they, um,
We'll put this money to good use
for the benefit of our students,
so obviously if we don't have
the funding, then they're not
able to um expand what they're
doing for our Native American
students. Thank you, Madam,
especially, of course, is when
you make those rule changes from
instead of having grant funding
just to provide recruiting
funding that's gonna be huge as
well as no reversions, because
that's going to be huge as well
to make sure that they can spend
their money, timely and
efficiently. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I know it took a lot of
time. Thank you or no, thank
you. You had some great
questions and points
representative.
I'm gonna add just a hair here
on that because when we spoke
about the literacy institute
we're talking about, it was
actually more than 30 is 60
million, it's 30 million for the
building and then 30 million for
the reading um initiatives and
so on that we have, so it was
quite a a ticket price, but I'm
happy to hear that the, it's
moving along. So thank you very
much. We've got only about 20
minutes left and I have several
people 1234567 people on the
list. So if we can keep your
questions and answers a little
bit.
if it would help all of us.
Senator Gonzalez, you are next.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
will try to be very brief and uh
you know, some of it has been
touched also by uh
representative Lente, but uh
first of all, uh, I just want to
compliment you on the handout.
I, I really like this setup.
It's this to follow and and uh
really well and then the other
part is, uh, just thinking of
all your staff or, you know, the
hard work that goes on.
Um, the first part that I was
gonna ask is um
When will the new rating ranking
of of uh
Of our state. When will that
happen?
Um, Madam Chair, Senator
Gonzalez, are you referring to
our school designations. Is that
what you're referring to overall
ranking that we get nationally.
Um, are you referring to our
nape sort of scores and ranking?
Are you referring to child
well-being ranking.
Well, I think you have to help
me out on this. We refer to as
the being forty-ninth and this
to that ranking.
So Madam Chair, uh, Senator
Gonzalez, so there's an annual
child well-being ranking that
does include education is a
component of that, that is done
through the kids count ranking,
um, uh, that the NEAKC
Foundation puts out, and then
our next uh.
Nape
His next academic year. It's
not, it's not this year, but the
following, um, academic year.
Yeah, but sure, I think it'd be
interesting because of all the
initiatives that we have been
working with.
And all the
Additional funding that has gone
into place.
To see what it's going to do to
our overall ranking, you know,
so.
Um, I'll be interesting to see,
you know what.
Our progress has been and, you
know, where we're at.
So, uh, thank you for that.
The other part is uh yesterday.
I brought up the question and I
really quite didn't get an
answer.
But uh
Do we have a number on how many
students are homeless.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator
Gonzalez, we do. I don't have it
in front of me, although Deputy
Secretary Castilla, do you have
that number off the top of your
head?
She said it's about 10,000
students um are experiencing
housing insecurity.
And
Um
That's really alarming because
That's a lot.
And uh so, uh, uh, Madam Cha so
is this part of still covered a
lot through Title I.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator
Gonzalez, it is, yes.
So our request, Senator
Gonzalez, Madam Chair, Senator
Gonzalez would allow us to um
fund additional staffing to help
support these families. There
are um not all of the supports
are available in the public
education system, but if we're
able to help them navigate, um,
resources at the state and local
levels. That's what we would
like to do. Um, and so I just
wanted to tie it back to our
actual request. It is, it's a,
it's
incredibly alarming. It's very
concerning, Senator.
Very well then off with um on
the funding that you have on
page 4 for the bilingual
multicultural, Hispanic and
black, uh, so the 7 million,
what would that number be now if
you were to add 7 million.
Um, sorry, Madam Chair San
Gonzalez, can you ask that
question because the page 4
where you have a.
You have here that uh on uh
Education Act.
And you have 57 million, but 50
million going to Indian
education fund, and then 7
million to bilingual bicultural,
Hispanic and black. So what
would the new number be with a
+7.
So it's, it's an additional 6
million. So last year the
bilingual multicultural um
education Act, we did not
receive any funding for that in
this current fiscal year, um, we
did have funding for the black
education Act. And so uh this
request will allow us to fund
all of the um education acts
that we have at the department
currently.
Oh, OK. Uh, madam chair, but,
um, prior to say we didn't
receive last year, but before
that, what was it? Um, Madam
Chair, Senator Gonzalez, I think
it was about 500,000 per act is
what we received prior to this,
uh, fiscal year.
Hey.
Madam Chair, with that, um, you
know, um.
I, I really feel it's slow, you
know, and I really think that we
really need to work with that,
you know, when we start working
on the budget.
Uh, the next one is on the
transportation, um, so we do
have a shortfall in
transportation.
Antonio's looking at me.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator
Gonzalez, I, I should wrangle
Antonio up here if you have some
really detailed, um, requests
for or um request for
information. We do increase um
our transportation funding
requests based on increase in
fuel costs and other
transportation-related costs
annually.
Oh, I'm sorry, but um, on um.
Antonio, get over there, they're
calling you.
Oh.
Yesterday we also had uh the
Department of Transportation.
And just a rough number if we
have.
Do we still have or actually
school buses cannot cross
bridges.
And we turned that into feeder
routes.
Is it high number or is it?
Um, Madam Chair, Senator, uh,
certain bridges do have weight
limits, so they they can't cross
in certain areas, that is
correct.
So, uh, so school districts do
have the opportunity if they
can't get a bus over a bridge to
offer per capita feeder, which
is included in the formula.
Well, I think we have to um be
sensitive to that and what uh
representative Lente brought his
uh.
You know, when, uh, this kind of
conditions.
And then they places absentee,
you know, I think we really have
to look at that and weigh that.
So, uh, and we have an increase
on federal on uh feeder routes
or
Pretty much about the same.
Um, Maen, it's been about the
same, um, I'd also like to
mention those school districts
also have the opportunity to uh
use suburbans, they apply to the
state and and so that that could
assist in some districts as
well.
Thank you for that, um.
And then on page 5 on your
expansion request for 15 new
FTEs.
Would you have, uh, do you have
a space available or will you
have to rent or?
Um, Madam Chair, Senator
Gonzalez, we do have space uh
within our offices currently to
expand and honestly, um, it's,
it really is, uh, would allow us
the ability to maintain staffing
that are currently or were
funded with ER funding, so they
are currently in, in the
buildings, um, and then to hire
some additional staff within the
Office of Special Education and
we do have space for, for those
additional stuff. It's not.
a lot, Senator, but so we
definitely have space.
almost done, but on the, on your
appropriation where you have the
legal fees for um
The Martineziazi, uh, for how,
how long is that contract with
the attorneys.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator
Gonzalez, you know, as long as
we continue to need um legal
representation for this lawsuit,
we will need to continue to pay
for those services.
Madam chair at a certain point
they have to go through uh.
Requests for a proposal, does it
expire?
Um, Madam Chair, Senator
Gonzalez, um, I'm not quite sure
for legal fees. I will tell you
that our attorneys are very well
versed in the lawsuit. They
have um um great expertise for
us. They have represented, um,
the state in previous lawsuits
and have particular knowledge in
this area.
OK. And uh the last part of
Madam Chair, I really want to
compliment to you and also with
uh
Oh, it's Denise.
So, Denniella.
Uh, because I have been asking
for a long time to get a
progress on the teacher reach.
And she sent me one and really
um.
Take my hat off to this district
that I've applied for the
teacher each you have Gallup,
Zuni Mosquero demons, central
Maxwell, Springer, Cuba, and
House, and here again, I mean,
if we're talking about.
equity and we're talking about
trying to have the best
education statewide and a
fairness basis.
You know, without good teachers
and.
Teachers cannot be in a place
where you don't have housing.
You know, and I know that that
is even going further now to
more support staff, but I really
like to see uh, you know, uh,
more of that and how we can work
with it. And then I also have
some ideas on the working with a
mortgage finance authority that
we could apply to the
manufacturing part to where it
could be done, built right here
in our state.
And avoid some cost.
And at the same time some
economic development some of the
areas within the state.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Senator. I'd
love to work with you on teacher
housing, and I agree with you,
Denise is fantastic.
She came early in the morning
and she sits there and I said,
OK, all right.
Good work, Denise
and Antonio, I have a new one
for you. I won't tell you now.
On your electric thing.
All right. Thank you very much.
Uh thank you, Senator Gonzalez,
you know, we're just very
fortunate to have Senator
Gonzalez with his expertise
here, served in given most of
his life, if not all, since
newborn, I think, to education,
public added, and for the
betterment of our students.
Thank you, Senator. All right,
we're gonna move on to Senator,
I mean, no, we got
representative Chatfield first,
Thank you, madam chair.
Uh,
welcome Secretary Desi. Uh, the
first thing I would like to say
is I'm so impressed with your
presentation. Thank you. It's
clear, concise, easy to read, we
oftentimes get a stack of papers
that no living breathing human
being can read in the few
minutes that we have here, uh, I
really appreciate the format is
well done. Thank you so much.
Uh, secondly, I would like to
say how much I echo, uh,
Representative Lite comments,
you know, it's
amazing to me how much in common
those of us in remote rural
areas have with those, uh, uh,
you know, in the, in the, uh, on
the reservation and in the
various tribes, uh, we have a
lot in common, you know, cowboys
have culture too, and, uh, a lot
of times our, our kids are out
of school on Fridays, uh, for
branding, for shipping, for the
various things that we do and
they learn how to get up, show
up, and make a difference. And
And so that's an important part
of education also and uh
The long debate about 4 day week
or the 5-day week. I just uh
take a minute once again, the,
to say that on that, on that
Friday is when our kids are able
to travel long distances to go
to the doctor. They're able to
participate in the family
business, which is ranching or
farming or whatever, and uh they
learned a lot of, a lot of
things that's important to them,
and that the
Some of the top performing
schools in our state are one day
a week school, so, uh, that's,
that's my thoughts on that. On
to the 300 new teachers,
uh,
You mentioned that you had 300
new teachers coming into the
system. I was pretty excited and
then I saw that you had 350
vacancies in special ed. Can you
tell me, are we gaining or
losing?
Um, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Chatfield, um,
both we're gaining and, and we
lose educators, it's, it's a
reality, however, I think with
the programs that the state has
put together in partnership with
our educator prep programs and
our school districts and charter
schools, we are seeing bigger
jumps.
Seeing that many students go
through the teacher residency
program is incredible, and when
we better train and prepare our
pre-service teachers, they're
far more effective in the
classroom, and that helps us to
keep them longer, um, when you
are not supported in that
classroom and you are
struggling. It is much more
appealing oftentimes to leave
the profession then to stick it
out, and so we really believe
these programs will help us to
not only bring more in, but keep
them.
So, Madam Chair, I guess the
question is, do we have more
teachers this year than we had
last year.
Um, uh, Madam Chair,
Representative Chatfield, I have
not seen the total count this
year, we rely on um outside
entities that help us track the
that data that's part of our
request for our data systems and
the relationship that we have
with our educator prep programs.
We're not really able to track.
Those, um, educator accounts
effectively and so that's part
of really looking at our
licensure system, our connection
with our EPPs, we need to be
able at the state level to know
exactly how many teachers do we
have coming in? How many do we
have going out? What we can see
is what's coming out of our
programs like the teacher
residentsency program or the
educator fellows program. So
Madam Chair, it's, it's
important to us to know if we
invest in more teachers.
Are we getting more teachers?
So, uh, I don't know how we get
that number, but I, I would, I
would love to know, know the
answer to that.
Uh, next, CTE I really commend
you guys uh on CTE everyone
that's been around knows that,
that's been something that I was
pretty excited about for, since
I arrived here, uh, 97%
graduation rate, awesome, um, I
think if you checked the
attendance rate of those people
in those CTE programs, you would
find that, that you have a very
high attendance because they're
actually coming to school to
learn
learn something that they're
interested in and that they see
a, a future for themselves in. I
think uh many of those uh kids
that graduate with a skill, uh,
may work a while in that uh
profession and decide they want
to be the boss and go on to
college or not go on to college,
go up to the ranks. Anyway, they
are, are
A working part of society,
they're contributing member of
society and, and, uh, kudos on
the CTE programs, I think that's
a, that is a awesome thing. New
Mexico grown meals. We have, uh,
been working for years to stand
up, uh, packing houses in New
Mexico that would process beef,
chicken, uh, pork, a variety of,
of meals and uh
I don't know if that's included.
It's, it's kind of in its
infancy. I don't know if that's
included in the school meals
yet, uh.
What say you, Madam Chair,
Representative Chatfield, I
don't know how I know that is
part of what we want, we seek to
bring into schools, we have to
really change where we're
getting our food from for our
student meals. I would love that
to happen, um, the last school
meal I had, um, the.
The meat that I ate was, did not
look like meat, and so, um, you
know, that is part of this
effort. It's not just expanding
the number of meals, it's about
making sure that it's high
quality and we wanna.
We want those products to be
coming from New Mexico to the
greatest extent they can be.
Madam Chair, we're, it's kind of
in his infancy, but we're
standing up in state processing
we're in standing up in-state
beef inspections. We'll go have
our own inspectors and uh when
the, when the time is right, I
encourage you to, you can reach
out to me personally and I'll
try to put you in touch with the
folks that will help make it
happen that we have good,
healthy New Mexico products all
the way across the, the plates.
Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Chatfield, and we've got
Representative Garcia next, and
we've got Representative
Armstrong, Representative
Saranana.
Senator share and we've got
Representative Luhan. Thank you.
Uh thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
secretee, thanks for the
presentation. It's a really
good, you know, I hate to keep
uh keep up kicking the can down
the road, but um what dentist
said earlier, you mentioned you
had 130 some sites around the
state.
To help these students out,
you know, in my district, Madam
Chair, all due respect, I
represent 6 counties, and I have
not seen one.
Tight and none of the counties
and you know it it's, it's
rural, it's maybe native, but
you know, we're, you mentioned
earlier that you had him by
motels and whatever the
Albuquerque Las Cruz and Santa
Fe, you know, New Mexico extends
out of those three cities, and
we really need to look and see
why.
I ruled in Mexico is being left
out on this can you that
Madam Chair Representative
Garcia, the summer reading
program was in 117 sites
statewide. We worked really hard
in the amount of time that we
had to have them in every single
community, um, I seek to do
that uh for this coming summer,
um, we made, um, efforts to
partner with our legislators as
well to help us.
Push local entities to sponsor
our sites, um, our intent is for
it to be fully free and fully
accessible to every student. I
can get you the list of program
sites that were in your area
though, representative.
A Madame Chair and the
secretary, you know, I, I know
you can't do them all.
Uh, you know, we all understand
that this, this room, the whole
city understands that.
But when you do not have one
side and I represent 6 counties.
In those six count yet, you
know, at the bottom almost a
third of the state.
And I know it's our rule and,
and, you know, uh, what I'm
trying to get at is, you know,
if you could extend a little bit
more on what you're trying to
do, that would be really nice.
We all understand that you can't
do them all, but that's
understandable, OK?
Uh, next question I have.
is on page 4.
Uh, and that is, uh, uh, Indian
education fund, how does that
get divided between the tribal
pueblos, just for my
information.
So, um, Madam Chair.
Uh, Representative Garcia, so
currently it's in um through a
grant program where entities
apply, so that's both our school
districts and charter schools
are tribal education
departments um and uh and um are
able to apply directly for
funding. What we're proposing to
do is to revise that process so
that um we allocate funding at
the start of the fiscal year,
um, based on the number of
students that they are um
um serving, and so that funding
would basically flow to them,
um, at the beginning of the
fiscal year to provide them more
time to um utilize those funds,
um, and to also, um, no longer
require that that funding
revert and so we have listened
to our tribal leaders. This is
something that they have been um
really, really concerned about,
not just our tribal um leaders,
but our tribal educators.
This has been a burden for them
to utilize those funds, and so
this is um in response to their
request um in support of their
ability to to direct funding.
Thank you, Madam secretary and,
uh, Madam Chair, you know, I
just want to make sure that it's
fair for everybody.
Cause you know, it, it's,
there's issues out there that we
need to address, uh.
The next question I have is on
page one and maybe you could
toplanatory question, I guess,
and educator or ecosystem, you
have a teacher uh proficiency
development for 5 million and
right below it you have school
leader proficiency development.
But what is the difference on
those two? Um it's actually
this, there's um.
I had mentioned through our
priority schools bureau. We
provide um coaching and and
professional development to to
cohorts of teachers of
principles of superintendents
and also to our um instructional
coaches that um are in schools
around the state.
I thank you friend. Last
question, Madam Chair and
secretary, uh, right before, uh,
right below it and literacy and
STEM, you have uh
Structured literacy training for
17 million, and then you have
secondary.
literacy support for 5 minutes,
what's the difference on those
two? Madam Chair Representative
Garcia are literacy training and
coaching and and literacy
schools, model schools and
structured literacy schools have
been really focused on our
elementary school grades, right?
That's where we've really been
focusing on, but we are uh doing
now is expanding into middle
school because, you know, as you
all know, many of our middle
school students also are behind
in in literacy and need that
support.
So we're expanding those efforts
into middle school.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair,
Madam Siti, uh, thank you for
the presentation and, and like
uh on the first thing on those
sites, that would be really,
really nice to uh try to expand
a little bit on it, and you
know, that would be appreciated
through the whole uh.
Part of New Mexico Garcia,
that's a priority for for myself
in the department and we work
hard to make sure we're serving
all students.
Thank you, Madam. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative, um,
all right, we're gonna move on
to Representative Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, uh, Madam Secretary. um, I,
I want to commend you on your
literacy program. I know we had
uh one at La Permesa Elementary,
which serves majority immigrant
children there and uh and they
just saw phenomenal results, so
and and other uh places in, in
Valencia County, um, and, and
others across the state, so I,
I, I really like the program and
I know you're doing your best to
try to to uh.
To extend that across New Mexico
and, and we saw the results, um,
so the other thing that I just
wanna state is that, um, you
know, I'm a mother of 4,
grandmother of 12, number 13 on
the way, and I have
grandchildren in homeschool,
private school, public school,
and charter schools.
And, and I see the difference in
all of them.
Um, I, I think the legislatures
made it very clear that we want
ours.
Not days, and that uh in rural
New Mexico.
Uh, which the former PED
secretary came and rode the bus
for 2 hours one way to get to
school. Dodging elk, dodging
antelope, dodging deer, um,
changing buses in the middle of
it. And so I just want to remind
people that all school districts
are not created equal.
And they are very, very unique,
uh, to representatives, uh,
Lente's point.
Magdalena and Alamo Navajo work
really well together to
distinguish tribal, cultural
holidays, uh, and, and try to
work together. And that was left
up to the school board to do
that.
And I would suggest, go to your
school boards.
And ask them to work together
with the, the tribal entities in
the district to, to make sure
that that happens, because we
want local control.
We don't want PED telling us
what we have to do.
Uh, to a certain extent, of
course. Um, so the biggest
problem that I see um is that is
transportation.
Rural New Mexico transportation.
I know we did, we tried to fix
it. We've made a mistake. We're
trying to fix it again. But when
we want kids to get to school,
We, we need to be able to
transport them.
Uh, Magdalena has a huge
transportation issue, we do our
best to always try to uh get the
kids where they're going. We
coordinate with Alamo Navajo. We
bus kids back and forth.
Even athletes at the end of the
day have a separate
transportation bus.
To try to, you know, to
encourage the kids to to play
sports and stay for after school
extracurricular activities. So,
um, I, I just wanna encourage to
fix the transportation issue and
make sure that those school
districts get their fair share,
um, of, of what they, what they
need.
One of the questions I have,
madam, uh, chair, and Madam
Secretary is the family
engagement homeless and foster,
the, um, the million dollars for
coordinators.
How do you envision that working
and where are these coordinators
located?
So Madam Chair representative
Armstrong, the coordinators
would be um located within the
within the public education
department.
And so we were able to do some
of this work with our Esther
money, um.
During the pandemic and coming
out of that.
Um, we, we found them to be
highly effective. When you have
an individual who can really
work with a family and
navigating systems and getting
connected to services, it really
is helpful. They also work
directly with schools to make
sure that
They're doing the things to
support their students as well.
Thank you for that. I, um, uh,
Madam Chair and Madam Secretary,
I, I, with no disrespect, but I
don't, I don't know that
somebody sitting in a Santa Fe
office is going to be able to
help somebody.
In Sanho. I, I think that it
might be duplicate to do that
when we've got CYFD, we've got
home visiting, we've got a lot
of other entities that are
trying to do that, and I, I feel
sometimes we're siloed and, and
I just don't know, of course, I
want to help the families.
But is it really the best use of
funds to have them sitting in
the Santa Fe office trying to
help in a district and so I, I,
I appreciate you trying to do
that. But just, and that's just
my opinion, um, I just don't
want to duplicate services and
we have CYFD and foster families
and home visiting all the things
I mentioned that that could be
uh.
Instrumental in helping, helping
that. So and then local, local
entities at the district level,
the school nurse, uh, is a big
one in our district. Um,
The CTE, I want to thank you for
that. I know across the state of
New Mexico we have made great
strides in um turning these kids
out uh with career readiness and
engaging them to want to go to
school.
And uh I, I really do appreciate
that, but I would just, uh, uh,
deplore you to fix the
transportation problem and um
The legislature really did mean
our, not days. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Sure, thank you,
Representative. OK,
Representative Saranana, you are
next. Thanks for your patience.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I just
want to thank you and your staff
for all the great things you're
doing. I think after 8 years of
being in the legislature, I
finally feel we have the right
person in the in the right
positions, all of you to do this
job and get it done. So thank
you. Um, most of my questions
have been asked. I just have
one,
Under a student and family
support.
How are we supporting our
military? We have a Purple Star
schools, but, and I've been
trying to get information from
PED and I know the base curtains
have been trying and we haven't
been able to get any. Is there
anyone who can give me an update
on that?
Um, Madam Chair Representative
Saana, I don't have that
information in front of me, but
I will.
Personally, after this, go and
get an update for you to be
happy to to sit down with you as
well and have a conversation
about the support that we do for
those families.
And, uh, deputy secretary Debell
is telling me that we're
absolutely working so we'll
have.
Uh, an update for you. OK,
great. That's all I hear. Thank
you so much.
Thank you very much for that,
Senator Scher, and then we've
got Representative Lujan.
Um, thank you. Excuse me. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Uh, to, to representativesente's
question about $15,000 versus 6.
I think where that number comes
from, if you take $4 billion
roughly the budget, and divide
it by 300,000 students, you get
up $13,000 per student. You
throw in federal money, and
that's where you get probably to
$18,000 per student. Yes, that's
not the.
It's not the unit value, but
that's how much the state
spends.
Per student overall so
Per student overall,
um.
$16,000 I mean 16,000 times the
panic button was pushed.
Porque
Um, for, uh, Madam Chair,
Senator share for a variety of
reasons. I actually could send
you a list of the different
categories in which a school
would press or utilize a panic
button and it, and it varies,
um.
OK. That just seemed like a huge
number to me. Um, we talk about,
uh, instructional materials of
$5 million. It is, are, are we
talking about books or are we
talking about some kind of
digital or both. Madam Chair,
Senator, it's all of the above.
OK. I just, uh, for me, I know
that not every place can deal
with digital. I know, uh, great
portions of central consolidated
School District don't have
internet access, but.
Um
I, I personally, well, I
personally like to read a book,
but if I'm just looking up
something, I have access to all
of the information ever created
in all the history.
Right here.
So
Yeah, uh, insurance premiums,
looks like insurance premiums, I
know this wasn't part of your
trip uh thing, but
But
It looks like they're about to
increase by about $1000 per
Employee
Has there been any consideration
of how much of that will be paid
for by the employee versus the
school district.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator share
what we know from from Nimsia is
that costs are increasing. I
don't know what that um comes to
from a per employee level, um,
We could get that from you from
Nimia, but we are aware and
they've alerted us even since um
prior to last legislative
session that costs of insurance
are climbing quite um
drastically uh for uh risk
insurance in particular is
something that is really driving
up insurance costs. OK. And then
the last is really just a, a
comment, not a question, so a
half a
500
$500,000 is that right for um
attorneys' fees for
Josie Martinez
So that's
That's that much money that
we're not using to educate
students. Madam Char, Senator
Sheer, that's correct. Thank
you. Thank you, Mary.
Thank you, Senator Sheer. All
right, we've got representative.
then we have Representative
Brown. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, try to just really jump into
this. Um, first of all, I just
want to, um, appreciate the
direction the PD is going with
our special education
department. Um, I did, as you
mentioned, attend the, the, the
Academy of Parent Academy
university university, yes,
that, it was amazing, Madam
Chair and all my colleagues and
all those that are listening. It
was one of the most amazing
events and conferences that I've
been to this year and I've been
to
about
When
So thank you for doing that.
Thank you for the focus on
special education as a parent of
a child with special needs and
having had to navigate our um
public school system. This is a
breath of fresh air. I was able
to engage myself as I interacted
with parents and still
understanding that they are
navigating and having the same
questions I had in my child now
is 23 years old.
So I want to thank you for this
focus. It's probably one of the
most important things that we're
doing with our budget as far as
I'm concerned.
Thank you, Mr. Mann, Chair, for,
for allowing me those remarks.
Um, next, I want to kind of just
dive into the budget, um, out of
school, um, budget amount is
that $20 million Madam Chair.
Uh, I believe that's what we
have on here, yes, thank you,
Madam Chair. So, um, where or
what are those programs that are
going to be um prioritized or
used. Can you give me a, uh,
idea of how you're planning this
because
How, and I'll add a couple of
questions to that. Is this a
competitive out of school time
grant program, or can it be? And
will it be used for
community-based organizations,
and can it be dedicated in other
portion of it dedicated to
public school districts. What is
that portion? Thank you, ma'am.
Madam Chair, Representative
Lujan, thank you for your
comments. First of all, about
our efforts for a special
education, um, yeah, the, the
out of school time money is
utilized by providers
throughout.
the state.
And, and it could be utilized by
schools.
You, would you, you really, you
really want to speak to this.
Come on up.
Yeah,
they're eager to answer your
question, so I'll let them do
that. That's true, madam chair,
yes, thank you, um,
Representative Lujan. So the,
the out of school time is um
funded for partners. It is
funded for school districts with
a grants process as well as
other opportunities for other
district partners and uh outside
entities to um work with the out
of school time team, um, last
year there was also um money in
that same appropriation for high
dosage tutoring.
Thank you. I, I appreciate that.
Um, I just wanna make sure um
how we're gonna get that done in
the plan, and I, I'll be happy
to meet with you because I have
some ideas surrounding that,
that budget line item. The next
thing I really wanted to dive
into, Madam Chair, is some of
the reports that we received
regarding our charter schools.
Um,
So since FY 10, annual audits
have noted issues between PED
and PEC authorized charter
schools regarding fiscal
management, financial, internal
controls and oversight.
Most findings were reported in
state authorized charter
schools. Auditors noted
misstatements of financial
statements were largely due to a
lack of management oversight,
lack of communication between
divisions and lack of effective
internal controls. 2 charter
schools received disclaimers of
opinion due to the auditor's
inability to reconcile financial
statements.
Now, one of the things that
you're trying to do is maybe
look and rework the SCG with our
charter schools, and I want to
know what is the plan for them
when we're having these
findings, Madam Chair, and also
when we are using our budget
with the agency typically uses
budget adjustments uh to use
federal grant awards which have
increased substantially in
recent years, and the
adjustments from other state
funds were.
We due to um when you went in a
changed the budget for um
Transfers, the PED net transfers
is what I um addressing here,
adjustments from other state
funds were due to additional
state charter schools set aside
funds, while cash balance
transfers were pulled from
career technical education,
community schools, and pre-C
Carden fund balances. So to me,
Madam Chair, um, there's.
there's an imbalance here
regarding our charter schools,
and I want that to be uh
addressed. This is something
I've been addressing for many
years. I know you're new to a
secretary, but this is something
that now when we're looking at
the audits, when we're looking
at when we're pulling funding
and moving it to charter schools
and in lieu of um our community
schools pre uh pre
pre-kindergarten.
In career technical education, I
have a problem with that, and I
think many, I think I'm just
drawing that out and I'd like to
know, um,
Your response and maybe you
don't because you're new to a
lot of this information, but um
I have a problem with this and
the accountability with our
charter schools, and we continue
with other budget efforts to
give funding and resources to
our charter schools, and then we
have these kinds of findings. I
want this addressed. I want to
know how we're going to even to
the point of how we are, um,
addressing our SCG and the
differential, um,
Management of our charter
schools or state charter charter
schools and our regular public
schools. I think there is, there
needs to be some kind of uh
adjustment and adjustments and
how we have a real equalization
in our budget towards, um,
remedying this. If you want to
make a comment, you can, if you
want to talk offline, I know
we're going to, but I think that
this is an issue and I really
wanted to bring this to the
forefront. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, madam, Madam Chair,
signaling that I should follow
up with you after this hearing,
and I will absolutely do that.
Thank you.
Thank you, thank you very much
for that. We're gonna go to
Representative Brown. Thank you
for your patience,
Representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and um
I'm gonna call you Madam
Secretary. I think you're gonna
get confirmed to the post, so um
I want to invite you. I just
spoke with you briefly before
the start of your presentation
that's be municipal municipal
schools has a program there uh
using right now called
Opportunity Culture, and it has
changed.
Everything about what happens in
the classroom, I would like you
to come in personally see it for
yourself and talk with the
teachers and the administrators
who are part of that. It's, it's
amazing, truly is.
They're also doing some other
very innovative things, um, in
terms of teacher, uh,
professional development, things
like that, and uh I think
they're first in the state for
these efforts, so.
Very encouraging and by the way,
Madam Chair and Madam Secretary,
I am very encouraged by your,
your total presentation today. I
see some improvements happening,
and you spoke about uh what is
working and the need then to
make additional continued
investments in those things that
are working, and I think that's
truly the right approach.
Um, I do want to ask, madam, um,
Madam Chair and uh Madam
Secretary about
Nutrition in uh in our schools,
um, we know that there's a lot
of movement going to happen at
the federal level for cleaning
up the food supply. Uh, we all
know that additives in food and
the wrong kinds of foods, uh, do
actually hurt children and lead
to behavioral and medical
problems. So
How will that, my question is,
how will that probably affect
your
Rejected budget.
Uh, for the school, uh, food,
uh, programs. I wonder if it's
underfunded because they're
gonna have to be some changes
and that usually involves some
additional cost. So that's one
of my questions, ma'am.
Madam Chair, Representative
Brown, thank you so much for
your, your comments, um, the
quality of school meals is
critical, and I agree with you
completely that um we wanna make
sure that what we're providing
students, especially well for
all students.
Many of our students, that's the
main source of their nutrition
throughout their their day, um,
and needs to be the highest
quality as possible and in order
to really accomplish that, we
need to do more of locally
sourced products, but it's also
revamping.
Um, how we implement our, our
Nutrition systems at the school
level.
Where we're getting our food.
What we're asking of our
students in terms of what do
they want to eat, um, they wanna
eat good quality food. I've
heard it from students across
the state and so that's uh a a
priority for the department and
for this administration in
general to really improve the
quality of our meal.
Yeah.
Um, now I'm sure these, these
improvements are really truly
essential and uh it will play
out over time to prove to be
very beneficial. I did want to
ask also, Madam Chair and Madam
Secretary about um what you've
given us today in terms of the
budget figures, uh, these
calculations do not include a
compensation increase and so my
question is, what kind of
increase are you asking for,
we'll be asking for, and in
terms of dollars, how will that,
uh, add to the budget.
request.
So Madam Chair Representative
Brown, I can tell you that the
executive is looking at
compensation for all state
employees. However, we are very
closely aligned with uh what LFC
and LESC is looking at for
compensation.
And I, and I believe that uh
directors and I will be able to
just mount your cutting to the
bottom line here. If it's 3%
increase. How many dollars does
that, would that add to your
budget request. So for each 1%,
it's about $37 million.
1% increase.
OK. Thank you very much.
And then final question, it's a
little bit trivial perhaps, but
um I understand the concept,
Madam Chair of panic buttons.
These are mobile panic buttons.
Does that mean they're worn?
Around the the uh
Does the teacher the staff
member where the button, or is
it located somewhere in the
classroom.
Madam Chair Representative
Brown, there's different systems
and so there are some that are
stationary. There are some that
are utilized on devices, um,
such as a cell phone, so it
depends on the system.
But they're, there are different
sort of options. OK, I, I
reacted to when I um heard it
said that 16,000 times have been
pressed. I, I just found that
very interesting, but again, the
reasons medical emergency
perhaps fights breaking out. I,
I get that. OK, thank you very
much, Madam Chair. Thank you
very much. I think we've run
quite uh late here, so we're
gonna stop, but I'm gonna defer
all my questions. I have 4 or 5,
which I didn't need to ask
immediately today so.
I will wait. I want to thank you
and your staff for all your
great work all that you're
doing, you've taken on an
enormous task
and you, Madam Chairwoman. I
appreciate it. Thank you,
members of the committee. And
yes, you bet and you have a good
day and we're gonna move on to
the next.
interim committee report,
legislative Education Study
Committee that was supposed to
start at 10 and
So forgive us for a little bit.
Of our tardiness here.
Yeah
All right, John, are you ready
to go? to start or do you want
to wait for someone you Senator,
vice chair Souls is is hoping to
to run you through the
presentation. He should be right
back. He just stepped out before
we we wrapped up. Um, I can talk
just a little bit about, uh, you
should, you should all have this
OK, why don't we so we can get
started because we're way behind
here a little bit of context, we
should go, hopefully pretty
quickly. Um, just a little bit
of context here.
The, the sheet that you have in
front of you has high level
priorities, uh, from LESC, um,
it does not, it's not all
encompassing, but it does cover,
we hope, the most important
topics, um, you'll see that it
tracks in some places very
closely with what you just heard
from, from the department
because we've been working with
them as well as with your, your
education staff at LFC uh to try
to align as much as possible,
um.
And, and here he is. There we
go, Senator, good morning. Good
to see you
Yes, we're a movie. Thank you.
You can proceed, Senator, where
you're going to be the one to
give us the committee report.
Yes, thank you, and, uh, John
has permission to jump in
anytime that I get something
wrong or need some extra
clarification. Uh, the main
amount of the money always goes
into the SCG, uh, that money
gets distributed to the
districts where they actually
spend the money to make changes
are listed in the handout there.
Uh, one of the biggest changes
is changing how we do the
at-risk.
And so it's a 41.3 million, but
what it does is it puts more of
it into the methodology we've
been using of the family income
index, which more precisely gets
the money to the districts that
have the highest needs as far as
the, the students, uh, that also
allows charter schools that in
the past have had their
Um
At risk index based on the
district that they were in that
didn't necessarily represent
their particular ones. And so
this allows them to get more
accurate funding of the at-risk.
Basic program revision, uh,
this, I know, uh, I think it was
uh Representative Chatfield, but
he talked about it allows for
funding for the CTE programs,
uh, moves down to 6th grade in
order to get more of the, the
actual needs out for the
programs that tend to cost more.
The compensation, this is always
one, there were questions in the
last presentation about how many
teachers were gaining, we're
losing, and things of that sort.
New Mexico is
much, much better in attracting
and keeping teachers and lots of
that is the compensation. Uh,
this continues to provide
appropriate compensation, uh,
for both cost of living and then
raising the minimum teacher
salaries in each of the three
areas. We now are the highest or
one of the highest in the
region, which means we are
stopping the brain drain out,
and we actually have more people
that are requesting coming into
New Mexico as a result. And so
those teachers' salaries matter
a lot on making.
sure that we've got highly
qualified people teaching our
most valuable asset in the state
which are our kids. Uh, they're
also in the last presentation. I
know there were questions about
the insurance, um, NISA has
indicated that they're at risk
or their risk factors in
particular are going up. These
are the planned increases to
cover those based on what
NIMSA's research has showed. And
so those are in the the
so-called above the line funding
that goes into the SEG that
flows directly.
out to the districts.
Do, did I do all right or any,
anything you'd like to add with
that? Thank you, Mr. Vice Chair.
Uh, I'll just, I'll just
Add a little bit more detail to
that basic program revision. I
think it's important that you
recognize that that that uh
revision actually increases the
factor for secondary students,
so it means that school
districts would receive
additional funding for 7 to 12,
traditionally, 6th grade has not
been included in that secondary
factor, this proposal would add
6th grade into that secondary
factor one, because we know
that's a critical transition
year for a lot of students, and
because most 6th graders across
the state actually go
go to school out of middle
school and are part of that
middle school model, so your
largest school districts really
serve most of their 6th graders
in a middle school. So we, um,
this was also based on the work
of a 2 years of an SCG revision
working group that we conducted
both last interim, uh, 2023, as
well as continuing that to 2024.
We heard these things from
school districts, school
business officials, we included
superintendents and our labor
partners. It was a pretty
representative group of folks
and these recommendations come
out.
of that work. So I just wanted
to add that. That's not
something we cooked up as staff,
uh, individually. That was based
on a lot of feedback and study
that we did, including some of
the middle school task force,
and the needs to improve middle
school outcomes. Thank you. Um,
The categorical appropriations.
This is now talking about, I
think this is usually called
between the lines, uh, the
biggest one, transportation,
which we know we have been
underfunding for some districts
for many years. Uh, my district
down in Las Cruces, it's a few
million dollars a year that
we've been underwater in
transportation, which means that
money is coming out of the money
going directly into classrooms.
And so we think, and there we've
done some studies in the LESC
that this now will allow
for that and it actually I
believe holds back a little bit
of money for ones that still
might be underwater, um, the
idea is sort of present the
receipts and we're gonna make
you whole. Uh, we don't want to
be taking money out of
classrooms for transportation
because the formula doesn't work
perfectly for small rural
districts and large urban
districts and trying to help
make it so that nobody is
getting hurt through the
transportation. Uh, the
universal school meals is that
is getting rolled out, uh,
districts still have additional
and other things, uh, that we're
working on, that's the money
for, for the one there and then
we get, uh, you want me to take
a short pause.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, I'll
just add a couple of quick
things about transportation as,
as senator said, um, our
recommendation here is, is very
close to the recommendations
you'll probably see from PED and
and LFC. We do have an initial,
additional 5.2 million that
we've called adequacy funding.
We uh proposed this funding last
year as well. And that is based
on
We've heard from charter school,
um, school districts and charter
schools across the state about
deficiencies in funding. You'll
hear from your staff this
afternoon, uh, or right after
this, I think about it, um, and
it's transportation study that
your staff did or an evaluation
that your staff did, very
similar to the findings that um
E LESC found in their study that
we found in our study last
summer, um, but again, we, we,
I feel pretty strongly that it
that additional funding for
transportation is important. I
did want to point out for
universal school meals that uh
that number, you're gonna see
broken up in various places in
various budgets, potentially,
but we think this is the, the
true cost of that program based
on information that we've
received from PED about the
number of students who are
accessing those meals and the,
the amount of reimbursement that
we get from the federal
government based on the
demographics of those students.
One thing that's not on here
that I neglected to put on
but I, but I think we should
mention is our, our categorical
recommendation does include 20
million uh flat funding
essentially for the Indian
Education Fund. Then we move to
what's typically called below
the line funding. Uh, the first
one is the early literacy
program. New Mexico is now
several years into the
structured literacy program. Uh,
if you hear about
We need to slide the thing or I
don't.
Don't make me do that. I'll,
I'll mess it up for sure.
Thank you, thank you, Kelly. Um,
We're several years into that,
people talk about the
Mississippi miracle where they
went from the bottom and moved
up a bunch. Lots of that was 10
years of consistent
funding and literacy.
Uh, work. We are a couple of
years into that, most of our
teachers have been trained and
are continuing that work. We
have new teachers coming in, we
have our universities that are
still doing it. It's one of
those things where we just have
to stay the course and continue
to do that so that we start
reaping the benefits, some of
the early numbers are indicating
that that is working. This is
money that is recurring every
year and we'll need to continue.
We, it's one of those you never
get there cause there's always
new.
teachers coming in that need
training and people that are
gonna need updates on their
training.
The, they're also science,
technology, education, arts, the
steam, there's money for doing
all of that, that just
reinstates earmarked funding
and, and supports for, for those
programs that we know are so
vital to to future jobs within
our communities and our
societies. And then, uh, I got
to go ahead, I can continue on
down with below the line
appropriations of the
non-recurring funding, uh, the
structured literacy Institute.
Uh, to continue that, that's a
very important one,
both the initial training on
literacy, but also the continued
professional development that
teachers need on the structured
literacy, which is the critical
pieces so that our children
learn how to read and on grade
level.
Uh, CTE summer internships, uh,
this is a program that actively
gets our students out working in
the community, uh, in paid
internships, I believe that it
pays $15 an hour. This last
summer, I have a hanger down in
the Las Cruces airport, and we
had 6 summer interns out there
that were actively learning and
working on airplanes and
maintenance on a hanger and some
days their job was to go fly
with me. Uh, and so we were very
actively working on trying
To, to spur those interests, but
people were in all kinds of
businesses around. If anything,
the biggest thing we have with
that is we need more businesses
that are willing to take on
summer interns, but it's a
wonderful program to get
students, uh, direct.
Um, supports during the summer
and learn what the real world of
work is like and how it's
different from in school time.
Out of school learning time, I
heard that was presented in the
last one. I think this matches
very close with the, the public
ed departments funding for that,
the educator Fellows program,
again, the same thing, uh, that
supporting teachers, very
actively, uh, 9.5 million on
attendance projects, uh, lots of
that is working on those
critical students that have high
Absenteeism and what kinds of
things do we need to do to, to
solve those, those are not the
same in every district in every
instance. And so, you know,
those are going to be programs
where districts will be working
on what their specific district
needs, and behavioral health is
in that same area. Uh, we expect
our students to be in school all
the time and be able to work, we
have to make sure we're taking
care of their mental health
issues and needs as well. And so
that's what that initiative
would be.
So
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
Senator covered this pretty
well, as I said at the
beginning, this is not the, the
full extent of the below the
line appropriations that we
would recommend to our
committee, but these are the
sort of high level uh big, big
ticket items, if you will, for
below the line non-recurring.
Most of these are essentially
keeping most of these
initiatives flat year over year.
It's a place where we think
These programs need continued
support, um, but don't
necessarily fit into the next
section that the senator will
talk about and I think this is
something that you've already
heard, heard of from your staff
a little bit that we've been
working with them and I'll let
Senator, uh, so talk a little
bit about this.
So the next group are the
multi-year.
Below the line. And so these are
similar to the grow ones where
you don't want it, where every
year you've got to come back.
These are ones you have to
sustain for a year or two so
that you can show some of the
results of the redesign of high
schools, uh, lots of that
redesign is really looking at
how do we make them more CTE,
more focused on what students
are going to be doing
afterwards. I think, uh,
nationally, uh, for many years,
we had an everybody go to
college and if not, then we'll
see if we can figure out
something else for you to do.
And I think
You know, this supports a
broader view of what high
schools are in society and
expectations of students. Uh,
the supports for students who
are unhoused. These are students
that are federally identified as
McKinty Bento, uh, eligible and
uh pilot program that was done
out of the Cuba schools
indicated that those students
typically have a graduation of
about 60% and when there was a
direct cash transfer to those
students that they graduate.
rate went up to 94%, which
that's good for the entire
state. This is a defending to
cover that program, estimates
are we have between 5 and 10,000
students who would qualify in
the state of New Mexico. I don't
know that all of them would do
it, but it looks like that's
gonna have legislation with it,
but that will be on an opt-in
basis by districts who choose to
do that with their students. Uh,
Money for community schools and
continued community schools
nationwide have very good
results compared to traditional
ones where you provide the
wraparound services right there
where kids are, which helps keep
them in school and keep uh
supports families and other
things within the community, uh,
elementary math achievement, uh,
we know from the Martinez Yazi
lawsuit that it wasn't just
literacy that actually math was
a larger concern. This is the
start active math learning
programs similar to the
structured literacy.
Programs that we know are
necessary and, and required if
our students are going to be
competitive at national and
international levels, uh, in the
secondary literacy, um.
Teaching of reading does not end
at 3rd grade, uh, even though
they people talked about after
that, you learn, you read to
learn, reading continues all the
way through high school and into
college. This is supporting
those kinds of initiatives with
it, um,
The last ones on there and then,
uh, supports for innovative
approaches to staffing, uh,
opportunity culture model, uh,
this continues, I believe, and,
and John, correct me, but some
of the things that we've been
working on about grow your own
programs and, and trying to get
people into the teaching ranks,
uh, rather than making it
exclusive. Uh, the last one,
STEM network broadens local
access to STEM resources and
training strategic initiatives
and other kinds of things. And
so it's supporting.
Uh, students getting high level
uh, science, technology,
advanced manufacturing types of,
of, uh, information and
opportunities.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
I'll just go ahead and add to,
to what the senators said about
each of the programs, um,
similar to the way that you all
uh envision to grow. We
envisioned this as a sort of
education specific grow if you
will, but it includes uh
potential legislation that would
outline who would be responsible
for developing and monitoring
and evaluating these programs.
So the point here is that these
would get 3 year appropriations
because we know that some of
these initiatives, we need to,
we need to watch them over time.
It allows for those programs to
build capacity and actually be
able to have some 3-year
planning uh to improve program
implementation, and then on the
back end, have, well, I should
say on the front end, have a
very clear picture of what
evaluation should look like so
that we're gathering data and
monitoring progress throughout
the course of those 3 years, and
at the end of the 3 years have
an actual evaluation, so that
you all can make a decision
about whether or not any of
these programs are worth long
term and sustained funding
funding.
Um
Again, I'll just add a couple
of, uh, couple of things.
You probably saw some of these
in your uh request from PED this
morning, your presentation.
Some of these numbers are, are
literally taking some of those
numbers and multi, multiplying
them times 3, so that we can, we
can get that 3 year rollout, um.
And as uh Representative Brown
mentioned earlier, it doesn't
include those innovative
staffing models, we've seen um
some conversations about school
class size.
And that class size matters.
In New Mexico, we actually have
relatively small class sizes
compared to a lot of other
states, uh, in the country.
But what we have heard from
teachers is that um small
classes are great, they need
also additional support in those
classrooms, so that that
opportunity culture model
especially.
takes a really high quality
teacher in a school and actually
broadens their reach to be able
to work with other teachers and
provide support for students in
other classes. They won't
actually have a class of their
own. It would provide support to
multiple classes and multiple
teachers, uh, and receive uh.
A salary to do that. So that's,
that's part of that innovative
staffing model, um, and I'll go
ahead and, and stop there.
And, and the last thing that's
on the brief and I'm not really
gonna go into it much, but other
policy considerations, they're
not directly based on finance.
Some of them are the legislation
that has to go around the
finance pieces, but just, uh,
the changes the state
equalization considerate or uh
guaranteed principal
preparations, uh, legislation
around restraint and seclusion,
um, and then capital outlay for
districts and and how those
things work, uh, next Tuesday,
the public school capital outlay
oversight task force is meeting.
where we're gonna be talking
about school construction in the
capital outlay needs around
that. Uh, the LESC or yeah, LESC
has been working hard. Uh, we've
got a number of members who have
been there at all the meetings,
representative Baca, uh, sorry,
uh, Representative Sergeant Yana
in particular of the other
people who are here, um, and so,
uh, I think kind of in general.
Funding for education is sort of
like buying savings bonds. You
can't buy a savings bond and
expect full value 6 months
later, you have to stay the
course for it to become full
value. We've been making the
right investments in education.
We're starting to see them pay
off. We've got to stay the
course with these programs to
make sure that we get full value
for the investments we're making
in education. And with that,
madam chair, we'll turn it back
over to you. Thank you. Thank
you very much, Senator Soz, lots
of work went into this, my
goodness, thanks for all your
incessant work improving
education and of course, um,
that's an understatement. I want
to thank John also for your
work.
All of John and all of the LESC
staff. We couldn't do without
you, truly, um, and the
committee, you've worked in
extremely, extremely hard all
through, through the year. So
thanks again and I'm gonna go
tosentative Baca first and uh
and then we've got
representative Luhan.
that, so representative here.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Director.
And thank you, Senator. Um, I
will be brief. Uh, I do have the
pleasure of serving on LESC as
well in the interim.
Um, so, Madam Chair,
One of the, one of the topics
that came out, or two of the
topics came out during the
interim, was middle school
reform, um,
And as we talked about high
school graduations and we talked
about some of the decrease in
proficiencies.
The issues actually have their
origin and actually middle
school.
They may drop out and as
freshmen or sophomores, but
The thought comes into their
head.
Can you briefly talk about what
were some of the priorities that
we talked with those middle
schoolers, if not, I'll help you
and I'll prompt you because I
see John's look on your face.
All right. Um, when we, when we
met, Madam Chair, we met with a
group of middle schoolers from
across the state.
Their 3 priorities from the
mouths of babes was school
safety was number one.
CTE, as we heard yesterday, the
decision for doctors or other
careers actually their origins
start.
Really pre-K.
And they're talking about
electives and, you know, in for
engagement, you know, for many
of us older folks with the gray
hair, when we were in school, we
took like an elective wheel,
like I still, I took woodworking
choir, you want to hear me sing,
um, I still remember the songs
you sang.
But I think that's another
important part to capture as
this at risk when we're talking
about looking at 6th grade.
Is that kind of targeted towards
those priorities that were
brought up, safety.
Um, the CT and the uh electives
or more engaging classes at the
middle school.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Baca for the
question. Yes, one thing I
should say first off, one thing
that isn't on here, that is a
capital outlay request that
we're proposing is $50 million
to go out to uh sort of on a
proportional share to school
districts, uh, for safety, and
we're talking about school
infrastructure. I heard earlier
about this, the communication
pieces, um, these would flow out
directly to schools to use as
they see fit.
for school safety
infrastructure, right? And so
that's again, that's radios,
that's
Um, other kinds of hardening of
schools, if you will. That's,
that's one piece of it. One
thing that isn't on this sheet
but is included in our proposal,
uh, or it is actually the
behavioral health supports for
students is another critical
component in school safety
because we know, um,
When kids have
Adults they trust, adults that
care for them at a school,
they're, they're more likely to
feel safe.
Um, I would argue too that are
uh our secondary revision
actually gets a, a lot of the
things that you're talking
about.
It, it is a senator soul said
about career technical
education, but it's also about
engagement as as a whole across
the secondary um environment,
performing arts, fine arts.
Going as far as counselors and
social workers in those
secondary levels to address both
college and career, um,
counseling and those behavioral
health supports that we know are
critical for attendance as well
as school safety. Um, so I think
the, it's probably addressed in
multiple pieces, and, and that
was intentional. Um, we know
that school safety obviously um
is about physical safety, but it
has to do with those other
pieces as well. Same thing with
engagement, attendance, um, and
students feeling that the
schools are a relevant place for
them.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you. And I do want to highlight
that I brought that up on
purpose is that this committee
and as far as the LESC has also,
it's an increase, the $50
million is an increase of about
$35 million of appropriated last
time through a distribution, so
the fact that our school and
this committee's, you know,
we're trying to make an
investment in that. Uh, Madam
Chair, when we talk about
Just help me on the teacher
minimum salaries.
And it say increase the minimum
salaries by $5000 annual. Is
that for each of the three
tiers.
And then how does that play in
with the actual 3%, is that 3%
comes for all public, so we're
talking about school support
teachers. Can you just briefly,
because that's, that's uh
Madam Chair, I'll try to be
brief.
It's 5 $5000 for each of the
teacher levels, so to 55, 65,
and 75,000s for levels 12, and
3.
Usually the way we do that, if
you, if you also do a percentage
increase.
What we do is everyone gets the
percentage increase first.
If there are teachers that don't
reach those minimums with that
3%.
We'll go ahead and bump the bump
their their salaries to that
minimum. So that's for all
licensed teachers, the 3%
accounts for all education
staff, and not just teachers,
and then the last piece on here
is that
Uh, administrators, principals,
and an assistant principals,
their salaries are actually tied
as a factor.
to level 3 teachers salaries. So
when you, when you increased
level 3 teacher salaries, you
also automatically increase a
system principle and principal
salaries as well.
Thank you, Madam Chair. John,
you actually got my, just stole
my thunder that I was talking
about the issues of compaction,
and I, I agree, and I, I support
paying our teachers.
I also really support we can
take a look at as our hardest
working people, which are
support staff.
These are the folks that are
working on our classroom, caring
for those students with um needs
as far as life, uh,
Life skills or other types of
means. Uh, Madam Chair, my
My my thought about you talked
in here about $20 million for
educator fellows. Does that also
include teacher residences as
well, uh, that program. Madam
Chair Representative Baca, you
all funded through Grow last
year, $60 million for teacher
residencies over 3 years. So
this does not include additional
money for teacher residencies
because you've already funded
that for the, for the current
fiscal year and 2 more. This is
specifically for educator
fellows, and it's the same
amount that you all appropriate
for FY 25.
And thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you for that
clarification. I think both of
those are definitely trying to
address our teacher shortages,
getting high quality folks and
truly grow on your own as we
have those folks who want to
grow and become staff. I'm not
sure the last thing I'm gonna
talk about is really, we talked
about capital and many of us sit
on the Capitol outlay.
We need to really engage and
invest in things that are not
covered by the regular SCG
capital.
I don't care if a student is in
sports, and fine arts, in band,
and drama.
Many school districts are having
to make the choice of how they
can get those engagements. If
students feel that they have a
place.
And that there's something that
they may be successful at.
They are more likely to attend.
So we need as a committee with
these monies that are being
reverted, these monies that are
kind of out there installed. We
need to channel them and to
invest in our programs, CTE is
great. I love CTE will always
put security is great.
But we also need to support our
activities and target of seeing
these activities, going out
there and having fundraisers.
To participate in competitions
that they worked for, athletic
teams, I think that when we look
at this and getting engagement
and getting attendance, this is
another thing that we as a
legislature,
Have to provide them
opportunities and experiences in
schools that make them want to
come to school and then hence
allow our teaching staff and our
faculty.
To address their learning needs.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Yes, thank you very much for
that. OK. Um, because of time,
we're gonna move on to
Representative Lujan, and that
is, oh, we've got Senator Woods
here, so you are after um
Representative Luhan.
Thank you, ma'am, um, I'll, I'll
echo just what, what my
colleague um representative Baca
said and the the school
engagement, I think that those
are well worth um investing
dollars and I'm happy to work
with you, uh, rep Baca on seeing
where we can maybe ship some of
those funds for that engagement,
but is that with student
engagement or an after school
programs is that the $20 million
that you have that you're asking
for, Mr. Chair and chair.
Now, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Luhan. So we do
have $20 million for out of
school time programs, which
could include after school
tutoring, other kinds of things,
um, more broadly, I think the
The, the secondary revision gets
at some of that engagement
issues to Representative Baca's
point about other other
activities that that keep kids
in school. We think that we know
that those, those programs are
often more expensive,
particularly the career
technical education, and so that
secondary revision and an
additional $91 million we think
addresses that as well.
Appreciate that. Thank you.
Um,
So my next question is gonna go
to some of the the things you
had uh
As you were talking throughout
your um presentation uh
regarding charter schools and
how, but some of these things
benefit an additional fundings
to our charter schools, um, what
is the total amount of changes.
Budgetarily.
That will assist charter
schools, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, Representative Lu
Han, so we don't have any
charter specific um policies.
And so, actually, it depends,
um, so I'll, I'll very quickly
try to explain our our secondary
revision, which actually gets at
the at-risk factor. You have
some charter schools that have
made it a
A mission of theirs specifically
a part of their charter to serve
as uh to serve students who have
dropped out of school and are
doing, and we can re-engage
those students in, for instance.
With the current at-risk factor,
if you're in Albuquerque charter
school, you actually get less
money for your student.
Uh, on an at-risk factor because
you're using the Albuquerque
Public schools at risk factors.
So for a school like that, the
revision would, would mean
additional funding.
If your population of students
does not match that of APS in
that it is actually uh a higher
income population of students.
Right now you benefit from the
current at-risk formula because
you're
You're essentially getting
credit for all of APS students,
not just your own. So if you're
serving a population of students
that does not match APSs in that
it's higher income, you'll
actually get less money out of
this revision in the long term,
as we try to ensure that
students who need it get the
money most. Thank you, thank you
to me, what I'm hearing is there
there is an imbalance.
And
Yes, there's an imbalance in how
we're, you're asking to
appropriate these funds and
we're looking at equalization
and I understand it's a
specialty school. I have nothing
against a specialty school and
the the mission of a school, but
there's an imbalance and there's
a direct relationship to
specialization where then we
lose benefits to our regular
public schools, uh, work with
you on that. Um, I'm not against
it. What, what I am getting at,
Madam Chair, is that when we are
looking at real equalization and
we're looking at
real balance in our budget and
we have uh imbalanced
appropriations between our
A state chartered charter
schools and a regular public
schools. I don't know that we're
really looking at the issue
holistically.
Um
I don't believe I'm the only one
that thinks that, but there are
so many different, there are so
many, um, pull out factors that
are going to our our charter
schools and for instance, at
NMFA we have $10 million going
to them for their facilities,
uh, and, uh, infrastructure
costs. So this is what I'm
getting at, gentlemen, um, and
members, I think we need to
re-evaluate how we are
differentiate differentiating
between our state charter
charter schools.
and our public schools and
really gets you a real balance
of how we're going to do that in
our budget, the other thing I'm
looking at is um
The state equalization gave to
the SCG the study uh to
implement uh or replacing or you
have your three key points here.
What happened with the study if
there was one too put our
community schools, uh, budgets
into uh the SCG manager. Yeah.
Madam Chair Representative Lu
Han, um, so you all, uh, put
together, I believe, a memorial,
and I'm gonna forget the number
to study that that community
school issue. Um, I believe that
task force has met a few times.
I'm not sure that it's actually
put together a complete
recommendation, I think PED.
The PED ran the task force and
they would probably be better
to, to let you know what the
conclusions were.
chair. I just think that
The, again, when we're looking
at balances and we're looking at
what is working for our schools,
and we're in, we need to really
um bring it into our budget full
scale, and I don't, I didn't get
a report on that. I'd like to
see the report on that because
I think that's, I believe that
that's where this budget belongs
and how we, how we implement
that is really going to benefit
our schools overall, and that's
really the solution based uh way
of approaching our budget,
if I could just add so our
budget does include that $8
million.
Time 3 for 3 years and and they
should be able to increase that
risk money for community schools
initiatives as well. Again,
Madam Chair, I appreciate all
those efforts and everything
that you you you really come in
all the work that has been done
for what you've you've put
before us, but as you know, as
we are looking at our budget and
bringing this together, and
we're looking at um what our
recommendations are from 3
different uh perspectives, uh,
and then we have to make the
decisions. I, we really have to
have these conversations and
really be holistic about it.
Um, we're looking at our
community schools in the $24
million that you're asking for,
what is that distribution for
our districts, madam chair.
Madam Chair Representative. So
again, this takes that $8
million and multiplies it times
3, so that the department has 3
years' worth of 8 million and
the department determines,
according to the statutory
regulations around community
schools who receives those
fundings and how those
appropriations are divvied up.
Matter, is that enough money for
all of our community school
programs.
Madam Chair Representative, uh,
that's what the department asked
for.
Again, thank you, as we're
trying to manage all these,
these, these perspectives. Thank
you for your response. Um, may I
interject for just a second.
You're sorry about that. Don't
mean to be rude or anything, but
we are running quite behind,
we're half an hour behind is
what I was just told and so if
we can just move it a little bit
quicker with quicker responses
and questions, it would be
great. Thank you I'm trying to
be as quick as I can, madam
Chair, but I think this is
really important as this is the
majority of our budget. And so
I, I appreciate the.
time. Um,
And, and now I'm just caught off
guard. So, um,
We will talk more, I guess, um,
and for the sake of time and
other questions that are in
front of us, um, but yes, we do
need a better holistic approach.
This is very still siloed and um
until we get to those points and
we know what works.
And we have evidence-based
solutions you really need to
focus in on those dollars. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. All
right, Senator Woods, you are
next, Madam Chair. Good morning,
Senator. Mr. Director. What do
you expect?
The uh health insurance to
increase what percent increase
are you expecting?
Madam Chair, uh, Senator Woods,
I, I hope I don't get this
wrong. I believe it's in the
neighborhood of 10%, uh, for the
health side and uh I don't have
all the numbers in front of me,
but again, this number comes out
of discussions that both LFC,
LESC and PED have had with NIMSA
about sort of creating a a
Smoother phase out of increases
rather than trying to do big
increases on the front end and
then sort of taper off. And I
want to say it's between 10 and
11%. I may have that wrong
though. We can get back to you
with more information.
Uh, I appreciate that if you
could get me something on that,
and also I'd like to
What what do you expect the
liability?
costs to go up.
Madam, uh, senator, again, let
me get back to you with, with
exact numbers so I don't say the
wrong thing. OK, just one last
question, and this is gonna be
the, the tough one for you, and
I know you'll get back to me on
this one. What do you expect
your total budget all-in cost to
be. If you had your total budget
put in just like you have it
here. What would you expect?
But we would spend for public
schools in our budget.
For the next year.
Madam Chair, uh, Senator Woods.
I can tell you what our, what
our, um,
SCG request is currently with
with without some input from our
committee, and so what we'll
bring to them is about 4.5
billion.
In, in money that goes directly
out to schools.
SCG. That's right.
OK.
Uh, why I said that, uh, uh, is
because, uh, the first thing
that, that
The Secretary for Ped said when
she got up there, was that she
didn't have a budget estimate
yet, because she was waiting for
the governor's office to
determine
Uh, the, the employee raised
part of the deal. So that's why
I was asking you, because I was
hoping y'all had a
total budget for me, so.
I know. Thank you. And if I
might, Madam Chair and, and
Senator Woods, uh, they're also
individual members have some
very good ideas about things
that maybe you should ought to
get funded in education that
haven't been directly discussed
by the LESC. And so there will
be some other ones. I hope this
committee will look at those
because I think there's some
really good ideas for districts
and some unallocated funds where
individual districts have
different needs and ways that we
might be able to do that. And so
the budget that comes out of
here, there may be some other
requests that if there is extra
money, um, that this committee
Look favorably towards investing
it in our future through
education.
Thank you. And, and Madam Chair,
thank you for the time and, and
thank you, gentlemen, for your
time. And yes, each individual
school district, there's a huge
amount of difference in the
state of New Mexico culturally.
Ru urban huge difference. Thank
you very much.
All right. Thank you, Senator.
Thank you, John. I don't have
anyone else on the list so we
want to thank you also profusely
in the LEOC staff again and um
just everyone involved, just a
lot of work into this, but
we're, we have this and our
staff has it, we're gonna review
it, go through it again. So
thanks once again. Have a great
afternoon and we're gonna move
on to the next item. Thank you,
Madam Chair and committee and
appreciate the hard work that
you do. Thank you. Uh-huh.
Alright, we're gonna move on to
the progress report for school
transportation and uh
As you can see, most actually
are all our morning has been
dedicated to schools. So, um,
Clayton, we've got you on and um
Elizabeth and let me see who
else. I think that's it. All
right, good morning. Good
morning, um, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, uh,
we'll just pull up our slides
very quickly, and then um uh
Elizabeth will start us off, uh,
with the presentation, and we'll
be uh quick and considering. OK,
uh, hello, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Elizabeth Dodson. I'm
one of your LFC.
Program evaluators. Today, uh,
Clayton Lobo and I will be
presenting an LFC progress
report on the public school
transportation funding formula,
which you should have in tab H
of your binders.
First, I would like to thank
Amanda Luaris, the director of
the Transportation division at
the publication department and
her staff for their
collaboration on this project.
And I'd also like to thank the
transportation personnel at the
school districts we interviewed
for this project for their time
and insights.
Now, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, page 4 has an
executive summary of this
report.
This is a progress report of a
2011 program evaluation of PED's
transportation division, which
is summarized in the callout box
on the side. Uh, however, the
scope of this report
specifically focuses on the
funding formula and recent
changes made to it.
Uh, the transportation funding
formula tries to predict a
district's transportation
expenses based on variables like
ridership and miles driven, uh,
but the formula is not directly
tied to district transportation
practices, uh, for example,
individual route length, time
students spend on buses, bus
riders per buses, those
schedules, etc.
Therefore, the funding formula
does not promote or set
standards for efficient
transportation systems.
Um, on this page, the 3rd and
4th paragraphs describe some
recent changes made to the
funding formula.
During the COVID-19 pandemic,
you, the legislature, uh,
amended state law to hold
districts harmless from
experiencing funding losses due
to ridership declines.
Uh, Additionally, last
legislative session, you removed
a density factor, which used to
reduce funding for large school
districts with high population
densities.
And you added a reality factor
intended to help rural
districts.
Both these recent changes led to
rapid funding shifts for many
districts in FY 24 and FY 25.
Um, now moving to the background
section that starts on page 6.
This report will use the term
districts to collectively refer
to both school districts and
state charter charter schools.
State appropriations for school
transportation have increased by
38% from $97 million in FY 18 to
$134 million in up by 25.
If you'd please turn to page 7.
Part one shows that the funding
is primarily for maintenance and
operations, but there's also
funding for other um parts of
student transportation. The
money distributed for um
maintenance and operations can
only be used for transporting
students directly to and from
school. It cannot be used for
field trips, extracurricular
activities, or sporting events,
but you'll see there is some
funding um for those separately.
As the appropriation has
increased, school enrollment,
bus ridership, and bus miles
traveled have decreased and are
projected to continue to do so.
Charts 2 and 3 on this page
illustrate these statewide
declines since FY 18. Turning to
page 8, however,
You'll see that key expenses
associated with student
transportation have been
increasing.
His bus ridership and mileage
have decreased, charts 5 and 6
show that spending on drivers'
salaries and diesel fuel have
increased.
I want to note here that FY 23
was the most recent year that
full transportation spending
data was available to assess for
this report.
If you'll turn to page 10.
The report describes the funding
formula which is outlined in
state law.
The formula tries to predict
district future transportation
costs based on a regression of
select site characteristic
variables.
PED has the authority to change
the variables used in the
regression, but has very rarely
done so.
The formula analyzes different
kinds of variables for large
school districts with more than
1000 students enrolled. Small
districts with less than 1000
students enrolled in charter
schools. Chart 7 shows the
different variables that the
formula considers for each
district type, as well as the
contribution of each variable to
the district's total funding.
Moving to page 12 and 13, uh,
the report provides some
detailed examples of how the
formula allocated FY 25
transportation funding for a
large school district. We have
Rear Rancho here and a small
school district house and um we
can definitely talk more about
how this all works out later if
you'd like, in the interest of
time, uh, with that overview and
background information, I'll
turn things over to Clayton to
present the report's findings.
Uh, thank you, Elizabeth. Um,
now, Madam Chair and members of
the committee are starting on
page 4
you'll find a first, uh, finding
of this report. District
spending is generally close to
transportation allocations. So,
uh, on page 15, the report
describes how um
Allocations from the funding
formula generally match uh
district spending for uh for
most districts. However, there
are some outlier districts where
spending doesn't match their uh
funding allocations, um, the
funding formula in and of itself
assumes that districts um uh
spends transportation dollars on
optimized student transportation
systems. However, the state has
not adopted um or used uh
benchmarks or um operational
standards to gauge.
Uh, the efficiency of school
transportation systems and uh on
charts 10 and 11, uh, you can
see variations on different
measures of efficiency. Um, if
you'll turn to page 16, the
report describes how, um, some
districts have to spend um more
money than they received from
the transportation, uh, formula.
And when this occurs, they have
to use um state equalization
guarantee or SEG dollars to make
up the difference. Um, so this
part of the uh
Court describes uh, that
section, uh, that, um,
phenomenon. Uh, if you'll turn
to page 19, you will see that um
recent transportation formula
modifications have created
funding volatility, um, for
districts. So, uh, as mentioned
by uh Elizabeth last legislative
session, you passed language in
the state budget, requiring PED
to remove the density factor,
uh, which, um, deducted funds
from districts with high.
population densities, uh, and
replace that factor with a
rurality factor, um, and, uh,
you added $3.9 million to the
transportation uh appropriation
in order to cover uh and fund
these changes to the funding
formula. Uh, the report, this
section of the report describes
how removing the density factor,
um, uh, led to funding increases
or um districts with high
population densities, uh,
particularly
Lily Rio Rancho, um, and, uh,
then the report also describes
how um uh uh the additional of 3
new charter schools and uh which
cost 900,000 also was
unaccounted for in the
transportation appropriation at
that time, um, and, um, so these
and other uh factors, uh,
account for why the um that $3.9
million did not prevent.
Um, funding volatility or
decreases for some mid-sized
rural districts, um, if you'll
turn to page 21, uh, the report
describes the uh decreases to a
medium sized rural districts,
um, and, uh, the report
recommends keeping um the
formula methodology uh stable in
order to mitigate a recent
volatility, uh, NSS uh the
effects of these funding formula
changes on on spending. Um, if
you'll turn to page 22.
To, uh, the report describes
how, um, half of unspent
transportation funds from
districts, revert into a state
transportation emergency fund.
Um, PED can distribute dollars
from this fund to a trans uh
transportation emergencies or uh
other unexpected cost increases,
such as fuel cost increases, uh,
and this section of the report
describes how cash balances in
this uh fund have grown to over
$9 million in recent years after
reversions that occurred during
the COVID-19 pandemic, um, if
you'll turn to page 24, uh chart
18 describes how um recent all
ations from this emergency uh
transportation fund were in
fiscal year 22, um, in response
to fuel cost increases. And now,
uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'll turn the
presentation back over to
Elizabeth uh to go over the
report's key recommendations.
Thank you, Clayton.
Uh, Madam Chair and members of
the committee, I ask that you
turn back to page 5 of the
report where you will see the
key recommendations and I also
have them on the screen for you.
Um, the public education
department should adopt
efficiency benchmarks for
student transportation systems
by FY 26.
Keep the transportation formula
methodology stable through FY
26, and consider how the
efficiency benchmarks could be
incorporated into transportation
funding for FY 27.
Uh, PED should also leverage the
transportation emergency fund to
support districts uh with
significant decreases after the
FY 25 formula change.
Uh, thank you very much, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee, Clayton and I, as
well as representatives from the
transportation division will now
stand for questions.
Thank you. Good job. Both of you
appreciate you very much. And
we've got Representative Baca,
you are first, and we've got
Senator Gonzalez and Senator
Woods.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I'll be
very brief and no trick
questions, be very direct.
Uh, as you saw on page 16, my
district is one of those that
I
In the hole is having to spend
operational dollars to support
our transportation costs. What
are some of the reasons that
have been reported to your
report to this findings that is
causing those um basically gaps
in funding. So, um, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, um,
the, the report describes how,
uh, salary costs increases and
fuel costs increases, uh, other,
other expenditure uh rises have
led to
of that, um, part of this
report's recommendation for um
setting uh efficiency benchmarks
and operational standards, um,
would help, uh, the state better
uh identify uh disconnects
between uh allocations from the
transportation formula and uh
spending needs within districts.
Thank you, Madam, I, I, you
know, I think it's
Kind of curious is that.
Those 5 communities represent 10
of our, you know, 5 of the 10
largest communities in our
state, um.
Madam Chair and uh.
Tunnel here. One of the
questions with this rise in the
request in the, the increase in
funding.
Does that also include air
conditioning for our school
buses.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
thank you.
Um, the
Amount appropriated for
transportation um is determined
by PED based on
Um
Based on inflation increases and
fuel prices, while they may
consider other variables, those
are the ones I know for sure.
And um
What I do know about air
conditioning on school buses is
that currently, um,
With administrative code they
are optional, but must be held
to standards of use.
Well, thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you and, and the question
I'm gonna point is it should not
be optional.
As we're talking for many of our
students have.
Long commutes sometimes hours
each way. This is, this is
something that I think that we
need to, that air conditioning,
whether it be in our classrooms
and our school buses.
Should not be considered
optional, and they should be
ferried into the cost of
replacement, um, of that. And
so,
Um, I, I thought that it was,
there was a a requirement that
any new bus that was done after
2018, I believe, or to look at
it, Sunny, um, was supposed to
be with air conditioning. Is
that correct, manager, Sonny?
Thank you. Yes, Sony, thank you
for helping here, so go ahead
and answer, Madam
Chairresentative Baca, you're
correct that there's a new PDE
regulation that says all new
buses post that date, I will be
Uh, required to have those air
conditioning units, however,
that doesn't mean that the
existing buses that are out
there, uh, that haven't been
replaced yet on their 12th year,
um, have been retrofitted
necessarily.
point.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you and my, and my last point is
just really a point, is that
You know, um, any
Required increase or minimum
days will actually add to a
district's cost of providing
transportation to the students,
and so,
If there's any, any um
requirement for minimum number
of days.
Then the money that you're
requesting will not be
sufficient to support those
districts, especially those
rural districts that are
currently um
On a 4 day week or other, so I
just want to highlight that you
don't have to respond, but I do
think that it just need to be
aware that
We will also unintentionally
forced districts into, you know,
kind of bearing the burden of
some of these costs. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative, and
thank you, Sonny. Where did you
go?
Oh, there you are. Yeah, thank
you for your help, Senator
Gonzalez, you are next. Oh,
thank you Madam Chair, um.
Just a few things, so.
On the 12 year replacement or
recurrent, up to date.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, the, this report
focused on the um uh the um
transportation funding formula,
the bus replacements are done
separately through capital
outlay, um, but Sunny has some
information on the uh bus
replacement cycle.
Madam Chair and Senator
Gonzalez, the uh replacement
cycle because of the revenue
situation, um, has been going as
according to the year of the
buses that are needing to be
being replaced, excuse me. So
yes, we are caught up on funding
those buses, but I do know that
the request from the department
this year did not include bus
replacements. Um, so I imagine
that's due to the fact that
there are no buses.
Uh, that the PD has reported.
are in their 12th year for this
year. Uh, that is a bit
concerning because I think it
may be through the state to
think about.
Pacing the replacement on a more
regular basis, rather than
having, say, like a $39 million
replacement in one year and then
nothing the next year.
Oh, Madame Chair, Mr. Chairman,
I think we really need to look
into that because then otherwise
we'll get behind.
And then it's a lot harder to
have a catch up plus we have it
on statutes, so I mean, we
better uh
Look into that if we need to put
um that those dollars there for
the replacement part because we
have always had the 112.
Replacement, you know, we have
always had that in
Replacement, you know, we have
always had that into
the next question to uh a little
bit to uh Senator Barca.
So, uh, Sonny, uh, what is the
difference now on the
On the average of what we're
paying for a regular bus and
then one adding the air
conditioning.
Um, Mr. Chair, uh, Madam Chair,
and senator. I, I need to go
back and get you a more specific
number on that, but my
understanding when I first
started, was that buses were
about 100,000
per
Diesel vehicle, and I believe
that cost has increased.
Um, Tonio.
135.
Um, at this stage, um, at some
point, I had the number for air
conditioning being between 5000
and 10,000, but I'm also needing
to sharpen my pencil on that
number as well.
Very well. Oh, the last part,
uh,
Madam Chairman that I wanna
bring up this song.
Uh, a few years back.
Well, first of all, we used to
practice this and then down the
line somewhere it got into where
It wasn't allowed.
I, uh, the Department of
Transportation.
Never used to be called into
working with the firefighting.
And now they do.
So, in case of
That that would happen, that we
would need to have
transportation for evacuation or
for so.
That's something that we might
look at into where.
Holly would have to be an
override by the governor, you
know, if we have a policy or if
we have it in place.
But, you know, we have to be
open to that because uh I mean,
if you need transportation like
now, you don't need it 3 days
from now to evacuate, and uh,
you know, we're seeing more and
more very
demanding and very crucial
forest fires.
Or emergencies, you know, even
with flooding too.
So, um, just something to look
at and maybe at the right time,
we can have that discussion with
her.
Governor's office.
Thank you, man. Sure. Thank you,
Senator, for that.
We are going to go on to Senator
Woods. Thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair, um.
This may be out of your
wheelhouse, but how are reliable
are the electric buses we put
out so far.
Have y'all heard anything on
that particular piece of it. I
know that Chama had one, I don't
know where the rest of them
went.
But uh I've, I've heard through
the grapevine that they were
having some trouble. Have, have
you heard anything on that?
Uh, uh, Madam Chair, members
Committee, uh, Senator Woods,
can't really speak to the
reliability of the, um, uh, a
rollout of electric vehicles at
this time. OK, well, that's
fine. Um
So you're gonna keep the, the uh
formula pretty flat in your eyes
and then just take care, let the
Uh, emergency.
Money pick up the difference if
they apply for it as needed. Uh,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, that's correct. We're
thinking of the recommendations
in terms of, in the short term,
uh, there was a lot of
fluctuation in recent years. So
let's, um, provide some
stability uh for transportation
directors out there, um, and
then in the medium term, let's,
uh, identify have the state
review and identify efficiency
benchmarks in order to better
understand the disconnects.
between spending and funding
allocations, and then in the
long term, that could be uh
conversations about how to
address things going forward
without trying to, um,
Play whack a mole essentially
with uh funding formula changes
every year and the new issues
popping up.
You know, it's, it's funny when
we start talking about these
school districts and where
they're located in the, I don't
know exactly how it's done, but
I know that personally, I see
diesel prices in particular,
vary a lot across the state. I
don't know exactly how those
guys, those uh contract for
that. I don't know whether it's
a
Uh, GSA deal where they can get
a deal on diesel, but I know
Clovis in particular is the
highest price of diesel I saw in
the state.
And, and don't know why, but
that's the way it is. So, how do
they, do they contract that
individually? Do they go through
GSA? Do they go? How does that
work out?
So, could, could you clarify,
uh, do the contract which aspect
of the operations, Madam Chair,
sir, I, I was talking about
When they buy their fuel when an
individual school or bus
contractor buys his fuel. How
does he do that? Does he
contract for a six-month period?
Does he buy
Is it up to him to contract for
that fuel, and it's rolled into
his operating costs. Does GSA
have a purchase contract for
fuel that they can use.
Or would you know.
So, um, um,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Senator Woods. I, I
believe that that would vary by
districts, but that is my
understanding. Um, I would need
to follow up on that. OK, thank
you very much. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Sure, thank you, Senator.
All righty, Representative
Saranana, you were next. Thank
you, Madam Chair, and thank you
for the presentation. Um, where
were you on electric buses, um,
good.
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, representative
Saana, um, if you would turn to
page 32 of the report. There's a
description, uh, of, uh,
information on electric buses
and and um the rollout of some
um
Um, movement from diesel buses
to electric buses there, um, the
formula in and of itself, uh,
does not, um,
You know, the, the formula in um
Collecting data on buses, uh, my
understanding doesn't
differentiate between diesel and
electric vehicle.
OK, but if we look at electric
vehicles, they're quieter,
there, the health benefits are
huge for the kids, not having to
inhale diesel. They, um,
They help with the environment.
There's so many good things
about these electric buses that
I hope we we really look at them
as a and um and maybe hear from
these schools as a benefit and
and what they can do in
regenerating electricity.
There's a lot of things that are
beneficial to our state with
just these buses, but thank you.
Yes. Thank you. And let me ask
you one question, um, let me ask
you a question. Some of these
charter schools in in I I see it
cause I, I'm hearing them
complaining about buses, and
then we look at PD and their
ridership. So they have a 45
passenger bus, and they have 4
kids on it.
How come we don't come back and
and make them change to like
suburbans or small buses, but
they can't, oh, we, we're short
on money for buses, but they
don't have the ridership in in
Look at the numbers and it's
like,
The $300,000 bus operating for
seven kids when we can operate a
suburban for 1/3 the cost.
Uh, Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, um,
members of the committee, uh,
Senator Munoz.
I'm sorry I confused you. As
long as you didn't call me
madam.
Mr. Madam Chair, um, now we're
in trouble
so
Mr. and Madam Chair, uh, um, so
relating to
Relating to your point, um,
this, the, the one of the core
recommendations of this report
gets to exactly those type of
efficiency, uh, benchmarks, bus
utilization is something that's
not really considered in the
formula, but as you point out,
it's an important factor for the
state to be able to look at and
when thinking about its formula
and when reviewing the um costs
and expenditures of districts
and charter schools. Yeah, and
and the charter school goes all
the way to Zuni, which is 40
miles one way. So it's an 80
mile round trip to pick up.
4 kids.
I mean,
And then they complain they
don't have enough bus money.
And like
By a suburban, you have plenty
of money because you won't be
burning that amount of fuel. I
mean, uh, somehow we got to
capture some of that.
Where they, other ones need the
money and they don't need the
money because they don't have
the ridership, so we gotta fix
that.
Thank you, Mr. Madam Chair.
Thank you. All righty, Senator
Gallegos, you are next.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you all for presentation.
I came a little late, but I
liked the discussion on the
buses on the uh electric buses I
show back there on 32 that they
cost upwards of 400,000. Now,
the ones that were given free.
Are they in the budget or is
that federal money that we're,
uh, I know that they'd offered
them to school districts.
Very few took the offer, uh, but
I'm wondering if it's in this
project or was that federal
money. Um.
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, a
members committee, uh, Senator
Gallegos, um, so I, I would have
to follow up, uh, regarding the
that um that particular
question.
I can actually, uh, Madam Chair,
Senator, um, the buses listed
here in this chart that are
electric buses, these are, I
think all purchased with federal
money. There's two different
programs, um, and I can direct
you to the website that has the
names of them. I know that one
of them is the Volkswagen
settlement.
And thank you for that and and
then just using your numbers on.
On page 32 is the bus costs
400,000. You get $15,000
savings.
Uh, it's gonna take us 20 years,
26 years.
The balance that value that bus
out, so I, I appreciate my
colleague's enthusiasm in that,
but, uh, I just don't understand
how to do the math, but put that
on you. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you very much
for that, uh, Senator Gallegos,
and we've got someone else. Oh
yes,
go ahead representative,
Madam Chair,
um, there was a $250,000 grant
last year. I think we still have
it. The buses, if it replaced
the bus, we have them at 110,
135. I think it went up to, so
it gets closer to that 400,000
just with a grant the grant and
what we would normally cost for
a bus. So it's not a great
amount that that's separate.
I mean, it's not like we have to
pay the $400,000 if we can get a
grant and pay for and and and
the cost of a normal bus, you're
pretty close, that's only
65,000, we would be different.
Uh,
yes, Senator Gaitarian, I
appreciate that dialogue. We're
still talking about taxpayer
money, regardless of its federal
or state, beds don't make
anything, nor do the state. The
issue is it takes 26 years of
the 15,000 savings to be able to
justify.
The bus
I'll yield with that.
All right. Thank you very much
for those points. OK, we, I
think we are done. I don't have
anyone else on my list. I
appreciate all your work, thanks
to our staff and uh for all,
everyone for working so hard and
uh
We are uh going to break for
lunch. We have lunch being
served out here. It's gonna be
here at 12, is my understanding,
so we will return back here at
one o'clock.
for our early childhood
education and care department.
So, um, yes, my understanding is
lunch is comes in at 12. I don't
know if it's arrived already or
not. So thank you very much, and
we'll see you soon.
