3% that was added could have
been almost sufficient to cover
just that cost. But those
weren't the only cost that
increased to districts. We saw
red uh a reduction of our at
risk of 895,000 this past year.
Um, I'm incredibly appreciative
of the work of the LESC and the
recommendations that are going
to come today as they as they
seek to address the issues of
that risk and focusing in on
FII, I think that's an awesome
approach that they're looking at
and
I appreciate their work. We also
saw a reduction in
transportation to 60. The risk
insurance also went up, costs
our district 127,000, uh, and
the NESA Medical also went up,
uh, adding another 300 or
deducting another 304,000. So we
saw a negative impact to our
district of $2,639,000 right?
And so the 3% that added uh the
little over 900,000, um, for
salaries was awesome, but
unfort.
we saw a significant decrease,
um, and it caused us to have to
go into our um our.
Our budget, uh, operating budget
reserves, um, and we went from
3.5 to 1.9. As I mentioned
earlier, when you, you're
operating reserves are really
important for districts. Um, we
use those to make those first
initial payments for risk
insurance. We use them to cover
salaries that have to be paid
out between May, June and July.
Um, we also use those reserves
for RFRs that and federal funds
as well as state level, right,
to cover payments. And so when
you get to the 1.9 and get below
that 1 million.
If you have any emergencies,
roofs, or any major issues that
you may need to access those
dollars. Those dollars go away
pretty quick, uh, on top of the
2.6 um negative impact that we
saw, you know, just like Silver
and Kre and across the state,
the cost to districts continue
to increase, whether it's
travel, right, whether it's
hotel costs, whether it's food,
whether it's heating, whether
it's cooling, all those costs
continue to increase. We really
do hope that as you continue to
look at the.
and funding the schools that you
take into account that it's not
only salaries that need to
increase, but we also need to
look at the cost of inflation
and how it's impacting the daily
lives of our school districts.
The 55%, little over 5% is what
went to the SCG.
If we were to truly have made
Silver schools in other
districts whole. I can only
speak for silver. A 7.75%
increase to the unit value would
have put us in a better spot
just to put that into
perspective.
I want to transition a little
bit into our um facilities
master plan, which you have
before you is a breakdown of our
capacity while we are addressing
curriculum and instruction and
working on alignment in our
district. We're also looking at
aligning and right-sizing our
district as it relates to our
student body, enrollment numbers
and our facilities. Right now,
in Silver schools, we are
approximating that we are about
45 to 50% utilization in our
spaces. And so we are over the
next 5 years going to have to
make some decisions.
locally on how we right sizes
and we're working with PSCOC to
address that.
Being out of school all day,
you're going to hear those
bells. So it it nostalgia at
work right there, um.
As we look to address the right
sizing needs of our district. It
is estimated that, um, on the
other side of addressing our
facility needs, um, we could be
anticipating a $1.4 million a
year anticipated savings to the
district as we address those
needs.
We recently went out to bond to
our community and our community
supported that bond, uh, as a
result of the what was presented
to our facility's master plan.
We're looking to right size our
district. We're also looking to
take care of cliff schools. So
if you know anyone in the
PSCOC, please put in a plug for
us uh to let them know that we
are going to be applying for a
waiver. We've submitted our
letters and I'm, I'm shamelessly
asking for support, um, but we
want to make sure that we take
care of our cliff community. Um,
we're also looking at continued
security upgrades, our sports
complex, as well as $22 million
worth of repairs needed to the
rest of our district. And so
over the next 5 years while
we're working to improve our
student achievement, we're also
going to be improving our
facilities as well, thanks to
the support
Of our local community here in
Grant County. We've submitted
all of our letters of intent to
the PSCOC for those fiscal
supports.
Attendance, I'm happy to report
that throughout our district the
efforts around the state as well
in silver is showing a steep
decline in uh not steep, that's
slight exaggeration, but we are
seeing a decline in absence rate
from 2223 to 23, 24 in our
chronic absence rate across the
district we're seeing that
decline. I think that's a trend
that you're seeing across the
state, with the exception of
Silver Scholars, if you scroll
down to the bottom here, you'll
see that silver scholars has
seen in the opposite direction.
And increase in chronic absence
rate. Now why is that
interesting to note. Silver
Scholars is our pre-K school,
right? And so those students are
dependent upon their parents to
bring them. You know, oftentimes
when we talk about chronic
absences, typically there's uh
the the image of the older
school kid, middle school kid or
high school kid skipping school,
but the reality is we see some
of our highest numbers in those
age groups where they're
dependent upon family, um, their
mother or dad or someone to
bring into school, whether it's
kindergarten or in this case,
pre-K and the
Trim in that real-time data
speaks for itself.
We do hope that it's something
that the legislature takes up.
Um, we really do need some uh
support in how we're addressing
attendances. Um, the attendance
for Success Act is amazing, and
it really does provide
opportunities and pathways for
schools to positively uh
influence and support parents
and students in coming to
school. But the other end of
that is the students who are
continuing continuing to fall
into the chronic absence.
Category, the there's going to
need some other teeth or
leverages in play to help
encourage them to come to school
and right now, that doesn't
exist. Um, I'm pretty sure I'm
not the first one to tell you
that, and I'm hoping I'm not the
last one to mention it to you as
well. As we take a look at our
student achievement, I spoke
earlier about our assessment
alignment. Now, we here until
we're consolidated schools,
we're working with Matt Goodlaw
and Cindy Barris has really um
worked with our teachers and our
staff to build assessments.
That really align with our scope
and sequence. In the column on
the left here, you will see um
M1, M2, and ST M1 and M2 are are
milestones every quarter we give
a milestone that aligns with the
scope and sequence of
instructional skills and
concepts that were to be taught
and learned, right, and then um
the beginning one, if you look
over to the right, you'll see
tops before the milestone. Those
tops are the test of
prerequisite skills from the
previous year. Um, and so that
is done, uh, the teachers.
get that information through uh
I would call a student baseball
card that kind of outlines.
Is that, is that, is that my
time? Am I up with and so
we are monitoring our assessment
alignment with our state
assessment. What I can tell you
is through the trends of our
data we're seeing that we're
seeing more students shift from
the novice category over to the
nearing proficiency and likewise
we're seeing those numbers from
our milestone shift students
over to the nearing proficiency
and then shifting over to
proficient. We've got a long way
to go, but we're starting to see
that alignment and as we
continue to align our scope and
sequence and
Rely on our assessment data to
give student achievement data
back to parents, to students and
teachers, will continue to
improve. Um, I am pleased to
talk about our Spotlight
campuses out at Cliff, um, over
in 6th Street and Jose Barrios.
Um, we do have some work we're
gonna work on with our La Plata
Middle School, um, as it relates
to uh special education
inclusion, but all things
considered, student achievement
we're heading in the right
direction and we've got some
amazing principals and teachers
who can tell you that. And I
just talked about that.
Uh, and I talked about that. I'm
ahead of my schedule.
Um, school-based mental health
program. I really, really want
to talk about Senator Heinrich's
support of $6.5 million that
came to Silver Consolidated
Schools a couple of years ago.
Um, we have really focused in on
mental health throughout the
state of New Mexico. Um, Silver
Schools applied for this
particular grant two years ago
and we were one of the only
schools, I think, in the state,
uh, in fact, I think we were the
only school district to receive
these funds. I know that
counties receive these funds,
but it was $6.5 million to
increase mental health
providers, um, to provide
wellness rooms and spaces
throughout all of our campuses.
We've been creating safe spaces,
and opportunities for students
to um experience not just the
logistics of being in a building
that provides education, but
also in a place that they can be
nourished, that they can be
supported and find uh
individuals like social workers
and counselors to meet their
needs. If you find time today to
make your way around the campus,
make sure that you have a
lanyard so that you don't get
stopped by security, but you'll
find in.
See some of those examples of
safe spaces in our commons
areas, um, where we're trying to
soften, uh, the library that
you're in is also being
transformed through funds that
you guys provided, um, you
provided funds for CTE as well
as for um safe and security. And
so for safety and security, we
continue to reinforce um our
layers of security throughout
the district, but for CTE, we're
remodeling our libraries. The
carpet here is relatively new,
right, but we also took out a
lot of the structures that
you're going to see around the
building.
are coming in here, um, to make
it more conducive for careers
and for accessing technology and
being more of a media center,
right? Um, but that goes back to
creating safe spaces, uh,
collaborating efforts, we're
working with core schools, we're
working with Western New Mexico
University. We're working with
uh Hidalgo. We're working with
um Gla Regional working with a
lot of different uh providers to
to continue to enhance our area,
uh, with Western, we're looking
at a grow your own program to
develop our social workers.
Um, and so interns are able to
come and work within our school
system and likewise graduate and
hopefully we'll be able to set
them up with um sustained
funding through Medicaid where
they'll be able to stay, stay
employed with our district and
continue to provide support
services for our students. Um,
comprehensive mental health
services. Um, we have Care
Solace, and you've probably
heard, um, services like
BetterHelp, uh Better Health, I
think it is, is what it's called
Carolis. These are resources
that are available 24/7 to our
students, to our staff
To our parents they can go
online, be connected, um, with
someone who can meet them
immediately in their need and
likewise connect them with a
service provider, um, at no cost
to them, and this is provided
for all of the families in our
district. Um, we also have a
cook center, uh, if you're
familiar with them, likewise, we
provide parenting university,
uh, and parenting support as
well as counseling support
throughout our district.
Um, Cindy Barris is working
with, um, various individuals to
take what we've received an
investment through the $6.5
million to continue sustain it
throughout the district. So when
the money is gone and the and uh
we don't have access to it any
longer that we'll be able to
sustain it. It is my hope that
through the legislature they
continue to look at ways in
which they can likewise help
build sustainability within
districts and invest in these
areas for schools. That's one of
my favorite top topics, which
is.
The Ron Clark Academy. Um, I'm
curious how many of you are
familiar with RCA theon Clock
Academy.
Oh this is going to be fun, um.
And I'm gonna pause for a second
and I'm going to uh give you a
very brief snippet if you don't
mind, 3 to 5 minutes, uh,
showcasing what the Run Clock
Academy is, then I'll take you
back through that. I'll give it
a few seconds to get started.
Throughout the day, while you're
here at Silver Schools.
You are likely going to see
students in red, black, blue, or
green over the next several
days. Those are their houses,
they're their symbols, right?
The Ron Clark Academy, the
philosophy behind it is the idea
of creating a culture and a
community for students who may
otherwise be looking for a sense
of belonging within their school
community. And so within each
campus you'll see these four
communities of students, of
staff, of, of.
Parents
that are championing and
supporting one another. Um,
we're looking at how this has
increased student engagement and
wanting to be at school and be a
part of their houses. If you
think of the concept of
fraternities, sororities, um, or
even for lack of vocabulary,
Harry Potter, the idea of the
houses, those groups, it's not
Harry Potter, but when I say
that, people go, oh, I know what
that means, right? But that's
what the house concept is about.
Um, it develops leaders, um,
from elementary through to
middle school to high school,
um, it recognizes character and
builds relationships within the
houses and across the district.
Um, there is definitely a sense
of belonging that comes with
being in a house. I myself am in
the best house, which is uh
Amistad, right? Um, and we tend
to be fiercely loyal throughout
our houses, right? But you have
Arad Archiismo, you have revere,
and you have the Seindi.
Um, there's a sense of school
pride.
That comes in with being in one
of these houses, right, and
seeing how they celebrate and
celebrate and support one
another. I can tell you that all
of our schools, school board
members as well as our staff,
our members of the house. This
is our first year implementing
it. I know Clovis, um, Hatch,
many of the districts around the
state are, I shouldn't say many,
but several other districts have
foray into this. Cobra and
Silver like ways begin this
process last spring, training
our staff, learning more about
it, and then we brought it to
life in our district.
This year. Um, we had house
sortings, which are amazing bits
of fun. You'll see some clips of
it, but it's where your older
students get sorted into a house
and then they welcome their
younger peers into that house,
and that creates that
brotherhood, sisterhood support
system, right? There's a
celebration that comes with
knowing that whether I'm a uh at
Stout Elementary or Jose Barrios
kindergarten, 3rd grade, or 2nd
grade that I can look up and see
a middle schooler at La Plata or
a high school.
student who's a mentor to me in
my house, right? It creates that
sense of belonging and support.
Our middle school principal
would tell you that in her
survey that we do every year,
her students told her that one
of the things that they
struggled with was feeling that
they were being bullied and that
they did not have that sense of
belonging when they went to
school, um, recently, uh, and
you can talk to her, I think
she'll be here later. Uh, she
said to me that there's
definitely a difference of
atmosphere and and feeling
amongst her students and they've
talked.
About it. We, we monthly have a
report that is given to our
staff by our leadership from our
campuses and our board meetings.
La Plata will be presenting to
the board in October, and I
think the board is going to hear
more about how the house system
is helping them and addressing
that survey data point.
Oh, I've been talking, so I was,
I hadn't had a chance to look up
and see. So what you're seeing
now is our
Elements of our house.
Sorting process.
If you've never been in a room
full of students who are
excited, who are running up to
one another, hugging, cheering,
um, applauding, high fiving, um,
it's a pretty emotional
experience.
Right? You, it's especially if
you're a teacher in education
because you live for those
moments, right, those moments
where kids are in full of joy,
and I'll tell you throughout the
district, the beginning of the
year, as we were watching the
sorting process take place,
that's what we saw, and that's
what we felt, and we continue to
see that in the house
competitions and experiences
that are slowly emerging around
the district. Just like any
initiative, it takes some time
to get things going.
Uh, and what you're seeing here
is one of the house competitions
at La Plata.
This is definitely not slow
motion. It's still a.
Not only do our students get
into the house competitions, but
as you can see at uh 6th Street,
our staff do as well.
Within the houses, part of the
building building accountability
within oneself and within this
team is the point system that
you saw a few moments ago. You
saw the flags and you saw those
points, each individual student
earns points for their for their
houses, right? And so that's
again, you're building a sense
of responsibility within
oneself, but also a collective
responsibility to your peers,
uh, within your house and within
your campus.
Bring it to a close.
Work-based learning
achievements, uh, I'm, I'm
really pleased to talk about the
innovation zone investment that
has happened both in silver and
in Kobe. Um, Silver schools uh
this past year we had 55
students and participating in
internships across 14 different
community partnerships. Um, we,
we have a graduation rate of
84%, 100%, uh, at cliff schools,
uh, combined, I believe, for
about 85 8 86% graduation. We
are uh looking more into
capstones and learning more
about implementing.
for Capstone projects here in
our schools. What we're really
seeing and hearing a lot more
about a soft skills development,
as as far down into the middle
school where we've got a course
in a class of CTE that's really
deep, the deep diving into that
further.
um, Cindy Barris and her team
continue to look at how we can
blend and braid different uh
financial financial sources to
sustain the innovation zone,
right? Uh, the funds that we've
received that continued to
decrease over time.
One of the points I hope to make
and hope to hear from our
legislature is how they're going
to build in additional dollars
to sustain these um programs,
the work, the innovation zone is
amazing. You know, we've got
work-based learning internships,
um, we've got students that were
able to pay to go to get these
experiences and so they're able
to likewise reinvest back into
their households. Um, we are
partnering with communities, P&M
linemen, of course, um, I think
there's about 2 or 3.
Districts in the state that are
currently using the PNM lineman
course, um, Kobre and Silver has
aligned our schedules so that
our high school students are
able to take advantage of
opportunities both at our campus
here in Silver as well as in
Kre, um, it is our hope that,
um, we're able to do the best we
can to mirror opportunities that
we see happening in communities
like Rio Rancho and in Hobbs,
you know, we don't have the
investment and the type of
facilities.
That the CTech facility has, but
what we want to do is make sure
that we're good stewards of not
only the legislature's funding
that they give to us, but also
our community funding and not
replicating our resources and so
by working together and aligning
our, our, our schedules and
working with Western New Mexico
University were able to see who
has this resource and what
program do you have, and if I
can send my students to your
school and you can send your
students to my school. We don't
have to replicate that, and so
our kids can get the best of uh
that we can provide across um
our districts. It is our hope
that investments into these
types of innovations and
programs can be funded so that
we can continue to develop what
we have here going.
And I won't read that to you
because I spoke a lot, but um, I
just wanna thank you again for
the opportunity to visit with
you. We are so glad that you're
here in Silver schools, um, and
I will stand for any questions
and I will yield to the
distinguished gentleman uh over
to my right. OK.
Welcome and thanks for coming
down, um, and Mr. Hawkins, thank
you for the invite to come over
and uh be part of this, um, and
then we're gonna be really fast,
uh.
One of the things our districts
are very similar. We've also
been on declining enrollment for
a long time now, um, we just
realized this morning that we're
uh literally half the size of
the Silver School District where
about 944 students at the
moment.
And, but what I wanted to do
quickly is just do some
celebrations because I've looked
in your um agenda and structured
literacy is one of those agenda
items. Um, I feel like in our
district we're doing a very good
job of it. So I brought an
expert with me. I've got Miss
Chavita, which is my curriculum
director, and so I want her to
be able to celebrate her hard
work here, so if you'll just
give us a quick overview of our
structured literacy program in
our district.
Again, my name is Suzanne
Chavita, and I've been with Kree
for about 6 years and how I came
to Kobe was I worked for the
Reeds to lead program. I'm sure,
um, some of you know what that
was, um, many, several years
ago. I think it started back in
2015. And I was one of the
regional reading specialist for
Ree to lead, so I would come and
I would, um, um, coach the the
Kobre teachers on how to teach
reading. And eventually, um, I
came to work here.
So core is very good at applying
for grants. When a grant is
pushed out, we're like, we're
gonna apply for this. So we have
received pretty much every grant
that Ped has pushed out in
regards to structured literacy.
We received Reeds to lead.
We received, um, circle for a
couple of years, then we applied
for CLSD and that um we also
received, I'm very proud to say,
the most money in the state for
CLSD and um I, many people say,
well, that's unfair. You're a
small district. How did you get
$70 and uh this these other
schools that are bigger than you
receive 3 million. I said
because we asked for it, right?
Always ask always shoot for the
stars, so we always do when we
write a grant. And um, so with
that $7 million it's coming to
an end. We did receive a no cost
extension this year for 750, um,
but I heard, um, that we are
going to have another round of
CLSD, so, um, you will be
hearing from us. We will apply
for it.
And but our philosophy behind
structured literacy is people
make the difference. It's not
necessarily curriculum, right?
We know that. I mean, curriculum
is a resource, but it's the
people, so we have put in, um,
most of the money, I would say
90% of these grants we push
through with people. We thought,
OK, we need to do interventions.
Kids are not where they need to
be. We know that, but we can't
expect teachers to be doing the
interventions and then teaching
core content
And you know, teachers are
already overwhelmed, so we said,
you know what, we need a hire
interventionists. We need to
hire interventionist that
focuses on the babies, K1 and 2,
and we need to hire an
interventionist that focuses on
34, and 5. So we spent our money
on people. We hired an
interventionist at every school,
even our, even our small school
that has 80 students, we thought
they needed an interventionist
as well.
Um, so we have seen an increase
in our scores. When we applied
for the CLSD, you have to set
goals. Our goal back then, 5
years ago was 75% of our
students would be proficient.
And now that I look back, it's
been 5.5 years. We are almost
there.
And so I'm, I'm very proud of
us, and it's all because of CLSD
and the support that we were
able to receive with those
interventionists. We also were
able to hire a reading coach. So
those coaches, because I right,
I was funded from Reeds to lead.
Then of course we know Rele is
no longer here. So with the CLSD
we were able to hire coaches. So
those coaches would go and and
support teachers on how to teach
structured literacy.
And so we believe at Cobra that
PD and people make the
difference and you, and it is,
and they have, we are almost at
75% proficient in our grades K
through 5. We do have more work
in in regards to middle and high
school, um, but we're getting
there. And um again, we also
applied for the structured
literacy grant. That is 25,000
for every elementary school, so
all our elementary schools
receive that. With that 25,000
we
But um we braid our funding and
that helps um fund our
interventionist, right? Because
with the 750,000 that we have
this year with CLSD we were not
able to um bring in all our
interventionists back. So that
search of literacy grant did
help um fund those
interventionists. And again, um,
we, with that, with structured
literacy, we have every teacher
attend letters.
Which is, I, I'm sure you've
heard about letters. It's a
two-year course. There's 8
units, and each unit takes
approximately 10 to 11 hours. So
we believe at Kobre that because
teachers spend so much time on
this that we need to pay them a
stipend for this.
Um, they, they work, um, I, I
did the course. I, I did a fast
track on it last year, um, and
it, it was cause I need to know
what they're they're going
through, right? And uh it was a
lot of work, and I thought, you
know what, we need to pay these
teachers and so we do, we pay
them a $500 stipend for every
unit.
And that comes out of our CLSD
funding as well.
Um, so, um, again, thank you for
allowing me to present on um
Kobre and um our our
celebrations when it comes to um
structural literacy. Thank you.
So, um, because I can see we're
over just a smidge right now.
I'm gonna, we're gonna stop
here. Uh, the only one, I have a
comparison and I'll just hand
you my my chart that I have that
I have a comparison of our SCG
from 24 and 25. And I know you
guys are very aware of this that
uh our rural population,
um, for our district our size,
we took a $432,000 hit on that
this year. Um, I know we've, you
guys are very aware of this.
and I, and so I wanted to do a
celebration and I also wanted to
do a struggle, so there, there's
one of our struggles. I'm gonna,
I'll hand this to you so you
guys have that information so
you guys can look at our
comparison of last year, uh, to
this year, um, and in that, I
wanted to thank you guys so much
for coming and welcome to our
area and.
Thank you for letting me have a
few minutes of your, your time,
Mr. Hawkins. And the other
thing, and I wanted to say last
little celebration here. I think
what's really helping us in our
communities is the partnerships
and teamworks of our district.
And if you keep hearing this,
um, and I will say this, there
is extremely fierce rivalry
between our districts, and I,
and I hope we're breaking that
down because we're realizing,
yes, our kids can go play on
whatever field or sport they're
doing and we'll, you know,
that's great, but when
It comes to academics, we should
be teaming together, and we
should be using resources and we
should be using things that are
helping our students and the
more we do that, I think the
better it is. So I'm hoping that
we're doing some things in our
districts together that are
benefiting our students across
the board. So thank you so much
uh for your time and uh welcome
here to the Silver and core
area.
Great. Thank you all so much. So
we'll come to questions. uh,
Representative Razas.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. You looked
over and said, OK, fine, I'll do
that.
Mr. uh, first of all, Mr. Chair,
I just want to tell Mr. Hawkins,
don't worry, I'm long winded
also. So we explained things,
but I, I failed to to uh.
Say that the prospectors are
here and they're all standing
here and they have a little uh
uh lapel pin here that
recognizes them, big, big, uh,
we, we're blessed to have them,
Mr. Chair, they organize, um, a
meeting right before we go to
the session.
definitely helps us understand
the projects and, and what the
needs of our community are, um,
would probably, you know, I, I
will say that, you know,
Priscilla Lucilla with a cog
works together with with uh uh
prospectors.
And it allows schools, the uh
western, uh, the municipalities,
all to come together and tell us
what the needs of their
community and and their their
priorities are. So I, I, I
wanted to thank him here. We
also have some board members
here that I see from Silver
High, and I, and I just wanted
to thank you both for your um
for your presentation. Mr. Coy,
um, did you have, cause I, I
know you don't have as much time
in Mrs. Shada, thank you for
the.
Presentation. Did you, are you
struggling the same with the
same child or are you, do you
have the same challenges, I
guess Mr. Hawkins has when it
comes to transportation, um, and
how is it affecting your
reserves, your operational
reserves, and do you have, I, I,
I know where I've seen what
silver has, but where are you
guys at?
Um, so on our transportation, I
think we took about $86,000 hit
on that. Um, so, of course, our
neighbors took
a lot bigger hit, um, we were
able to, um, you know, it was
easier to handle that than, you
know, than $300,000. So again,
you know, I have these in here
and I'll I'll share this with
you where you can see the
comparison of last year to this
year, um, and where we were able
to gain in some places, but you
know, we did take some some big
hits. Our biggest hit was, of
course, in our rural population.
That was the one that was the
hardest.
And I think that's, Mr. Chair,
what I wanted to ask is, is I
didn't get clarification, um,
exactly how that hurt your
funding when you said you cut
routes. Is it, can you expand on
that a little bit?
So we ended up having to do, um,
was we consolidated our routes,
um, and when I say consolidated,
we had an AM, we had, um,
elementary route and the
secondary route, uh, in the
mornings and in the afternoons
and so we adjusted our schedule
to go to one route in the
morning and one rot in the
afternoon, which really impacted
our schedule, right? And so at a
time when there's concern that
we want to make sure we have as
much time as possible devoted to
the learning environment,
knowing that
We do have stagger times and
things of that nature for
logistical purposes when you're
dealing with elementary and
secondary, we had to make some
adjustments to our schedules
because what we didn't want to
have happen is our elementary
students to get out of school
and then have to sit outside on
a bus for 30 minutes in front of
the middle school or high school
because we couldn't take them
home, right? and elongate their
day even further, and so that
cut into our instructional time.
Um, we also have to be
respectful of the schedule and
contracts that come with our
employees when you're doing
negotiations.
Make sure that you don't make
the days too long, so we went to
one route, um, that helped, but
again, your bus companies at
that point in time, they were
already into contracts. They
already had employees and so
they had to find ways there are
to cut into their budgets and
it's not like, no offense tober
Kirk, you're a real rancho where
you have so many different
vendors and places that as a
company you're providing
services to if you're the
Montoya Bessy here in.
Grant County, you're providing
services to two locations, more
than likely. Silver schools in
Corey, and so they took a hit
from Silver, and they took a hit
from Colbra and they still had
to find a way to keep their
employees employed and take care
of their community and that's
the type of impact that you're
seeing across rural New Mexico,
whether they have two buses or
15 buses, that's the type of
impact they felt.
And I think that's what I wanted
to say, Mr. Cherry is I, I think
with role of New Mexico we fall
in a different category right
than than these, you know, Santa
Fe, Albuquerque, Las Cruces
because we're just so rural. I
mean, you got cliff schools out
there, uh, you guys, uh you have
uh San Lorenzo and if some of
you guys went over to the
mountain that that you'll pass
one of the the rural schools
that are out there and so, um,
and then the only other thing I
don't wanna take up all the
time, but the um putting um
elementary school kids.
And high school and junior high
kids, were there any challenges
there? I mean, little kids
hearing probably things they
shouldn't hear until they get a
little older and you know what I
mean, so I, I, I think it's not
your fault, you're just, you
fell into this, right? You have
to, you have to adjust. I'm not,
I'm not here trying to poke. I'm
just being a realist, right?
I've, I've had 5 kids go through
the school, so, um, that was
just something I, I, I think it
was challenging here in town at
first. Now, most of your ro
schools including Cliff and
probably core, you know, if you,
you probably have a.
experiences where you've got,
um, K-12 students on a bus
together and and and so there is
that element of being able to
support one another and Big
Brother and Big sister are
watching in there, so so there's
some positives. It's also a
little unsettling at first to
get used to. One of the things I
wanna mention though that while
the transport the density factor
change impacted this, uh, and so
PED had to make these
adjustments. I think it's
important to note that while it
was an effort on their part to
adjust for saving funds and
allocating funds to places they
believed
needed it, um, the mileage
didn't change, right? So they
talk about student participation
and impacting their decisions.
10 miles is 1010 miles. If I'm
going down that street and
dropping off 5 kids or 15 kids.
I still got to go down that
street. And so when they deduct
reduce those dollars that made
it harder and more difficult to
do the same job.
And I know I said the last
thing, but are you guys still
coordinating because we had had
preliminary meetings, Mr. Chair,
about how Kobre Silver uh could
come together with Western New
Mexico University, the mine, um,
and I work on that vocational
program, uh, we're still, are
you guys still trying to merge
some sort of program where it
continues to work toward the
result of a progressive um
learning in the vocational
settings so that when they go.
To Western they can kind of just
transition.
Cobra Silver has been working
with Connected. So if you're
familiar with Connected from up
north, Gallopt McKinley, um, is
working with Connected to really
coordinate a career, uh TE CTE
programs in their area,
likewise, they put out a paper
last year, um, that went to the
LESC, which is how we discovered
them and so we are really
working with Doctor Shepherd.
He's been a great partner, um,
and Michael Cory has been really
focused on keeping us going on
this. And so it's, it's really
been good for us.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Madam Purim, please.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you so much for this, so
upbeat, uh, presentation this
morning. I am so excited about
what you said about structured
literacy. I'm the reason we are
looking at structured literacy.
It's only taking me 30 years to
do it. Finally, I got a governor
who, OK, I get that. Yes, we
need to do that, uh, so very
exciting, but Superintendent
Hawkins, I wrote.
Do something you said early on
because I was so amazed by it,
you said the attendance for
success act is really amazing. I
don't think we've heard that
anywhere, but I mean, we, we
passed it, we like it, but a lot
of people have not liked it, and
then you said it needs more
teeth and leverage, so my only
question is what are your ideas
about those teeth and leverage.
Is this being recorded?
We'll protect you though,
whatever you say.
The reality is it's one thing
when you have a high school
student or a middle school
student who skips school, right?
You can have consequences for
that the next day and I'm
speaking in a very general term
off the cuff, but when you have
parents who refuse to take their
kids to school, um.
There's no, there's no amount of
polite calling or central
meetings or candy or hugs or or
all the things that we're doing
wonderfully in our schools,
that's going to positively
encourage you to bring your
child to school. If you saw the
value in education, you wouldn't
need the extra encouragement in
the first place, you'd bring
your kid to school. And so when
you get to the point that if you
don't see the value in
education, you're not really
seeing and experiencing all the
wonderful extracurricular
opportunities that our schools
have to offer.
Uh, and the, the attendance
support visits the offers to
come pick up your child to bring
to school if all of those
things, the medical supports
that we have, the counseling,
we, we are a center, a support
for our community and our
students. If none of those
things will encourage you to
bring your kid to school, then
there should be some type of
penalty through legal measures
by which the schools can engage
that household to say, look,
we're tasked with educating your
your child and and providing
For our community's future, and
you're not doing your part.
Right. And so what that looks
like and to what degree I'll
I'll pause on, but I do think
that there's got to be a
municipal um legal remedy that
holds uh parents accountable,
um, to ensuring that their kid
comes to school, um, and at the
risk of getting dirty looks from
some folks at some point. I
think that's what's missing.
There is no consequence through
that uh means for us to take a,
whether it be a middle school
kid or a high school kid who's
skipping school or a household
parent.
Who just decided, you know what,
not today. There's no remedy to
address that, and there's
nothing that's attendance for
Success Act has that will
address that.
All right, well, thank you for
that, uh, Mr. Chairman, that's
certainly what we've heard and
we are looking at it, um, I
mean, I think both of you have
shown today, um, your work, uh,
to make these schools a place
where kids want to come and
you're you're um uh significant
improvement, um, at least for uh
for silver, we, we've got charts
from him. That's why I'm talking
about that. Uh, I think it's
significant.
And and it reflects, I believe
it reflects, um, the dedication
of our educators and
administrators to try to make
schools a place where kids want
to be. This is a nationwide
problem. It, it's really been
created by the pandemic. This
did not used to happen to this
level, uh, I believe people,
parents used to think.
The job of the day for you, son,
daughter, is to go to school. I
do my job, you do your job. They
buy in. I mean, that used to be
the feeling, so we've just sort
of got this feeling now that, oh
well, they closed schools for a
couple of years. Everybody was
online, can't be that important
if we can just sit at a computer
and do it, uh, so, so I, I just
think we're all pulling in the
same direction, uh, we intend
to.
Try to get more funding for the
attendance issues, um, but I
appreciate your comments. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Represent memo.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, thank
you, gentlemen, and, uh, Ms.
Shavida for uh for your
presentation, um, along the same
lines as what the tendons, I
100% agree with you that we need
more teeth. Um, I've, uh, in
fact, after the last, um, LESC
meeting, uh, which we talked
about uh attendance and stuff
like that, or actually I think
we were talking with the uh
principals around there and I
went home and I talked to my own
attendance coach at Berlin High
School and uh.
And I asked, and sat there and
had a conversation with him and
he was like, basically you get
to tier 4, you do your little
thing there and then it comes
right back around and you start
the process all over again and
it's just this circle and and
some you can scare them into.
OK, let's show up, but some.
What do you do?
You know, and so we, we sat
there and we talked about, um,
you know, is it, is it
punishment or reward? Is it
like, what do we do in order to
entice people to, to, uh, care
like you said, find the value,
and I think that's one of the
biggest things is I know the
value we uh here in this room,
we know the value. We need the
people out there to understand
the value, um, and, and, um,
like this last session, um, I
did get to sponsor a bill about
the school absentee enforcement
with, uh, I think it was House
Bill 130.
To with a Representative Tarazas
and because it was something to
put a little more teeth and I
definitely want to work and and
figure out how we can uh do
something because we have people
that are that are hired in in
their whole goal is to get these
students to school, get them so
we can educate them because I
mean, I sit there and talk to my
students, you know, as long as
you're here, and I, and I don't
know how we just had a
parent-teacher conferences. I
don't know how many notes I
wrote that.
was, if I have them in class,
they're fine.
They're not passing my class
because they're not here. That's
it.
Because the and and especially
in physics, you can't miss, you
get lost.
You know, and, and that's the
thing in, in having that one on
one conversation with them is
like, this is not a class, you
can just coast by. This is not.
You need to pay attention, um,
and those are kids that we can
hold accountable, but when it's
when, uh, you know, I've also, I
used to be in elementary.
I've seen 6th graders taking
care of their kindergartner, and
they're the ones responsible for
getting them ready and if they
don't get on the bus in time,
they don't go to school, the
entire family.
And there is no one there, so
that, that I think that's, and I
know you guys, I'm preaching to
the choir as far as, uh, those
are the things that you guys
have, so I definitely would like
to, um, um, I know this is gonna
be something that we're going to
bring back this this session,
uh, what it's going to exactly
look like we'll see once we get
there a little bit more, but,
uh, but I believe that our
schools need some sort of teeth.
Um, well, like I said, whether
it's teeth or reward, I'm, I'm
open to to whatever we, if we
need to entice them and hey,
they might get something.
If there's a certain level of of
attendance for their student or
um, or there's or there's some
type of punishment, but the,
the, the that circle has to
stop.
The and any comments, please.
Yeah, I would like both. It it
would be awesome to have
rewards, of course we want to
celebrate our students that are
doing what they're supposed to
be doing, and then I think
really honestly on the teeth
piece, we're not talking a large
population, you know, so when we
talk about the need that we
have, we're not, we're not
talking, you know, hundreds of
families in our community, we're
talking a few that need a little
extra help or incentive to be
able to get their students to
school. So, but we need
something to be able to entice
that to happen.
Just go back the circle.
And then they learn that and
then they're like.
I, I would echo it's it's funny
we were thinking the exact same
thing. If you look at our data
points, our data points clearly
show across the state and here
in silver, the vast majority of
our students are going to
school. And so when we talk
about the successes of the
attendants for Success Act for
those who may be on that bridge
area. Now it's working. And so
when we're talking about teeth,
we're talking about the
percentage of kids that year
after year continue to show up
in the chronic absence report,
right? We see those numbers,
they haven't changed, if any,
they've ticked down a little
bit, but it's the same small
group.
We have consequences when you
speed for the same person who
doesn't get it, uh, you can say
politely slow down, but if you
get caught speeding, you have a
consequence, and if you're
continuing to have your kids not
come to school or continuing to
be a student who's skipping
school at the secondary and in
that chronic absence category,
clearly the incentives and the
positives that come in school or
not something that's going to
fit for you. So where's the
consequence for that? And that's
that small group.
Thank you, um, thank you, Mr.
Chair. The other thing that I
wanted to, to definitely say, I
feel you on the whole reserves
thing, so, uh, I am, I am one
person that especially when you
have to do a lot of the grants
with PED, it is, um, for, uh,
it's the RFP process in which
I've voiced many times. I hate
that process, uh, so, and if,
and if I can figure out another
way, I will definitely push to
get that. So, um, but, um, so I
feel you on that, but what
really perked
My interest only because in at
Blin High School, I am part of
what we call the Eagle Force,
which is our leadership and
we're responsible for, for, uh,
you know, doing all of that, any
changes, any rules or anything
like that in there. Um, we've
been discussing a lot about
school, um, community, OK? The
community there, um, and, and,
and enticing that. Tell me a
little bit more. You, this is
your first year for that Ron
Clark Academy, right? And, and
coverage, does it also?
Um, how was it as far as the
transition, how well is it like,
can you already see it now it's
still early on in in in the
year, but you already see a
difference in in the culture?
Give me, give me your first what
quarter assessments as far as um
what's going on. I feel like our
elementary school programs that
of course students really buy
into that and I feel it was a
lot easier for them to get
excited and to feel that
belonging in the group. Middle
schools kind of, you know, some
kids are really into it and some
kids look at it and they go,
this is not up my alley. High
school is kind of the same, and
I think
For us, it's gonna be putting
the standards and having that
and as the students grow through
our program and get older, I
think it's just gonna continue
to get better and better because
they bought into it at a younger
age and now they're working
forward. So, um, the parts that
I really like are being able to
have like we have classes that
are having competitions against
each other. And so some of them
are doing math facts and so for
them to get together and they
already have a team, they're on
a team already and then.
They're able to compete against
each other, but it's always in a
positive way, so it's, that's on
us to teach them that we cheer
for everyone, even though we're
part of one group. So it's a
good start. I think it's gonna
be a program as long as we stay
with it, it's gonna grow and
it'll just keep getting stronger
and better.
I would echo his sentiment. I
would say it really comes down
to the the ownership that your
staff has and that your
administration has an
administrators have at the
campus level and how you embed
it, right? And so if you look at
the middle school for for La
Plata, right, again, they did a
survey last year and that what
the the data really told them
was the sense of belonging was
something that was their lowest
area and so they went all in,
right? And so you're seeing
aspects of of the house concept
in every.
Bit of what they do and so what
they have seen is a reduction
slight because it's only been 9
weeks, right? A reduction in
some of the conflicts, not so
much conversations revolving
around um student tensions. I'm
gonna use this term and I hate
using it bullying. It still
happens, kids, you know, we're
still dealing with certain
things, but what they're saying
right now is they're not seeing
it.
As much now as they did at the
beginning of the year last year,
and so can you uh directly
attribute it to this concept.
It's still early to tell, um,
but what I can tell you is we
are definitely seeing the
dividends having our middle
school students go down to our
different elementary campuses at
the beginning of the year when
they were doing their sorting
processes really helped open
their eyes, I think, of the
leadership roles they have,
right, and the idea of being a
big brother and big sister, and
then bringing that back to their
campus and.
that even though we're in this
middle space, right, and we all
know middle school students and,
and, and all the things that
they're dealing with internally,
but also recognizing that
there's still, you know what,
uh, I can be a leader for these
kids and I can be a a mentor and
I can support the kids and it
kind of changes your perception
of your role in the school
system, cause before they
isolated, they're just on their
own and they don't know if they
want to be elementary kids or
high school kids yet anyway. But
now that they know, no matter
what, whether I'm middle school
or not, I'm still a leader.
So we're seeing that the
elementary level, same thing,
right? In the, in the point
competition to his point, you're
seeing more school pride, you
know, hopefully that will
translate to attendance numbers
and so we'll, we'll see more,
but we're.
We're we're hopefully
optimistic. And again, just like
any other um
Roll out
It it takes time.
So, um, Mr. Chair and Mr.
Hawkins or or both of you, um,
how was the staff reception? I
know anytime we do something new
that's immediate breaks first
and then believe me, only
because, like I said, everything
you roll in, you, I roll, I go
from Eagle Force to the science
department, and then, uh, and
it's, it's fun at Eagle Force
cause it's all kinds of ideas.
You go to the science department
and they're like, no.
And so how was, how was the
staff reception? we did, and I
think did similar, so we'd spent
our spring semester this past
spring sesemester, um, exposing
our staff and training them and
taking them to the Ron Clark
Academy, and so we used the last
bit of our ARP dollars for
professional development to
send, um, I'm gonna say close to
60, 65%, 70 75% of our staff has
gone to the Ron Clark Academy
and experienced.
Um, what it's like to have the
house concept, the high
expectations of instruction, um,
the culture, our board members
when we had board members went
and, but in so doing that, it
helped to create that sense of
ownership. So when they came
back, when they came back, they
want most, if not every one of
them who went and came back won
it and so you have almost a 75%
ownership saturation before you
even roll it out to your
students. And that's what we
were wanting to do.
Oftentimes, uh, we as
administrators go see something,
get excited, come back and go,
let's do this now, right? And
your staff just go along for the
ride and they're struggling,
right? And what we did was we
wanted to go from the ground up
with our staff first.
So they could see the benefit
and experience those
opportunities and so there's, I
think there's a a a better buy
in or ownership and what it can
do for the culture. Um, do you
have some who are probably not
as on board as others, you know,
you, you've got your teacher who
wears her house and everything,
right? bows, arrows, earrings,
socks, she's on mustad from top
to bottom, right? And then your
others who will wear the shirt
and, and I'm, I'm gonna go along
and I'll see if I can get into
this.
So it's, it varies, but by and
large, at least in silver, I
would say that we have a
significant, um.
Buying ownership in it.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you. I, I, I agree with
that because we, we often will
sit there and talk, uh, that's
that students don't change until
we have until adults change.
And, and when, when adults buy
in, then then we set the tone
and we can't always put
everything that OK, they need to
change. No, maybe my baby
behavior needs to change and
then that that changes something
else. Um, so thank you, thank
you for that. It's very
interesting. I'm definitely
gonna have to have a
conversation about that. Thank
you.
Represent Gurola.
Thank you, Mr. Sherard. Thank
you so much for uh welcoming us
here and for the presentation.
Um, I agree about, um, um,
having students in school is one
of the.
Main or the most important thing
that we need to not only for
students, it's a basic right for
education but also building
community safety, many other
areas. I have a a a couple of
questions. Um, you, you
mentioned that um the parents
don't see value in education.
Um, do you have any, um, have
anybody approach the communities
and ask what are the reasons why
they are not bringing the
students to school, um, is, is,
it's easy for us to.
That perception, but if we go to
the communities and learn
exactly what are the barriers,
maybe we can address uh the
situation in a better way has,
um, do you have like some kind
of a um I don't know, research
or questionnaire or form where,
where are the, which ones are
the reasons why parents are, are
either we can call it to see
value in education or why they
are not bringing kids to school.
What are the barriers?
So we did a survey and we do a
survey every year, the part of
our strategic plan development
was also embedding surveys for
our staff, for our students, and
our parents. And so we do have
some survey data about um the
value that you see in school and
things of that nature, um, that
I could share with you. I don't
know that it would translate to
those who aren't coming to
school. I think oftentimes we
ask those who are here, the
question that is hard for them
to answer because they're
present, right? Um, I would say
that for some students.
I think I see when you're
talking about a small
population, some would contend
that it's the experience they're
having at school.
Whether it's through peers or
maybe they're struggling
academically, right? And so you,
you may have some who have that.
You have others who basically
not not negatively, but they've
got other ambitions that don't
necessarily align with the
traditional school setting,
right? Um, I can share the data
with you that we have from Stor
education from the last two
years and we'll have another
survey that goes out this year.
I don't know how well it'll line
up with those who aren't
continuously coming because
they're not the ones who would,
you know.
Complete that data, um, but I
can share that with you, yes,
ma'am. Thank you. Thank you.
Yes, usually the, the ones who
show up and answer are the ones
who are here. So maybe going to
the communities and knowing will
be, give us a better data. Um, I
I'm really interested to know
that so if there is any common
uh um theme there, you can work
on that. I'm thinking as a math
teacher, I could do all kinds of
things, best classes, jump on
the desk, everything. But if I
keep doing the same thing, I can
put all my.
energy and do everything I can,
but if it's not working, it's
not gonna work as much energy I
put on it. Um, I had to change
for something that was
completely different. I never
thought it was part of math.
That's when I saw the
difference, but it was out of my
comfort zone, out of what I
thought it was needed. Um, I'm,
I'm just curious, what are the
barriers, um, that's one
question. The other question is,
um, we have been um getting some
reports in the past about the,
the students in the Martinez
Jai um um lawsuit
And those subgroups like Native
Americans, multilingual
learners, special education
students. Do you know what you
do, you have information about
how those students are doing in,
in literacy in attendance in,
in, you know, on all, on all the
success that you're having here
is, is any, any data from those
spec specific groups.
I would say that we have.
We do have our data. What I
would say is that we still have
some work to do, right? When
we're looking at our, our
special education, we're
currently working on inclusion
development here at the
secondary level. So our
elementary school inclusion
process and I'm talking about to
that demographic starting with
sped. I'm seeing that, um, our,
our data is pretty good at the
elementary level and that's
partly because they've been
doing inclusion for a long time,
um, and secondary in the last
several years we've transitioned
from the resource model more to
include those students into the
the the.
Classrooms which they're going
to receive on grade level direct
instruction, right? So we're
continuing to provide training
and opportunities for our staff
to to help understand and how to
work with students who are 345
or 6 grade levels below. And so
uh the the secondary level we're
a work in progress. Um, as you
can see through, uh, I'm on the
wrong slide.
Doesn't matter. Point is, we're
we're working on it, um, as far
as our subpopulations, I would
say that we're doing pretty,
pretty good, right? as compared
to, can we do better?
Absolutely, whether it's our uh
we have a very, very low
bilingual population here in our
area, uh, in comparison to
dimming that has a significantly
higher bilingual population down
the road, um, but we still have
our resources and programming
for our students through
technology, through our special
programs, we have resources that
allow our teachers um and
Students to interact and work
through those barriers of
language, right, while they're
acclimating, um, we don't have
the interventionists that they
have in their programs, but we
do have some pretty strong
support programs in our
district. Again, we want to
continue to make them better. I
can share with you our uh state
assessment data, but we, we're
doing OK. We're we're, we're
doing all right. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Sher.
Thank you. Um.
Along the lines of attendance,
um, and I think representing
Mirba Moya was alluding to it,
but how many referrals to CYFD
or juvenile probation, have your
school districts made?
It's a hard uh number because
CYFD referrals, there's two,
there's two things I would say
that. One, oftentimes it's done
anonymously, right? And so I'll
tell you that I couldn't give
you an account for the anonymous
submissions. Uh, I'll tell you
it's not uncommon on a weekly
basis for a district our size to
have one or two, if not more,
right, because social workers,
and every one of us are
mandatory reporters. So if
you're a social worker, a nurse,
a principal in your counter
situation, you know, there are
times when they will report your
teachers are oftentimes.
likely to not leave their
information because they want to
maintain a positive relationship
with the in the household,
right? But they recognize that
there may be something that's
concerning to them. And so they
reported, we do encourage them
to let the administrator know,
so if a parent shows up, um,
they at least know something is
going on, right? And they don't
show up and asking questions and
no one knows what's going on but
a lot of times it's done
anonymously. Our administrators,
we have pretty protocol, pretty
strict protocols of certain
things come up that require
CYFD.
They pretty much report pretty
uh pretty quickly. And so that
can be documented and and and
looked at, but as far as giving
you a hard fast number, you
know, in any given week a
district our size, not uncommon
to see one or two, if not more
depending on the circumstance.
And and so superintendent, are
you referring to?
Referrals to CYFD in general
because I'm talking about
strictly attendance referrals
because the last portion of the
attendance for Success Act is a
uh referral to CYFD and juvenile
probation. Um, and so like when
we've been talking about, um,
attendance, um, and the
attendance for Success Act like
that to me has seemed the part
in talking with school districts
that is um the missing portion
of this, and so that's where I
was.
Interested in the referral
strictly on attendance. So I'm
gonna give you the answer and
then Mr. let me give you my
interpretation of the answer and
then Mr. Corey can fix, fix me
on his part. So I can tell you,
we have, but there's not
anything they can do, right? And
in that regard. And so I think
we've been told, and I want to
be real careful in the way I say
this because I'm speaking in
general terms and I'm being
recorded, but uh we've been
through this process and and
quite frankly, you can make the
referral, but as they will tell
you, as I said before, there's
no teeth, so there's nothing
really that they can.
I think they'll do home visits
and they'll go through the
motions, but at the end of the
day, I think that's kind of
where that that tend to
struggle. And so I want to be
cautious in that, but I know
that we've reported and.
That's what happens.
Well, luckily I've brought along
someone that's very
knowledgeable in that area in
our district, so I'm gonna turn
it over. How many of you, how
many referrals have you made
this year? I, I apologize, this
is our attendance success coach
as well. She has many, many jobs
in our district, probably too
many, 10, um, that's a joy of
being a small district. You wear
like 40 hats, right? Uh, Teresa
Via, this is one of her areas.
Um, so far I've made about 15
referrals and um it's the same
thing, nothing ever happens.
I mean, sometimes they'll
contact the parents sometimes
they'll show up to the houses,
but most of the time they do
absolutely nothing, so it's
useless.
And so that's kind of the
general answer that we've been
hearing from school districts as
we've gone along and you know
I've made a request and I know
the staff is following up on
getting CYFD um in front of us
to talk about um what this looks
like from their side because um
we've heard all sorts of
different things as regard to
um.
Attendance for success and it
just sounds to me like it's not
fully being implemented because
we have that final component,
um, that is not being responsive
as it looks like for now, and
obviously that's a problem
superintendent.
I would add, I think one of the
areas that I think I've
witnessed within this structure
is while that recommendation for
referral exists. I don't know
that there's any specific policy
or language that specifies what
it is they can legally do as
consequences when they get the
referral. And so whether it's
take it to magistrate or taking
it to the local sheriff or
whatever language you want to
do. I think there's a missing
link in what authority they
have.
Once they receive the referral
and so I think there needs to be
very specific language as when
they get it, these are the
things they can do and how they
can refer it. And I think
likewise there's gonna have to
be language that if it goes to
magistrate or if it goes to your
local PD or whatever and I'm
speaking out of turn. Likewise,
they're gonna need some language
reference point of what they
then have the authority to do
with that. The general.
Contact this person isn't
enough referring it to this
person doesn't give them the
authority to then leverage the
the resources they have, and I
think that's where law
enforcement or CYFD would
contend. You referred to me,
what can I do?
And I appreciate that. Um, as
far as we heard from Kobre in
offering letters, training
stipends, is that happening in
Silver Consolidated Schools?
So we have it set up right now
where we provide lets training
during the day, um, and so we
don't have to necessarily do
these typings outside of the
time. Um, we do it, um, in fact,
we just literally had our uh
session with our 5th and 6th
grade 2 days ago, um, at our
central office. We do offer
through if we were to do
sessions on the weekend, um,
then we offer to pay those
individuals for their time
there, but we didn't receive the
wonderful s the funds that they
received to be able to provide
that.
Opportunity. If the legislature
were to see fit to provide
additional funding for
professional development as it
relates to the letters to be
able to to pay the teachers for
their time for the work that
they do after that, we would
greatly appreciate that
opportunity to be able to offer
that to our teachers as well.
And so if it's during the day,
what?
would have been in its place,
uh, alternative professional
development, um, for teachers,
I'm just wondering, like if
you're doing it during the day
for teachers, it's in their
contract day, um, what does that
take away from? Is that taking
away from instruction? I that
taking away? I mean it takes
away from instruction, but
again, uh, likewise to Mr. we
want to respect our teachers,
um, in the time and so doing it
during the day, they don't have
to go home.
There there's still some work
that they have to do to get
through those units, but being
able to offer the the training
in session during the day, um,
takes that teacher out of the
classroom, right? Um, and you
can't do it any other time,
right? You want to respect their
time with their families, um,
outside, and so that's that's
how we cover it. Um, we have a
trainer of trainers within our
district, um, who are in their
excellent at what they do, um,
and so we've been working
through that. Uh, we used to
work with the PED initially to
provide those training
opportunities for our staff.
Um, but what we saw was the
scheduling of how they did it
and oftentimes was fell on.
Times where it wasn't convenient
for us. Um, it was like on a
Friday or a Monday if you've
ever been in a secondary school
or an elementary school on a
Monday or Friday, you know,
those are the worst states to
have professional development
opportunities. And so we were
able to get our folks trained
and, and to be able to provide
those opportunities um
conveniently within our
schedule.
And, and lastly, because this
brings up for me the the
question of um micro credentials
and what you're hearing from
your schools about micro
credentials because it sounds
like we're having the same issue
with when to place when
educators are going to be able
to do a micro credentialing, um.
I was just wondering how you all
are handling that with some
comments might be.
Madam Chair, and I apologize,
I've not been going through, Mr.
Chairman and Madam President, I
haven't been going through the
chair appropriately. I, I would,
I've, I've heard mixed uh
thoughts on the
microcredentialing. And so for
me, the jury is out still, um,
on the microcredentialing, I
don't want to speak expertly and
give an opinion on it. I, I
think it's still early. I think
there are some serious concerns
on the microcredentialing
process and whether it's um I'm
repeating um certain elements of
the traditional experience they
already have.
And so some there are those who
argue that it's um.
Is busy work in some areas.
There are those who say that,
and I would be real cautious
because again, I, I, I recently
had a conversation with a few
folks who are going through that
experience right now and so
they're struggling with it, um,
so I'll just say jury's out on
my for me on that one.
Great. Well, thank you all so
much for being here and
certainly for hosting us here
over the next 3 days. Thank you.
All right, so we're gonna move
to our second item.
Or a third item, as it were,
middle school.
Oh, I'm gonna take this, this is
my.
You want me to come back up
later? No, you.
Unless you need a moment, but
you'll you'll sit with us. I'll
come back, OK.
You said.
You can take the main spot I'll
sit there.
Um, I'm gonna use this. I don't
want to try that one.
Just.
OK
Yeah, no, don't sweat. Actually,
um,
I, I'll have to clear.
OK, uh, good morning, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee. Um, we are here today
to shift gears a little bit and
talk about middle school. So as
you all know, there was House
Memorial 4, which was carried by
Representative Yone Grola as
well as Representative Garrett
during this last legislative
session, which prompted us to
form a task force and a formal
study on middle school, and so,
um, we'll do our best to make up
time. I'm looking at the clock.
I know we're a little behind,
but while also doing justice to
the amount of work that went
into this. You can see that I
Joined by Miss Yushu Sananena,
who's um one of our interns
actually from the summer. She's
a high school senior and joined
us and worked heavily on this
report, helping us to organize
the meetings, helping us to
really, excuse me, um, to design
the agendas and the learning
experiences. Um, so she and I
are going to start the
presentation. I'll finish out
the report and then we're also
joined by Superintendent Hawkins
again, who is a member of our
task force on this. So with
that, I'll pass it to Miss
Sanzanene going to talk through
the first couple pages of the.
Ports and you can find that
behind tab 3 in your binders.
Thank you, Jess. Uh, good
morning, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. So as you just
heard, uh, this middle school
study began with House Memorial
4, which was introduced during
the legislative session in 2024.
Since then, you have heard a
presentation in May of 2024,
with a brief that summarized the
developmental needs of middle
schools learners and outlined a
plan of study for middle school
education. This report today is
going to provide an overview of
the membership of the task
force, the study process, and
the findings.
Through the summer, through the
working group that we created.
So you see a list of about 30
names here under the task force
members, and I'd like to point
you to the fact that this was
staffed mostly of teachers,
students, parents, and education
leaders. So we had about 30
members that were trying to make
up the demographics,
particularly of the Martinez
Yazi case, uh, to see what
exactly is needed in order to
create better access to
education and better quality
education within New Mexico.
From there, once the task force
was created, we posed 4 study
questions, starting with what
are the models of middle school
environments being used across
New Mexico, how and in what ways
do these align with the research
and best practices on middle
school design.
The second was what is the
relationship between various
middle school designs, uh,
whether that's kindergarten
through 8th grade schools, 6th
through 8th grade schools, 6th
grade academies, junior highs,
etc. And what is that
relationship to student
outcomes?
What are the articulate needs of
middle school students and
educators and how do middle
school designs align with them?
And lastly, we looked at what is
the plausible statewide policy
approach to supporting middle
school students and what can the
legislature do through policy
recommendations.
So within this task force we had
3 meetings, 2 of them were
virtual meetings and one was an
all day in-person meeting in the
New Mexico state capital.
Within this first meeting on
July 30th of 2024. We are
looking at responding to 3 main
questions. The unique needs of
middle school students. Uh, what
a successful middle school
structure looks like, and then
what funding is needed in order
to develop these successful
middle school models that would
address the needs of these
students.
The 2nd meeting on August 15th
of 2024, was looking at the
summary of the findings from the
first meeting and giving
presentations about different
middle school models, national
research, with a particular
focus on Clovis Municipal
schools and their 6th grade
academy approach.
Lastly, we had our middle school
summit, and this is where we had
the most involvement from our
middle school students from the
panel. This was on September
5th, in which we asked student
panels what the ideal middle
school environment would look
like to them, as well as
presentations from our task
force and a working session to
prioritize policy
considerations.
From here, I'll turn it back to
Jess to look at the findings.
Thank you so much, Yue for that.
Um, so my remarks today are
going to focus on those 4
research questions and what we
found in response to each of
those. So as I already
mentioned, that first question
really asked us to assess models
of middle school being used
across New Mexico. If you'll
remember in May we told you that
the three kind of primary models
that we see in national research
are first at kindergarten or
pre-kindergarten as
pre-kindergarten has expanded to
grade 8 school. The second
primary model, um, is actually a
great
6 through 8 school and that's
kind of what we think of as our
classic middle school today,
standalone building with those
three grades in it. And then the
fourth kind of dominant model is
a grade 6, or I'm sorry, a grade
7 and 8 school and that's a
little bit reminiscent of when
we had junior highs that were
much more common. Turning to
page 4.
Of the document here. Um, if you
take a look at figure one,
you'll see that we have all
three of those in New Mexico,
but we don't have just those.
Um, as you can see in figure one
there, 115 of our schools that
serve middle school students are
those classic grades 6 through 8
schools. That said, we also have
55 KH or pre-K through 8 schools
and 28 of those grades 7 and 8
schools that are more like
junior highs. We also though, if
you look at the narrative to the
left of that graphic there, we
have, for example,
83 K through 6 schools where
we're seeing students at that
middle school developmental
level in more of an elementary
setting. We also have 3 schools
that serve only 6th graders in
the entire state. So we found
that New Mexico is not atypical,
that this is actually very
common that communities actually
decide where to serve their
middle school students best, so
our variety of models is not
uncommon. That being said, um,
perhaps due to New Mexico's
rural nature. There are a fair
number of schools that serve
larger number of students in one
building, and this might be
because it's more feasible for
some of our smaller districts
from an operational cost in
capital outlay perspective, to
again consolidate the cost of
running those schools as much as
possible, so wide variation,
very common, not atypical that
we have that, but again, we do
see a pretty high number of
different types beyond the 6
through 8 classic middle school.
Moving to the middle of page 4.
This gets into research question
2.
Which asked us to take those
models and figure out if there's
a relationship between all of
those different types of grade
configurations and student
outcomes in available data. And
if there are differences, what
some of the drivers of those may
be. So we're going to first
explore our achievements, and
then we'll get into attendance
and then we'll get into how
those are not the only two ways
to look at some of those
outcomes. But I'm going to point
you to figure two next and what
this is actually showing you is
proficiency rate trends in
middle school grades. So this is
a
Assessment data from the Nimassa
our big state summit of exam for
um grades 3 through 8 actually,
but this is isolated to students
in just middle school, and this
is showing you achievement
results for school year 22 and
school year 23.
And so we'll start with English
language arts, which is that
light blue line at the very top
there. And what you'll kind of
take is the takeaway from this
so that I want you to take from
the takeaway from this is that
English language arts results
are actually fairly stable
throughout middle school, and
we're not seeing quite as big of
swings in that. And then also
importantly, this shows two
different cohorts of students
since there are two assessment
years here, and we're actually
seeing that statewide trend that
we've talked about with literacy
increasing, also showing up in
middle school. So for example.
All students in grade 6 who
tested in school year 22 had a
33% proficiency rate, but those
um in in school year 23 students
who are in 6th grade, so the
next cohort actually had a
proficiency rate of 37%, so an
increase.
We'll jump down to math next,
which is that red line, and this
is actually kind of the opposite
story. We see that throughout
middle school, students are
decreasing in their math
proficiency, and we're not
seeing that same trend of the
cohorts improving over time. So
let's stick with 6th grade
again. So for example, those
tested in school year 22 at
grade 6 or at 33% proficiency,
but the next cohort actually
showed a 31% proficiency rate
and so a decline there.
But you'll notice those red
lines also drop as you go
through the middle school
continuum. So they're losing
some of the progress and then
we're also seeing changes in
where students are entering.
The turquoise line, which only
shows up for grade 8, is
science, and we assess the
science in grade 8 only among
these three grades, and so that
one's a little bit more stable.
You can't see a time trend in
this because it's just.
Grade 8, but you'll see that's
fairly steady and as we know,
looking at our our broader
assessment data that lands right
in the middle between English
language arts and math.
So lots of time on that one, but
it sets us up to turn to the
next page, page 5.
And while statewide averages
show one picture of academic
achievement. The task force also
explored academic outcomes in
those various middle school
models offered in New Mexico. So
figure 3 actually has quite a
bit of information for you to
kind of absorb in it. So I'm
just going to highlight some of
the key trends we found and you
may want to spend some time
looking at this one a little bit
more in depth later because what
it does is it breaks down those
9 types of models and shows you
English language arts, math and
science profession.
fici ency rates in those
different types of models. As
you're reading this, it's really
important to pay attention not
just to the model, but to that
in number at the bottom, which
is the count of how many schools
actually fall into that.
So here's the summary of it
though, across all models,
reading proficiency consistently
outpaces math and science, which
is again consistent with
statewide trends in all grades.
Whenever we broke down this
data, the highest reading
proficiency was found in schools
serving kindergarten through 8th
grade students at 53%, which is
much higher than the average,
but if you look at the chart
right next to that, the pre-K
through 8 actually had a 34%, so
that's a pretty big swing with
only one grade difference in
those.
Um, we found that math
proficiency was highest in the
schools serving pre-K through
6th grade schools at 45%, but
note again, that's for 23
schools.
Three of the main trends that we
found beyond kind of that just
overall reading proficiency
being higher or that smaller and
less common school
configurations with those
smallest sample sizes such as
schools serving pre-K through
8th grade. There's 25 of those,
or only 6th grade, 3 of those,
um, show a lot more variability
in their outcomes. And this
trend may suggest that
specialized models may face
unique challenges or that their
programs might be more tailored
and produce very distinct
outcomes. In this case, perhaps
implementing
Really strong literacy that
builds on elementary level
learning that you all as a state
have really invested in.
A second big finding is that the
more common models with the
largest sample sizes such as
that classic 6th through 8th
grade model, which is by far the
largest in here at 109 of those
that we had assessment data for.
Tend to show more balanced but
moderate proficiency levels,
which might suggest more
stability in the results when
there are more data points, aka
students being analyzed.
And the third is that models
that mix school grades with
younger grades show more
variation in their proficiency
levels, and that might be due to
the challenges of addressing the
needs of a broader age range
within one school building.
Turning to page 6.
In summary, these outcomes are
not just about the actual
configuration of grades. It's
actually probably more likely to
be right here at the top of page
6, a combination of structural
factors, instructional focus,
and the challenges inherent to
math and science education that
we're finding both in New Mexico
and nationwide. So in the
discussion of findings, um,
section and I'll just kind of
summarize the key points here on
it, um, national research is not
clear on which one of these
configurations is quote unquote
best. There is
No research that clearly favors
one or the other and you can
find research that actually um
produces conflicting results.
That being said, um, there is
some polling research that shows
that families tend to favor
models that are kindergarten or
pre pre-kindergarten through
grade 8, and there is a widely
held belief that persists that
limiting transitions might be
beneficial for students.
We note here that the outcomes
are probably not related to the
specific grade configuration
that are probably more about
some of the items we have
bulleted in the middle of page 6
for you, just a couple of those,
for example, could be curriculum
and instructional choices, but
also resource allocation,
including funding, teacher
supports, and the actual
demographics of those teachers
and what kind of experience they
have, for example, classroom
materials, um, school climate
and engagement. So there's a lot
of other variables that are
probably producing those
outcomes in middle.
School models than simply what
grades are in a building.
The next outcome that we looked
at is attendance and this is
again not going to be a surprise
to you all. We've looked heavily
at um attendance over the last
couple of years as a committee,
but chronic absence rates, if
you look at figure 4, do
increase across the middle
school continuum. You can see
for fiscal year 23, uh, grade 6
students had a 34.7% chronic
absence rate, but by 8th grade
that was 40.7%, so increasing
and this rising absenteeism is
students progress may
So lend itself to those lowering
achievement levels that are seen
across middle school.
We'll switch now to page 7 and
just a brief note, um, the task
force, again, we looked at
available data achievement and
attendance is two outcomes, but
members of the task force um
recognized that there are a lot
of other variables that would be
interesting to have statewide
data on, and those are things
more around mental health
engagement in school
environments, and social
emotional well-being, and those
would be interesting indicators
to look at. We didn't have
statewide data necessarily
available to do a deep dive into
that, but that's certainly
something the local level could
look at to.
Supplement some of the other
academic and um attendance
findings.
We'll move now to research
question 3 starts here on page
7.
In this one, there's a lot of
content in the report for, so
again, I'll try to focus on the
overarching finding for it, but
do take time to read through
this and then there are several
appendices that we're not going
to cover in depth, but that you
can really see the work of the
committee because this question
asked us to identify the
articulated needs of middle
school students and educators
and determine if middle schools
are aligned to those needs. So
there's a lot of work that the
task force put in to really
elevate student voice and to
hear from middle school
educators.
Directly.
So we explored this question in
numerous ways. Um, the first
usually covered this, we had our
very first task force meeting
virtually. We broke into
breakout groups and we actually
did some pretty in depth, um,
jam board sessions. Um, everyone
who works in schools knows that
tool. Unfortunately, it has
retired. We're all very sad
about it. But um jam board
sessions are great and we
actually then thematically
analyzed all of those. So this
is just a sample of one of
those, but they're actually 9 of
these that we can show you if
you want to take a look at them
to respond to
Various questions.
The second way that we looked at
this is that students
participated in a panel
discussion at the in-person
middle school summit that are
acting director facilitated. It
was a really great and
interesting session. We had 8
students there.
Turning to page 8. Another way
that we investigated this is
that at that same in-person
middle school summit. We
actually asked students and
teachers to identify their quote
unquote dream school, and then
we captured those responses and
again in your appendices you can
actually see um photocopies of
all of those sticky notes if you
want to take a look through
them. There's some really
interesting information in them,
but we did some thematic
analysis on those quote unquote
dream schools to look at the
gaps between what folks said
they would really like to.
and what they're actually
experiencing.
So, moving to page 8, this is
first what you're going to see
is a summary of student needs as
identified by adult members of
the working group.
And again, I won't list all of
these to you, but in summary,
through those breakout groups,
we identified 7 major themes
that adults felt were unique
about middle school, and those
are listed here on page 8 and
into page 9.
Figure 6 here shows you how much
consensus there was among group
members about those seven
themes. So for example, one of
the major themes was social
development, and that was
reflected in um members naming
that the need for peer
acceptance really grows, social
pressures really grow, but the
need for emotional intelligence
also grows in some of the ways
that they identified solutions
to that are expanding clubs,
extracurriculars, athletics, and
social relationships. That
network graph will show you
because there's a lot of
overlap in the very middle of
it, that there was a ton of
consensus between the three
different groups. So there's 3
layers to this. Each of those
reflects one of those breakout
groups. There were some that
were a little bit different, so
taskforce Group one, for
example, is the one in red, and
you can see the web actually
pulls out to the margins a
little bit more for that group,
so they talked a little bit more
about things like academic
needs, but there was a lot of
consensus anywhere you see all
three kind of corners
overlapping, um, in the items
such as mental and emotional
support
That'll show you that that's
really what folks coalesced
around.
Moving to page 9.
This is where we're actually
going to show you what students
said, so we asked adults and
then um there's some student
voice in this, and again 8
students joined our task force
meeting whenever we were at our
full day in-person summit in
September, along with their
parents, of course, and um one
of the biggest findings that we
write here is that students
overwhelmingly overwhelmingly
reported school safety as their
major concern.
School safety actually became
the one item that had consensus
across all 8 students for its
importance to them. And they
told this to us in ways like
saying I'm, I'm fearful about
something bad happening, but
they also talked about bullying,
um, among peers as being a
reason they don't feel safe at
school.
They also talked about school
violence sometimes, such as
fights in hallways or bathrooms,
vaping at school and wanting
things like more close friends
and more desire for close
relationships with their
teachers to feel safer.
Figure 7 here is a word cloud of
other items that they told us
would be part of their dream
school and again you can see all
of those Post-it notes and um
it's actually appendix C, but we
consolidated them here for you,
and you'll see that there's um a
lot of practical things in this
list as well as some other
things that are more about like
emotional well-being, but for
example, they asked for
comfortable chairs. They asked
for a garden. They asked for
their schools to be more bright
with windows, like the kind of
room we're in right now.
They asked for it to smell clean
and fresh, um, to not be too hot
or cold, um, to have some
friendly classmates.
But you'll also notice other
things in this word cloud. They
asked, for example, for their
teachers to connect with
students on a personal level
more. They asked for more art
and music programs and also
electives, um, and they asked
for some other loftier things
like one of the the responses
was I just want a teacher who
really believes in me.
So, those were our student
needs, um, that were identified
there.
Getting to the bottom of page 9,
the task force overall whenever
we looked at what adults said
and what students said, they
found that many ideas about
middle school reform are very
well acknowledged in both
research and practical
understanding of what should be
happening in classrooms.
Despite knowing what
transformation could and should
look like, however, members of
the task force noted a
disconnect between the ideal and
the reality of what their
schools actually look and feel
like.
Um, I do, uh, their summary
point was that they still they
still feel like their middle
schools today don't reflect what
they actually want. Students
reported feeling overwhelmed by
academic and social pressures
feeling really rushed in the
school day to complete their
work and feeling like they
didn't have access to learning
opportunities outside of core
academic subjects.
Educators have a strong sense of
all of the research around
middle school because as members
of the group know, and I know
members, um, um, who are on our
uh LASD committee attended. Um,
there's a lot of decades of
research that actually identify
things like advisory periods or
interdisciplinary learning, for
example, is middle school best
practices, and educators who are
part of our group absolutely
knew about that and they
expressed a lot of interest in a
desire to collaborate and offer
more interdisciplinary learning,
but said that systemic barriers
such as
rigid instructional time
requirements, overwhelming
administrative duties and
insufficient planning time make
it nearly impossible to
implement these practices. On
page 9, we do highlight some
bright spots, for example,
Clovis has experimented with a
6th grade academy that's really
kind of been community driven.
It's what their families have
asked for and even then they've
still had to be really creative
and staffing, so there's room
for innovation, but it really
takes a lot of thoughtful
strategic planning at the LEA
level.
We'll move to page 10 next.
And this is where we're going to
get to the very last research
question which asked us and the
task force us meeting staff, to
determine a plausible statewide
policy approach to support
middle school students and to
identify specifically the
legislature's role in this.
Figure 8 here is a systems map
for you all to consider. I'll
draw out just a couple of these,
um, but the takeaway here is
that a comprehensive policy
framework to transform middle
schools really does require the
collaboration of all
stakeholders and coordinated
efforts across each of these
entities, um, to drive
meaningful, lasting change. So
the legislature, for example,
you see, um, we write holds a
primary role in ensuring
sustainable funding models,
adequate facilities and
transportation and leading the
state and signaling the
need for middle school reform,
which arguably um you all have
done with House Memorial for and
kind of asking us to study this.
But there are other items here
too, for example, students and
families are key in this entire
system and one of the items all
dry draw out here in particular
that students reported to us,
um, but that school leaders also
reported to us is that parents
um may tend to disengage a
little bit in the middle school
years as their kids are getting
older, but students said they
very, very much still want their
parents involved and.
Schools could do a job to engage
them a little bit more clearly
in ways that we do a lot in
elementary level and kind of
begin to drop off from our
design, but parent involvement
really still mattered a lot to
our students.
Moving to page 11, um, this, I
won't spend too much time on the
heat heat map, but these are
some of the key ideas that
you'll see in research listed on
the left there, and again,
that's things like advisory
models or um interdisciplinary
teaching and learning, and it
shows the levels of emphasis and
breakout groups and so where
there's darker turquoise, that's
where there was most emphasis
and where there's lighter, the
lighter blue, that's where there
was maybe less kind of consensus
on those, but we'll close with
recommend
and mechanisms, and we have
these organized as we often do
for you all, um by the
legislative branch by um the
public education department and
then finally by school districts
and charter schools and for the
legislature, we have 5
considerations for you all.
The first is that you could all
consider.
Adding 6th grade to the
secondary basic program unit
factor in the state equalization
guarantee. You're also going to
hear more about the state
equalization guarantee our
public school funding formula
later today, but the summary of
this one is that currently,
students in grades 4 through 6
have a cough, have a cost
differential factor of 1.045 in
the SCG while students in grades
7 through 12 have a cost
differential factor of 1.25. The
specific grades that fall into
Each of those factors were last
adjusted in 1974 whenever the
SCG was established at a time
whenever junior highs were much
more common and there was a
clearer divide between 6th and
7th grade.
Now, however, our dominant model
places 6th, 7th, and 8th graders
in the same environment, but
those 6th grade students do
generate less funding than
students in 7th and 8th grade.
So it's one potential
consideration. Another potential
consideration is that you all
could consider expanding CTE
career and technical education
funding to middle grades. That's
been a large focus of you all as
a legislative body is to invest
in those programs at the high
school level, you all
appropriated a total of 45.
$1 million for that last year is
closed today.
Do not go to the Blue Door cafe.
Um, and that could potentially
allow for some more hands-on
practical learning that students
are asking for, of course, CTE
can be age appropriate in
different levels, so it's more
about career exploration and
hands-on learning in middle
grades as a best practice, but
that would feed into that CTE
continuumlet of it.
That would feed into that CTE
continuum that you all have
invested in in high school.
Turning to page 12, the third um
consideration that we have for
you all is to continue strong
funding for attendance, social
and emotional learning, math.
And mental and behavioral health
supports that you all have
already signaled as investments,
but that would especially be
given the academic and social
outcomes seen among middle
school students and that funding
could potentially be driven a
little bit more explicitly to
middle school levels, but you
all have invested in all of
those items already.
The 4th is considering requiring
a middle school specific
educator and leadership
preparation pathway or
potentially even license as well
as supporting ongoing
professional learning. Many
educators noted that they hadn't
actually received specific
training to work with middle
school students even though they
have very distinct, um,
emotional, developmental,
academic needs, and so they did
express that ongoing
professional learning really
matters to them. That's very
tailored for who they're
teaching.
And the last is that you all
could consider defining middle
school and state law.
A definition for middle school
does not currently exist,
although it does exist in
administrative role and junior
high is defined. And so this
might actually be considered a
little bit more technical
cleanup since the term is used
throughout the entire public
school code, but it could allow
for potentially clear and
uniform guidelines on middle
school structures and a legal
definition could potentially
empower school districts and
charter schools to adopt best
practices that are more
explicitly named for middle
school.
For the public education
department, we offer 3 potential
recommendations. The first is to
consider offering greater
technical assistance in learning
for middle school educators.
This is again very similar to
what we noted above, which is
that many middle school
educators feel like they're not
getting the actual content they
need to know what to do.
Um, they could also consider
directing targeted allocation of
funding, for example, the
attendance in math
appropriations that you all, um,
attendance, for example, you all
appropriated $5000 for last year
and some of that could be
channeled specifically to middle
school environments.
Um, they could also help to
create structures that share
those best practices in middle
school statewide. One
interesting part of the task
force is that many of those
educators said this is the first
time they've ever felt they had
a dedicated space to learn what
other districts are doing, for
example. So learning from one
another is really powerful, but
it does take formal structures
for that to occur.
And then we have 4
recommendations for school
districts and charter schools.
First is that you all could
consider forming learning
communities to again also play a
role in sharing those, um,
resources, ideas, and leadership
practices, um, we are always
talking about data here at the
LESC and we would encourage
school districts and charter
schools to really look at their
data in a disaggregated way
across different grade levels
because what a 6th grader might
need for math looks very
different than what an 8th
grader might need for reading
support, for example, so it
matters across student grade and
identity, but also subjects.
Um, the third is that talking
with students and families to
really authentically engage them
in redesigning middle school
efforts is another role that our
school districts and charter
schools could play a role in.
And then lastly, um, they could
potentially leverage some of the
changes that happened in House
Bill 171, which changed high
school graduation requirements,
and yes, I know we're talking
about middle school, but one of
the requirements, for example,
actually two of the
requirements, for example, in
there, um, one is you have to
develop a graduate profile, and
ideally those are done in
partnership with your
communities, with your families,
with your students, that process
in and of itself could be used
to also inform middle school
redesign while you're using it
to develop your grad profile.
Another one is that the law
itself strengthens the next step
plan process, which is an
advising document that all of
our students are required to
develop and that actually begins
in 8th grade. So that is a
middle school mechanism that was
bolstered in the graduation
requirements and that could be
looked at as well.
So with that, um, I will pass it
to Yu Shui, and then we'll close
with Superintendent Hawkins.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee. So this past summer,
I was an intern for the LESC. I
got to work with Jess on this
project. However, on top of
that, I created my own internal
report for the LESE focusing on
a student-centered analysis of
middle school and the student
experience within our New Mexico
schools. And so I would like to
supplement some of the things
that Jess has said with both my
own experience as a student and
the data that I found in that
report. So I'd like to start by
asking you to turn to page 8 of
your report.
And so middle school has been
identified as having critical
transitionary periods embedded
into the student experience and
as Jess talked about, this is
something that could be limited
in order to benefit students and
the student experience. So
breaking this transitionary
period into both the transition
into middle school they come to
the office.
And the transition and the
transition into high school. So
starting with the transition
into middle school, what makes
this such an abrupt change for
A lot of students is the fact
that it's a combination of a lot
of factors changing at once. And
I'm going to give you just a
handful broken into 3 main
groups here. So starting with
changes getting to school.
There's transportation habits
that are paired with starting a
new school that include things
like new bus schedules, um, and
new routes that affect a
student's morning routine.
Within the Los Alamos Public
school system where I go to
school. Students previously
attended elementary schools in
White Rock, for example,
transition from having about a 3
minute
drive or walking to school to
going on a bus with peers for
about 45 minutes to get to the
only middle school in our
district. And so this is a very
large change that happens very
suddenly and affects students in
how early they have to wake up,
right? Students also have to go
to middle school earlier than
they would high or elementary
school to begin with, which also
affects that routine. The second
group is going to be changes
associated with any new school
experience. New peers as middle
schools usually combine a
variety of elementary schools
into one building. You have the
splitting up from familiar faces
as larger schools divide
students into different groups
and you have new class schedules
where a lot of these middle
school students may be
experiencing having
individualized class schedules
for the first time.
Lastly, you have new sets of
expectations as students get
older, grades start to matter
more and there's greater
expectation for self-reliance,
independence, self-advocacy, and
responsibility. Of course, these
changes are difficult for
individuals at any stage in
life. However, this is
particularly influential because
one, this is the first time that
many of these students are
experiencing such a change in
their daily routine, and 2,
these social and structural
changes happen alongside key
physical, mental and emotional
development in these.
Adolescence.
Then the transition into high
school, particularly for middle
schools that have 6 through 8
and 7 to 8 models comes very
shortly after students have
adapted to their middle school
environment. This creates
another jarring change as they
transition into yet another
school system with more peers,
greater expectations, and even
greater academic pressure.
I'd like to touch now on mental
health. Students are in need of
very strong developmental social
and emotional support. At the
bottom of page 9 of your brief,
you see this validated, as Jess
said, by students reporting,
feeling overwhelmed by academic
and social pressures. In
addition, you see at the bottom
of page 7 that data from the
2021 New Mexico Middle School
Youth Risk Behavior survey
indicates that 28.4% of our
middle school students struggle
with mental health, with with
these percentages increasing.
With older grade levels. This
emphasizes the importance of
having adequately implemented
mental health resources through
schools. Another need identified
in figure 5 is the connection to
adults outside of their family
unit and creating means for
students to find support through
school staff can help facilitate
this development while also
meeting students' mental and
emotional needs.
While it is acknowledged that
larger changes, as we said, may
be technically infeasible. It is
also valuable to emphasize that
there are existing models that
can be worked upon within these
middle schools. Suendent
Hawkins, for example, mentioned
in his report on the Silver City
Consolidated School District
that there were efforts to
develop mental health within
many schools, within my own
school district, school
counselors are provided in order
to help students with their
mental health. However, I'd like
to note that the presence of
school counselors alone is not
enough to have students.
Feel heard and seen. A common
sentiment felt by students
within my own middle school was
a disconnect from school
counselors because there wasn't
extra steps taken to ensure that
there was a connection with
them.
So, for example, many students,
myself included, had not met the
student, the school counselors
at their school that were
supposed to be helping them with
their mental health. This was
because many students would have
to go to the office and ask for
a meeting with their counselors,
and this extra step can create a
barrier for these students to
actually receive the support
they need, because having to
walk yourself to the office in
the middle of the day and ask to
see a counselor can feel very
reserved for extreme
circumstances instead of just
needing.
Someone to talk to or just
support throughout your day.
As a final point, I'd like to
emphasize the need for mental
health, particularly for our
students outside of the regular
academic track, whether that be
students that need extra support
in their regular classes or
students that are on advanced
math and English tracks.
So just touched on proficiency
rates on both pages 4 through 6
of the brief, and it is
important to acknowledge that
these rates are ranging from
about 18 to 53% in figure 3.
This indicates a struggle with
academic content in our schools,
and the stress to keep up with
mastering material in class adds
to mental health struggles for
students. However, as a student
that was enrolled in advanced
classes within middle school,
I'd like to speak on the other
side of this spectrum. The added
struggles that are experienced
by many students that are
impressed with the
expectation of performing at
higher levels. In the 7th grade,
I was placed in my school's
advanced math track. I was
taking algebra One, earning high
school credit within my first
year of middle school. I'm
thankful for this opportunity
and thankful for the teachers
that pushed me, but it is
undeniable that this expectation
to perform at a high school
level when just reaching middle
school, added stress to added
workload and impacted my
enjoyment of this key
developmental year for me.
So not only was I under the
expectation of learning higher
level material, but I was under
the stress of adapting to high
school workloads that require
discipline study habits that
many students that are just now
entering 7th grade have not had
the opportunity to develop yet.
I believe that greater support
to address the needs of students
like myself could have helped my
class develop the skills
necessary to balance this class
along with their cognitive and
emotional needs.
Uh, lastly, I'd like to touch on
something that Mr. Hawkins
talked about earlier, and that's
the mentorship of younger
students, uh, through these
middle school transitionary
period. So within the elementary
school that I was in, which is
Chamisa Elementary, we had
something called 6th grade
buddies. So the kindergarteners
would get paired with 6th grade
students. They would meet once a
week, and together they would
form a bond that then lasts
until they graduate high school.
This year, as in my senior year,
when before I go and walk the
stage, I will be walking through
my
Elementary school and meeting
with the buddy that I met when I
was in both kindergarten and
when I was in 6th grade. And so
this creates the sense of
community throughout elementary
to high school. That to me has
been very, very impactful.
However, there is not a follow
up with this program within my
middle school in Los Alamos. So
even though the 1st and 6th
graders are all very well
connected and you reconnect when
you're in high school. You do
not get to have any kind of
interaction with
In that middle school years, um,
and see what's happening with
these buddies, regardless of
whether that's the
kindergarteners that are now in
4th grade, or the high schoolers
that have graduated.
And so adding a greater
connection here can also help
foster mental health support
while also creating the kind of
community that so many of these
students have indicated within
the figures in the study that
they are craving within their
schools.
So lastly, just to finish this
off, um, I really want to give
some thank yous to the LESC.
Throughout the summer, I've
gotten to witness the passion
and the dedication that all the
members on this committee hold
and all the data analysts really
displayed through all the work
that they do every day. So, in
the supporting of House Memorial
4 on this particular project,
it's proven enough of the
dedication and the attention
that you're giving our students.
So I'm deeply appreciative of
this opportunity to come talk to
you, to work with you throughout
the summer, and I really.
Thank you for your time.
Can I just say you know?
Can be done. Well done. Thank
you.
Our experiences here at Silver
Consolidated Schools align well
with the comprehensive review of
the middle school matters study.
I can see how the challenges we
face and the proactive measures
we're taking here at Silver
Consolidated Schools kind of
reflect similarly, similarly in
the findings in the
recommendations from this
report, uh, looking at the
unique needs of our middle
school students, teachers, and
administrators at our middle
school, we did observe coming
out of COVID that we saw, um.
A more of an increase in
depression and anxiety and
challenges and a sense of
belonging and self identity
coming out of that, especially
after being in isolation for so
long. This is definitely
consistent with the report
findings. The report emphasizes
the importance of targeted
interventions and addressing
this through and we're
addressing this through the
implementation of the wellness
rooms, but not simply having the
wellness rooms and increasing
the um service providers, you
know, we added social workers in
all of our campuses.
For our social workers that we
had and counselors, typically
we're targeted towards our
special needs students, right,
as far as uh case load by adding
an independent social worker in
each of our account campuses,
that person was available for
all students and then putting in
policies that would allow the
students when in need to are in
crisis or whatever circumstances
may be to be able to leave and
go straight to the wellness room
and seek the counseling and
support that they need in that
time that is, that speaks to.
Some of the comments you were
making regarding the barriers
that some students uh encounter
when having to go to the office
and hope that a guidance counsel
is available. So in most of our
campuses, you're going to find
that you have a counselor, a, a
social worker who is dedicated
for our special needs, but for
all students, and an additional
social worker that is strictly
there for those moments of
crises or needs, not just for
our students, but also for our
staff as well.
We also have SCL check-ins and
we also provide social supports
through the, I'm gonna, I'm not
gonna get this right, but if you
look around the room, you're
gonna see a poster about a
llama, right,
and this
Alongside Lama, and this is
similar to Kolli, which is an AI
resource that allows students
whether it's in the middle of
3rd period or for it's after
school or whenever they need
that resource and they're having
a moment of crisis or need some
assistance to log in, get that
feedback. I, I, uh, that
assistance, that guidance, that
support, and then connection.
And so it's another way to meet
those immediate needs
Our teachers also face um
likewise a line.
With your report, um,
professional development needs,
right, additional supports and
how that they can identify this
and making sure that they have
dedicated time, um, professional
learning, uh, community
opportunity. It's important that
we have legislation that exists
that does not restrict that
time. One of the issues that the
superintendents and the state
education focused in on this
past year was the belief that
when they made adjustments to
the 180 day calendar that it was
taking dedicated PLC time out of
the schedule. This
Conflicts with what we saw in
this report that says it's
important to teachers to have
that additional time for
professional development.
Likewise, our administrators
want to continue to have that
PLC time and professional
development time amongst peers
of peers in their group. So
providing opportunities for um
middle school, junior high, uh,
administrators to get together
and collaborate, not just in the
high school group or in the the
elementary group, I think would
be ideal for them to also
likewise uh celebrate and share
best practices.
Looking at the structure of the
middle school and their the
ability to serve needs, you
know, in silver, we are offering
CTE classes, business career
readiness, access to the high
school for auto tech uh here and
providing opportunities for
those students to broaden and
see the opportunities they have
before them. Um, again, that
aligns well with the report that
we saw. We want to continue to
look at ways in which we can
embed those opportunities of
transition for careers and
electives at the middle school,
uh.
Adressing the factor the way you
spoke about will definitely um
look to increase funds.
Now in silver, we are one of the
28 school districts to have a 78
combination and not a 678,
right? And so it may not
directly send funds to the 7-A
campus, but by including those
sixth grade students into that
number as we're looking at
reconfiguring and right sizing
that gives us another avenue to
look at when it comes to
addressing our capacity needs,
um, there are barriers to the
middle school structure.
That we're addressing also with
the implementation of the house
system, right? And you talked a
lot about that sense of
belonging and that connectedness
and that mentorship, um, in this
first year that we're doing
this, we're hoping to see that
experience and that mentorship,
that sense of belonging, um,
really address some of the needs
of some of the issues we've seen
in bullying, some of the issues
we've seen and the need for
mentorship and leadership
development, um, and school
belonging as well, um, finally,
I would just
like to add that at our middle
school in La Plata on top of
these issues. They're also
looking at restorative justice
practices to address uh
classroom management and
disruptions and, and helping
students to reflect and identify
their issues that they may
encounter uh when they get sent
to the office and what they can
do to be put back uh into a
space where they're ready to
learn,
right, understand the impact of
their behaviors and grow from
it, right? And so we're seeing
that across the state.
New Mexico, um, more emphasis on
restorative justice practices
and so, um, using the house
system aligned with that, um,
we're seeing more of that, um,
self growth in our, in our
middle schools. I really did
appreciate looking, uh, reading
through this final version of
the study, as well as
participating given our voice. I
reached out to our principal,
um, and shared the resource with
her to get some feedback as
well, so I'm appreciative of
Star Cruise and her team for
sharing their insights with me
so that I
I can share it with you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um, I
just want to briefly
acknowledge, Michael Rodriguez
was one of the members of our
task force and is here executive
director of dual Language
Education of New Mexico, so, so
I'm out of the corner of my eye.
I just wanted to say thank you.
With that, we're happy to stand
for questions.
All right, members, questions.
Rear.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and um
thank you so much. And I, is it
Us, how do you say your name?
Um, it's Uhu
Ushu, OK, because I think
Chinese I I go the wrong way, it
would be great if you could.
Um, type up your report.
And share it. I think it's um.
You
The fact that you brought your
personal experiences. I think
everybody who worked on the task
force went back.
And thought and and this.
How we translate this into
legislation and policy because a
lot of it is superintendent
Hawkins has pointed out is a
district and school.
Policy and discussion and it
doesn't come from any
legislation or mandate. It comes
from good educational practice,
but um I do think.
Um,
On what the legislators should
address is adding 6th grade to
secondary basic program because
even if they're 6th graders in
K6 as Us pointed out, um,
there's such a huge transition
and I, you know, whether it's
sexuality classes or or or how
do you study independently
there's needs there that do
involve funding and then the
other thing, um.
I think we need to take a hard
look at is the middle school
specific educator and leadership
preparation. I'm K8 certified.
Um,
And I taught both middle school
and elementary school, but my
elementary school, of course,
was early childhood education
psychology.
And that's very, very different
as all three of you have pointed
out in the task force pointing
out that's very different than
middle school. My worst
experience as a middle school
student was making fun of my
locker partner in 7th grade. It
was a middle school model and
myself and another young man,
uh, pretended that he was in
love with her. So it's called
into the principal's office and
the principal, the vice
principal of women, I can still
see her face. She told
misunderstood. I was actually a
very horrible person who made
fun of someone. She thought I
was making fun of young love. I
was actually making fun of the
root of somebody's being. And so
I think a teachers and
administrators.
Need to get the specialized
review, not just that comes from
experience or expertise, but
from intentional training and
discussion.
So, um.
I really like what the
legislative uh recommendations
came out of.
Um,
The PLC thing is a big issue.
Because schools at all grade
levels that.
The educator interaction where
the ahas and the time within the
duty day, I can't say that
enough. House Bill 130 within
the duty day where you're really
addressing these things
intentionally. So thank you,
Superintendent for sharing that.
Um,
Because the school districts and
charter schools, a lot of it is
a choice, but you have to have
the time to implement it and
then the other issue I think we
need to look at is next step
plans, um, as the 8th grade
teacher, it's almost too late
when I taught in South Korea,
middle school students started
next step plans, their, their
system was 7th, 8th, and 9th
grade. They started in 7th
grade, their first year of
middle school, parents were
involved, students were
involved, and
Student advisors, uh, the
teachers were involved, so I
think we do need to look at next
steps starting earlier.
Um, because I, I always remember
councilors coming into the 8th
grade classes, you know, with
these high school manuals and,
and it was like all of a sudden
you're deciding something.
That you're gonna do in a couple
of months and it's almost too
late, so I just, um.
have so much respect for how
this um
Memorial that uh Representative
Grola represented B and myself
did.
It, it's very inspiring to see
how all the voices were brought
together.
All this enormous amount of data
from students, educators,
interested people,
administrators was put together
and came out with.
A kind of a concrete map of
where we can go, so I, I want to
thank each of you for your
participation and everybody
who's here that participated,
um, just very, very grateful and
I hope we can really move
forward on this. Thank you.
Go.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. She
and I, I just wanna join to
representative right here.
about thanking you for, uh, for
putting this organizing this
report and work um task force
and all the participants, all
the students and families who
took part of this, uh,
it, it was not easy. They had to
take a day out of school and of
their work too to be with their
kids in the in Santa Fe. So
thank you everybody who
participates uh um.
I want to also thank you um Uswe
Uwe for your for uh for your um
report, and I agree with uh R
Garrett to if you could share it
with us. Um, one of the things
that I felt when we were doing
this that it was, I wanted to
hear more about it. It was a
transition to high school. Uh,
we had a bunch of transitions to
middle school from elementary
kids and what it is to
transition to middle school, but
I, um, I was, I'm really
interested to know in high
school.
What how can we support the
students? Um, I was a grade
teacher for a long, long time,
and I know my colleagues in high
school keep telling us our
students are not prepared, not
so much academically but for the
system, and you mentioned that,
I mean, not just the buses, but
the locker rooms sometimes about
you have to choose your own
classes. You are the ones, um,
you have that support system in
the in the same way.
So uh it was really nice to hear
your perspective. So, but I
really would love to see how can
we help to transition to high
school.
Um,
One thing that um superintendent
Hawkins mentioned when in, in,
in the first presentation and
it's something that is
repetitive here is about the
mental health support.
Um, I think that's over and
over, uh, we hear it and anyone
who has been in a school in the
classroom knows that many of the
things that we talk to the
students on daily basis is not
about academic. Um, I keep
saying this all the time, every
time that a student told me, can
I talk to you outside, Ms.
Grola? I start praying so I know
it was not about math. Um, and
that report that the students
are asking to have with their
teachers is about this, and
teachers are completely
overwhelmed with everything that
has to be happening.
in the classroom and doing the
classroom that is we need a
support system for the teachers.
And so that support system has
to be translated to the
students, obviously, but um just
one counselor for 500 kids
sometimes.
It's just no, there is no way. I
mean, there is no way, uh, so
the teachers are the first
responder, that the first person
to respond to some crisis in the
classroom, so yeah, thank you so
much, um.
I just want to say thank you,
but yeah, Madam Representative,
I just wanted to add and thank
you for that comment, because we
do have approximately a 1 to 86
to 1 to almost 1 to 90 ratio
when it comes to counseling,
social worker, but that's
largely in part of the grant
that we received, the $6.5
million grant without that grant
our, our 1 to 1 ratios would be
significantly higher and so as
the legislature looks at what is
essential for schools at every
level whether it be elementary,
middle school, or high high
school.
It's important that we identify
what is it that every school
regardless of your size and
location, whether you're in
Wagon Mound, silver, or if
you're in uh Lee County or if
you're in Hiberno Leo, what do
we want to make sure we
essentially fund so that every
school can have X resource,
whether it's a nurse, X amount
of social workers or counselor
counselors per student. I think
those are elements that can
really be identified. We talk
about what every student
deserves. We talk about that
oftentimes with
Construction, but I do think
it's important when you look at
the SCG and look at how you're
building that, what does every
student deserve to have, and
then how do we fund it to make
sure that that can happen.
Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chef.
Represent like
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for the presentation, uh, my
question was similar along those
lines of uh for Sutent Hawkins,
um, my question is, is you
mentioned social workers and the
role that they play in this. And
so,
I wanted to ask about the, the,
the process of finding those
social workers and whether the
salary that the school district
could offer was competitive with
what they can get in the private
market.
Mr. Mr. Representative, I would
say that.
I would say, I think it's
commiserate, um, it's similar to
what you would find in your
school nursing situation because
of the opportunities that come
with the scheduling and school
opportunities. I think our
salaries are comparable to to a
large extent. Um, you're gonna
have to get pretty creative. One
of the things that we were able
to do was we worked with Western
New Mexico University and we we
were because of location and
convenience, you know, we built
a pathway of grow your own with
their interns and so we
supported one another, them in
educating and providing
opportunities.
These to put practice into
action in in the school system
and developing and working
towards that degree and likewise
that receiving the benefits of
having those skilled
individuals. We have one at our
middle school right now. He is
amazing. He's a part of our
staff, you know, and he not only
is he the social worker that we
hired through this program, but
he's also now a coach and he's
also become a part of our school
system and that's ultimately
what you would want to your
point, we have the benefit of
location, right? And so because
we have a university here.
Um, we have the access and
opportunities to take advantage
of that. If you're in Wagon
Mound or if you're in towels or
hotels perhaps, but if you're in
some of the locations that may
be more difficult, which means
you will have to see.
Make decisions and policy as it
relates to leveraging dollars to
make those opportunities of
attractive for social workers
from some of your larger
metropolitan areas. Um, but
again, it comes down to
partnerships.
Thank, thank you for that. Thank
you, Mr.
Chair, the, the, one of the
reasons I was asking was because
in the past we've looked at uh
possibly uh creating a tier
system for those uh support
employees. Uh, so the, the idea
of that is being, being
competitive, maintaining the,
the the the availability of of
qualified personnel because as
we know, much like teachers, uh,
Mr. Chair, social workers are
really hard to come by.
You know, there's not a lot of
them out there and so they
pretty much have a choice of
where they can go and, uh, you
know, honestly, you know, they,
they provided an essential
service to our communities in
general.
But I'd just like to emphasize
and uh or or uh talk about the
importance of the social workers
and the roles that they play in
this whole process. And I'm, I'm
glad that you're very fortunate
that you have a partnership with
Western that that you can that
you can grow your own and do
that here, but in, in larger
areas such as the where I come
from down in southern Donana
County, we have to compete not
only with larger areas in Las
Cruces, but we also could
compete with uh our friends are
and neighbors in Texas as well.
So there's, there's a, there's a
lot of, there's a demand for
For that type of work and I was
just curious as how, how, as to
how, how you approached it and
how it worked here for your
school district.
I, I would, I would only add
that if you look at a tiered
system, which I don't know that
where my thought process lies on
that. I would only add that if
you're looking at the TCI index
or looking how you're going to
fund those types of if you're
getting creative in it, I would
be cautious because once again,
oftentimes what happens is that
money gets diffused down and it
and and so the bulk of the
additional costs in that tier
system doesn't always translate
to direct dollars to go back to
them, but ends up coming out of
the operational dollars. It's a
well-intentioned.
Idea, but I would be cautious at
looking at creating a new tier
system that isn't fully funded,
um, and doesn't take that into
account, not opposed to it, but
I, I could see where we would
get stuck in the same situation
we were in with the three-tiered
licensure system.
Thank you for that. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. You're, I, I value
your, your expertise on this.
Thank you.
Other questions for members. All
right, um.
I did have one question. Um, I
see it.
Reflected in the report a bit
around 6th grade and kind of
learning cohorts, but I was
wondering if there was
discussion amongst students or
any of the members around um
that transition.
Obviously, the transition, but
more having.
More teachers, um, as a part of
their middle school experience,
um, as opposed to, you know, an
elementary school, you have the
one teacher primarily that sees
them for the entire length of
that grade that gets to know
them, um, sees them every day as
opposed to middle school when
you start having 567 different
teachers if there is any
discussion around that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, there
was discussion around that and
um students did report that it
can be kind of disorienting to
going from having one adult that
they really know to go to to
having potentially 6 or 7
teachers and so a couple of
ideas that came up around that,
um, advisory periods could
potentially be leveraged as at
least a consistent presence and
helping them to navigate all of
those. But we also, for example,
we talked about this in the
report a little bit. We heard
about Clovis, who has chosen to
actually put students into
Smaller communities to actually
give them more like 3 to 4
teachers to get to know as a
transitory year rather than
throwing them into that system
where they may have several
teachers at once, but it
absolutely did come up and um it
can be very hard for them, they
reported because they just don't
know those teachers and
sometimes you only form a
connection with one of them and
you might only see them for 40
minutes a day.
If I may, Mr. Chair, um, back
when I was in middle school and
it's been a couple of years and
things have changed in the Los
Amos Public School District
since then, but I did have 7
teachers a day, uh, from, you
know, having one to now having 7
at the middle school level, and
it is very disorienting as Jess
said, um, mostly because of how
little time you spend in each
classroom. So my classes were 45
minutes and then 5 minutes
transition and then 45 minutes,
etc.
etc. and you really don't get to
form a bond with your teachers.
Now my school did have a home
room of sorts, uh, that we would
report to at the end of each
day, and I would definitely
feeling a lot more connection
with that teacher because you
did get that little extra time
with them.
Since then, because of the
reports from students and I'm
sure other factors that system
has changed in my middle school
to now reflect the high school
system of block scheduling and
it has been reported that
students are feeling a lot
better about it because now you
only have 4 classes a day as
opposed to 7 and when you get to
the end of the day and you have
to do homework for all 7 of
those classes versus just 4. It
makes it a lot less overwhelming
to prepare for all your classes
every day.
And get their feeling ready to
learn.
I would just add, uh, the, the
experiences you've heard are
unique to both Los Alamos and
the Clovis, you know, here in
silver, you know, we have K6 in
our, in our many of our
campuses, their departmentalized
and other times we have
opportunities where students are
able to transition even in 6th
grade, to to their math, their
reading their science and their
social studies. And so I make
the pitch to that conversation
that uniquely the local control
both of the district as well as
the campus administrator to
the needs of the kids to balance
out the environment and the
community, you know, as you're
looking at legislative language,
you want to make sure that it's
not so tight that it takes away
the opportunities for the
district and the, the campus
administrators to uniquely
provide the atmosphere and
opportunities for those schools,
so hats off to Clovis and to Los
Alamos, as well as to the other
districts that uniquely are
finding ways to navigate and
develop those middle school
spaces.
Great. Thank you all for that
and thank you all for the hard
work you all have put into it.
Um, I did want to say that we
have a letter on behalf of the
committee and the staff, um, for
your internship and the
wonderful work that you did on
behalf of, of our committee.
Thank you so much.
Um,
so we're gonna take a picture
right away, but I don't want to
tell members that we'll come
back at one o'clock, um, lunch
is being served, set up in the
back, um, but we'll come back at
one o'clock.
Mr. Chairman, Yu Xi's parents
are here as well, so I just
wanted to also acknowledge them
in this in this process.
recognized. Thank you, Jess.
All right, we'll see you all at
one o'clock.
