When you said that.
All right folks, we'll go ahead
and get started. Good morning. I
hope you all are doing well, um.
Thank you to our student council
for welcoming us at the door,
um, our band, our awesome band,
welcoming us into the building
and then our culinary arts
students for breakfast this
morning. They're super awesome.
So thank you all, um.
Lynn, Tim, good morning. Hope
you all are well. We'll start
off with the um assessment
results for 2024. So please,
yeah, thank you. Good morning,
Mr. Chair. Um, we have got a
review of preliminary assessment
results for you behind tab 8 in
your binder. Um, it'll be a
staff created slide deck that
will run through very quickly
and then I will pass it over to
Lynn, and she will present the
department's analysis of the
preliminary assessment results.
Uh, I wanted to start off this
morning with just a brief review
of assessment policy in New
Mexico. Um, a lot of this will
look familiar to all of you.
It's something that we sort of
start all of our assessment
presentations with, but just
some reminders about what we're
talking about, uh, when we're,
we're talking about assessment
results or um proficiency rates
and in particular this morning
what we're talking about when we
talk about the results as
preliminary assessment results.
So, just as a reminder, uh, the
public education department has
been working over the past few
years.
To create what they're calling a
balanced system of assessments.
Uh, what a balanced system of
assessments is relies on three
types of assessments to gauge
student progress throughout the
year and then at the end of the
year. Uh, so first, you've got
formative assessments, which are
those light blue assessments on
this, this sort of time wheel
that you've got there, which
represents, uh, typical school
year. So those, uh, formative
assessments are happening
constantly. Teachers are using
formative assessment in the
classroom to gauge whether or
not students are picking up the
content that the teachers.
Uh, teaching at that moment.
Interim assessments are used
sporadically throughout the the
school year to check whether or
not the content is resulting in
students being on benchmark or
on target to reach proficiency
by the end of the school year.
Uh, so this is your IMasa or the
interim assessment, uh, the
interim MSSA uh measures of
student success and achievement.
Uh, this is also your NWEA map
assessment. It's the things that
teachers are using to uh your
iStation assessments or interim
assessments, things like that
that are used to
Uh, track whether or not a
student is on target at
beginning of year, middle of
year, end of year.
And then finally, at the end of
the year, you've got what's
called the big summative
assessment, and the summative
assessment, uh, is the Masa or
the measures of student success
and achievement. And in 11th
grade, uh, we use the SAT and
for science, we use the NMASR or
the assessment of Science
readiness.
Uh, so this morning we're
talking primarily about two
assessments that I've
highlighted for you on this
chart, the NM Masa and the SAT,
uh, those two assessments are
delivered at the end of the
school year. Uh, the Masa in
grades 3 through 8 and SAT in
grade 11, uh, for both English
language arts and for math. Uh,
the statewide assessments used
for this purpose are also used
for federal accountability
purposes and it's used to track
the percent, excuse me, the
percent of students who are
reaching.
Proficiency on the state
standards.
Uh, on the next slide on slide
5, you've got sort of a timeline
of the, uh, what happens when
when assessments are taken and
how assessment data becomes
validated. And so when we talk
about these assessments as
preliminary results. Uh, we're
talking about them as results
that have not been validated
yet. Uh, and so what that what
that means is that those
assessments that are taken in
April and May, um, they, they
come to PED as files from the
vendors who give us the
assessment for the masa, it's
cognia.
For the SAT is College Board,
and those vendor files go to PED
and PED begins cleaning them up,
uh, for both use for this
proficiency does set, but also
for uh the identification of our
uh support designations, those
TSI, CSI, and MRI schools. Uh,
so that process of cleaning the
data begins in June, goes
through July, uh, and then by
August or September, uh, PED
will take all of that compiled
vendor vendor data, uh, and send
it out to LEAs and every school
district and charter.
School will have a chance to
review their results and they
can appeal those results if they
don't match what the school
district or charter school sees
on their end. Um, and so that's
where we are in the process
right now. That file has gone
out to school districts, uh,
they're working on the
validation process. School
districts have some time right
now to uh send in their appeals
by October, we're hoping that
the clean and validated data
will be used to calculate those
school support designations.
And LEAs will get another chance
to say, wait, that data doesn't
quite match what we've got and,
and the reason for that is that
the, the school support
designations are based on more
than just proficiency rates,
you've got graduation rates in
there for your high schools. Uh,
you've got measures of school
climate, uh, from the panorama
survey, things like that that
are used to calculate those
designations. It's sort of uh
merging a bunch of data together
to, to create those
designations. Um, but by
November, those uh results
should be finalized and there
should be a new cohort of
TSI CSI and MRI schools.
And so I wanted to give some
context for, uh, presenting the
results and, and sort of why we
chose to present the results
now. Um, last year, if you all
recall, uh, we received the
final data set that was cleaned
up, uh, and we received it on
November 14th. Uh, and that was
uh very late, uh, even, even by
uh national standards to receive
assessment data. Uh, for you
all, the budget had already been
sort of created at that point.
We were debating the merits of
the LES.
versus the LFC budget at that
point. Uh, and it was too late,
uh, for us to do some really
critical analysis on whether the
investments that you had been
making were paying off, uh,
paying dividends and make
recommendations based on, uh,
those assessment results. So we,
we chose to bring a preliminary
assessments data forward to you
today, even though it's not
final and not validated yet,
because it's, we expect that the
general trends at the statewide
level will remain the same, uh,
even though those uh
Validation process will change a
little bit of the minutia and
could make some impacts for
specific schools or specific
small subgroups of students.
Um, ideally, we would have
assessment data ready far, far
before the next school year
begins. Uh, what you've got here
on slide 6 is a sort of a
timeline of when states uh
typically release their
assessment data. So every dot on
this chart is when a state
released their assessment data
in 2022 and in 2023, uh, and you
can see this chart actually
wasn't up to date with New
Mexico's release of November
14th, so I've got that in a line
across the top.
There
But you can see most, most
school districts actually try to
get their assessment results,
uh, results out around that
October time frame, uh, before
October and um currently, you
know, reviewing the preliminary
assessment results right now.
We're doing much better than we
did last year at November 14th,
uh, and typically or
theoretically we want to see
that line come down year after
year so that we have data, uh,
ready to use, um, and give you
all information about your
investments, uh, before you
start crafting the budget. And
here's
Just some quotes that that I
presented to you all last year,
but the, uh,
The impact is the same. Uh, the
reason that we need data quickly
or you all need data quickly so
that you can make a timely
decision. You, you are not the
only ones that use assessment
data. Families need assessment
data, uh, to make informed
decisions about their students'
educational journeys. Uh, so if
a, uh, parent is deciding what
school they want to send their
child to. They can use that
assessment data to make that
decision. Community partners who
are who are out there in the
field doing the work, uh, they
need that data as well to
understand if they're
investments are paying dividends
and you all need the data to
understand whether or not you
are having an impact on
long-term goals.
All right. Without further ado,
we will jump into the
preliminary assessment results.
So on slide 9, you've got a
picture of the statewide
proficiency rate in both ELA and
math. Uh, so, uh, once again,
you'll recall that before the
pandemic, we used a different
assessment, the PA assessment,
uh, and you'll see that
proficiency rates uh in English
were on a strong 3-year trend,
and then the pandemic happened,
math was sort of flat at 20%
proficient. Uh, during the
pandemic, the department
actually switched to a new
assessment, the MASA, uh, and
those assessment results are
Not perfectly comparable with
the park, uh, when you're
looking at this, you sort of
have to look at it as before the
pandemic and after the pandemic.
And so coming straight out of
the pandemic, we had a new
baseline, uh, 34% proficient in,
uh, school year 22 in English,
and 25% proficient in math.
Uh, in school year 24, the based
on the preliminary assessment
data, we see the 38% proficient
in English and 22% proficient in
math. So holding steady in
English compared with the
previous school year and uh
slight decline in math compared
with the previous school year.
If you get a little bit more
granular on that, uh, this is
the proficiency rate trends by
student subgroup race and
ethnicity. So what we've got
here, uh, consider each of these
uh set of lines as that 3 year
trend. So school year 22, school
year 23, school year 24 for that
particular subgroup. And we can
walk through a few of these
together so we can see, uh, how
each subgroup is performing. You
can, you can see sort of a
slight decline for Asian
students.
Caucasian students, uh,
reverting a little bit towards
their, uh, school year 22
results, uh, down from SY 23.
Uh, multi-race students are
slightly down in English, uh,
and have a strong decline in
math from 41% proficient down to
31% proficient this year.
Pacific Island students are up
in English, uh, from 44%, uh
proficient last year to 50%
proficient last year and are
holding flat at math, uh, down
slightly from 36 to 34%
proficient.
Hispanic students are showing a
strong 3-year trend upward in
English, uh, 29% to 34%, 35%,
and black students at 32%, 35%,
37%. And finally, Native
American students in English are
showing a strong 3-year trend
upward from 17% proficient to
22% proficient to 24% proficient
in this previous year.
And math, the story is very
different, uh, and I, as, as I'm
sure you're all aware, uh, our
math scores are declining
statewide. Almost every subgroup
is showing a decline in math,
uh, except for Native American
students who are holding flat at
12% proficient.
And here's how that plays out if
you look at, uh, what we have
termed the achievement gap.
So this chart shows you, uh, and
we've we've, we put together
this chart for you every single
year, uh, showing you the
difference between economically
disadvantaged students and
non-economically disadvantaged
students.
And so in English, you can see
that while non-economically
disadvantaged students show a
slight decline in proficiency
from 48% proficient to 43%
proficient, uh, economically
disadvantaged students are
showing a strong 3-year trend
upward, uh, 22% to 26% to 31%
proficient.
And that achievement gap closed
from 22% points down to 12%
points, driven mostly by that
decline, uh, from non
non-economically disadvantaged
students. In the same trend
holds true for math, uh, where
there's a slight upward trend
for economically disadvantaged
students and a slight downward
trend for non-economically
disadvantaged students that
close the achievement gap from
18% points to 10% points.
And so here's our analysis of
why that might be happening. Um,
we, we spent some time thinking
about, you know, what could be
driving that. Uh, the, the
leading theory that I've got
right now is that there there
are some strong societal
challenges that are pushing
achievement down for all
students. And you heard a lot
about that yesterday in our our
attendance presentation. Um,
students are, are dealing with
mental health crises. Uh,
there's a strong feeling of
disengagement and absenteeism
across the entire state. Um,
we're sort of feeling the
lasting impacts of
COVID-19 right now, uh, feelings
of family instability and, uh,
school safety all impacting
students' ability to uh perform
on these standardized
assessments.
But at the same time, we also
see programs that you, you all
have created in the public
education department has been
working hard on, um, that have
created resiliency for those
disadvantaged students. So
programs like structured
literacy or the universal school
meals program or your
investments in the at-risk
index, uh, have provided sort of
a buoy for those economically
disadvantaged students. Uh, so
while the entire state is, is
sort of holding steady or
trending downward, those
economically disadvantaged
students are sort of lifted up.
Um, some other ones and their
interventions, uh, targeted
interventions for low income
students.
A focus on language and culture
as a result of the lawsuit and,
uh, we would throw in a, uh, a
last copy out there that for the
uh COVID-19 relief funding that,
uh, we believe also played an
impact for supporting students
and recovering from the
pandemic.
On the next slide, uh, we've
also broken it down by grade
level. So you all can see how
those trends are playing out at
the great at each grade level.
Um, we'll start with English on
this chart, uh, those blue lines
across the top of the chart, and
you can see, um, some
interesting results with
English. So in 3rd grade, uh,
we've got a new cohort of 3rd
grade students, uh, and those
students are about 32%
proficient.
That's about the same level as,
uh, coming straight out of the
pandemic in school year 22.
In 4th grade, 5th grade, 6th
grade, and 7th grade, uh, and in
8th grade, we, we can see sort
of a strong trend upward or at
least holding flat in 7th grade,
uh, with previous year results.
All of those cohorts of students
are performing better than the
previous cohort of 4th, 5th,
6th, 7th, and 8th graders.
And then finally in 11th grade,
you can see a slight decline uh
for English, those students are
performing about at the level
that they were post pandemic as
well.
In math, uh, this trend mirrors
what we've seen in previous
years, where math proficiency
tends to increase in 3rd, 4th,
and 5th grade, uh, hits sort of
a critical peak right there and
then starts to decline in the
secondary grades, and we, we see
that year over year, uh, the
proficiency rate declines from
6th grade to 7th grade to 8th
grade to 11th grade. Uh,
strikingly in 11th grade, you
can see a 5% point decline, uh,
as well as in 7th grade, a 6%
point decline.
And so here is sort of uh an
analysis of why that might be
happening for in English
particularly for those 3rd and
11th grade classes that are sort
of everybody else in the state
is going up in, in English, uh,
in 3rd grade and 11th grade or
not.
Uh, the first thing that we'll
note is that this year's 3rd
graders, uh, the, the cohort of
3rd graders that were tested in
school year 24. Uh, those were
the students who were
kindergarteners at the very
beginning of the pandemic. Um,
so those are the, this is the
first time that we've ever
assessed those students, uh, and
you can see that, uh, in, in
kindergarten, school year 21,
that's where they were, um.
For our 11th graders. This is
also the first time that they've
been tested since the pandemic,
uh, because there's no
assessment given in 9th and 10th
grade. So you can see in school
year 19, those students were in
6th grade, uh, and then during
the pandemic, they were
finishing up middle school and
into high school, and this is
the first time that we've seen
their assessment results in the
greater proficiency rate since
that point.
Yeah.
Some other, uh, another possible
explanation for the decline in
SAT scores, uh, is actually
changes to the SAT itself. So,
Uh, for school year 24, the SAT
became what's called a computer
adaptive assessment, uh, those
computer adaptive assessments,
the SAT used to be something you
could sit down and take in a
booklet and uh you would write
out your writing sample and
things like that. Um, this year,
uh, it was, it became a computer
adaptive assessment, which means
that students are taking a
shorter test and the test is
actually trying to gauge
students proficiency level by
offering them harder and harder
questions if they're doing well
and trying
To sort of estimate where they
are, uh, based on the difficulty
of the questions that they're
able to answer. So in, in a lot
of ways, it's sort of a
completely different test.
Uh, and there was an
announcement last week actually
that Colorado saw the same
trends in their math scores
where uh students uh uh saw a
precipitous decline in math
results. And as a result,
Colorado decided, uh, we're
going to change the cut score
for graduation, uh, because
fewer students were showing the
same level of achievement in
math. Uh, so it might just, it
might be that because of the
changes to the SAT we're seeing
a lower proficiency rate. Um,
that proficiency rate.
For
uh.
For the cut score for
proficiency is a 5:30, and
that's just harder for students
to get to on the new format.
But I do want to call attention
to uh this chart right here. So
this is taking that 5th, 6th,
7th, and 8th grade line and
overlaying them. So these are
students where we have 3 years
of data, uh, and these are
cohorts of students. So, uh, the
class of 2031, those are the
students who were 5th grade last
year, uh, all of those students
you can see sort of a a sharp
increase from school year 22 to
school year 23, and then it
flattens out. And that same
trend for 8th grade students as
well. Uh.
And then for the class of 2030
and the class of 2029 are 6th
and 7th grade cohort this year.
Those students are seeing a
strong 3-year trend upward from
about 35% proficient to 40%
proficient. And that, that's a
remarkable thing. All of these
students are sort of coalescing
around 40% proficient. This is,
um, something that, that we
wanted to call attention to
because I don't think I've ever
seen this in my eight years of
looking at assessment results
for the legislature. Um, all of
these student cohorts are, are
moving together and they're
moving upward.
Uh, and this might indicate that
that investments in structured
literacy are beginning to pay
dividends for those cohorts of
students.
We wanted to spend some time uh
closing out this presentation,
talking a little bit about what
the word proficiency means.
Uh, the scores on the masa are
broken into 4 performance
levels. So performance level 1
and 2, those students are not
proficient and performance
levels 3 and 4 are proficient.
And so you can see, uh, sort of
over time, we, we, we would
expect or we would want if
proficiency was going up to see
more students moving from
performance levels 1 and 2 to
performance levels 3 and 4. And
what we do see in particular for
performance level 4 is a strong
3-year trend of students who are
scoring very well on the
assessment at that highest level
of proficiency, performance
level 4, it goes from 15%
proficient to 17 to 19.
Uh, performance level 3 is
actually flat at around 20%.
And then performance levels 1
and 2 are relatively flat as
well. So theoretically, over
time, we want to see more
students moving from PL2 to PL 3
and 4.
And if you take those overall
statewide rates, uh, and you do
something like this, uh, some of
you might be familiar with this
format that we've been using to
show how those rates, uh, uh,
shakeout in the average
classroom, right? So in a
classroom of 20 students, uh,
you could see this is how your
students would look if they
mirrored the statewide trend.
You'd have 5 students at PL1.
7 students at PL2, 4 students at
PL3, and 4 students at PL4.
And you can take all of those
students and sort of stack them
up like this in a in a bar chart
format on slide 19.
And you could see the uh
importance or the the relative
ease with which the state could
theoretically increase
proficiency rates. Um.
So the uh PED held a really
great assessment conference a
couple of weeks ago, uh,
bringing together district test
coordinators and implementers
from across the state together
to learn from each other to see
best practices and assessments
to, uh, look at, um, their,
their data and to understand or
to better understand how to
provide interventions.
Uh, this process here, moving
that one student from PL2 to PL3
requires a teacher to have an
understanding of that student's
data, uh, and an understanding
of the individual gaps that that
student has. So, uh, if you'll
recall to the very beginning of
the presentation, we talked a
little bit about interim
assessments, uh, theoretically,
a teacher can go into a
student's interim assessment
data and see individual state
standards that a student might
be falling behind on. Uh, so in
the case of math, maybe you've
got a student who's really good
at arithmetic, but.
is struggling with geometry. Uh,
a teacher can see that in a
student's interim assessment
data and can use that, uh, that
data to provide targeted
interventions. But for that to
happen, the teacher needs to
have an understanding of how to
do that. Uh, and so part of that
is time either in a teacher
teams and there's those PLCs or
individually for teachers to
actually sit down with their
student data and to, um, review
those concepts and those, those
things that uh students.
Might be falling behind on.
And on top of that, a a teacher
also needs once that data is
identified or that standard is
identified, the teacher needs to
understand uh effective
acceleration techniques. So you
want to keep the kids on the
grade level standard. You don't
want to have to go back to the
previous grade level to try and,
uh, remediate. You want to keep
pushing kids forward, uh, on
their current grade level
standard, uh, and to do, to do
that uh PED is actually put
together some, some really great
resources, uh, called scopes and
sequences where
Mapping to individual state
standards, you can go and see uh
if a student is deficient on a
specific standard, uh, the, the
scope and sequence will actually
have a uh a suggestion for how
to stay on the grade level
standard but remediate that
student and accelerate their
instruction.
And so if every classroom in New
Mexico was able to move just one
kid from PL2 to PL3, the
statewide proficiency rate would
go from 40% to.
45%. That's just an example of
what you could do if you just
move one student, uh, from, from
PL2 to PL3. Now, obviously, not
every classroom in New Mexico
has this performance uh in in
our most disadvantaged
classrooms, you would see a
greater number of PL1 and PL2
students. Uh, and so the goal
for those would be to move
additional students and to do
that, uh, you might need
additional resources, which is
the argument, uh, that you all
have made when you have
increased the at risk index. So,
Uh, that's just a little bit of
context for that.
And on the next slide, uh, I've
just provided those four
concepts again, uh, and, and
tied them to some existing
mechanisms that are happening
right now in New Mexico, um,
that, that teachers can rely on
to improve their data literacy
or their understanding of gaps
or give them ample time to
review data or provide that
academic acceleration. So in
terms of data li literacy, we've
got our education, uh, educator
preparation programs at our
colleges have a, uh, we've got
professional development like
the assessment conference.
The PED held just a couple of
weeks ago, um, focus on
investment in strong educators
in the classroom, uh, you all
saw, uh, well, teacher teams or
PLCs and ample time in those
teacher teams and PLCs, uh, give
teachers the opportunity to
review their data together, uh,
to learn from each other, to,
to, uh,
give individual students the
focus that those students need.
And then you all saw in Carlsbad
last year and heard from from
Annie earlier this interim about
multi-classroom leaders and the
impact that additional adults in
the classroom can have
especially strong educators, uh,
who, who can provide that
oversight for teachers who are
newer, uh, who are trying to
grasp these concepts.
Uh, for ample time, you all
have have made significant
progress with HB 130 and the
calendar flexibility that you
have created, um, the, the
question remains for us are
school districts taking
advantage of that flexibility in
an effective way? Are they
building innovative school
calendars, uh, are they giving
teachers the ample time that
they need to, uh, to study in
teacher teams.
And then once again, we talked a
little bit about the New Mexico
instructional scope, uh, but
I've got a link here on that
slide if you're looking at the
digital version, uh, you can,
you can click on that and go see
an example of of how standards
uh can be mapped to acceleration
techniques uh for each
individual student.
And on the last slide on slide
21, just some key takeaways to,
to uh summarize the presentation
for you all. So once again, this
is a review of preliminary data,
uh, that preliminary data is not
validated, but we don't really
expect the statewide trends to
change all that much.
Uh, and the reason that we want
earlier assessment data is so
that you all can understand
whether or not your investments
are making an impact before you
start budgeting for the next
year.
From school year 23 to 24, ELA
proficiency is flat at 38%. Uh,
but math proficiency fell from
24% to 22%.
Uh, the performance for our more
affluent students are
non-economically disadvantaged
students fell slightly while the
performance for students of
color and for economically
disadvantaged students held flat
or actually increased in most
cases and that we're
hypothesizing that strong social
factors that we're seeing
statewide that are, uh,
affecting students' mental
health, uh, are driving
achievement down for all
students, but recent investments
that you all have made have
provided some level of
resiliency for economically
disadvantaged students.
Uh, the ELA proficiency
increased in 4th grade through
8th grade, but fell for 3rd
grade and 11th grade,
uh, potentially highlighting
that we're finally seeing the
full impact of the COVID-19
pandemic, particularly for those
3rd grade students who are brand
new, uh, and we're our
kindergarteners in the pandemic.
And just an example of teachers
with adequate time and resources
and training can use that
student data to identify
specific interventions for
individual students, and if they
do that for one student per
classroom, more or less, uh, you
would see an increase in
proficiency of about 5% points.
So that is my presentation. I
will pass it over now to Lynn
Vasquez, uh, with the Public
education department.
And is he's he's gonna pull it
up.
I like the uh music.
2 minute warning for the bell.
OK, are we, are we good to go?
You can go ahead and get
screwed. All right,
Chairman Romero, members of the
Committee, first of all, thank
you for having us on the agenda.
And I just want to extend our
gratitude to our partners at
LDSC to John and Tim, we met a
few times. I, I do want to say
that we seem to be congruent on
many of the uh results of the
data. Um, however, I'm going to
present to you a different set
of data in terms of our
statewide trends. But before we
begin,
I, I want to provide some
context into assessments as
we're all held, we use
assessments to hold all of us
accountable, right? Just before
this meeting, I heard people
talking about the amount of
money that you've invested in
this state education system and
whether that's paying off. US
policymakers as representatives
are the people that you're
elected by, you want to be able
to respond to that. And then for
us at the PED we want to know if
our initiatives like HQIM or
structured literacy are taking
hold in our schools and so we
hold ourselves accountable for
this data as well. This data
reflects both the academic and
non-academic conditions that
exist for our schools.
Assessments are a measure of
learning, of course, in a
perfect world, a student shows
up daily to the classroom. Their
attendance is perfect, right?
It's presented with high quality
instructional materials with a
highly qualified teacher. And
who's an expert in teaching
those standards. That student is
then provided with assessments.
But during the year, as Tim
pointed out, those interim
assessments, and then they're
also presented with end of year
summit of assessments, and those
summative assessments, we as
stakeholders hope that we can
use to make policy decisions.
However, just like in slide 12
at Tim's presentation, we know
that imperfect conditions exist
for students. We know that
students learning is impacted by
a variety of factors, the amount
of food they have access to
their level of parental
involvement, their social
emotional
Being, the quality of
instructional materials in front
of them, their tenants and even
their teacher's attendance. I
was once a principal of a school
in which the teacher attendance
rate was lower than the student
attendance rate. But we know
that all those factors play a
role in our student achievement.
I also want to remind you just
because we have been impacted
and we only have 3 years of
longitudinal data being impacted
by the pandemic. I want to
remind you of our assessment
journey. We adopted new
assessments by an executive
order in January of 2019.
3 months before the testing
window opened, we reduced the
amount of testing time across
our math and reading assessments
and grades 3 through 8 in high
school. We always hear less
testing time, and we were able
to reduce testing time across
all grades in 2019, using the
MSSA and SAT school day. Like
all states, no assessments were
administered in New Mexico in
2020. That's a commonality
across the nation. But unlike
most states who went ahead and
tested.
In 21, New Mexico did not. We
only assessed about 5% of our
students in 2021. So we have
essentially two years of missing
assessment data. Whereas most
states have perhaps 4 years
longitudinal data, we only have
3. To safeguard against our
students COVID um learning loss,
we implemented very aggressive
programs and some of them have
already been named, accelerated
learning, we've put in
multi-layered systems of support
coaches, those interventions
that are
pension system in most schools.
We have reading coaches and
structured literacy coaches.
We've also implemented and
designed the New Mexico
instructional scope for our
primary content areas. We've
also been tackling the chronic
absenteeism rate and you saw a
significant decline in chronic
absenteeism, and then we've been
very aggressive with our high
dosage tutoring and high impact
tutoring, being informed by
those very specific skill level
deficits.
We target for tutoring, who do
we target for, for um those
types of programs and how, how
do we use our assessment results
to target the right students and
parents. So we hope that the
data conveys that your fiscal
improvements and I think Tim
said this very well at the end
that you do see some positive
impacts regarding the fiscal
investments that have been
either maintained student
learning or have improved
student learning as we see in
nearly most grade levels,
although there are some dips in
some grade.
Levels and then some grade
levels are actually flat.
But I think that you also what
will also be conveyed as we look
at our statewide data, um, is
the investments that we're
putting into reading, language
arts is very visible, but we
also feel like there should be
some investments to be put into
math. And so, um, I will say
that.
If I talked to my peers, the
other directors across the
nation. Um, what I hear is that
there are most states are
bouncing back faster in math
than they are in language arts.
We don't see that in our state.
I also want to put in context
these like 1 or 2 total number
of students proficient
trend-wise, right? It's not
normal. It's not typical for
states to see, although it would
be great to see a 5% increase in
language arts proficiency from
one year to another.
An average of 1 to 2 increases
of proficiency is very typical.
Anything beyond that at a grade
level, let's say, and in which
we, we expect to see a little
bit of that and a few of our
grade levels, especially in
language arts, whether it's 3%
or 4%, that's very significant.
Um, and so just to put that in a
little bit of context. I also
always like to put our students
in a in context, we have about
320,000 students, 89 public
With districts. And then we have
about 50,000 force of educators
and instructional aides in our
classroom. I also wanted to tell
you it's not challenges, this is
who we are, right? It's, we
don't see these as challenges.
These are the students that we
want to make sure uh achievement
improves for, but we are higher
than the national average with
both students with disabilities
and English learners. We have
the 3rd highest population of
Native American learners outside
of Alaska and Oklahoma. If you
Ever look at native performance
in other states that have high
native population rates, you're
not going to see, in fact, what
you will see is probably
stronger gains for Native
American students in our state
in language arts compared to
other states that have high
populations of native students.
Um, so let me go ahead and go
on. This is kind of what I
shared with you with the
caveats. We have 3 years of
longitudinal data, 10 presented
that very well. Um, what we
probably aren't.
aligned in is the overall
statewide performance for 2024
within the past 24 hours, so
please know that Tim is using
information, his LESC briefing
that was provided to him about,
I want to say maybe 2 weeks ago,
which was at that point the most
recent information that we had.
He also explained that we're
currently under an embargo
period, which opened up on
Tuesday, just 2 days ago at
noon, and from that embargo
period, we came to um some
Findings in which did change our
data. So here what I present to
you, um, as you know, we the
bulk of this content that we're
focusing on for my part of the
presentation is our math and
reading results. We do measure
math and reading for students in
grades K through 8. What is
different in 24, in the 23, 24
school years that we required IS
station math. We did that
because we knew that our math
achievement was dropping, right?
We haven't been able to bounce
back since the
pandemic. So we um requiredice
station K2 math for the first
time. Um, what I want to also
emphasize is that the science is
only measured at those 3 grade
levels, and we also have an
assessment for EL's 54,000 ELs,
English learners are pretty
significant portion of our
statewide population, and we
have an assessment the federal
government requires that we all
states administer and
Progress towards English
language proficiency. Please do
not get that confused with the
English language arts
assessment. The English language
arts assessment measures the
common core standards for
language arts. The, the English
language proficiency assessment
listed at the bottom measures
English language development
standards for anybody who enters
a US school or or New Mexico
school system that isn't
proficient in English, whether
you're from Nigeria, France, or
China. Um, so again, you see
that those 3
Longitudinal trends and as of
last night around 4:30, um, you
see that we were part of um the
the discrepancy by 1% point that
you saw in Tim's presentation
for 2024 rates. We have 39% of
our students proficient in K8
and 11 those grade level tested
grade levels combined, and then
we have 23% students proficient
in math, and then 37% of our
students.
proficient. So what was the
difference? During the embargo
period, um, our districts
pointed out that they were
missing that files that our data
sets was not inclusive of all of
their English learner
assessments that are provided in
Spanish. So by federal
allowance, an EL can take any of
these assessments in Spanish
they can take the MSSA math in
Spanish, the IS station in
Spanish, there's also a Spanish
language arts. If they
been in the US for 3 years. It's
automatic. They can
automatically be given the test
in Spanish.
In addition to that, they can
take the test in Spanish for an
additional 2 years with a
waiver. Um, as you know, we are
implementing a new statewide SIS
called Nova replacing our stars
database. Uh, in troubleshooting
this issue with one of the
districts that submitted an
appeal during the embargo
period, we realized that their
student SIS may not be speaking
to Nova correctly to gather the
Field, so we did not have those
ELs accurately as part of the
system. That's several 1000
tests if you think about 54,000
English learners, some of those
English learners do take the
test in English, but a good
majority of them take the test
in Spanish because they're
allowed to. So we had, we
included several 1000 additional
records in the data, which is
why you see that 1% change from
what Tim has presented just
within the past 24 hours.
Growing pains of a new data
system, I guess I'll, I'll
capture it that way. What we did
not have time to do is to
provide you grade level specific
information, and we really don't
want to do that until the
embargo is over. So let me give
you an example as to why data
can be unstable during a
district embargo period. A
district says, you know, for
some reason, my SIS said that
the student was at grade 11
during the 90th day enrollment,
but they're suddenly showing up
as grade 12 students in the
120th day Nova stars data
collection, bizarre things
happen, um, so, you know, we
probably pulled those 12th
graders out because we only want
to measure 11th grade learning.
So they filed an appeal and say
for some reason these students
did show up as 12th graders, but
they should be part of the 11th
grade cohort. So little things
like that get cleaned up during
this district embargo process.
And that's happening now for all
of our districts. So, um, what
I, what we can
Chair is our eye station data.
So as you, as Tim pointed out,
we see um we have Ice Station
for grades K, 1 and 2, and you
see a very nice growth trends
for those early reading levels.
Um, now if you said, well, you
know, Lenn was, is that any
different because we've been
using Ice Station for a number
of years. Is that any different,
those growth trends, then
perhaps even prior to the
pandemic. That's a great
question to ask in on the
surface level.
It might look like not really,
but the fact that we've had a
noisy disruption, right? The
signal is we want to see our
kids proficient. The noise in
that signal is the pandemic. We
don't know what impact that
pandemic had, and not only for
just one year in most states,
but 2 years in the way we
addressed our response to the
pandemic in New Mexico, but um
what we, what we do see is that
we see a positive trajectory
with significant gains. I told
you earlier, anything above 2%
is quite
Significant. And when you look
at the increases over the three
years, it's very significant.
What I would also say is that
when we looked at the
preliminary data even 2 weeks
ago, we did see that there were
persistent impacts of the COVID
COVID for our students in grades
3 and 4. I'll show you this next
slide to kind of best illustrate
this. So this I put students in
a cohort chart, let's say. And
so if we start out with, let's
just start out on the
right, the 23, 24 proficiency
change. Um, let's go ahead and
look at those 3rd graders. We
expect, we anticipate that there
might be a drop in 3rd grade,
that that's the only grade that
is not flat or did not see
improvement. And when we ask
yourself why did 3rd graders in
23, 24 see a drop and you trace
them back across the years. They
were kindergarteners during the
first year of the pandemic. We
also
recognize that we're not we're
not probably going to see as
much growth with our 4th graders
in the from the 2324 school
year. Why? Because they were
kindergartners in 2019-020 when
the pandemic first started, so
they actually had a part of
their learning virtual. We ended
that school year in remote
learning, if you remember.
So, um, but for other grades,
however, counterbalancing that,
I also point out when letters
training was initiated. Letters
training was initiated in 2021,
right? We have different phases
and different, but, but all
kindergarten teachers were
initiated with letters training,
um, starting that specific year
as a response to the pandemic,
that was a great move, um, but
as we follow letters training,
the, the letters training we
expect
To have seen impact for our
first graders in 2324. And so
that's what that green line is
following, and we do, we see a
significant 4% increase for
those students.
Even though kindergarteners, we
don't expect to see, we would
not have expected to see
kindergarten impact until this
year, instructional shift
happened for kindergarteners in
the 23, 24 school year. And is
it possible that they were pos
positively impacted as well.
Now, I know that um Senator
Souls, I know you're very astute
on your data. Somebody could say
that Lin, could it, could it be
that these kindergartners are
just brighter than the the prior
courts, possibly. Could it be
that
These kindergarteners have
parents that are just more
involved in their education,
therefore increasing their
proficiency rate, possibly yes,
all those are factors. But we
also can't exclude the
investment that the state has
made in structured literacy and
letters training. So, um,
anyway, I will let you digest on
that. And but I think it's
congruent with the points that
Tim also made.
In the next slide, um, I, I do
want to say something here
because Tim pointed out the type
of data that teachers get when
they use interim assessments.
One of the pleas that I make
with you in one of my summary
slides is to continue to fund
the statewide balanced
assessment system, which
includes we provide a statewide
interim assessment. Some of you
might have schools or you have
experiences or heard of names
like I Ready or NWEA whatever
those other
Assessments are, but we have a
statewide interim that we call
IMAA that we asked our
identified schools to administer
3 times a year. But in our state
summit of reports, these are
some of the, the points that I'm
sharing with you. Teachers,
schools at the state level get a
Analysis of the different
skills, strengths, or deficits.
We call it an item analysis
report. I have one for science
to show you later on in the
slide. But based on that item
level analysis. And again, this
is information schools get in,
uh, you know, one of our the
strings that we see on our
summit of assessment, and this
would appear on a school
classroom, a district and the
state report, we know that an
MSSA students are doing very
well with analyzing literary
text.
Part of that is because
elementary that the emphasis is
on literary text, right? We're,
we're reading literature to
students, but then as they
slowly progress up the upper
elementary into middle and high.
It gradually migrates into more
informational texts that balance
gets heavier on information
texts that's academic reading
that you need to for college
readiness. But we know that
informational text is actually a
weak area for our students in
elementary in those upper
elementary grades. So
Teachers get reports that tell
them what what standards are my
students strong in versus what
standards are my students need
extra support and that actually
comes not only on the interim
assessments, but we provide that
uh at the classroom in the
district level on the summit of
assessments as well. And so here
I'm showing you for SAT school
day, students are doing very
well with interpreting,
evaluating and integrating
information and ideas from text,
but they're struggling to with
their attitu.
skills and knowledge to make
texts conform to core
conventions of Standard English.
So, um, again, a little insight
look here on what students might
be doing very well in in terms
of standards. There's a long
list. I'm just giving you a
snippet here and what they might
be struggling with. But the main
point is that I want you to know
this insight actually comes as
part of the summit of assessment
results.
For all of our content areas.
So for mathematics, again, um,
it would be
It's 23%.
Statewide to do an apples to
apples comparison of the last 3
years of statewide math data.
But I told you earlier that we
required K2I station math. With
that, it's actually 27%, but it
wouldn't have been fair to put
that number in front of you
because we hadn't requiredice
station in 22 or 23. So just I,
I want you to to have that
information in your, in your
mind. So 23% statewide for the
apples to apples longitudinal
compa.
But now with the inclusion of
Ice Station K2 map it actually
jumps the statewide math
proficiency rate up to 27%. We
would like going forward in a
longitudinal data, we would like
to continue to report that
IStation map as part of our
longitudinal data. And so we'll
just keep reminding you in the
subsequent years of that change
because it just falsely looks
like we had a huge increase in
math achievement when we know
counter that we, we believe we
are anticipating a slight
decline.
I really appreciate Tim's slide
about performance levels and
being able to see where teachers
can change performance levels
for students, even if they're
not proficient. And so, please
allow me to spend a little bit
of time on an assessment
literacy for the members of the
committee. So I, I want to talk
about the difference between
proficiency and, and growth. So,
um, on the far left hand chart,
what I show you, there's 4
performance levels
Tim described. We, we name the
sometimes you call you heard
them called PLD's performance
level descriptors, PLDs. There's
level 1, level 2, level 3, and
level 4. Under the orange band
levels 1 and 2, we would say
those students are not
proficient.
Under the turquoise band levels
3 and 4, those students are
proficient. Those levels have
nomenclature behind them. Level
one we call novice on MFSA Level
2 is nearing proficiency. Level
3 is a proficient student and
level 4 is in advance. So when
we tell you that 38% or 39% of
our students are proficient in
language arts. It's levels 3 and
4 combined, right? So
proficiency is level anything
above.
33 and above.
Behind those levels and behind
the nomenclature are something
called scale scores. This is why
we call it large scale
assessments. It's the data is
presented on a large scale and
it's administered large scale to
thousands of students. So at
grade 3, and this is a true
scale, this is a a scale that
I'm presenting you from our MSSA
reading assessment and a student
that's novice, that scale goes
from 300 to 335. Students that
are novice.
will fall somewhere in that
scale. Some on the lower end,
middle, and high end of that
scale. And then notice that same
student or a student who then
takes as a grade 4 student,
there's a grade 4 scale.
OK, so I just want to make sure
that that's kind of a base just
knowledge.
When we talk about that upper
chart on the right hand column,
that is achievement. Here,
there's these are actually 3
real schools in New Mexico, but
because we are under embargo, we
remove the name. But school A,
B, and C. So here, achievement
is a point in time. What, how
did they do in spring of 2024.
And we know that for school A
97% of the, they had, they had a
97% proficiency rate for their
students. It's pretty
incredible. And in math they had
an 87.
That's the total number of
students at levels 3 and 4 for
reading and math, right? And you
see that for school, we should
give you the same data points
for school B and School C. But
achievement is just one story.
It's just telling you part of
the story, telling you how many
kids are proficient, how many
students are at 3 and 4 at any
school for any uh content area.
But the bigger story here that
we want to tell and celebrate
with our schools is the story of
growth, and that's what you see
in the last, the bottom table on
the right hand side. This is
growth. This is learning gains
over time. So, uh, when we look
at scale scores, we could say,
let's say we have a student,
Anthony, who at grade 3 on MSSA
is novice level one novice, and
his skill score was at 300. But
let's say at grade.
Before he moves to nearing
proficient and his scale score
goes to 440.
Right, he's not proficient, but
he's certainly showing growth,
right? And so, um, we're excited
because the conference that Tim
mentioned that we held two weeks
ago we had uh one of the, the
national renowned experts for
what we call student growth
model, which we are finally able
to implement growth model to
measure growth and to credit
schools for growing students as
part of school ratings, right,
invista score. We are
changing to something called the
SGP or student growth percentile
model because that makes sense
to us. Why credit schools just
by moving total number of
students to proficient and we
can actually credit schools for
actually growing students. So
when, so look at those same
schools in the top charts, the
same schools, schools A, B, and
C, and here you can see that
school A has a median growth
percentile in reading for their
students, that is
seventy-ninth percentile. So for
this school, the media growth
percentile in reading is 79,
which means that the typical
student is performing as well or
better than 79% of their
academic peers. So when we look
at a student and project what
should their percentile be we
look at the starting place of
that student. So let's go back
to Anthony, who was at 300. We
look at everybody else at
Anthony's cohort that started at
300.
And then we look at, you know,
if Anthony did move to 440. How
did his other cohort appears,
his academic peers perform
academic peer meaning kids that
started at the same scale score.
So, um, and I think what's
interesting here is school B. If
you'll get school B just
proficiency alone. For math,
wow, it's pretty dismal, only
13% of their students are
proficient in math, well below
the state average, right, of 23.
But then when you look at school
B in the bottom chart in terms
of math growth, their students
are at the 76th percentile,
right? They're really growing,
they're moving their kids from
one performance level to another
or they're moving them.
the scale score for growth. And
so that's really important, um,
because I, I think this is also
something and I.
There's a little kind of
verbiage about scale score, uh,
student growth percentiles, but
I think I did the best in trying
to explain how they work to you.
But I think what's more exciting
is that when we crosswalk, just
these three schools, we actually
crossed walked our 15 top
highest performing growth
schools, but we just crosswalk
these three schools and we ask
ourselves, do they have higher
than the average state
attendance, um.
Some of the initiatives that
you've funded like HQ like
family income index, the
implementation of HQIM and some
initiatives that you haven't
maybe robustly as funded, but
we're asking, we're hoping that
we're that you'll fund in our
PSSR request come January. But
notice that um even for school
A, you know, they're, they're
very active in our MLSS. What we
find when we look at our top 15
highest growth schools.
majority of them are very active
with MLSS. They've submitted an
MLSS plan or they have adopted
an MLSS coach.
Um, likewise, when we look at
school B, wow, tendon is pretty
decimal, far below the state
average, but yet they've adopted
high quality instructional
materials in both reading and
math.
And
That alone, you know, could that
be a variable for their
performance, possibly, right?
But I think um one thing that
you see is that the family
income index, they're funded by
that. But what we see just in
looking at these 4 program areas
alone, attendance, family income
index, HQI and MLSS, a school
that has any combination of the
two, right, has pretty good odds
of being able to impact growth.
And so, again, I'm showing you a
snippet by a three-school
sample. These are real schools,
but we also looked at this for
the top 15 schools, and you
would see that most of the top
15 growth districts or schools
rather, have higher than the
state attendance rate. We picked
out school B because we thought
that was a unique situation. In
spite of their low attendance,
they're still showing the
ability to grow student
learning.
OK. And then um I'm happy to say
that our instructional materials
bureau just released a uh HQIM
portal. You can now go, it's one
of the links on the resource
slide, but you can now go to
that portal and see which
districts have adopted high
quality instructional materials,
and which materials they've
adopted for their content areas.
And so that's the source of
information for that particular
slide.
All right. I'm to move this on,
um, science is pretty straight.
We, we see very nice, we see
significant uh science
achievement in grades 8 and 11
are statewide science percentage
has grown to 37%, um, and, and
again, that's an upward
trajectory in terms of our
longitudinal data. And just like
I showed you with MSSA and SAT,
we know that we can provide
teachers.
on what students are doing well
in terms of science and what
they need to focus on. So
planning and conducting
investigations to provide
evidence that an electric
current can produce a magnetic
field is something that our
students are doing well at, but
using a model to illustrate the
role of cellular division,
something that our students
aren't doing as well at. So
again, we have this item level
information.
About our assessments and our
performance. In the next slide,
I'm gonna here's actually, and I
know it might be difficult to
see, but this is actually one of
those item level analysis
reports. It comes in the version
of a CSV file, but you see in
the far left hand column, the
actual uh whether it's physical
science, the actual standard of
our state adopted next gen,
which is we call New Mexico STEM
Ready Science Standards. And
then you see the student um
skill.
description
I'm actually even struggling to
see it in my printed copy, so
let me, let me do it from my
slide, um, so one of the things
that you might see is that
developing, developing a model
to describe the matter, uh, that
matter is made up of particles
too small to be seen, um, for
this school, it's the very top
line the item average score was
0.94. Students did very well on
that and not only in the
but the district. They did
higher than the state average of
0.86,
right? So, schools, my point to
you is that classroom teachers
get this information, this item
level analysis information and
then they get that comparison.
How did my students in my class
do compared to the students in
my district at the same grade
level and compared to the
students across the state. So
hopefully very informative and
what we would hope is that a
school would look and say wow.
Arguing that gravitational force
exerted by Earth on objects is
directly down. We didn't do so
well. Let's focus our
professional learning on some of
these concepts. The next time we
get our PLC together, right? So,
I mean, that is the point and
even as at the state level, we'd
want to target teacher
professional learning in those
areas in math, language arts and
science that we know are
relatively weak for our students
across the state.
The last thing that I have to
share in terms of assessment
results is that English learner,
um uh assessment. So this access
for ELs is our state assessment
for measuring progress towards
English language proficiency.
Can they speak, read, write,
and, and listen in the English
language. So those four domains
are assessed, and here I'm
showing you by grade level. So
again, we have about 54,000 ELs
that take the
Test on an annual basis. I'm
showing you by grade level, the
total number of students tested
in that next column. And then in
the 2nd to the right column, the
number of students that exit
what we call exiting EL status.
In order to exit EL status, a
student has to score a 4.7 out
of a composite score of 5. If
you notice that students in
grades 4 and 5 have higher exit
rates at those grades.
Um, there's a part here that is
kind of heartbreaking in the
sense that if they don't exit by
then, is it possible that
they're stuck in EL status for
quite a while, right? Based on
this data, that's, that's one
possible message. Um,
but what ELs are doing well,
they're listening and speaking
abilities, those domains,
they're testing very well in,
but they're struggling in
writing and reading domains,
which is, I think, indicative of
our overall state assessment
results and by the way,
These 54,000 students also take
MSSA. This is an additional test
they take on top of the
statewide math and language arts
assessment.
And so, um, one thing that we
are considering is we're doing a
study, uh, so we used to have a
5.0 exit criteria. We've lowered
that to 4.7 because uh Rita, the
consortium that provides this
assessment actually redid their
standards in 2018, and we
noticed that standard was set
very high. That 5.0 is a very
high requirement. It's, it's the
most that that they can that
they could possibly achieve, but
we want to be able to look
At EL performance on access
compared to EL performance on
MSSA and see um correlation
there and is there an argument
possible to lower the exit
criteria. Um, so that's a study
that will be embarking on and
we're happy to come back and
tell you the results. I will say
that I know that um Tim's
presentation might have given
you a
appears to be more robust in
terms of our subgroups and grade
levels. But I think it's
premature. Um, it's slightly
premature. We see that 1%
increase. I think that what he
shows in terms of the subgroups
that's gonna shift after the
embargo ends. The embargo is
open till October 4th, so
districts can push back or argue
their proficiency rates between
now and then, and it's really
not so much arguing. It's here's
some data issues and and I think
especially with the adoption of
no.
Um, you know, it's just the
growing pains and we're working
through that. Um, I also want to
point out because I think um
it's a goal, it should be a goal
for all of us to get our results
out as soon as possible. What
Tim showed you in the slide
where we fell kind of on the
lower spectrum, being later in
the year, getting our results
out. Um, is in terms of our
validated proficiency. If you're
out of school and and and and
Chairman Romero, you know.
Schools get your results, their
results, they, they get their
vendor results from their vendor
portal and their ISRs, their
individual student reports to
pass out to parents as early as
June, those go out in June, July
and August. So schools can make
local decisions about their
upcoming schedule or where to
put students or can the student
get out of an English language
development class because they
exited access, they can arrange
their schedules far before we
put out accountability.
Proficiency and participation
data in the fall. And the reason
that it is, there is that a
little bit of lag is because I
think in particular the last two
years, the, the change to a new
data system, um, as you know,
we've had challenges with our
accountability model. I
inherited the accountability
team in December. We're getting
back on track with what the
federal government requires. But
what we are so grateful for your
time today, and we would be
pleased to come back, I believe.
The October agenda is already
baked, but we would be pleased
to come back in November to talk
more in depth about the the
final data, if you don't hear it
from the media first and in
relationship to our school
rating in Invistas. I think it's
a very important presentation
for the committee to hear and
understand how we calculate the
12 indicators in our statewide
accountability model that rates
our schools.
Thank you so much.
Right, thank you. Oh, I'm sorry,
this most important part.
If you would quickly because we
do have questions coming up and
we're already an hour into the
presentation. Oh, sorry, I
apologize. I do want to say for
legislative considerations, I
would be amiss if I didn't speak
on behalf of Acevedo Martinez
and Shibi Chandri. These are
kind of the wish list for math.
We know that numeros is a
microcredential. It teaches new
teachers how to teach math
effectively a focus on algebra,
which is a middle school focused
math program.
we would request funding for
math coaches and funding for
teacher preparation. Um, we are
redesigning math pathways, and
we asked for continued funding
for or we ask for funding for
MLSS. I don't think MLSS has
been broadly funded, but as you
saw in those growth schools,
it's one of the biggest impacts
that we see across our top 15
schools that show growth is
their ability to leverage to
have an MLSS plan and to
leverage an MLS.
His coach. And of course, you
already know about structured
literacy.
And now I'm done. Chairman
Romero apologies and thank you.
Thank you. Senator Stewart.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you so much, both of you for
this very detailed, uh,
presentation, um, I really
appreciate the focus on student
growth. Uh, it, it's something
that's bothered the education
committee for a long time, is
that even with students that are
not proficient, we aim to have
growth and if you start school 3
years behind, you know, in the
first year you catch up.
A year and a half and then the
next year you catch up another
little bit and you know that
that will be reflected in
growth, so, um, I really
appreciate that, um, so Tim, let
me just go to one, your page
about Colorado and the SAT and
how it was changed, uh, you note
that Colorado has cut their
graduation cut score on that, I
guess the question is, have we?
And of course this is
Kind of a one of the secrets to
assessment, so we set our own
cut scores. We set them as a
state,
so people think, oh,
proficiency, it's a concept and
what uh is proficient in another
state might not be proficient
here. The only assessment we do
where it's all the same as the
nape, and we know how we score
on that.
Uh, so I guess my question is,
Are we adjusting the SAT test
scores, cut scores because of
the changes in the SAT.
Romero, Senator Stewart, um,
first of all, thank you for your
question. And I do, I think Tim,
I really applauded Tim pointing
out because
the digital SAT test the change
of format, but there was also a
new scoring model implemented.
They're using a three parameter
IRT model to score the SAT.
Aside from that, a lot of SAT
school day stage, there's 13 of
us that use the SAT for as the
as a federally required as a
test for high school and a good
majority of those states did see
a dip in their scores because of
that scoring model. We're going
to hang with it because that
scoring model is more exacting.
It allows us to really hone in
the specific deficits for
students at the lower
performance levels. But the
context of Colorado is
different. The context of why
they're.
They're cutting, they're
changing their cut score because
that SAT score is tied to their
graduation requirement.
It's different in New Mexico
because with the passing of Bill
170 House Bill 171.
It removed the demonstration of
competency, means that students
do not have to pass a test in
New Mexico in order to graduate.
We're not going to change the
scale for proficiency in SAT
because um the, the educators
that we gathered to set our
performance levels to say, this
is what a student would need to
be able to know and do to be
considered proficient. We did
that, I say 3 summers, 2 summers
ago, and we, we actually, they,
they
felt very strongly of of using
the national scale scores. And
so that will stay, but I just
want to clarify. I think that
the situation in Colorado, which
I, if we were Colorado and we
had that as a graduation
requirement. We absolutely
would. Um, but I think that,
but, but your question does also
make me entertained, you know,
should there be an accountant of
that when we look at um, you
know, school ratings for high
school and so that's something
that I will.
and take back to our team.
Great. Well, thank you for that
and thank you, Mr. Chairman, for
your very excellent HB 171, uh,
that created as what we're
hearing from everyone, so much
more flexibility in course
offerings and so much more
flexibility for students, um,
so,
I get to my questions, um.
Before we leave that though, you
know, that's for students coming
in this coming school year.
So that uh uh definition of
competency is changing for
freshmen going into school in
this coming new year. So we
still have 4 years of students,
uh, that are operating on the
old graduation requirements. I
wish we'd stopped doing that.
I just don't really like that,
but you have a comment.
Chairman Romero, Senator
Stewart, um, I hope you're
pleased to know that that was
retroactively applied to any
prior cohort. So, including all
the cohorts that are currently
in school, we applied house 171
to everyone.
That's correct and there was a
memo that was a memo that was uh
that was a PED because I think
It would have been tremendous
equity issues raised by parents
in our communities, I'm sure
would have been an uproar. It
also means that somebody who
only was able to get a GED
because they could not pass a
demonstration of competency.
Let's say they were part of the
cohort of 2008. It, it could
mean that they could come back.
And if that was the only
gatekeeper for them to get their
high school diploma, they could
actually receive their high
school diploma. That is the
importance of that bill being
retro.
Actively applied to current and
prior cohorts.
Go ahead, Mr. Chair Senator
Stewart, I think one thing to to
keep in mind is, I think what
Director Vasquez is referring to
is that demonstration of
competency, which the department
had a lot of sort of leeway to
deal with even before 171.
The changes to the course
requirements will not go into
effect until next year's
cohorts, cohort of freshmen. So
the the demonstration of
competency is somewhat separate
but connected. The course, the
course works and the requirement
have to stay the same.
For those cohort of students
that were already in high school
prior to the enactment of the
law.
Yeah, so, uh, Mr. Chairman, of
course we heard, we heard the
reason we did that to begin with
was that we heard uh complaints
from educators and parents that,
you know, my child is a Junior,
you've just changed everything
for him or her, so that's not
fair. So that's why we put that
new, you know, we've done every
time we've changed the high
school, uh, requirements, we put
that in there, so, but glad to
see PED has been uh.
Flexible with that demonstration
of competency. So I know other
people want to talk, so we
try to move on, uh.
So I had a meeting with our
superintendent um really wanted
to talk about the top schools,
so, uh, for those of you not in
Albuquerque at the top schools,
uh, were schools that were
really underperforming and they
have 10 more days of school and
they have um a longer school day
and then they have the genius
hour at the end, which is just a
very fun thing to end your
school with, um.
She, she gave me some
percentages that have changed
for them in reading for some of
these schools, uh, East San Jose
19.1% improvement in breeding
proficiency. 19.1. I really
appreciated it Director Vasquez,
your comment about, you know, 1
or 2% is a hallelujah, uh, 4 or
5 is incredible, and that's what
we got last year, but 19 and
then Sandia.
27.8%. Miss is 23.6. These are
schools, two of them are model
schools that have doubled down
on structured literacy and
finally made a huge difference,
not 2 or 3% points, but a huge
difference, so, um, uh, it's,
you know, I really don't like
that we, we get these results so
late, you know, I've spent 25
years being a teacher. When you
do an assessment, you do it so
that
You can prove your teaching, but
this, you know, our statewide,
our federally required is just
done for us to make sure we're
accountable. The districts are
accountable. It really doesn't
help the teacher with the
exception of those descriptions
you gave where you give the
schools general, so it's one
thing to give, you know, develop
model to describe that matter is
made of particles too small to
be seen. Hallelujah, we got that
one, but we certainly
didn't get identified patterns
of daily changes in length and
direction of shadows. I like
that. I want to write a poem
about that, but they, they
failed on that, so it's OK to
have teachers find that out 2
years into their next school
year, but this doesn't say
anything about K-12.
And, and that's where the huge
changes have got to take place
in reading, uh, so I, I, I'll
just end with this one story
some people have heard it
already. I have a almost nine
year old, uh, uh, niece.
Um.
She missed K1 and 2.
Uh, schools closed in Oregon the
same the way they did here. So
no reading instruction, so she
goes into 3rd grade and they
say, well, she can't read. She
doesn't know how to read, so her
parents being of means put her
in a six week boot camp, kind of
like we tried to do here, but
this was really 6 weeks and it
was all day and it was
Slingerland, which is one of the
best structured literacy
programs you can get.
And after that, she's reading at
grade level. I saw it myself
when I visited them. It was so
shocking to me, um, how well she
improved. So, you know, there's
more and more evidence if we
will double down and really
learn how to teach reading at
the younger grade, it will have
this huge domino and ripple
effect for everything else, so I
just want us to continue to
focus on that. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Senator So.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh,
appreciate it, and it looks like
those light the trends are in
the direction we want and
closing achievement gaps in some
of those, uh, very, it's only as
indicated 3 years of of trend
data, and so it's hard to make
much of it.
We the changes that we're seeing
on the increases, are those
significant, um, and I guess at
least from my, I'd appreciate
like just a little star next to
changes that are significant.
very large data amounts and so
as you indicated, 1 or 2% points
is often very highly significant
when you're dealing with that
large but that would be helpful
as to, you know, if, if those
things are, are statistically
significant changes, and I think
fairly easy just put a little
star next to it or or something
of that sort, um.
When we talk about SAT or
various kinds of tests, those
tests are not static. Um, every
year they're doing an item
analysis, right? And they're
putting items in, they're
looking for items that
discriminate on abilities. How
does that affect what we're
trying to teach when the test is
constantly changing because of
the nature of the test. Does
You know, how does, how do
teachers know which questions
they ought to be looking for.
Does that make sense?
Yeah. So, um, Chairman Romero,
Senator Soz, I appreciate that
question and as you know,
assessments are a multimillion
dollar industry, um, and they,
you know, uh, as we don't want
to use a fancy word like
psychometricians that deal with
equating assessments, but there
is a behind the curtain, there
are processes.
And we are held to having high
quality processes because we
have to submit our assessments
to the US Department of E for
evaluation. It's called peer
review, and then they will give
us feedback about the quality of
our assessments, but we, we are
paying vendors, uh, if, if you
notice, uh 5 back before 2019,
our assessment budget request
was around 8 million. It's now,
it's, it's increased from 10 to
14 and now it's going to be 16
million Part of my request was
to
The statewide assessment system
to Senator Stewart's point, um,
there's the interim assessment
that does give that detailed
information to to teachers
during the year so they can make
that instructional change, but
the summit of MSSA serves a
different purpose. So even the
item analysis as a principle, I
can look at that I analysis and
decide, hey, I've got a very
effective teacher that does know
physical science, maybe I shift
them to, you know, there's,
there's programmatic decision.
that can be made and that's what
it's intended for. But behind
the curtain on a large scale
assessment, we know what a
typical and I'll just try to say
this an easy word, the
difficulty level of any
particular form. We try to make
that difficulty level constant
from year to year, even though
there could be 3 versions of
that form. On, on those three
forms, there could be a subset
of questions that are the same.
There's a subset of questions
that might differ and there's
also something called field
test, right? There's a subset of
questions that we are piloting.
Not scoring, we pilot those
items to make sure that when we
do the, the psychometric
evaluation of those items did
African American students
perform as well as Caucasian
students perform as Native
Americans perform on that
particular test item, right?
There's a whole process that is,
that goes behind making sure
that those assessments are
stable. Um, so I, I think that
those are kind of the hidden
things that aren't widely known
and there is a factor.
Here that we have a technical
advisory committee, uh, a
statewide tax, most states
education agencies have a tack
of national experts that are
designed to be able to evaluate
what assessment vendors do
behind the curtain if we saw, so
you know, some of the questions
we ask is when you talk about
the little asterisk, right?
You know, if the fact that we
saw, we believe we're going to
see a dip in our grade 3
explained by the pandemic, you
know, if we saw, you know, an
unexpected dip in a particular
grade area, we'd go back to our
vendor or the tech and say, hey,
can we take a look at the test
again? And is the test creating
some of the instrument
self-calibrated well, right?
because that is the most
critical thing in order to get
results. So that is something
that is like one of the
Most urgent things that we do
behind the curtain is to look at
how assessments are built,
designed and calibrated. OK,
thank you. I understand all that
the SAT, for instance, is much
more difficult today than when I
took it because students know a
lot more now than they did then,
but the test scores are still
equated to how other students
are doing and so it's constantly
recalibrating itself to to to
be.
static, so the scores to be
relatively static over the large
group
when they're, when they're going
through doing the and I lost the
the word for it, but checking
the test, uh, the population
they use it on as I've looked at
those often doesn't mirror New
Mexico. Does New Mexico give
lower proficient rates because
the test was not piloted on
population that's majority
minority, and with large native
populations in
rural areas, often the pilot
groups are don't mirror ours.
How would that be affecting our
scores, um, and kind of let me
wrap into that is the cut scores
that we use, who, how determined
those? What kind of validity is
used for those scores,
determination. OK,
so Chairman Ramiro, Senator Sols
again, thank you for your
technical questions. So we call
that differential item
functioning right when we do it,
what we call a different
analysis.
We look at test items and we
look at how do males and females
perform, how to um the different
subgroups perform against this
item and where the outcome is
the same. So again, that is a
huge process that happens behind
the curtain with stakeholders,
with educators, and technical
experts for all of our
assessments. And so any item
that has a different analysis
that is out of the norm or that
that while this was really easy,
this is really difficult for
females.
in New Mexico, we would throw
that test item out. It would not
be something that we would that
would be approved to be used.
And so again, we have to have
confidence in the processes, um,
and I think your question about
and so here at the SAT, one of
the nice things about the SAT
school day, we call it SAT
school day, but it is the
national, it is the same test as
the SAT National taken by, you
know, hundreds of thousands of
students across the globe, and
I, and in that population, yes.
Going to see various demographic
groups and I think what we're
looking for is there a
proportionality to that
representation as we would see
in New Mexico. And yes, that
those are some of the things
that that we check for. Um, and
again, uh parameters on, you
know, um, what, what items would
we keep or what items would we
not keep, but even before then,
during the item development
process on a test item has been
written and developed. We have a
stakeholder there.
bias and sensitivity review
committees that are looking at
that item from the lens of a
Native American student from the
lens of a cisgender female from
the lens of whatever it might
be. And, and making decisions
about is this an appropriate
test to put in front of a
student that might be
represented representative of
any of those types of
demographics. So even before the
analysis comes, even the design
phase that is represented on the
test. In terms of the cuts.
I told you earlier that for the
SAT, um, we had gathered about 2
summers ago after because we
couldn't have done this until we
actually had the test
administered and gotten the
results. We had gathered over 75
and I think the last time I was
with the committee,
I shared uh educators from
across the state had gathered to
look at
Is that, is that my vow to take
to take off the stage,
um to to gather.
Look at it, we call it a a
bookmarking process, right?
standard setting and to look at
each test item to say what a
student that is novice, should a
student that is novice be able
to master that item? Should a
student that is advanced, be
able to master that item,
you know what to bookmark where
they think certain cuts should
be. But for the SAT, when we got
our stakeholder groups and these
were again representative of
high school educators from
across the state, but they also
looked at
Other states other SAT school
states had set their standards
and um because it was, because
it is a national assessment our
our teachers that did our
standard setting wanted to
adopt, decided to adopt the
national cut scores that College
board uses for the SAT. So the
national cut scores are the same
as our state cut scores, which
is a pretty high bar, right?
Students really have to do well
to be considered proficient.
Chair, I was thinking more like
the, is it the messa, the MSSA,
the one that we have here that
is more just unique to New
Mexico, what was it validated
against as far as where the cut
scores were set on, great
question, because Chairman
Ramirez, Senator Sol, great
question. It came up, I going
back to Senator Stewart's
comment about NE or being
mentioned. We looked at not only
during is the other the teachers
doing the kind of the individual
bookmarking process, uh,
Of what they think and then
coming together in their grade
level groups to kind of validate
against each other, but we also
looked at things like NAEP,
right? NAEP scores at 4th and
8th. Do we, we're going to get
our next round of Nape scores
come January, and you know, this
is a double-edged sword with
states. Uh, when your, when your
state results look close to your
NAP results, uh, you know, you
know, great news, you know our
our our tests are calibrated,
but at the same time, NEP is not
designed.
And Common Core state standards,
right? So it's it's a
double-edged sword for me to
speak about, um, but we did look
at what's our overall
proficiency in 4th and 8th grade
for for math and reading? Are we
widely different if we set our
cut score here, does that get us
close to, to what NAP says. We
also looked at things like Tim's
pearls, um, other international
assessments in which we get
comparable age appropriate,
grade level appropriate data
from other types of sources.
And then, um, and I, and, and
again, you know, I kind of
passed assessments that that we
might have been used and what
was generally the performance
level in those assessments.
Thank you, Mr. Cherry, is, you
know, we talk a lot about the
reading and certainly and thanks
to to Senator Stewart, we've had
some real efforts and it looks
like that's paying off and where
it's being robustly used in very
significant ways. I'm a math
teacher, so I'm her counterpart
on the other side, we've got
to have the same focus on math.
People are not appalled by just
the basic level of where we are
in math and not concerned about
that at the same level we are
with reading, we are doing our
students a disservice and so I
appreciate the need to start
focusing on that and we need to
push our colleges and
universities to focus more on
quality math instruction, um,
and the PE to work on
retrofitting, so to speak, the
teachers are already there in
areas of math and high quality
math that
leads to increased achievement.
It was the biggest concern that,
uh, Judge Singleton had on the
Yazi Martinez lawsuit was the
test scores and math was
substantially below reading as
far as the the problems of an
equitable education in New
Mexico. We've been focusing on
reading. We've got to put that
same effort into math. Thank
you.
Yes
Representative.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. um, thank
you so much for the presentation
and all this information again
as a math teacher, I think this
is exciting. I have some
questions that um they have been
addressed already but I want to
clarify, um.
When you mentioned about um
reporting and making growth and
that's amazing. And I don't know
if it is possible for us to know
the specifics of that. Let's say
I have a 4th grade student and
3rd grade, my student was below
proficient in 4th grade it's
close to proficiency.
That means that my student
achieved that 3 grade
proficiency plus the standards
of this year, is that what we
are measuring or is only on what
I'm delivering, because that's
If I have a, if I'm teaching 8th
grade and I have students with
4th grade level and there are
new proficiency in aid, that's
not a small growth. It's 4 years
growth.
So if we could find that
information, I don't know if
it's possible, but um uh uh see
that's not even achieving close
to new proficiency that's 4
years growth, and that's huge.
Is that anything that we been
able to measure,
Mr. Chairman Romero represented
Coolla, thank you for your
question. And I, I want to make
sure that I understood your
question correctly. Um, so, you
know, I think when we, whenever
we use growth models, people are
questioning how much, how
little, you know, how long those
types of questions. First of
all, the point about your 3rd
grade example. So we know that
there is a discrete set of
learning targets.
With our state standards at
grade 3 and then there is
another set of discrete set of
learning targets for grade 4.
However, things like we know
that for language arts, for
example, skills built upon
skills, right? And it's a
progression of skills. Um, you
know, it's, there's still, for
example, understanding literary
text is something that students
are still held to do in both 3rd
grade and 4th grade. The
complexity or maybe
understanding the voice of the
narrator's perspective might be
something.
That's in addition to beyond the
3rd grade, but it's still
analyzing literary text. And so
I think in in in in that case,
um, and I think this was one of
your questions. What are we
measuring growth on which set of
standards, so it's that
progression of growth. So we
look at where was the student
and relative to their 3rd grade
standards based on their 3rd
grade skill score and if they
improved, you know, if they show
growth with their 4th grade
standards.
Um, and they do have an increase
in their their skill score has
adjusted where we can see that
growth, even if they're not
proficient yet. Um, it's still
an indicative of their, their
learning progression um between
3rd and 4th grade, it signals,
what is my growth between the
3rd grade standards and the 4th
grade standards, but most
importantly, it's signaling what
is my growth to college career
readiness, right at the end of
my academic journey. And we, in
all ways, we want to see that
Continue it to grow. I can't
remember the exact uh um
percentile and Tim, I don't know
if you remember from Damien's
presentation, but I don't know
if it was like the sixty-fifth
percentile is one academic
year's worth of growth, so a
student that is at the 60 5th
percentile that indicates
signals.
Stephen Heil, if you're
listening to this, you're
probably going to yell at me
later, but that might signal one
year of um academic or
anticipated academic growth for
students. So when we saw some of
those numbers that were in the
80s and 70s, that is more than a
year's expected growth. We know
that an ineffective teacher can
pull back a student in anywhere
between 3 to 7 years, right? Um,
but, but to be able to see these
incredible gains of growth, um.
That is beyond one year's
expected growth is really
incredible. Yeah. Thank you,
thank you. Yeah, that's um and
some of them the topics or could
be measured on progression like
that, um, not exactly everything
in math could be measured like
that. So, um, that would be
really interesting to see and I
think will be very helpful for
teachers to know uh when they
receive the scores in my student
grow 3 or 4 years grade level or
got closer to this.
I think it's, I don't know
stitch would be information that
I would appreciate.
Um,
The other question that I have
here is you mentioned also about
uh some of the students get
stuck on in exiting the um the
um EL label label status. Um, do
you have um any information on
how, what is the average, how
long it takes a student to exit
the EL status. I don't have that
number that I feel like I can
chairman Romero, representative
of Guerrilla. I don't have that
number that I feel like I can uh
Ideally, the department would
aim that a student would exit
within 5 years. Um, what the
average, I don't have that
number in front of me. It's a,
it's a great question. Um, and I
think one of the reasons why we
want to look at the exit
criteria, and I don't know if
I have it as an appendix slide
here. Let me see.
This is an interesting, I don't
know if Representative Grola can
see it the way that the, but if
you have it as part of your
notebook, um,
I shared this slide, and let me
see if I can. Do you have a copy
of it? Oh, can I seriously.
Thank you, Tim. I share this
slide because um
Again, they said this is one of
the things that keep me up at
night. We've been giving this
access test since 2010,
um Representative Grola, it's
probably going to be towards the
end of the slide deck.
I don't know if members, I don't
think members have access to the
access. OK then um in this
particular, and I don't know if
we want to move the the the
We we'll send it to you. OK. OK.
but in this particular slide,
what it's showing is that we've
been exiting students, um, you
know, prior to the 2017 standard
setting we were exiting
students, 5000, 7000, 8000
students a year. And then when
we reset their standards. We
believe that standard was set
very high and our exit criteria
was a 5.0. Many states lowered
their exit criteria after 2017.
that the consortium set a very
high bar for exiting.
We lowered our exit criteria in
2023. But what you notice is the
significant decrease in the
students that are exiting EL
status because our exit
criteria, I believe still
remains fairly high. Um, so I
think that has played a factor
in extending the number of
years, um, that, that we would
expect students to exit,
obviously, just by, you know,
looking at this data alone, um,
but I
I'll find out and, and share it
with the EEC your specific
question. I couldn't cite it
confidently right now.
I would like to look into that
to see the relationship between
that and the proficiency on this
specific groups. Um, another
question, um, you have an
average of how many tests the
students take on a on on a
school year because he's, I
mean, it's amazing to see that.
I love the data, but as a
teacher also I know that takes
time off my teaching.
I don't have in terms of, so
it's about 1,
1.5 school days.
So if you added up all the
testing, right? So if you added
up the summative testing, if
there's a required MOI testing,
BOI testing, a required progress
monitoring the combined total on
average is about 1 day and a
half of classroom time. Does
that answer your question? Well,
give me an idea. Thank you, Mr.
Sher. Um, another question, I
have a couple of questions more
and that's it. Uh there is been
a lot of support for,
For teachers and literacy, you
mentioned also that the support
on families and communities, uh,
is any um initiative to also
support the the communities and
the, the, the systems around the
students through the school
system.
Yeah,
um, Chairman Romero,
Representative Garrola and um I,
this is one of the reasons why
we have asked for funding for
MLSS or multi-layered systems of
support. Um, again, I pointed
out that it's one of, you know,
many of our schools and within
our 15 highest growth schools we
see that they have submitted an
MLS's plan, and some of them
have also voluntarily
received they wanted the MLSS
coaches, but within
are multi-layered systems of
support that family parental
component is, is a part of that,
right? We want to encourage our
schools to continually engage
parents and communities, um,
something else that we initiated
this year along with our early
childhood education care
department was something called
the Early Development
instrument, the early
development instrument is a way
to uh uh is a way to to see what
types of skills students
Enter um kindergarten with
developmental type skills. They
ability, their their hand-eye
coordination, being able to walk
a straight line, those types of
things. A part of that is also
something called the check. It's
a parent survey. So we're asking
kindergarten parents to complete
a survey about what they believe
is their child's level of
kindergarten readiness, and it
might have things like access to
food, right? A part of or access
to playgrounds in the.
Part of this is to provide
community type information. It's
a census survey so that us as a
PED public education of the
early childhood Education Care
Department in relationship to
community-wide initiatives can
see what resources our families
lacking the most or what
resources might we need to
buffer supports for students
coming in, um, additional
resources. And so there are
initiatives being taken. I know
that and I cannot, I'm sorry, I
cannot speak.
The entire bureau that does
family community engagement. I
know that we have a family
cabinet that um that, that
helps, you know, guide some of
our decisions, but it is
something integral as part of
our agency strategic plan.
Thank you, thank you for adding
that information and the last is
not my last Mr. Char is not a
question, probably a request,
uh, Senators also already talked
about making sure that how can
we make sure that our test is
relevant for our area, right?
So in, in the number 3 on
legislative considerations uh in
the past high quality
instruction material for reading
and language and following what
um Tim mentioned here, I will
also ask materials that focus on
language and culture as a result
of the Martinez justice lawsuit,
um, I think I'm relating to that
to that making sure that our
test is something that is
recognized, um, I'm trying to
have a students who are not.
In the status status for life,
also making sure that um they
they can access materials to
their own level and to their own
needs. Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Representative Garrett.
Thanks Mr. Chair. Thank you
both. It was a good tag team
combination, so I really wanna
compliment, um, the people who
put that idea together, um, and
your slide 20 Tim, I think is
more important than people
realize because you both
emphasized the need for the
collaboration time which House
Bill 130 that the chair and me
sponsored, wanted to make sure
because if we don't have that
ongoing monthly.
to look at all these test scores
and data items. It's not
something, believe me, at 11
o'clock at night when you really
want to go to bed at home, it's
not an effective time to do
that. But, um, Tim, you also
pointed out something that I
think is really important that
the chairman were talking about
on another issue is the state
can make rules like House Bill
130 embedded collaboration time.
But when you get to the school
level, is it happening because I
know as I
Talk to teachers in APS with
their new schedule, a lot of
that built and collaborated, uh,
collaborative time is getting
taken away, so I think we have
to realize the state can make
laws, but our district's doing
it and at the school level, is
it happening, so that's just
something I want to point out,
um, and, and on the test days,
uh, uh, start to call you
Reverend Gerrilla
representative girl
um.
You know, we can say it's a day
and a half, but as a longtime
school test coordinator who did
all the tests including access.
It it it's like 10 days of
disruption because you have to
change your schedule. You have
to change the bill schedule. You
have to figure out a lot of
things, so testing can be
disruptive, um, but that brings
me, and, and then another point,
Mr. Chair, that I want to make
when we talk about educator
prep, um, they need more
preparation and thank you, Lynn,
for
finding what MLSS is because it,
it's hard to remember that
that's making effective
solutions to kids with academic
behavior issues, so thanks for
saying that, um, where was I
going? Oh, OK, um, on the
interim assessments, this is a
long time pet peeve of mine.
These interim assessments which
give effective beginning of the
year, middle of the year, and
end of the year data to
teachers.
To guide their instruction
generally do not include
writing. And so there's a
disconnect between the final
summative assessment which has
writing both in English language
arts and in math because math is
useless if you can't explain
what the heck you're doing to.
So I just know that that's a
real shortcoming of interim
assessments, um, that is a major
shortcoming, which another aha
had.
While I was sitting is here is
that our teacher prep programs,
we don't emphasize writing and
writing is where you put
together the factual knowledge
and the critical thinking if you
can then explain it in your
writing, you've really analyzed
it. Far too many teachers at all
levels are not confident
writers, and therefore, it's
hard to teach writing, so I just
think that's an area I'm gonna,
you know, ask arrests for all of
us and then.
my question again on testing
relevance, um,
I stay,
the, the kids do I station in K1
and 2, and then they transition
into a summative test that has
writing. So how are we gonna
bridge that? Because I, I am
not, uh,
Champion of I station for that
reason. That's one of my
reasons. How do we get around
that?
Um, Chairman Romero and
Representative Garrett, and it's
always a pleasure to see you,
and I really appreciate your
questions. There's a lot there.
I think one thing I'll just
opportunity cost is being a
former social studies teacher.
What do you give up to get
something else? So at the same
breath, we know that we want to
reduce testing time and that
disruption of 10 days that
you've experienced. I imagine
adding writing.
to testing. It's one of the
things when we engage with
teachers about how can we
reconfigure the interim
assessment. It's a double-edged
sword for them, right, because
then that takes time. Do they
want, do you want an AI person
to score the the writing? Do
they score the writing? So I, I,
I hear you. I want to say I hear
you, but I also want to be
practical in terms, you know,
the opportunity costs, what do
you get to get something else.
Um, I, I also want to, um, you
know, in terms of the writing
deficits and I
I think that as we look at and
as we've seen other states look
at the use of AI, artificial
intelligence. It's something
huge on the landscape, and I
know that Utah has implemented
some AI writing tools that they
have seen for a few years. It
might be something that that we,
we don't want to take a look at
and see what investments could
be made, but I also know that
just because Ice Station doesn't
have writing, it doesn't mean
that students aren't writing,
right? We know that that
students in K12 are
writing.
One of the things because
multiple times when I've been to
at LESE and you in particular
Representative Garrett, I know
that you've been concerned about
the fidelity, and I, and I think
the word I'll use here in terms
of impact of programs, you've
been concerned about Ice
Station. So I actually took that
to heart. Um, I had my team do a
regression analysis. We took a
cohort of 18,000 students that
took I station at grade 2.
Followed those same students to
MSSA at grade 3 and what was it
was not the finding that I
expected.
I in essentially the regression
model ends up saying that um a
student that is proficient
levels 34, and 5 and I station
has anywhere between a 75 to 77%
or a little bit higher actually
in I station math even of being
proficient on MSSA.
Which is a very, very high
correlation. Anything above 0.5
is considered a high
correlation. And so that
actually gave me a lot of
comfort, actually, you know,
thinking that I station is a
pretty teachers like to use the
word predictive, right? We know
that Ice Station and MSSA are
totally different tests, but at
the same time, you know, we're
combining these in terms of our
statewide longitudinal data and
we do want to see, had I seen
something dismal, right? I would
have said, hey, we might want to
reconsider here, um, but
That that was I mean it was
promising to me that we saw that
correlation and we did that for
both math and language, math and
reading.
And so it seems to be, um, you
know, I would say it's a useful
instrument. What I think our
literacy team would say is that
in the subset of schools, they
funded with the not only just
with I station, obviously we
fund I Station, the assessment
monitoring tool for all schools,
but there's a subset of schools
that are also funded by the Ice
Station intervention curriculum.
Um, schools that are using that
ice station intervention
curriculum, might you might see
a slighter.
Uh, increase in gains with that.
I know, I, I'm not sure how
that's being funded, but I think
what you also speak to is the
fidelity of implementation. To
your point about chart 20. How
do we know, right? Because I
Station will say that this is
effective if you use it for 20
minutes or what x amount of
time. Any, any program that is
kind of off the shelf will say
that results by Carnegie Mellon
or whatever university they
worked with will say that this
will be effective for students
or you will see gains by the
fidelity of information.
That is a hard thing to capture.
Fortunately, I mean, I think
that's part of our mission and
priority schools, right? We know
that we know who our lowest
performing schools are, but the
school accountability model.
They're, they're out there in
our schools, they're doing site
monitoring, but it's also the
work of our MLSS, our
multi-layer systems of support
coaches, right, because they're
actually on the ground looking
at what are the weaknesses in
coaching teachers on how to make
those gains. And so I think
we've got the literacy coaches
in place.
But I, I, is there enough eyes
around classrooms, but we don't
want them to do it because
somebody's, even when somebody's
watching, we want them to do it
even when nobody's watching. Um,
but that's, that is a hard thing
for us to have a handle on and
to know for sure, but anyway,
and I hope that Iation
information is helpful. Thank
you, very helpful. One more
question on the access for ELLs,
um, and you don't have to do
this now is an exiting, can we,
when we're testing these kids
and
These grades, it's really
important to know when they
entered our system and then I
would be interested in knowing
when the 4th and 5th graders
exit at such a high percentage.
Who are they? Are they people
that are your true ELLs in the
sense that they came from
another country or they came
from Mexico, um, are they Native
American students who simply
don't test as well. Um, I would
be interested to know who are
these exiting kids and then at
what stage.
What grade did the kids enter?
Um, the system so that they're
tested, but you don't have to
tell me now, but I'd be
interested to know that. Thank
you.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Garret, I just want to let you
know that we, we are having a
presentation scheduled for next
month about English learners,
you'll get a lot of information
about exiting status. Uh, we've
also done some work about um how
they do on these, on our state
assessments after exiting EL
status, so we'll have hopefully
a lot more useful information
next month.
Resent Figaro.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Just a
couple of topics. One is a
concern about timing and the
timeline, um looking at Tim's
presentation on page 5.
And director Vasquez has
mentioned that this data is used
at school sites for everything
from staffing decisions to
scheduling decisions to
professional development to
target where needs are to
deciding who to target for the
accelerated learning, for the
tutoring programs, um,
With those crucial decisions
being made, November is way too
late.
What do you need from us as a
legislature to move this
timeline up so that cleaning can
happen in June, so that
validated data can be used to
calculate school support
decisions in August, or better
yet, in July before the school
year starts because doing it in
November means it's affecting
only half of their learning year
and that's a waste. We've got to
get the information.
Into schools to make the
decisions sooner and some
clarification on what
information they have in June.
But this schoolwide data is
really important.
Um, Chairman Romero represented
Figueroa. Thank you for your
question.
So again, I just want to remind
everybody that districts receive
their data, their individual
student data from an aggregated
data for their classrooms,
buildings and districts from the
vendor much earlier than when we
have uh as a, you know, federal
calculated proficiency and
accountability rates. And so
that November, there's actually
a deadline by the end of October
that we produce score ratings
and then we get report cards
state this report.
Cards out in January.
I think the challenges are
multifold. I mean, it's so easy
to say what's the magic bullet
to improve this. Um, I'll give
you a just real practical
challenge. Um, I, I last 2 years
ago, I think there was one
charter school that didn't have
a student information system. it
was a very small charter. They
were just manually uploading
data rather than having a power
school system or or or some kind
of system like that. We also
know that when humans are, you
know, uploading data, it's very
subject to air. The air
happen as soon as I register the
student, right? I could put in
the wrong middle initial, I
could transpose a number. Um,
and so that alone, when we do
data validation, and we get a
vendor file back and it doesn't
have the correct SSID or it, it,
you know, we can match certain
parts, but in, in our statewide
system, the students showing up
at a different grade level, um,
or at a different school even.
So right now we're not operating
on a real-time data system. I
know that there is significant
amount of
Lift and work happening right
now in our agency to get us
towards a real-time data system.
It's just that we're not there.
Um, I think that there are
states that possibly are able
to, if you looked at even though
Tim did a comparison of when do
states get their data out there
as a title, you know, federally
calculated data out. Ours is a
little bit later in the
timeline, but what we don't see
is what do those states have
that, that, that we don't,
right? Um, we know that
States that have statewide SIS
systems statewide student
information systems, right?
They're able to follow the IEP
of a student can follow that,
that student when they moved
from school to school rather
than electronic copy of an IEP
being handed to them by, you
know, a human being. There are
so many advantages in the
statewide SIS, um, if we had a
statewide SIS, we could pull a
student information when we
roster students to, you know, to
the vendor portal for testing.
Um.
But I think it's everything.
It's, I think it's multi-fold,
it's training at the LEA level
about how to make sure that they
submit clean data, right? And do
they have the right systems that
are speaking to our state
system. It's us getting our
house internally at PED with our
IT infrastructure, our house in
order in which there's great
initiatives happening right now.
There's a data governance um
team that's being pulled
together and then it's also, you
know, the actual system.
themselves and I know that um I
don't know how, if anybody else
has mentioned an SIS, um, but
that, but that is something that
would be helpful in being able
to validate data faster.
OK, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Director. So a statewide
SAS LEA training, um, and some
data governance work seemed to
be the three big things we need
to do to move up this timeline,
OK?
My other question is skipping to
page 10 of the director's
presentation.
For legislative purposes, this
data informs our decision making
and particularly around funding
and again I'm going to say the
timeline affects that. Thank
you, Tim, and thank you,
director, for giving us this
early data, this preliminary
data now.
In September, but we know the
schedule for budget building in
New Mexico. This is still a
little bit late, especially if
we don't have the cross tabs
that you've started on page 10
here.
But we need to assess what's
working and some of the things
that aren't here that I would
really like to see Mr. Chair,
are the investments we're making
in teacher preparation, making a
difference. Where's the tab for
high quality instructors and how
is that correlating to any
growth that we're seeing in our
students. Do we have data on
class size. Does that have any
effect? Do we have data on what
the things you were asking.
for like math coaching. Is there
a tab where we can see math
coaching is showing growth in
student data. These are all
things I would expect the answer
to be yes.
Uh, but to continue funding
these things to expand funding,
we have to make choices and we
need this data to inform those
choices. So again, moving up the
timeline is important, getting
as much as we can by November
seems super late and I don't
know if there's anything we can
do about that, Mr. Chair. Um,
but that's what I would like to
see out of the cross
referencing. There's a myriad of
things we have to make decisions
about.
Funding and if we could see any
relevant and valid connections
to student growth, it's helpful.
Thanks.
Represent way.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you for your presentation. I'm
going to be quick. I, as I'm
listening and and uh and then
reading um the memo from March,
um, about the demonstration of
competency. Um, correct, we do
not right now high school, they
do not have to have any
demonstration of competency,
correct?
Chairman Romero, Representative
Moya, that's correct. So that
concerns me in a, in a way, Mr.
Chair, only because, OK, I, I
teach mostly juniors. I teach
physics. Um, so I get to see, I,
I see them, um, coming in and
not being able to do basic
algebra that my general physics
do, um, my AP physics can handle
the the the trig and and stuff
that we that we do in there, but
my, my general physics can a lot
of them cannot. Um.
But I also see I get them. They
leave my class. These are all my
students when they do most of
their testing.
Um, so, um, so these are that
that's the grade level that they
do. I mean they might take PSAT
sophomore year, but other than
that, the SATs, their their
science test, everything else is
done their junior year. And I
get the questions from them that
then they ask, is this required
for graduation?
And I'm like,
no.
Well, then why am I taking it?
And, and, and that's their
thing, but I mean, they may not
need it for graduation, but we
need it. That's what schools are
used to get our grade. That's
what our state is used to assess
where we're at and everybody
harps on us constantly because
of where we're at. But that's
the thing. We're not, they don't
see value in this test.
And, and that is our, our, our
question is how can we get our
11th graders, our high schoolers
that are now looking for, I
mean, especially once they're in
their junior year, they're,
they're seeing their way out.
They see the light at the end of
the tunnel, and these tests are
done at the end. They're there,
there's, they're tasting the
senioritis because they see,
they see the seniors doing it
right now and only because I see
it. I see the, I see these kids
and how they relate to their
world at this point on a daily
basis and
And, and that is our struggle
and the conversation we've even
had at our school.
Is how do we get them to care
because that SAT, um, uh, you
know, those that want and
already have a focus on college
will care because they want the
stuff to get into college.
But those that are going to go
well with their, with their
father.
As soon as they get out, or
those that already are are um
farming with, with the, with
their family farm, they don't
see the value in this. They
don't. And, and when they have
that daylong SAT test, we see
them when we're proctoring these
things. We see them by the end
of the day, they're just
clicking.
That's it. Like they are not
even engaged whatsoever because
they're done.
And so how do we get them to
care if it's not because they
have to achieve something.
Um, which you, they still have
to find value in that, um.
What is it? What can we do?
That, that's, that's my problem
and my question because I,
because I see it every day.
Chairman Representative Moya,
thank you for your question. And
I think that um this is, you
know, why the DOCs were in place
for so long.
Um, and for our state, and, and
again, this is my 3rd state
agency. I was at the Kansas
Department of Ed for 5 years. I
as the Maryland Department of
Ed. Um, I've been in this
department of ed for a combined
total of 8 years. It's very
unusual for a state to have 5
hoops for a student to jump
through states that do have some
sort of testing requirement.
It's usually
Math and reading, right? Um, but
I think one thing that I've
learned about the New Mexico
landscape that is very different
than Kansas and Maryland, is
that, you know, the value of
local control, right? It's a
Kansas is also heavy local
control, but they've had a very
stable um department that I'd
say that.
High schools are the diploma
granting institutions. We are
not the the the ones granting
diplomas, although the state
sets course requirements. Um, I
think that the state did move
into the right direction by
removing assessments as a
barrier to access to
post-secondary and a barrier to
access to graduation. However,
that being said, we haven't
really had a testing requirement
in place in high school since
the pandemic, even though House
Bill 171 didn't get passed until
the past cycle, um.
We suspended that requirement
for testing because there was a
lack of testing um available
because of the pandemic, but
yet, even with the lack of
testing, it didn't really bump
our graduates to extraordinary
heights.
It seems to me, our graduates
are pretty flat. They might be
increasing, you know, by a
percentage or two but they seem
pretty flat for the most part,
which tells me that high schools
are probably still towing a
pretty heavy line for what their
expectations are before granting
a student a diploma. And even
though the state has removed the
statewide requirement for a DOC,
it is not removed. It is not not
permitting high schools to
provide their own summative
assessments or to set their own
measures for grant.
Graduation. Your Board of
Education can require your
students to take some sort of
cumulative test, right, even
though that we at the state have
suspended that with the passing
of the bill, but, but you have
local control over your diploma
granting powers
and, and absolutely are there
districts that do that? They
have to complete a portfolio or
some other, some other piece of
evidence or artifact that says
that yes we believe as a local
institution that you're, you are
ready.
To exit our system. And so I
would just, um, I want to tell
you, I hear what you're saying.
Uh, I'm not so convinced that
our high schools have let their
their their pedal off the gas in
terms of what they expect for
students to be able to know and
do in order to graduate to
graduate. I don't see anybody is
just graduating kids on or also
our graduates would be
skyrocketing, right? Um, and so
I think also with HQIM we know
that high quality instruction
materials includes both checks
for understanding.
And high quality summit of
assessments. So at the end of
the chapter or at the end of the
semester, at the end of the
year. Those HQI materials have
assessments, resources built
into them that can be leveraged,
and if not, we still have all of
our end of course exams. The
state back in the DOC when we
were heavy, heavy into DOC,
um, we have over 80 some odd
intercourse exams for various
subjects and grade levels. Those
are available to our schools to
compile.
their own that you can use those
items to compile your own state
level assessments for science,
for math, for social studies,
um, but, um, I, I wanted to just
share that context with you, but
thank you for your question. Mr.
Chair, and um
Miss Director Ms. Vazquez, I, I
in no way, shape or form think
that the high schools are
lowering. I know in my class I,
I have a very rigorous
expectations and my, my students
will usually meet them, but it
takes a while for them to
understand that this is
I expect and this is what
they're going to achieve. Um,
but, uh, and that's why a lot of
them don't like my class, but,
um, because I make them work,
um, and, and I know high schools
across the the state or the same
way. I know what the teachers
are doing. I understand what the
teachers are doing. My question
is, um,
Where we are graded on a test
that is not required for
graduation. We are graded on
test scores for students that
like I said, I see them
clicking.
Because they have, they see no
value in it.
Um, so how do we get them to
value it because I know what's
happening in our schools because
I see it in the classrooms. I
hear it from the teachers. I see
it from the from the students. I
see the work that's being
produced. Um, but that is not.
An indicator of our test scores.
It's not. And how do, how do we
fix that?
Thank you.
Yeah, I don't have anybody else
on my list, um.
I guess, to that point, it's
interesting that you bring that
up, representative, because it's
similar to the question or the
issue we heard yesterday around
attendance and how do we make
that a part of um our school's
culture, um, and I see that very
much the same way because you
just listed a few reasons why
those assessments for juniors
are important. So how do we
instill that at the school level
amongst us? Is it our
responsibility or is it PED's
responsibility to
Instill that into, into our
students. I think it's an
interesting question. And for
me, I mean, I try to weigh in on
the side of making that case for
students and I think it's
difficult to the way we have to
organize testing. I'll add this
to your point, is that we have a
day when it's PSAT, all the
sophomores come if it's SAT the
this this this uh juniors come
in and it's only them. And like
for us, it's on a Thursday and.
They're the only ones coming in.
Everybody else is off, and then
I have students that I've never
met before, taking that test. So
part of it, I mean, how do you
remedy that? Um.
And how do you organize that?
It's a difficult question, but
how do you start instilling that
sort of why this matters at so
many different levels to our
students at the school level,
um, quickly
Romero I want this to be of
value to you and also
Representative Moya. Part of the
requirements of when we and
again going back to why does the
data come out so late. We have
to apply the federal
accountability rules. The
federal government says you
Can credit a school with a
child's test score, unless that
child has met full academic
year. Full academic year means
that they've been enrolled,
continuously enrolled for 90
days. They appear at the 120
snapshot and they appear at the
EOI snapshot. Any child, so a
child that walks into your, your
school for the first time, 2
days before the test window,
that test would be kicked out
for your school ratings. We
would not include that student
score. That student might still
receive
a score, but it would not be
considered a valid score for
rating your school or making
high stakes decisions. So that's
actually part of the extensive
cleaning process when we do data
validation. We only rate schools
based on the student population
that meets the full academic
year requirement. OK.
No, I, I, I certainly appreciate
that and I think to the, to the
issue is that how do we instill
that sort of like intrinsic
motivation within our students,
and I see that very much as my
part of my job and I hope that
it's the same amongst the
colleagues that I work with as
well is that it's not just for,
oh, what, what is this going to
get me? Um, am I going to get a
reward for doing this or not,
but it's that intrinsic
motivation as to how we try to,
as a social studies teacher,
Try to get our students
interested in in civic
engagement. It's not just me,
me, me, what am I gonna get on
this side? It's how do we make
the case that what we're doing
might be at a personal sacrifice
like all of us are doing at this
table, taking time away from the
work that we do to serve the
members of our community. Um, I
see that as in the same light,
but certainly something subject
in um of debate. Um one thing I
was wondering, um, uh,
Director, maybe Tim, um.
is
How do we start leveraging.
Me and my colleagues, social
studies, um, because it's very
much ELA related, it's very much
um for economic side, very much
math related, um, I mean, part
of our idea in House Bill 130
was that embedded professional
development adding enough time
for educators to work across
departments so that I know what
are
Grade and level appropriate
questions to ask my economics
students based on, you know,
Graphing abilities, statistical
analysis, um, um, and then with
my English colleagues on, you
know, where could we bolster
their reading abilities in
certain areas and and work with
students, so I guess while we
focus in these two areas, and I
mean, some people say that math
and math particularly have have
it difficult in teaching. I
honestly think it's the opposite
where us in social studies are
spanning so much.
um that we can do any number of
things with our students, and
it's all.
A supplement to the curriculum
they're getting in English and
math, except I'm afraid that
sometimes it's so broad that we
don't have direct instruction
for us as educators, like, no,
you need to go here. You need to
go here with your reading
instruction with your writing
instruction with your math
instruction. Um, so I guess my
question is like, what is our
role? Um, what would you suggest
is our role as social studies
teachers, not directly.
English or math teachers, if you
have any ideas.
Uh, Mr. Chair, thank you for the
question. I think my, my
foremost idea, I think you
you've already touched on is
just time and collaboration. Um,
I think the assessment
conference that that PED hosted
a couple of weeks ago. Uh was
really illuminative for me on
the power of PLCs and the power
of of uh instructional coaches
who understand student data and
uh who can help teachers, uh,
literally game plan.
Down to the standards level,
like exactly what to work on and
that that data should be
available for all teachers and
all subjects, uh, and all
standards. And so, um, part of
it is the responsibility that
that PLC has elevating that
responsibility and saying, you
know, well, we are a team of
social studies teachers, um,
today we're going to look at
math data because that's
something um that, that, you
know, our, our standards
interlink in economics, at
least, right? Um, so I think the
Understanding that building an
understanding among teachers
that that is the responsibility
of those teachers in addition to
providing the adequate
resources, the adequate
training, the adequate time to
review that data.
Chairman Romero, I say this from
my six years as a, as a middle
school social studies teacher
and then also as a two years as
a classroom principal here in
New Mexico. So I think, you
know, you hear these adages like
reading is everybody's
responsibility across the
curriculum, right? And there is
a lot of truth to that, but I
executed at the local level, and
I'll give you an example at at
my middle school in Cuba, going
back to what Tim said about the
PLC. I had my PLC, um, once a
month.
I'm sorry, um, once a week,
somebody, whether it was the
science teacher, the social
studies teacher, the math
teacher or the language arts
teacher provided a writing
activity to students and, and we
decided that cohesively, so it
could have been a, a writing
prompt in social studies that
was the context of something
being taught in social studies,
but we were all reviewing that
student's work for writing. And
what was most critical about
that is that the feedback and
most in what
To Representative Garrett's
point, most times when you see
feedback for writing for from
teachers on top of the student's
paper might say, good job, you
know, our, our nice conclusion,
whatever, but you don't see like
you didn't really support your
thesis statement, right? Or your
point too was very weak because
of this particular reason. And
so to hone in and so I think
there's a collective
responsibility. I, I, I, I agree
that there's a collective
responsibility for all of us to
motivate our students. We share
that with you at the state
level.
Right, that's just, this is why
we have things in our MLSS to
build, to speak to those
systems. But there's a
collective responsibility um for
uh just as and I will also kind
of flip that table a little bit
for you, um, Chairman Romero is
that on the SAT there is a
subscale score. There's a
subscale for social studies that
is embedded in the SAT. You're
probably aware of that. But we
know that there are science
items or items across our other
assessments that are in the
context of
Social studies. So I think it
has to work both in both ways
and we're conscious of that. Um.
I hope that helps answer the
question.
Mr. Chair, I think
You've already done one thing,
uh, which is, which is the new
graduation requirements and, and
what I mean by that is by
allowing some flexibility at the
school level to make those kinds
of decisions about what's
important, what courses should
look like, um, obviously time is
a is a big one. The other thing
I think is something maybe you
want to be careful about not
doing, which is putting sort of
false constraints or constraints
on school systems that actually
lead to the sort of
disconnection that you're
talking about, and I would use
the demonstrations of competency
as an example, when you had so
Many demonstrations of
competency where you as a social
studies teacher was were
responsible for a particular
test and an and an EL teacher
was ELA teacher was responsible
for another test that actually
got in the way and I and uh and,
you know, as a teacher heard
other teachers say, I can't work
with you on this particular
thing because I'm actually being
measured on something completely
different than you're being
measured on. And so having
different targets for different
teachers, and obviously all of
that was in the was in the this
theme of accountability and
making
sure that students were learning
what what they should have been
learning and I think that was an
admirable goal, but it's how
you, how you go about that. And
then I think part of the other
piece about graduation
requirements and some of the
other things that you've now
funded in work-based learning
and career technical education
really allows for the
integration of multiple subject
areas across across content
areas. And of course, that's
easier said than done,
logistically, it's difficult.
People aren't necessarily
trained
To do that sort of thing. So as
you think through both policy,
professional development, pieces
for teachers, and then
continuing to signal to school
districts that they have that
level of flexibility in
determining what it looks like
at the local levels will
continue to be important.
I appreciate you all's insight
into that question. Thank you.
Um, thank you all for
presenting. We appreciate it.
Thank you.
I think it was a pleasure.
All right, folks, so we'll
transition to item 9.
I think we'll have presentation
materials making their way
around.
To
Thank you.
And tell me what it is.
Oh
All right, so we're a little bit
behind schedule, but we'll play
some catch up and but we have
our next great panel in front of
us and Doctor Sanchez Corriego,
welcome back to AA.
This is a first principal here
at Trisco Heritage.
I know what that is.
Oh yeah.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman.
Members of the committee in the
midst of this cooling mist. My
name is Mary Andrews, and I'm
your senior policy analyst
covering whole child education.
I'm grateful to be here today
along with experts from New
Mexico Appleseed and Cuba
Independent School District to
talk about a conditional cash
transfer pilot for students
experiencing homelessness that
was piloted during the 2020 2021
school year.
New Mexico apple seed designed
and implemented this
intervention to provide
educational and financial
support to students with
inadequate housing in
partnership with the Laelin
Foundation and piloted this
program in Cuba Independent
School District and West Las
Vegas School District.
To provide a bit of context in
the 2020, 2021 school year,
according to the public
education department. There were
8,135 students experiencing
homelessness enrolled in New
Mexico public schools.
Students who experience
inadequate housing substantial
academic challenges compared to
their adequately housed
counterparts, including higher
rates of absenteeism and lower
graduation rates.
The work of this pilot program,
Dovetails nicely with the topics
LESC has been investigating this
intram.
Yesterday, the committee heard a
presentation on a systemic
approach to engaging schools to
increase student attendance and
also a presentation on healthy
universal school meals. This
afternoon, you'll hear a
presentation on equitable access
to out of school time and why it
matters.
All of this work fits in well
with the LESC roadmap and the
focus of the committee on
overarching systems, whole child
education, academic design, and
the educator ecosystem.
I'm gonna let this panel of
experts get to the details of
the pilot, as well as impacts
and outcomes. But I did want to
share some of the guiding
questions that motivated the
design and implementation of
this program for students
experiencing homelessness, as
there's a lot of alignment
between this work and the
roadmap you all have been
working on to transform public
education.
The full evaluation report of
this program, which you should
have in front of you, the glossy
report.
Notes that these are the guiding
questions that motivated the
design and implementation of
this pilot. First, can monetary
incentives to an adequately
housed students who may be in
need of academic and social
emotional support, increase
engagement in school tutoring,
and emotional support offerings.
Secondly, does that engagement
improve their short term
academic outcomes and social
emotional well-being. Finally,
how do you design a pilot
targeting traditionally
marginalized and traumatized
populations.
Addressing student well-being
and ensuring all students have
the holistic support needed to
be engaged and learn at school
are fundamental components of
whole child education.
And this was the work of the
pilot program, providing support
to students experiencing
homelessness, who face
substantial academic challenges
compared to their adequately
housed counterparts and
dramatically increasing
graduation rates in the process.
With that brief introduction,
Mr. Chairman and members, I'm
going to turn it over to our
panel of experts to introduce
themselves and begin the
presentation.
Good morning. My name is Daniel
Velvety. I'm the director of
community strategy for New
Mexico Appleseed.
Good morning. I am Doctor Karen
Sanchez Carriego. I am a retired
7 weeks superintendent here in
New Mexico, a licensed
administrator and a community
member.
Thank you, members of the
community of the committee. My
name is Danika Dunlap. I'm the
McKinney Venta liaison in Cuba,
New Mexico.
Thank you, um, Chairman, members
of the committee, again, my name
is Daniel Valverde. I am the
director of community strategy
for New Mexico Appleseed. I'm
here on behalf of our executive
director and founder for New
Mexico Oy Jennifer Ramo. She
couldn't be here today due to a
medical emergency. So I guess
I'm going to be your backup
quarterback for today. Um, I
want to start off by thinking,
uh you chairman, members of the
committee, um,
For your thoughtfulness and
looking at the intersectionality
of homelessness and education.
Um, today we're going to talk
about our McKinney Vinto
Improvement Plan, um,
specifically the um GPA plus
program. Um,
Our goal is our goal is to
improve the McKinni Vo
Improvement plan or Minni Vo and
the lives of the McKinney Vinto
students. Um, for many of you, I
know you already know what
McKinney Vento is, but for the
ones who don't, um, McKinney
Binto is a federal law that
ensures the rights of students
to go to school when they are
homeless. inadequately housed or
don't have a permanent address.
The act aims to reduce barriers
that prevent many housing
insecure youth and children from
enrolling, attending, or
succeeding in school.
So who are these students and
why are they considered uh
homeless. Um, many of the
students, they are, they can,
they live in shared housing,
they even doubled up with other
families. They live in motels,
hotels, or even campgrounds.
Um, many live in emergency, uh,
um, or transitional shelters or
just inadequately um house,
which means they don't have
electricity or even running
water.
So what does McKinney Vento
provides students? Well, it's
not much, but what they do
provide is uh the ability to
waive documentation
requirements, medical or birth
certificates for enrollment, uh,
provide transportation, which we
call school of origin in case a
student has to move um to a
different school district, they
have the right to go back to
their school district or their
original school to keep
continually, um, and they get
gas cards, bus
classes and even at times they
get taxis. Um, they have the
ability to waive student fees,
um, help with extracurricular
activities and those costs
associated. Um, and most
importantly, they help with
immediate enrollment.
So what McKinni Vinto does not
provide is any sort of permanent
housing. Uh, they don't provide
any additional or academic
enrichment programs, long term
case management services, or
even financial assistance,
including clothing or even help
with utilities. Uh, each school
district is different, um, for
instance, Las Cruces Public
schools uses their general funds
to pay for things such as um
shoes, clothes, they even have
on site um.
Facilities to do washing and
drying their clothes as well,
but that is not um used for
federal funds.
So what does it mean to be
homeless in New Mexico for these
students. In our research, we
see that they are highly, highly
mobile. They have limited access
to Internet or even electricity.
Um, and they have always told us
that they have limited places to
even study. Uh, we see frequent
school changes within these
students that really stops our
academic performances. Uh, they
struggle with food insecurity,
and they are increased risk of
mental health and substance
abuse.
As of last year, just like
Merritt said, there was 9,835
students that were identified as
McKinney Vento. That gives us
about a 3.1% enroll student
percentage, um, through our
work, we have actually believed
that that number is very low,
undercounted in many times. We
can go into that later, um, but
when we look at different types
of data sets, we look at YRS
census kind of gives us an
indication that it could be a
lot more.
Uh, we can even, we kind of
estimate sometimes we think
about about 15 to 20,000 kids
that are not counted.
The total federal funding that
the New Mexico receives is
roughly about $870,000 per year
for McKinney Vento. That that
comes out to about $87 per
student, not including
administrative costs, um, and
also it's divided up between all
school districts and even
charter schools as well. So the
funds get very small, very
quickly.
The reason why we're here today
is because we want to do one
thing and we want to fix the
graduation rates for these
McKinney Vento students.
We usually, we have been seeing
an average graduation rate for
these students hovering around
55%.
55% graduation rates. That's in
contrast with non-e economically
disadvantaged students at hovers
itself around 84% as well.
In the years and through the
pandemic, um, New Mexico
received roughly about $43.6
million through the art funding
that was help help school
districts with flexible spending
to improve the lives of these
students. That has now ran out.
So what do we do with that?
New Mexico apple seed New
Mexicooppo is proposing what we
call GPA plus, that is
guaranteed payments for
attendance plus services.
Appleseed is proposing that we
give 1500 kids statewide, $500
per month.
To attend school and to improve
their graduation rates.
Just so we can kind of be on the
same page with um definitions. I
know everyone's proudly heard
stuff around this, um, universal
basic income. This is not it,
because that means everyone gets
money.
A guaranteed basic income.
Everyone who needs it gets it.
Um, we're working with cash
transfers where they or cash
transfers meaning that you just
get the cash. We have decided
that we wanted to work with cash
transfer plus, so that's money
plus services. Uh, we, uh,
worked with in the last couple
of years looking at the efficacy
of unconditional versus
conditional um money, um, but
we've settled on cash transfers
plus conditions. Those
conditions are 90% uh to get for
the
Students to get the money, uh,
they need 90% attendance.
Weekly checks check-ins with
socio-emotional help.
They have to complete their
schoolwork, and they have to
attend tutoring.
We need to dismantle barriers
for attending and graduating
school for these students who
are very unlikely to graduate.
They need help now, and at the
same time, we can build
evidence-based interventions in
the same at the same time.
We have the ability to stabilize
families and provide additional
welfare tools and even at the
same time kind of can satisfy
some of the Yazi Martinez
requirements.
Our primary goal is to heighten
graduation rates and attendance
and what we will see from this
are the secondary effects, which
will be improved food security,
eviction and prevention, and
even preventing family
homelessness while looking at
reducing child neglect.
Apple seed has done some
research-based observational
studies in 4 locations. We did
it in Las Cruces public schools,
Albuquerque Public Schools, uh,
West Las Vegas and Cuba. In
Albuquerque Public schools, we
did this, the same thing, we
paid students $500 to go to um
to attend school. We had 40
participants, uh, all 8th grade
through 12th grade, we had 39
out of 40 students finished the
program.
In Las Cruces public schools, we
had 25 participants, all rising
9th graders. We had 24 out of 25
students complete the program.
In Cuba and West Las Vegas, we
had a we had a total of 53
students, the same, giving them
$500 a month. The same must
attend tutoring, weekly
check-ins, attending 90% of
school and completion of their
schoolwork.
Our executive director really
wanted to um kind of work with
some of the school districts and
um came up with what they, what
she called the compassionate
exemption rule. And I just want
you to kind of think of that in
while you're, while the students
are in the program that
sometimes they need like a pause
because they might not be able
to attend school. And some of
these hardships that we put out
there just think if they hit
that was things such as like
physical injuries that they
couldn't go to school or even
severe housing issues. We had
one student whose roof.
Caved in
So they had to miss school to
help their family put the roof
back on. So that was a
compassionate exception. We also
saw death in families as well
that the reasons they couldn't
go to school.
So I know we're kind of have a
little short amount of time, so
I just want to make sure we get
to the highlights and the
reasons why we're here today. We
saw in our work, especially
within Cuba that we had a 93%
graduation rate for our program.
93%. Think about that again 55%
compared to 93%. And to make it
even more dramatic during that
time. That was the same year
that the 5th there was a
graduation rate for Statew for
McKinney Vinto students was at
51%.
Uh, we saw with the, with the
students that the increased
attendance rate and even when we
saw their improved grades at
this time.
At the end of our intervention,
we always like to go and
interview the students and the
families and some of the things
that we found from this from our
work was that the families
repeated how stipends motivated
motivated their students to go
to school.
They said that they provided
critical support to to meet
their basic needs.
And even several families told
us that they avoided eviction at
this time because of the money.
One of my things that I see that
is most important and the most
overwhelmingly positive part of
this. There's a lot to this, but
as many kids who struggle with
homelessness, I always say
students or even children should
not deal with the adult issues,
but they're dealing with
homelessness, they become adults
really quick, but the worst part
about that is that.
They don't feel like they have
any control over their lives.
They told us that in this
program they felt proud to
assist their families and even
made school their priority
during this time.
Students said that the
intervention was a major factor
in why they stayed in school.
100% of the students that we
surveyed and their families said
they was helpful in paying
bills, helping with school
supplies, and even keeping them
motivated during these times.
We also saw that 100% of the two
said that tutoring was
instrumental in helping them
graduate.
If we want to get serious and
help improve graduation rates
for the most vulnerable students
in our in in our schools, we
must invest in these kids and
must invest in them right now.
Again, Chairman, members of the
committee, I want to again thank
you for your thoughtfulness and
looking at the intersectionality
and homelessness and education.
Um, I want to pass next to um
Dr. Karen Santos Grego, who was
actually there during the Cuban
intervention. Thank you.
Thank you again, uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. I'm
here this morning to speak on
the possible bill and or the
work of Appleseed to bring
support to New Mexico young
adults and the graduation rates
connected to targeted financial,
academic, and SEL supports. I
want to begin by stating that
supporting young school children
and their families fiscally is
not a form of leftist socialism.
But reverse with contributions
of fiscal support which data
shows leads to students,
specifically high school
students, to graduate, seeing
their contributions in a world,
in other cases where they don't
see avenues for them to be able
to succeed.
Um,
There's a lot of data that shows
that students with um poor
attendance, lack of economic
support, and the inability, all
the stuff that you guys hear all
the time, uh, to emotionally
regulate.
Are, are, are prevalent,
especially in 9th graders and in
some cases, in a lot of cases,
they're less likely to graduate
from high school. During the
lifetime, the typical high
school dropout in the United
States burdens the economic by
approximately $272,000 in
reduced tax payments, higher
dependency on health care,
higher crime rates, and greater
welfare dependence than
individuals who complete high
school. Data shows that targeted
educational systems change tied
to fiscal support.
Leads to higher high school
graduation rates. I'm going to
tell it just a quick brief story
about um a couple of boys we in,
in total and, uh, Ms. Dunlap is
going to talk more about this.
Uh, we were funded for 20
students, but we were able to
actually oversee 27 students
because of the fact that
identified students had brothers
and sisters. And also, please
note, when we look at
homelessness in New Mexico, we
had to go back um when I was in
Cuba to to really look at
families living with families
because um Hispanic families,
Native American families.
Anglo families, other families
in New Mexico, they don't look
at homelessness at family living
with family. But in the
definition, and it is, is that's
the homeless student. So what's
going back and identifying those
kids and their living situation
uh was really helpful, but we,
we got, we went out, one of the
things we wanted to do is, is
ensure as we were looking at
holistic um changes in our
school district and how we were
going to support this was we
used apple seed funding that
came from the foundation Lanel
Foundation solely to support
that the kids received the
money.
And then any other additional
supports we took out of our the
at-risk money that the state
gave us or any kind of
operational dollars and other
dollars. But one of the things
that really struck me was going
out to visit two boys. They were
brothers. They had lost their
mother and father, um, different
kinds of things. They were
living with an aunt and uncle,
and they were living in a in a
pretty much a dilapidated hogan
that was next to the home that
was there that wasn't in good
shape either. And one of the
things, um, we went and we
talked to the to the boys, uh,
and, and talked
About that, and we went out and
looked at where they were
living. They came out and I
remember them coming out and
talking to us and even the uncle
and they talked to us about how
they were going to utilize that
money to fix the living space in
which they were in, right? Um,
and help with other things, but
it was amazing that they also as
these kind of growing up
individual adults, how they were
contributing economically to
their own success and allowing
them to be able um to, to be
able to participate. We never
ever treated this as a welfare
but a hand up, right?
And so it's a step up. It's not
like, hey, and we wanted to make
sure as we rolled this out in
our community too because we
didn't want people to say, oh,
you're giving, how are these
kids decided they're going to
get $500 a month, and our kids
are not getting $500 a month and
we wanted to make sure,
explaining I would always tell
them, well, I, you're not
homeless, are you? Do, do you
feel like you need this money?
So going back and in the
creation of beloved communities
in school districts is is how do
we help our neighbor and how do
we help each other? Um, again,
the visits with the boys in
their living spaces resulted in
them being more open.
about their needs, how, how we
could change the trajectory of,
of their own lives by graduating
from high school. One was a
junior, one was a senior, every
single senior that we had did
graduate. We started seniors,
juniors, sophomores, 10th, um,
9th graders, because we wanted
to catch the, the kind of like
the, the highest or the lowest
hanging fruit, if you will. Um,
but anyways, all the students
who participated in the pilot
program, graduated and fully
completed and passed all classes
during the time, and they
complied with everything that
had to be done, you know, it.
Tutoring, uh the social
emotional, we hired a social
worker that went out, etc. So,
um, we did a lot of things like
systems change, increased
attendance, we saw kids really
talk more about the value of who
they are instead of their
socioeconomic situation and um
again, we provided academic
supports. Not only did the
teachers know, but we provided
additional academic supports. I
wanted to just say because I
know that this legislative body
is very forward thinking and
your work to connect fiscal
support to graduation and
retention of students in New
Mexico.
is um really forward thinking,
so I'm here to answer any other
questions that you have in
regards to uh the time and the
the situation that happened
here. I'm only here to speak for
what was done in Cuba at the
time I was there. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee.
Oh, I'm passing it over to
Janika Dunlap. My apologies, who
is the McKinney Vento liaison at
Cuba public schools. Thank you
so much. Thank you,
Chairman, Chairman Romero and
members of the community. This
is my first time, so it's
definitely an honor to be here,
so bear with me. Again, I have
been the McKinney Vental liaison
for 3 years in Cuba. Right now I
am looking at over 240 students
on my roster out of 719. So this
program is pivotal for the
students.
There at this time, my
methodology is grassroots home
visits, working with community
members, working with the actual
parents, all while making sure
those cultural nuances are also
integrated in how we help
students, which also matches
with um the Martinez and Yazi,
um, decision. Um, the challenges
that we are absolutely facing is
absolutely a food desert. There
isn't any food, no running
water. I have students who are
living in a home
13 to 15 people at a time.
Again, no running water. Um,
living in tents. There was a
family of 8 who was actually
living in tents, um, that was a
constant endeavor of making
sure, how do we prepare for
warmth? How do they eat?
So again with those home visits,
those are pivotal, um, and it
still maintaining their
education, family engagement,
and still ensuring that they
meet the requirements of
graduation. With this particular
program, it is definitely an
essential when families come to
us for assistance, we are
looking at the holistic child.
If we do not meet that, these
graduation rates will definitely
plummet. So it is imperative
that this program remain intact.
That the students continue to
attend classes which this has
increased.
The grades which has increased,
which is definitely a
self-esteem builder for these
students.
And in closing, I'd like to go
ahead and bring forth the video.
For students.
And before we watch this video.
I implore you that as we lessen
the barriers of these students,
we prepare a generation.
So they can be contributing
citizens to our society and make
a larger impact not only for
their families, not only for the
next generation, but also for
the global world that we are
approaching right now.
And if we do not start at the
essentials, they cannot move
forward.
That will be stagnant.
Thank you.
just
Um
waiting on the video to pull up,
so give it a moment, please.
Um
Oh
Um
Cuba, New Mexico. Um, I
graduated in Cuba High School in
2021.
Right
have a one year old
Um, I got into the cell program
during my junior year of high
school, I believe, and.
It just helped a lot with food,
clothes and.
He's in the household, and they
always like to have after. I
actually liked school and I
think that these tated to get my
work done on time also.
Um, I am very proud of the work
I accomplished because I ended
up at the top of my class and
showing my sisters the hard work
pays off just made me feel like
a role model to them.
I do believe that money has an
influence on school and school
and schoolwork because when
students struggle with financial
stress at home, it impacts their
ability to focus and learn.
Therefore, being confused.
I'm not doing the work or
skipping.
Oh
Uh, the tend that I buy every
month.
through school and ultimately
just help me graduate.
I driver made and new goals and.
Being a better person from.
So and my.
Helping out my family.
And with that, Mr. Chairman,
member of the committee, we will
stand for questions.
Thank you Senator Souls, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, very
excited about this program. We
had a long conversation and
already working on getting the
legislation drafted around this
in that, you know, this will
make a big difference. I mean,
if people are concerned about
our ranking as being 49th or
50th in the country, just moving
the graduation rate of these of
the homeless students.
Into the 80s instead of the 50s,
moves us out of the bottom. I
mean, this alone would do that.
Um, clearly this pilot showed
how effective it is,
um, couple of things I'm very
interested as we're working on
drafting it if comments from the
committee about ways to, to
implement or or put it in there,
but, uh, Daniel, you indicated
1500 students are set up for
this, yet the estimates are
we've got 5000 or more.
Why you not put it larger and do
it to full scale or make sure
that there's enough money that
every student who qualifies
would be able to participate.
Um, Mr. Chairman, um, Senator
Sols, uh, good question. Uh, we
would love that if that's what
we decide here today if we want
to bring in more students, let's
go. We are not opposed to that
at all.
Thank you, and I, I appreciate
that when we had talked before,
we're looking at doing it as a
grant program through the PE so
that it's an opt-in for the
district to do it, so nobody is
being forced to do it as a
district, um,
and maybe this is for a
superintendent. Did you, did you
talk with other superintendents?
Are they interested in in doing
this kind of a program for their
students? Do they recognize it
as being a problem in other
districts, Mr. Chair,
Mr. Vice Chair, Senator Sols, I
did not talk to other
superintendents. It was um
proposed to us when, uh,
attorney Romo called us and
said, you know, uh, we know you
guys are doing a lot of holistic
work, um, taking a look at being
the eighty-ninth highest at-risk
district, um, but I did not
really talk other than the other
ones that were in the cohort Las
Cruces, Albuquerque Public
Schools and, um,
I'm missing one.
Anyway, we, we kind of did have
discussion, but um, I don't
wanna speak for for my other
colleagues, but as an educator
myself and seeing our work even
in the North New Mexico and also
I was a superintendent on the
Navajo Nation, which as we know,
right, a lot of those children
do come to the local public
schools is the impact and
support was very, very high, and
being able to have monies that
came from another place, um, was
very important. I love the fact
that you're talking about, um,
the grant opting in, so it's not
pushed upon them and they don't,
so this is something.
they're making us do, right?
It's something that we choose as
a community and and and as an
area our board was very, very
supportive of that as they knew
that this was going to be a leg
up. The graduation rates um in
2018 in Cuba public schools were
at 62% when we, when um I left
there and I'm sure it'll
continue was at 97 and actually
um it was probably it was lower
in the actual was 93, but
because we had juniors that were
graduating ahead of time and the
state was not being able to
calculate those. It worked
against us.
To have them graduate early, but
we were really at 97% and that
was a contribution of change
because economically and all the
things that we were doing with
the at risk with the ESR funds,
with all of that, but this work
in terms of having the support
of very, very strong people, um,
to be able to help and support
that. So my apologies, Senator,
I can't speak for other
superintendents, but, um, I will
say that we do see that across
the avenue that it's very
supportive.
Chairman, um, Senator Sols, uh,
New Mexico apple seed.
actually likes to what we do is
we work with McKinney Vento
liaisons across the state. We
actually have like a little
committee where we do bring up
issues and we bring up potential
legislation that we're thinking
of. We have attendees from all
over the state, um, they're very
excited about this program, and
if I can't speak on behalf of uh
um superintendents, but I know
the McKinney Vento liaisons who
are very serious about this and
want to bring these programs to
their students and they want to
do that quickly.
If I may, sir.
The chairman and the committee,
we have to have this program.
There are just so many students
in need, and when the families
come to us, this gives us an
opportunity for them to have
that open door so they can do
better, um, with transportation,
with this being such a very,
very extreme rural community as
well as poverty. Again, this is
opening the door for exposure to
more and also again more access
as we alleviate the barriers.
Thank you. Thank you. And you
know, my next question for, um,
Miss Dunlap. This was 40
students, you indicated that you
have 200 or more that qualify
under the federal regulations
for McKinney Vento.
How did you manage who got
selected were the other ones
like, what about me?
Absolutely, thank you, Mr.
Chairman and Senator Swells. So
the selection of students, um,
we started with the most severe
students, OK, so they were high
school students, seniors were
first, juniors were 2nd,
sophomores, and then freshmen.
So when I speak in terms of
severe cases, that means the
living situation. What was that
like? Again, I spoke with a
family with living in tents.
You're speaking of a family of 8
and that's just not the only
family so they.
absolutely destitute and also
parents who were absolutely
deceased. So that's how we
started and then worked our way
on down.
Thank you, sir.
Thank you.
Um, I think, you know, we, we,
we want to make sure there's
enough money for all the
students who qualify, uh, I saw
in the breakdown, and by the
way, the math doesn't quite add
up correctly, but I think it's
off by about $4 million but, um,
I saw that there's money for
dedicated, uh, staffing at the
PE. Does this provide for
additional staffing. I'm
thinking the larger districts,
Albuquerque, Las Cruces, the,
the one staffer who is dealing
with McKinney.
Vento suddenly has a much larger
program. Are they going to be
able to do that? Is there money
for staffing at the local level
that would be part of the grants
the districts might be making,
um, thank you, Chair, um,
Chairman and Senator Soz, yes,
so, um, um, through the McKinney
Vento Improvement Plan. We do
want to bring more money to uh
the public education department,
uh, her name is Dana Malone and
I believe she just got moved to
a different office and I think
it's the student.
Wellness now that she's under,
um, she is a, she's a one man
team. Uh, she's absolutely
outgunned by which, uh, poverty
and she's also is the sole
person who handles all the McKay
Vinto work in the state of New
Mexico, so she has to work on
compliance with every school
district, including charter
school. So we actually want to
bring in more help for her and a
full team to take on these funds
and work individually with the
schools. And then yes, there's
also on top of that for the
schools to be are going to make
sure that they get.
Funds to help with and uh and
also that is part of the we we
want to work with the school
districts if they want to be a
part of this program that they
do have to kind of help us out a
little bit with that.
Thank you. And yeah, I was very
struck the the comment about
this helps most, it sounds like
many of the students are using
this to help their families.
It's not just the student, but
that it prevents eviction. You
know, that's good for landlords,
you know, when if the families
aren't being evicted and for
food and all of that money gets
spent back into the local
community and so it's got
whatever the economic 2.5%
multiplier, this money is not
going into savings accounts or
other places and so it's.
Economic growth for the local
community through
are most in need, so I very much
appreciate it. It's going to be
one of my top legislative pieces
through this next session. So
thank you, and again, very
interested if people have
thoughts or ideas on how to make
it a good joke.
Thank you Senator Lopez.
Uh thank you, Mr. Chair, and
thank you to each of you for
your presentation. Um, thank
you, Senator Souls for moving
this forward. This is, um,
So much needed.
And I also wanted to put on the
table is that I'm working.
With
Another group of persons, um,
called the Lenel Foundation,
right? Um, and other persons
working with grandparents,
raising grandchildren.
And we are also going to be
proposing something, so maybe we
could sit and chat together and
bring some of the other persons
along with us to chat, um, about
money, of course, but we are
also looking at a pilot project
to see how, um,
Money is a stipend could help
families, especially those who
are raising and it couldn't just
be grandparents and maybe kin,
auntie, uncle, you know, someone
within the family raising
children who are in their care,
but also with that too, um, it's
an effort so that these children
are not placed in CYFD, um,
custody because of issues as to
what you've just described with
regards to um.
You know, a stipend what can
help with, you know, issues on
rent, um, food, just some basic
living opportunities that would
help many of these families.
And of course, Mr. Chair, that
goes back to definitions of
neglect and such that we, um, I
think.
Utilized in a very um different
way that hurts our families in
New Mexico, so the children's
code task force, there's a lot
more, Mr. Chair, that's coming
forward as to how we're looking
as to not criminalize poverty.
And we do that so much, Mr.
Chair, when we put our children
in, I call it harm's way in many
different scenarios and once the
child gets into CYFD custody in
any way, shape, or form, it's
very hard to remove them. And
there's other, you know,
snowball effect, as I say, and
others, Mr. Chair. So I want to
say thank you, um, but we too
are moving on a program that I
had researched back in 2016. So
this is a long drawn out effort
to try and
I think, um, move forward with
what you have done already with
the demonstration project, which
is always essential um to try
and get the attention of those
who have the purse strings to
see how we can make sure that we
put money in where it really
helps our families.
So, um, and, and we're modeling
our program after Washington DC
that already has a program, and
I know, um, at least with you
from what you've been able to
do, you know, we have that, that
little, um,
How to say obstacle about giving
a gift of general fund dollars
to to families. Um.
And I believe this other process
is another option that's
available, that's modeled after
again, Washington DC and the
town of program.
Um, so there's, there's a lot of
other concerns that have been
brought to the attention over
the period of time that we've
been looking at this, but we
will be having a a proposal
coming up this coming session.
So, um, Mr. Chair, I'd just like
to see if Senator Souls myself,
and some of the persons here at
the table, we could sit down and
chat and maybe have an
opportunity to work with Lionel
Foundation and some of the other
persons, Secretary Groginski and
others who are also moving
forward on a proposal for this
coming session.
But I want to say thank you to
each of you and it's good to see
you, superintendent Sanchez
Grego.
Thank you.
I saw a lot of nodding heads, so
it seems like there's some
agreement there, but you all can
work that out. So
Representative Roy Caballero.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you all so very much. I am uh.
I'm, I'm super excited. A few
years back I met with uh
Jennifer Remo, and we spoke at
length about how um she was
trying to
Tap my brain in terms of how
legislatively we could get to
this point.
And um, how we then would be
able to wrap ourselves around
addressing systemic, uh,
poverty.
And because we agreed that, uh,
poverty was the overall factor.
Um, affecting.
So many uh.
So many uh social economic
conditions that our children are
facing.
And so we had a great.
Meeting, uh, there was.
Some indication, um,
And I, I want to ask this
question first because
Our concern many years ago when
we spoke because I wanted to,
and I did introduce a memorial,
uh, to get us off the ground
with guaranteed basic income as
a result of that discussion.
Um, Anna had legislation also
ready to go. Unfortunately, um,
our legislature.
And committees weren't
Quite prepared, uh, ready for,
um, this type of legislation. So
it sat on the table, but we
agreed that pilot projects were
very important to demonstrate.
How effective, um, providing
this small.
Um,
Cash transfer would actually
help.
Um, increase graduation rates
and, and, and.
Address our cycles of poverty
with cycles of opportunity. That
was the bottom line. So my
question is one of the major
concerns was the anti-donation
laws in the state of New Mexico.
She indicated at the time that
this had been brought up to her
in her discussions um with very
throughout the various
administrative levels that this
would be an impediment.
Um, to any kind of legislation
in that direction. Do, do you
know if McKinney Vento actually
releases us from that anti-
donation, um.
Problem potential.
Um.
Mr. Chair, I'm Representative
Roybel Caballero. I can look
into this and get this back to
you, but my understanding is
there are exceptions to the
anti-donation clause, and one of
those is when the state
benefits, Director Sna can
correct me if I'm wrong, but my
understanding is that if the
state benefits from an
investment, um, similar to
investing in in New Mexico
students that aren't enrolled in
New Mexico public schools,
there's an exception to the
anti-doation clause.
Yeah, Mr. Chair Representative,
um, I, I just, I just caveat all
this that we're not lawyers. So
I think it'd be best to, to
probably get a legal review of
something like this. I don't
believe that McKinney Vinto law
in itself would would exempt any
sort of program from it from
state anti-donation clause, uh,
statute. So I think it's
something we'd want to, we'd
want to review.
Mr. Chair and, oh, and thank you
for that because that is very
important because as
She was having discussions at
that time, um, that was one of
the holdbacks of why we didn't
proceed further with the actual
uh legislation. So it would be
really important to because many
of us, there are a number of
groups, as you are aware, um, in
Albuquerque in particular and
Bernalio County that have been
looking at this throughout the
summer and um creating uh
workshops.
And meetings uh from a
grassroots level because this is
in my belief has to be
grassroots driven, which is what
Ms. Raymo and I agreed upon.
Because
On your page 7 in this report,
and it's highlighted in red.
Very few.
Policy makers, administrators,
um, politicians agree that
racism
And racial inequality is the
root cause.
So that oftentimes because
We don't agree on that, stops.
The advancement of programs such
as these.
But because your research so
adequately referenced.
And every page.
All of the data the studies.
Everything that we've been
saying as grassroots community
organizers, and I say we because
that's the world that I come
from that racial inequality.
Removes access.
And equity
From these institutions.
That's why we had the banking
industry, um,
sued
And Wall Street sued because of
the redlining that occurred and
access to mortgage mortgages.
That's the reason why school
districts and our US Department
of Ed has been sued multiple
times because of lack of access
because of the red lining that
we experienced throughout, so
it's very important.
That even though we may address
this here in our intertro, Mr.
Chair.
It's important for each and
every one of us rather than
showcase what we propose to do
that we spend time talking with
our colleagues.
And helping them understand.
Along with our grassroots
community groups helping them
understand through stories such
as um
Uh, Doctor Grego and, and um
Miss Dunlap have all and all of
you have demonstrated.
The, the direct correlation
between poverty and lack of
access to education. So I say
that because I want our
community groups.
That are already working around
the state as a collective.
To stand first and foremost.
In drafting the language that is
necessary to go into this
legislation because it has to
mirror.
What you all have just
demonstrated.
That to me is the most important
and effective thing that we can
offer, uh, together with our
partnership with New Mexico
apple seed, which has been
exemplary, not on the forefront,
but behind the scenes.
Because it's behind the scenes
work, Mr. Chair, that brings us
to this point. And that's what I
truly believe in. So it promotes
earlier representative Mirabal
Moya made some great
observations or statements about
her students questioning what
is, you know, what is this going
to be in for me. And that we had
this discussion about how we can
talk to students about engaging
them, about the importance of
what they're learning.
And how it's going to be
applied. Well,
Promoting and demonstrating
community.
Collective well-being versus the
pull yourself up by the
bootstrap when we don't even
have boots.
Concept
is probably the most valuable.
Way to demonstrate to our
students in our, in our schools
and in our families, how to do
this. Our there Mr. Chair, our
students are already coming from
families that are demonstrating
this because they have multiple
families living together. They
don't let anybody stay at
cultural and traditional uh
practices and beliefs don't
allow us to have our families
out in the streets as much as
possible, we try to avoid that.
So they come in my mother-in-law
used to.
Say Bamospo masawa alcaldo we're
just gonna add more more water
to the soup, bring him in.
So that's.
The mindset.
That we need to adopt.
In all that we do.
And so I really encourage our
legislators and my colleagues in
the community to come together
with you all who are the experts
in this area. I consider you all
driving this and the community
collective groups driving this
effort. And so, um, we're, we're
designating our staff. Thank God
we finally got staff
available to us and others to
Help facilitate um the
conversations between now and
2025 legislative session so that
we can ensure that what we put
together.
is reflective of
The demonstration results that
you all have indicated here
today, so I just wanted to say
this and to thank you because
I've been a longtime fan of New
Mexico apple seed and all their
work and they approach more
importantly, that your director
has taken because it's been a,
um, like I said, it's, it's not
a showcasing approach.
Um, it's, it's really a
demonstration that it can work
approach. And that's what we
need to break these cycles and
to create institutional change.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you very much.
Thank you, Senator Maestas.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I just want to echo the
sentiments that were just
mentioned. I'll try to be brief,
but first of all send our best
to lawyer Ramo and her family
and it's great to see you and
just tremendous work by
Appleseed. That was a great
question, uh, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Soz, why, why aren't you
doing all 5000, you know,
homeless students, blah blah.
I mean, it's
It depends on who writes the
check, right? I mean, it depends
on who, who allocates the money
to do such a thing, um, page 7,
Mr. Chairman, the, the red box
is just really profound. It's
kind of a heavy wrap regarding
racism many times we think of
racism as.
demographic group consciously
oppressing another demographic
group that's not, that's not not
the way racism manifests itself
as much more sophisticated, much
more subtle, particularly in New
Mexico.
And so it's a very difficult
conversation, but it's, we're
just talking about the root
cause.
We're not, no one's a bad guy.
None of us were around in 1598.
None of us were around in 1846,
but those historic, uh.
You know, injustices have led to
inequalities, and we know which
communities that affects most
and so, um, so someone mentioned
Ms. Charm about the 8th or 9th.
Most, uh, I forgot the word you
said, but the most vulnerable or
the most, um, in need or
whatnot. I was at LFC earlier
this week, uh, they did a, the
executive branch did like a 40
year presentation on what the
world's gonna look like, and
they forgot to tell the
committee that this is what it's
gonna look like if we sit on our
hands for 40 years. This is
what's going to look like if we
don't change our tax code for 40
years. This is what it's going
to look like if we just do
nothing for the next 40 years.
They, because those stats were
just ridiculous, but it.
But if we, in fact, make a
tremendous impact with the
financial resources at our
disposal we can reverse those.
Those anticipated trends and we
can make a profound difference
and so, so I appreciate you
going to Cuba and West Las
Vegas, um.
I think, I think the stats
derived from, from those
programs.
Have convinced us we just got to
convince our colleagues that
it's a great $1 spent and it's
really the, the crux of Martinez
Yazzi is putting resources into
these vulnerable communities,
um,
And then also, you know, anti-
And then also, you know,
anti-dation is, is.
What we
The legislature shouldn't be
concerned about anti- donation
if someone wants to sue, let
them sue, but we just gave $500
checks to people just because we
just wrote $500 checks to every
single New Mexican of course we
justified it with COVID, but we
didn't justify it with the
argument that it makes.
That it's a public benefit. This
is without question of public
benefits. So anyway, I thank the
chairman and Senator Sols for
and uh appleseed for bringing
this forward. It's something uh
that, that we can make a
profound difference in our
communities if we, if we ratchet
it up and, and, and do all the
students. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Representative Garrett.
Thanks Mr. Chair. Thank you, all
of you. Um, 2 questions on the
required warm handoff.
Um, it says it's required. I
think that's a beautiful and
wonderful thing.
Um,
I know that working at Southeast
and Southwest New Mexico
schools, uh, Albuquerque schools
where kids often move back and
forth between trailer parks and
very, um
you know, insecure housing, even
to do it within one district is
challenging. Do you have
suggestions for this? I, I mean,
it's having the kid having the
student supported in that
transfer is beautiful.
But are there some practical
ways you envision?
Chairman, um, representative
Garrett, uh, thank you for that
question. Uh, yes, and that's
actually why we really came up
with this um with this part of
this legislation, um, this was
born from our work with McKinney
Bento liaisons across the state.
Um, first and foremost, most of
the McKinney Vento liaisons,
it's, uh, it's high transition
for their, their work. It's a
lot of work and sometimes you,
you see that superintendent.
In small districts are the
McKinney Vento liaisons. Um, so
this really came because we saw
a lot of students when if they
move schools within a district
or outside a school district, it
really only relied on the
relationships between McKenny
Vinto liaisons to come together
and talk about their students
once they moved. Uh, we want to
remove that because like I said,
there's transition, there's a
lot of things that can happen
sometimes these students are
highly mobile and very quick
amount of time.
We want to help them out by
building in just like um if you
um you have a number within the
students, so it triggers
automatically that they were
identified at another school
that can help one McKinney Vento
liaison contact the others, so
there is zero lag time in the
transition for them. So
sometimes they don't have
documentations, they don't have
birth certificates, uh, they
don't, uh, they might have to
move with from parent to grandma
across the state.
And they don't have all their
stuff. And if there's any lag
time in education, well, I can't
tell you guys, you know it
better than I do about what that
does to these students. So
that's why we built that and and
that came solely from um working
with our McKinni Viento liaisons
across the state.
Uh thank you very much. And then
my other question is, um,
Last Friday I toured Gateway
West, which is up to 6660
adults. They no longer have any
minors living there with
families, uh, they've been moved
to a hotel. Do you have a plan
for working with um group
situations sponsored by cities
or agencies where you might find
many of the students together
with families or guardians. Is
there any for that?
Type of situation where have you
considered that?
Mr. Chair Romero and
Representative Garrett, so we do
have a connection, so pardon me,
let me just go backwards with
the first handoff as Mr. Valardi
stated, we also as a group of
liaisons have created a system
to those who actually hand off,
we actually have a connection
with either higher ed and also
vocations for those who move
into those industries as well.
As far as another handoff and a
tracking system. The only thing
that we can do at this moment is
to connect with the students as
a community and remain and
maintain that data. That is what
we're doing right now and as we
move forward, that tracking
system will become better.
Thank you.
And Chairman, um, Representative
Garrett, um, you know, that is
something that we have
considered and we've talked
about because we didn't know
that, you know, until we really
started talking to liaisons
across the state, as that is
being an issue. Um, again, it
really falls into how robust the
McKinney Vento liaison office at
that certain school district
because they're the ones who
really understand their
community when they go out to
the community, they almost know
where to go. They know what
apartments they can go to, with
hotels, they have good
relationship.
With actually um the hotel
owners. So if something happens
that they not only can inform
them about students um being um
having to do emergency stays at
hotels, but they also have
discounted rates for those
hotels if there's an emergency
for some of the students who get
kicked out their family get
kicked out of the house. Um, so
that's also why we do want to
kind of give, we do want to make
sure that we give more money to
these liaisons across the state
because it shouldn't just be for
the large school districts who
have.
I like I some have like 20
employees that work for them. I
think APS has like around that,
so they have the capacity to do
that. We want to build that
capacity out for even rural
areas as well.
Mr. I'm sorry, Mr. Chair, and
Representative Garrett, we have
developed a huge network in
Cuba.
So that maintains meaning to
Cuba city council members, we
have garnered relationships with
realtors, actually other
landlords, so we can go ahead
and meet the needs of those
students. So we have helped
plenty of families in emergency
shelters, those who are living
in cars, not only just
discounted rates, we have
garnered support from local
organizations for wood, for
propane, for water. So we are
working direly and and
connecting.
And networking to go ahead and
get those needs met. Thank you
very much.
If I could just chime in as
well, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Garrett, who is
my representative, by the way,
in my area, um, I also want to
say that, and I know this is a
lot of your work, but you know,
as a longtime educator, as
somebody who grew up in the
South Valley here in in
Albuquerque, uh, my parents are
from, um, Manzano Torreon area.
My dad's dad died when he was 18
and he helped raise 11 brothers
and sisters. Brian Zamora is my
cousin who is the who is the
Um
oh my God, she's she's on the
Supreme Court. That is my, my
dad's sisters. Anyway, and so
with all of those things, you
see that these kids could not do
this, but if we don't change the
system again, talking about
money, right? You're gonna put
this money into it and we, and
you know, a lot of what we hear
is we're gonna, it's a grant
opportunity school districts can
opt in or opt out. They have to
go in and change their system,
right? Because we have a lot of
people that are in our districts
and we were a tiny little
district that we were using
our at-risk money, we were using
our operational dollars. We were
checking and seeing what our
social work workers were doing,
what were our principals doing?
How do we collaborate this with
the teachers. I heard you guys
talking about this before when
they were doing the, the, you
know, the PLCs and stuff. So I
would also say as you push this
and you look at this, don't
provide an opportunity for us as
educators to be able to say,
this is another little pot of
money and here's the little
slither of McKinney Vento and
whatever it is. No, we have the
opportunity to take this like we
did with the $20,000.
Put it directly into families'
homes. Look at who was there
already on our campuses and say
we're paying for the, for the
liaison. We didn't get money for
the liaison, but we went to the
county, we went to, you know,
other places, and I want to just
reiterate what Representative,
uh, Roy Bacavareo and um I'm
sorry to mispronounce your name.
Uh, Senator Maestas and Senator
Lopez and all of you about this
whole talk about poverty cycles
of poverty and cycles of
opportunity. Someone has to get
off the Ferris wheel in order to
be
To help and sustain the families
as they do this, and so I just,
you, this is so powerful, I
think. And so I just want to
thank you as a grandma and Nana
myself now and seeing our
grandchildren and others that
we, we do this in this whole
collaborative way as a community
to support this. Thank you, uh,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
Any other folks questions,
Soarddo Lopez.
Mr. Chair, if I may ask, what
was the number?
Of homeless students, was it,
what was the, the number that
you had shared?
Um,
Um, Mr. Chair, um, Senator
Lopez, that number, um, oops, I
got it.
is for last year, uh, because
how they do the accounts they do
30, 60, 90 day counts.
Yeah, uh, throughout the year,
so we're seeing what it was last
year, that number was 9,835
identified students. OK, no, I
appreciate that. Just to make
sure that I have the right
number.
That all grade levels? Yes.
OK, thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
All right, thank you. Um, so I
don't have any other questions.
The only thing I want to say is,
and I think you all put it so
eloquently is that, um,
yesterday we were talking about
um attendance, we're talking
about what can we do in schools
for our students in attendance,
and there's so much we can do,
but then there are all the other
factors that are external to
what we can do. And this is one
of those programs that can work
on those externals to get our
students into schools so that we
could provide.
The other half of what our
students need to succeed. So
thank you all for doing this
and, and certainly look forward
to the legislation um upcoming.
Thank you all. Thank you.
All right, um, so with that, we
have lunch, um, till 12:30, so
we'll come back at 12:30.
Thanks, folks.
