All right, folks, it looks like
we're back online. Yay.
So we'll go ahead and get
started. So.
Please, Natasha.
Good afternoon.
Thank you
Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, we are
here today to talk about um
students in foster care or
experiencing homelessness. Um, I
am joined by Tara Mangoni, who
was also helped us during the
summer as a teacher on special
assignment, um, her teaching and
experiences and research, uh, on
this topic have been absolutely
inspiring, so I'm happy she's
here and was able to make it.
Um, we are also joined by
Crystal Wilson and Dr. Kenneth
Salazar from APS also very
Passionate people and Simone B
and I cannot tell you the
passion on this um on this panel
is very inspiring, um, chairman
and members of the committee, I
will get a little emotional on
this one because I may, um.
I like to start by expressing
how grateful I am to have this
huge accomplishment in my life,
to meet this topic hits hard at
my success, um, statistically,
I'm an outlier for some form of
visual idea of the severity of
this, um, my ACE score is a 9
out of 10. And so I was a child
uh navigating these very topics
that will be presenting here
today and I'm honored to be
sitting here with some of the
most passionate people I've met
during this.
Research. And I'm excited to
share that um with what we
gathered here today. So thank
you for lending your ears. Um,
so with that, Tara and I will,
um, begin our, our research on
this uh brief that we put
together.
Um
Excuse me, so, uh, students in
foster care or who experience
homelessness face significant
Authorization or due to
voluntary placement by their
parent. Um, when different
statutes or agencies define a
term such as this
inconsistently, it can lead to
confusion about eligibility of
services. Um, it can hinder the
coordination between and among
the agencies that are set up to
care for these students and in
foster care, and it also creates
barriers for them to access the
necessary resources that they.
to be a successful students. Um,
an LFC report from September
2024 showed that in fiscal year
24, 872 youth entered the foster
care system while 542 did exit.
Um, however, as of July 2024,
there's still currently over
2100 students um under CYFDC.
Um, students in foster care
experience academic challenges
that are unique to them that
their peers do not always um
experience. Oftentimes this is
due to high mobility and the
disruptions in their education
that that can cause um a
particular note is the fact that
students in foster care graduate
at a significantly lower rate
than their peers. Um, if you
would turn to figure one on page
3, we can see that the data
shows
The overall state graduation
rate in 2023 was approximately
77%, while that of students in
foster care was around 45%.
Additionally, national research
finds that students in foster
care are twice as likely to be
chronically absent. Um this
further widens the learning gaps
that make meeting academic
achievements and milestones such
as graduation, more difficult
for them.
Um, Natasha will talk about
identifying and tracking
students in foster care.
Thank you, Tara. On page 3 we
provide information on
identifying and tracking these
students other than through um
school registration, students in
foster care are primarily
identified through communication
with between CYFD and school
districts, but this process
faces significant challenges
such as delayed in or failure to
notify, um, schools of foster
care placements, which can pose
a safety risk. However, after
speaking with CYFD's Office of
Advocacy, they create
a new SA team that intends to be
more involved in the education
of foster care children,
including um school notification
letters. See what's Office of
Advocacy also serves as the main
point of contact for schools
regarding school placement,
transportation, and other
educational issues in students
that are in foster care.
However, the current state of
identifying and tracking these
students is that there is no
standardized statewide process
for identifying and monitoring
these students. Notably, if
school districts have an
indicator in their systems to
track students in foster care.
Most schools don't continue to
update, um, student status in
foster care placement. If foster
care placement changes or is
terminated. This leads to
discrepancies in reported
numbers potentially affecting
the resources allocated to
support these students.
Um, Tyra will now speak to the
training initiatives and
supports for foster care for
students in foster care. Thank
you, Natasha. Um several school
districts noted that there is a
lack of dedicated training for
serving students in foster care
and have expressed a desire for
more training in order to
support these students and build
relationships between educators,
education staff, and the foster
care system, um, to address
these concerns, PED and CYFD
have put
To place several initiatives and
planned training to support
those serving students in foster
care, namely PDD is planning for
mandatory virtual trainings to
address this topic specifically
beginning in this month of
October.
Currently PED staff meets also
with the CYFDSA team every other
week, um, and from there they
will be continuing to develop
technical assistance and other
training endeavors. Uh, CBIFD
also in collaboration with PED
is developing training and
guidance for school districts on
points of contact and processes
around what are called best
interest determination meetings.
Um, additionally, this new ESSA
team will be providing more
training around tracking.
And addressing the educational
needs of students in foster
care, specifically to find out
if there are disability
education services that they are
missing out on, um, particularly
an individualized education
program or the 504 program, um,
just to make sure that they are
receiving all of the support for
which they might be eligible.
However, challenges remain, uh,
related to funding and
consistent training for those
supporting students and.
Foster care
Um, some of the intentional
services and supports for
students in foster care, um, are
really geared toward creating
educational stability for these
students, which, as we've
mentioned before, it is very
difficult sometimes for them to
attain. Um, one of the things is
the goal is to keep these
students in their school of
origin, um, whenever that's
possible to minimize the
disruptions that we have um
spoken of. Some other supports,
um,
specifically for students in
foster care, um, are also in
place. I'll just name a few, um,
these students are eligible for
immediate enrollment when they
are moved to a new school, um,
and that means even if they
don't have all of the
documentation such as their
birth certificate or anything
like that that they should have.
This helps make the transition a
little bit smoother and go a
little faster. And there's also
financial support for um some
educational needs for students
like tutoring. These come
through a program through.
CYFD called the Care and Support
of Children Fund.
Um, and also the fostering
connections program by CYFD
offers transition planning
support and help for students
that are aging out of foster
care, which are also um pretty
vulnerable at that point and in
need of these support services.
Um, Natasha will talk about
funding and the liaisons.
Thank you, and you'll find this
on page 5, when the funding for
students in foster care section
regarding state funding, no
dedicated funding is
specifically allocated for
foster students, education. All
students in foster care may be
supported through the at-risk
index in the SCG at the school
district level. Some districts
and schools allocate resources
from their general budget to
support these students. But this
varies and lacks consistency
across the state. Additionally,
The FY 25 CYFD budget according
to um an LFC report includes
approximately $387 million with
228 million allocated for
protective services, um,
operating budget and supports
foster care maintenance. Still,
it is not an educational
specific funding source.
Um, funding is also available,
such as Title One and the
McKenny Vento, um, homeless
Assistance Act, which is
designated for homeless
students, um.
But it can be extended to foster
uh students in foster care who
uh meet this criteria.
Ty and I will now be switching
to the status of students
experiencing homelessness, which
um is on page 6. Is that right?
Yeah, 6.
research shows that students
experiencing homelessness face
numerous challenges that
significantly impact their
academic success.
Including high rates of
absenteeism, poor academic
performance, and low graduation
rates, as illustrated on in
figure one on page 3,
prolonged periods of
homelessness exacerbate these
issues, often leading to social
isolation, rejection, and
disengagement from school. These
findings highlight the urgent
need for targeted support and
resources to help these students
overcome their circumstances,
build resiliency and thrive
academically and socially.
I'll give it back to Tara for
the definitions and
demographics. Thank you,
Natasha. Um, when we talk about
defining what a student
experiencing homelessness is
there are very specific ways in
which they are defined. Um, the
McKinney Vinto homeless
Assistance Act, which is also
detailed on page 4. identifies
these students as those that are
lacking a fixed regular and
adequate nighttime residents. So
for some students that could
mean that they are sharing
housing with other people, which
is what we call doubled up. It
could also mean that they are
living in hotels or motels using
a voucher or some other form of
financial assistance. They could
be living in emergency or
transitional shelters, um, and
also.
Children and students that their
nighttime residents for them is
a location that's not typically
used, um, for sleeping or
accommodation like park benches,
cars, abandoned buildings, and
the like.
research from the 2122 school
year found that 1.2 million
students in the United States
experience homelessness. This
accounts for about 2.5% of the
total public school population,
which actually marked a 10%
increase from the previous year.
Now, despite this national
increase figure 2 on page 7
shows that in New Mexico is
steady decline in students
experiencing homelessness can be
found. Uh, moreover, as figure 3
also shows on page 7, New Mexico
is seeing a similar trend of
students experiencing
homelessness from marginalized
groups disproportionately
represented.
Um, these disparities serve to
highlight the state's failure to
meet its constitutional
obligation to provide adequate
education for those
underrepresented groups, um, as
reflected in the martiniasa
Yazi, excuse me, lawsuit.
Um, Natasha, back to you for
identifying the students.
Thank you, Tara. Um, on page 8,
we talk about the identification
of and tracking these students,
um, in talking with the school
districts during the
registration process, um, and
the homeless liaisons, they're
able to catch these students
early on. Um, they also are able
to identify these students
through referral processes from
local agencies rather that be
like shelters, community
organizations, they, they, the
homeless liaisons partner with
these communities.
To establish that report to be
able to capture all these
students that are using these
resources in their community,
um, in smaller communities, it's
also informal networks, um, and
word of mouth, uh, with students
with like schools such as
Maxwell with 89 students, um,
They're able to establish
relationships with the families
themselves to determine um
homelessness status. Um,
homeless liaisons are actually a
big part of this as they, um, I
will also let APS talk to this a
little more, but they are able
to have that community outreach,
um, outreach initiatives and
they they work to remove these
barriers for these students, um.
Another one part of this, or
actually I'm gonna let Tara go
on and speak to the services and
supports for these students, um,
as, yeah.
Thank you, Natasha. That's OK.
Now there is availability for
students experiencing
homelessness, excuse me, to
access various um necessary
services. However, these
supports vary across the school
districts across the state. Uh,
these services could include
immediate school enrollment, as
I spoke to before, the
availability to receive
essential supplies including
backpacks, school supplies, and
clothing. Um, sometimes their
hotel vouchers.
And rental assistance available.
One of the main issues is
transportation of these students
and having the support to ensure
that those students remain in
their school of origin. They're
also um are support services
that provide tutoring for these
students to help mitigate those
learning gaps and mental health
support and counseling, which um
expresses like a recognition of
the significant emotional
challenges that students
experiencing homelessness often
Face, even with these supports,
um, that are available,
challenges still remain in areas
across the state.
Tasha
Yeah, and I'll be touching a
little bit on the homeless, um,
homelessness and r, um.
Is that right? Yeah. Almost the
in rural and urban school
districts, we have a heat map
here on page 10 that speaks
specifically you could see as a,
as a visual here. Um, the
services and supports available
for students experiencing
homelessness in New Mexico
different significantly between
urban and rural communities. As
you can see in Kmado 21% um.
are experiencing a high rate of
homelessness and in Cuba and
loving and in Springer, um, the
heat map shows that, um.
As you can see, it's really
it's, it's significant, uh,
urban districts such as APS and
Las Cruces, they often have uh
more services due to the greater
resources and infrastructure,
these districts typically have a
dedicated McKenny Bento funding,
um, and liaisons and a largest
support team, um, that are
supported with diverse funding
also as they are able to pull,
uh, funding from their community
organizations, um, from
sponsorships.
And, uh, that just, it, it gives
them that bigger bucket of money
for them, um, including Title
One and uh like I said, local
partnerships. In contrast to
rural districts, they face other
unique challenges and often get
limited services for students
experiencing homelessness. These
districts generally have smaller
budgets and less funding for
programs dedicated to supporting
these students. I've also heard
like, um, mental health and
transportation being a big, uh,
barrier for these students.
Um,
And uh I would also like to uh
speak to.
Um, the funding for this, which
is one primary source of funding
is the Federal McKenney Bento
grant, which provides financial
support for these students
specifically with districts
receiving an award on an annual
basis, but with a 3 year grant
cycle, um, PED explained uh that
New Mexico actually received
$756,000 from the McKenny Vento
and that's across the nation,
um, as being a part of the
nation, the state alone receives
756,000.
And from what I've learned from
PED, which I'm pretty sure
someone will speak to a little
more, which is we were able to
grant 16 out of 39 applicants
for that funding. Um, and I'll
let her go into the details of
that, but in addition, many
districts allocate a portion of
their Title One funds to support
students experiencing
homelessness. The American
rescue Plan Fund also served as
a temporary source of financial
support during the COVID-19
pandemic. However, the funding
cycle ended on September 30th.
Another federal funding source
is the education of homeless
children and youth funds which
some districts report utilizing.
Um, in addition to federal
funding and state distribution,
many districts rely on the local
grants and donations, um,
between their community
partnerships and with that
districts also often use their
general operational funds, uh,
to support students experiencing
homelessness with other funding
sources, um, are insufficient.
Um, and how these funds are
distributed are they they focus
on addressing the basic needs
whether it be hotel vouchers,
um, clothing, food banks, um,
whatever they can do to school
supplies, uh, to help these
students for sure and um.
With that being said, uh, for
example, another one was
transportation costs in Rio
Rancho shared with me that they
reported spending $85,000 on
transportation, um, for a single
year, which exceeded their
$30,000 grant that they received
from the McKenny Bento program,
and that was just on
transportation alone, um, and
that's the gist of what they do
with their funds. Um, I'll also
turn it back over to Tara to
talk about the, um, homeless
liaisons oh, never mind. I am so
sorry.
Um, with that being said, I will
conclude our brief with the
policy and budget considerations
that we do have in mind, um, we
are looking at ensuring adequate
transportation and funding, uh,
with the, what I've been hearing
from these school districts is
that the funding for
transportation, it's the wording
in what is already in statute
needs a little more improvement,
um, however, uh, just having,
making sure we have insured, uh,
an adequate.
transportation funding. We also
wanted to improve cross-agency
collaboration between PED and
CYFD, um, as we've heard, they
CYFD and PED are actually
meeting on a monthly basis, I
believe, um, and it's a new
program that they are doing also
with the SA team so it sounds
like a lot of good things are
coming of that. Um, enhanced
data collection and notification
systems, we want to be able to
track these students and notify
schools um of these of what's
going on with these students so
that they're.
Probably served. We also want to
talk about, um, provide
technical assistance at risk
funding, um, on at-risk funding.
So provide technical assistance
from PED to school districts to
clarify that at-risk funding and
the SCG can and should be
utilized to support these
students. Um, improved
communication on partial
credits. We've also learned that
um in statute we do have uh this
this this way where we are, we
could have, I'm so sorry, these
students can have received.
credits when they are mobile,
and those will follow them.
There's also, uh, as you've
heard from Appleseed, this, uh,
implement guaranteed payment for
attendance, um, we're also
recommending that. And with all
of that, I will go ahead and
turn it over to APS doctor um
Salazar and Crystal Wilson.
You have our slide deck up.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, thank
you for, um, your time today.
I'm gonna introduce our amazing
director who will go through our
presentation and I'll be here
for any questions after. Thank
you. um, Mr. Chairman, um, and
members of the committee and
Doctor Salazar and Natasha for
the invitation.
Um, I'm here today to share with
you how Albuquerque Public
Schools is implementing the
McKinney Vento Homeless
Assistance Act. Um, our
implementation, our successes,
and also our challenges.
OK
All right, so, um,
Today I'll be telling you a
little bit about our, um, our
work in Albuquerque Public
schools. We do have a phenomenal
facility, um, with space
dedicated and the Helen Fox
Education Complex. We have an
extensive warehouse, um, which
allows us to provide family
resources and one of the things
that we value, um, from this,
um, great space is the ability
to go into the community to meet
families where they are both
literally and figuratively, um,
we
know that students who do not
have clothing and shoes and
hygiene items and backpacks and
school supplies are not going to
start school until they have
those items. And so if those
items are available at the
school and the student does not
have them, they will not likely
go to school first. Um, so one
of the things that we are able
to do is we are able to go out
into the community to where the
student is to provide those
items. So within our extensive
warehouse we have everything
from food, basic
Hygiene items, um, to shoes,
socks, bras, underwear,
deodorant.
Flass, makeup, all of the basic
necessities that a student is
going to need and want in order
to be successful in school. We
do this, um, through a variety
of community partnerships, um,
where we're able to bring in
donations that allow us to
provide these basic items to
students. So it's no longer
enough to provide a backpack and
school supplies to students
experiencing homelessness. They
need far more, um, extensive
supports. In addition to that,
out of our um Helen Fox
education complex.
We're able to offer a pre-K
program for our youngest
students who are unable to
access any early childhood
services due to their mobility
or their current living status.
These students begin their
program, their educational
opportunity with us in a welcome
setting where we're able to
immediately address their needs,
support their families, and then
as housing is.
Um, is achieved, those students
are then able to remain with us
for the for the rest of the
school year or transition to the
schools in their new
neighborhoods. Um, this is a
fully supported process in our
district and we work very
closely with our schools
throughout the district as we
transition our youngest
learners. We also have an
e-sports lab in space for
students who are working on
online education, um, who may
not have access to internet
services throughout the day or
computers and technology to be
able to maintain.
their schooling while they're
experiencing homelessness.
From our comprehensive case
management model, um, out of
our, um, space, we have a large
team. I am the director. I'm the
homeless liaison, um, for
Albuquerque Public Schools. We
also have two clerks. One clerk
who focuses on data and correct
information for our students
experiencing homelessness, whose
phone numbers, addresses, and
other personal information
change on a frequent basis. The
second clerk is dedicated solely
to the transportation for our
students. Um, and we
work extensively to ensure that
our students have transportation
back to their schools of origin,
um, and support them in any
transitions throughout the
school year. We also have a
budget technician who helps
monitor, um, our funds and our
use of funds and keeps us in
alignment with our procurement
processes. We have 4
coordinators, 2 who help
coordinate their resources for
the team out of the office and
two who help coordinate our
warehouse, bringing donations in
and getting items out. We have a
six-week turnaround
Um, and we usually have bare
shelves.
Um, we have two social workers
that work in, um, collaboration
with 11 resource teachers to go
out into the fields to do
outreach, find our students,
connect them back to their
schools, um, and ensure that
they have meaningful educational
opportunities. In addition, we
have two resource teachers that
focus extensively on our early
childhood families. We made that
decision as a school district
because we were hearing of
students of children, infants
born, going into
NICU and exiting the NICU to
parks, cars, and abandoned
buildings. We know that students
who are not connected to
resources when they're born,
come to kindergarten, still not
connected to resources. These
are the siblings of our
students. These are our future
students, and we dedicate our
time to make sure that we're
connecting families to resources
as early as possible. You have a
15% chance of experiencing
homelessness in your first year.
Life
We need to intervene and we made
that decision strategically.
In addition to that, we have 2
pre-K teachers and 2 educational
assistants that work in our
early childhood programming that
I, um, shared with you just a
moment ago.
In order to find our students,
we have extensive efforts around
identification and outreach.
Some of the things that we're
most proud of that align with
the McKinney Vento Homeless
Education or homeless Assistance
Act are the student residency
questionnaire, which is a
requirement for all schools when
students register that families
have the opportunity to
self-disclose or self-identify.
The second piece is through our
community outreach. We do an
extensive amount of community
outreach. We go to resource
fairs, health fairs, um,
throughout the throughout the
community across all
organizations, um, and it aligns
with our comprehensive case
management model as well. We
have an online referral system
that anyone in the community can
access. I've shared the website
with you on this slide as well.
You're welcome to take a look at
this, um, McKinney Vento
throughout the state is linked
and networked.
And so if I receive a referral
for a student who's in a
community that I do not serve, I
am obligated to reach out to the
McKenny Vento liaison in that
community and assure that that
student is identified in the
school system, in the community
where they are.
Um, we also use screening tools
throughout all of our schools to
help school staff be able to
identify and refer students to
us for additional services.
We have community partnerships
that help us with identification
and outreach and as was
referenced earlier, fostering
connections, um, is a program
for students who age out of
CYFD. We work closely with our
fostering connections team in
Albuquerque to understand who of
our students have aged out of
foster care, whether or not they
have safe, adequate nighttime
residents. And if they are
eligible for McKenny Vento
services, we are able to pick
them up when foster care ends
for them.
Um
Already this school year, we've
identified over 1700 students
last school year, we saw a great
increase in the number of
students that we served, um,
over 4000, um, and prior to that
we had been in the mid 3000s.
As we work to identify our
students in Albuquerque Public
schools. We have systems both
with our foster care team, um,
our foster care point of contact
does follow through with CYFD
confirming, um, all of our
students who are in foster care,
and so far this year has
identified 426 students in our,
um, community who are in foster
care.
McKinney Vento has the, um, 1700
that I just referenced, and we
worked with New Mexico Public
Education Department and the
Department of Education last
spring to confirm that students
who experience homelessness in
foster care qualify for McKinney
Vento. Um, so at this time, we
are looking at 50 students who
are dual identified and are able
to access Mikinivento supports,
um, while they are in foster
care. So to clarify
what dual identification might
look like. These are our
students who have been taken
into custody by CYFD but do not
remain in the custody of CYFD.
They may flee foster care homes.
They may have lack of placement
options and be living in
shelters. Um, because of their
status without having a safe,
adequate nighttime residence,
they qualify under McKinney
Vento as well.
Our funding sources are Brayden
and blended.
We in Albuquerque Public schools
have, um, dedicated more than
our than more than is required
of our Title One Part A funds to
serve our students under, um,
experiencing homelessness under
McKinney Vento. In addition to
that, we do apply for the EHCY
or McKinney Vinto subgrant
through New Mexico Public
Education Department. And we
also have grants through our
city and county. And we rely
extensively on private
donations.
Um, as this graphic shows you,
we, the majority of our funding
is direct services to students,
direct interaction with
students, um, direct connections
with students and relationship
building to ensure their
educational success. Another
major component of our funding
goes to transportation for
students to their schools of
origin.
This is a new expense to make
Kenny Vento because of a
shortage of transportation
options across the country.
We are now utilizing services
such as alternative
transportation, which is similar
to an Uber, but it is designed
for students and those, um,
drivers are background checked
and trained by the school
districts. However, the cost of
that service is extensive. It is
quickly eating into the funds
that we are able to utilize for
direct services to students, um,
and this graph is current as of
the beginning of October.
However, we are on track to need
to pull additional funds from.
Direct services to students to
be able to afford the
transportation cost.
So I'd like to talk a little bit
about our challenges. Um, one of
the major challenges that we
experience as um liaisons
throughout the state, but
specifically in Albuquerque, is
that the need
And especially the need for
housing far outweighs the
resources available in our
communities. One of the things
that we know about serving our
students who are experiencing
homelessness and their families
is that we need to be able as a
community to provide the
supports and services that are
needed as soon as a family is
ready to receive them. We are
currently out of balance as a
community. When families seek
Um, substance abuse services, we
can't find openings. When they
seek mental health counseling,
behavioral health. We can't find
services. When they seek
housing,
We can't find housing. We have
multiple barriers. We work
through many of those barriers
we may work through $15,000 in
arrears, we make clear
evictions, we may find Social
Security numbers. We may do all
that work, and we still can't
find housing. The average time
for a family to spend in a
shelter setting before they can
get into housing is 9 months.
And that's with a team working
behind the scenes to make sure
that all of their barriers are
addressed.
Remains a major barrier or major
challenge for us in the work
that we do.
Our second challenge is of
course transportation, as I just
shared, the cost of that
transportation is extreme. It's,
um, and it's very challenging
for school districts. However,
what we do know about that
transportation is that it works.
It improves attendance rates for
our students. These are our most
vulnerable students, and when
they are provided with routes
and access to school, they are
attending school. And when
students attend school, we see
improvement in their educational
outcomes.
The third challenge that we have
is funding.
Spraying and blend blended
funding takes creativity. It
takes innovation, and it draws
time and resources away from
interactions with students. It's
an amazing opportunity to be
able to fund the programs that
we do, um.
And we are far from being able
to sustain without support from
our community.
In addition, I'd like to share
with you our future goals.
Our future goals, which are much
more exciting than our
challenges are that we see a
balance between our assets our
balance of our assets and our
resources. We are working
extensively as a team to do some
functional asset mapping. We've
learned that that means that we
have to stay on top of this on a
day to day basis. Agencies and
organizations close, points of
contact change.
We are working to establish and
maintain strong community
partnerships.
We're also working extensively
to increase student engagement
Enrollment is one component of
that. But we're looking at
meaningful educational
opportunities. Our students
engaged in sports because we
know that sports keeps them
engaged in school. Are they
participating in music programs
in fine arts? Are they accessing
language classes? Are they, um,
taking advantage of IB classes
AP, um, dual enrollment, all of
their opportunities. We want to
ensure that our
Students who are identified
under McKinney Vento have
comparable access to those
activities.
We also want to see stability
and we're working towards
stability. We're very focused on
reducing recidivism. We are very
concerned that we see families
take vouchers.
Succeed on those vouchers for a
period of time and then enter
back into our system of
homelessness.
So we have a family
stabilization program in
Albuquerque Public schools,
where we work extensively with
families to identify what
stability will look like for
them. And finally, we know that
from all of this work, we're
going to see improved student
outcomes, attendance,
engagement, academic success,
and graduation will tell us that
we've improved our student
outcomes.
Thank you so much for your time
and your attention.
Thank you. I'll now turn it over
to Simone Van from PED.
Natasha, do you have the slides
for me?
To Chairman Romero and to the
committee members, good
afternoon. Uh, my name is Simone
Van. I have a, a recent title
change, so I am the at-risk
intervention response director
at the New Mexico Public
Education Department and I thank
you for your time and I will uh
share with you programming
information for students
experiencing homelessness and
students in foster care at the
New Mexico Public Education
Department.
And so today I go, I'll go
briefly over a program history
with you.
Thank you. uh, current status of
the programming and then also
we'll talk about some of our
future goals. So I don't wanna
say that programming for a
foster care recently started at
New Mexico Public Education
department, so it's about 6
months old, uh, but in the past,
uh, there were two plans that
were created back in 2018.
With our ARP HCY funds and
that's the American Rescue plan
for homeless children and youth.
That was the federal funding
that we got for COVID-19 relief.
We were able to do some
programming with the education
for homeless or for students
experiencing homelessness. Some
of those are listed there like
homeless training programs for
homeless liaisons. Also, we have
an advisory council that we have
for, uh, deciding within the.
Community, what programming is
good for students and families
experiencing homelessness.
We have a federal fund which was
already discussed for the
education of homeless children
and youth, but I do want to
highlight that that federal
fund, um, 25% of it is retained
within the state and that does
cover the salary for our state
coordinator, who is Dana Malone.
The 75% goes to our districts.
Um, this year that 75% was the
756,000 that Natasha mentioned.
But we did kind of raise that
and we sent to our LEA's 765,000
with our ARP HCY funding uh
expiring, that's all our funding
that we have for the education
of students experiencing
homelessness. Um, it was able to
cover 15 LEAs and then we had
one REC that's our regional
educational cooperatives, um,
that did a consortium uh for our
smaller.
Districts, so they combined
about 10 of our smaller
districts, and those were the
ones that were awarded that
grant. It is a 3-year grant
cycle. So for the next 3 years,
that's what we're covering.
If we look at data, um, we can
tell that these two student
groups need our help and
support. Um, if we look at our
proficiency rates, uh graduation
rates, and our attendance rates,
students who are experiencing
homelessness and students in the
foster care system, um, have the
lowest rates and so they need
our support.
Some things that the federal
grant was uh able to cover our
listed here, um, but I would
just wanted to highlight a few
of our, our districts. Um, you
heard the great things that uh
is being done within APS, uh,
but in Aan MGordo they created a
whole like unit they have where
our students experiencing
homelessness and our students
and their families are able to
come in and and shop for
essentials that they need
clothing, um, and they were able
to do that.
using um our RP HCY funds, which
once again are the ones
expiring, um, and also they
braided it with their family
income index funds, which is a
funding stream for economically
disadvantaged students.
Recently we had a call from
Riodoso and they said they had
1800 students who were
experiencing inadequate housing
because of the um fires and and
the the flooding within their
region and so we were able to
help that district, uh, once
again with the ARPHCY funding,
uh, based on those needs and so
those are the funding streams
that we use, but once again our
ARP HCY is gone.
As of September 30th, and so
without those funds, those are
the needs that we will no longer
be able to meet.
Within the program, um, based on
having the additional, um,
COVID-19 relief funds. Uh, we
were able to build uh
infrastructure around our state
coordinators, so we now have 3
supporting positions, um, she is
one state coordinator for all of
New Mexico and so it's nice to
have that additional support
around her. Also, we've had
community navigators which have
been awesome, um, they're
navigators within the
communities who
Know how to get to the resources
that our families need, um, who
are experiencing homelessness
and so we have 5 right now, um,
once again that is using the ARP
HCY funding.
In foster care, um, we are
definitely with our foster care
programming, um, building the
infrastructure, uh, Tara
beautifully described the whole
situation as far as our data and
just not having that
infrastructure right now. So one
thing that we are doing is
meeting with CYFD uh to build
that infrastructure within both
of our agencies. The SA team
that they created actually
started by our conversations
with CYFD.
Around educational needs for
students who are in foster care,
so that team is newly built and
it is specifically to support
the education of our students in
foster care.
Also, what we're doing is to
create within New Mexico a
definition for foster care
students. Um, I am a part of the
subs substitute care advisory
Council and one definition that
they use there that I think
would be great for the state is
any student who is in substitute
care is a student in foster
care, and so that would be any
student um who is not with their
legal guardian or parent.
We're also establishing foster
foster care point of contact,
the districts and state charter
schools have been working hard
with identifying foster care
point of contacts in each of
their districts. Um, some
districts like APS has a
dedicated person for foster
care, but other districts,
especially in our rural areas,
um, it's their superintendent
who's who's doing it all, um, so
programming across the state
we're we're trying to be very
strategic and making sure that
it works.
For all of our districts, um,
our rural and our urban
districts.
With foster care, I do want to
say there's no, um, funding
federal or state right now for
students in foster care. So
we've been working closely with
our family resource centers, our
family resource centers, um, it,
it provides PE a unique
opportunity to work more closely
with our families and our, our
community, our students in the
community. And so here's a few
examples of what we're doing
within the family resource
centers to support these two
students.
Groups. One thing we're doing is
to uh co-locate with the family
resource centers, and that's to
provide cross training and so
they're in the community once
again and uh we have a bunch of
state agencies and sometimes
it's hard to navigate what's
available to our families and so
we are strategically going to
the Family Resource centers to
cross train those who work there
who are with the community, um,
to let them know what services
we do offer as
State agency and how we can
support our families. We're
looking to partner with Locker
505, um, to provide monthly
visits to our family resource
centers. They provide clothing
and needs for uh students
experiencing homelessness, uh,
but also they provide, um, GE,
excuse me, GED services for
families who might need that as
well.
Some things that um we're
looking towards for the future,
um, is first to try to continue
the programming that we have
right now, um, we, of course, as
a state have to look at the fact
that a lot of our uh federal
funding, the COVID relief
dollars are no longer here and
so some of the programming that
we have, we would love to
continue it. I know we can't
continue all of it, but some of
it has been very helpful and I
think will really help these two
students.
Groups
For our homeless programming, we
would love to keep our 3
supporting positions, um, that
help to support our state
coordinator.
Um, also, uh, at least 2 of the
community navigators we would
love to retain if we're able to.
I know we can't retain all five,
but at least 2 of them.
We're looking and and working
with we have actually a
subcommittee that's looking into
transportation and being able to
provide alternative
transportation options
throughout our state.
Also, being able, when we did
the um education for homeless
children and youth grant. It's a
competitive grant, as I said
before, we had 39 districts that
applied for that grant and the
ask was over $300 but we were
only able to choose 15 of them,
and we could only give $765,000
so that's kind of an example of
the need that we're seeing, but
just not being able to meet that
need.
So we would love to have a state
flow through grant, um, to
support homeless programming,
and that would be money that we
would give to our districts to
continue to support the student
group, uh, in our state, there's
over there's about a little over
10,000 students who are
experiencing homelessness and
the grant was able to cover
about 6000, so there's 4000 of
our students out there who are
not covered by this federal
grant.
For foster care programming, um,
we are continuing to build the
infrastructure we are having
those 4 meetings, um,
where with the foster care point
of contact and the foster care
point of contact is super, super
important because as we try to
keep our students within their
origin school, it's not always
possible and so sometimes
students will have to switch
schools, but without having
those point of contacts in our
building.
It's hard for that transfer to
go smoothly and quickly and so
that hampers the education of
our students in foster care.
So the building that
infrastructure will ensure that
there's a speedy transfer of
educational records and supports
that our students need to
continue their education
seamlessly. This issue is super
personal to me too, and as I, I
talked with Natasha, um, you
know, I grew up as a, uh, foster
care family in New York, um, and
my brother uh came to us through
foster care, um, my dad was
super happy. We had 4 girls.
And that, that was his son, um,
but I saw firsthand the uh
trauma that foster care, uh, or,
you know, students in foster
care go through, um, then the
trauma of being in a brand new
home and then some of them
experienced trauma by having to
switch schools even just talking
with CYFD right now, a lot of
students are moving quite far
when they enter the foster care
system, um, some to less.
Cruises from Albuquerque, um,
and that's unique because before
it was more closer to uh where
they were, um, and so there's a
lot of need for infrastructure
across the state where we might
not think Las Cruces and
Albuquerque need to talk about
foster care. Now they do, and,
and even within our rural
districts and so it it's super
important that we do have the
support in our state to provide
this the support that both of
these student groups need, so.
So we can start raising their
performance, their attendance,
and their graduation rates.
Thank you.
Thank you. And Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, we now
stand for question.
Great. Thank you all for the
presentation, Senator Soltz.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and
Natasha, takes a lot of courage
to talk about your own story. I
know it well in that though I'm
a one, my daughter, we adopted
and she's an 8, and so, you
know, many of the things so we
adopted her out of the foster
care system. She's given me
permission to talk about her
story, so uh she's now 30, I'm a
granddad, see my granddaughter
is 6 months old, my daughter's
doing wonderfully, and, and
their kids, uh, but still that
trauma is always there a little
bit under the.
Surface when things get hard and
it never completely goes away,
uh.
One of the things in uh Natasha,
I think it was in yours, but the
map and the districts that have
the highest percentage of
students that are homeless.
And they all seem to be very
small districts way out in the
frontier areas there was a map
and and a a chart. I don't
remember exactly where.
What concerns me is in Las
Cruces and in Albuquerque,
though the services may be
inadequate, there are services.
If you go out to those
districts.
There's nothing.
The schools are the only
services and often the
superintendent is the McKinney
Vento. How do we manage.
That for those districts where
there are no services to refer
students to and that almost
sounds like it's rhetorical, but
it's a real question, yo, what
do we do to help those students
when there's, there are no
services.
No, Mr. Chairman and uh Senator
Solz, that is a great question
actually, um, from what I've
been talking about, it just
starts with the um.
It it reaching out to the
community members, engaging
families to participate in
getting those parents to
actually engage too, um,
providing incentives, uh,
providing opportunity really.
I've spoke with Cuba as well,
and it's just like the there's a
need for a workforce as well,
um, as you said, it, it may be a
community issue as well. Um,
there's a lot of things that
could, uh, contribute to that,
um, more than I would love to
dive deeper into this to get
like more uh rounded answer.
But that's that's what I can do
right now unless, um, you know,
some of my colleagues would like
to add to that too, but.
Anyone wants to add and Senator
Souls,
um,
that's why I feel it's super
important to first find those uh
point of contacts within each of
our districts, but also to bring
them in and figure out their
unique issues and problems. Um,
sometimes it, it could be, uh,
just getting with schools, um,
districts that have more
infrastructure just to
understand that infrastructure
and what we could do poss.
in our rural areas, uh, but
right now I'm sure a lot of our
rural areas feel that they're on
their own, uh, and so that's why
I we're bringing them together,
uh, this year to try to
You know, real life practical
things that they can apply to
help their situations and so
that's why it's super important
to get those point of contacts,
get them together across the
state and so that we can start
looking for solutions within our
state.
Chair and members of the chair
and Senator Sols, I'd like to
also add to that that, um,
Albuquerque Public Schools is
oftentimes a resource for many
districts throughout the state.
We have extensive conversations
with districts about exactly
what you're talking about.
They're calling and saying,
well, how are you addressing
this? Um, we do have some unique
community partnerships that
allow us to, um, create.
Avenues to overcome barriers
that give us ideas that we can
then share with our smaller
rural communities. And some of
those examples might be opening
up their high school gym to
allow students and families in
to shower before the school day
begins. That does require some
training and some strategy on
the part of the rural school
district to maybe fund an
individual to open the facility
to set that standard, um, so
that families have access to
that.
In addition to that, we talk
about resources such as stayover
shelters, which allows districts
to use funds or to bring
community organizations, um,
whether from their community or
other communities, um, to
utilize cots and establish the
gymnasium as an overnight
shelter in communities that
don't have shelters. These are
happening across the country.
They're even happening in
Albuquerque public schools
because we have pockets that
have the same resource issues in
our
community
And I think the collaboration
across the state has really been
key to creatively identifying
solutions, um, and ways to
address barriers.
Thank you. Thank you, and you
know, I know the N A Aid
Institute, the 100% community is
in many of the smaller
communities and trying to work
through that to build capacity
of the resources and the things
that are there, but it's both a
human capacity and you indicated
that you know by the end of the
60 days, your shelves are bare
and you've got to refigure out
how to get all the services out
to kids and you know, again,
we're a wealthy state and we
allow this to happen.
And and occur and it doesn't
have to, we, you know, making a
bigger investment in, in our
kids and it's part of the reason
I think why, you know, people
would always complained that
we're last in education, we
aren't taking care of the kids
most in need, you know, that,
that I think we could be, uh,
this man, you had indicated or I
saw on one of the things that
the Las Cruces family Resource
Center. I'm from Las Cruces.
Where is that? Is it up and
running? I provided some money
for the district to do.
Such, but I heard there was some
problems getting the money
allocated and who was gonna
actually do it? What's going on
with that, please, Mr. Chairman,
Senator souls, it, it is, it is
in the process, um, they, they
did have a location. It was on
Main Street. In fact, my, uh,
team is visiting there 2 to 4,
so they should be there right
now, um, the place right next to
the public school office? I know
they were looking because I
provided some capital money for
the remodel of that as well, I
believe it's it's I think it's a
good problem, but the problem
was that the things that we
wanted to do. I mean this is
very estate agencies, not just
uh New Mexico public education,
um, that, that facility didn't
have enough room, so I did hear
from uh Jeannette with CYFD that
they found another facility in
in Las Cruces. I'm not sure
exactly where it is yet, but as
soon as we have a facility that
has the room, um, we are ready
to begin and and those are,
there's several conversations
about different things that we
would like to do in the family
resource centers, including the
one in in Las Cruces.
Thank you. I'm,
I'm impatient. Yeah, we needed
this for a long while, and I
really would like to see it go
clear down to the early
childhood education and prenatal
level and hope that, you know,
if you have any influence with
that secretary about releasing
some of those monies so that we
can get the parents the training
and the kids at the youngest
level, it prevents child abuse,
it fixes lots of
The problems early on so we
don't continue to have it as
they, they age out or at least
we can reduce the numbers. So if
you've got any influence, please
push them. We're ready, we want
to move, you know, I'm
impatient, uh, Mr. Chair.
The last one I think you said
that there are 10,000 homeless
students in New Mexico, I think
that's an undercount. Uh, the
numbers I've heard is close to
5000 in Donana County, um, and
so those might be the ones that
are formerly been identified,
but most people, I think,
believe that's an undercount,
but that there are 4000 that
essentially are getting no
services. What do we need to do
to get them some of the help and
services so that they've got the
chance at a better outcome.
in life
Mr. Chairman and uh Senator
Solz, thank you for the
question, um, I, I think that
having the COVID relief funds
that we had in the state, it, it
gave us a unique opportunity to
see the need and what we can do
as a state with additional
funding, um, those are
identified students and you're
absolutely right. I, I think one
of the categories that we feel
when it comes to students
experiencing homelessness and
those covered under McKinney
Vento.
That the uh students who are
inadequately housed are the ones
that are hard to find and
inadequaly house could just be
they don't have air conditioning
are the ones that I think within
the state that are hard to find
that we we need better
identification of, um, but if we
had a a state flow through grant
for our LEAs we would be able to
cover more with the ARP HCY
funds, we were able to cover 53
uh districts.
Uh, while, you know, while those
funds were available, so
literally we went from 53
districts having federal funds
to help uh students who are
experiencing homelessness down
to 15. And so that, that's a
huge dip that we went down
because those funds are no
longer available, so just having
a state flow through grant that
could go straight to our
districts, we would be able to
fund more and cover more of our
identified students. Mr. Chair,
and you may have
me in some of the earlier
questioning, how much money
disappeared from the federal
that we need to, yeah, what,
what's the dollar amount and not
just what we could barely get by
with, what would it take?
To really deal with the problem
appropriately. Give me uh and
and I'm not gonna hold you to
it, but how much money are we
talking about per year to to
essentially fix this to
something that most people would
think might be a reasonable
manageable amount, Mr. Chairman,
Senator Solz, thank you for that
question. Um, with the ARP HCY
funds we had 3.6 million, um,
and really we've only used that
the last two years because of
COVID, um, the funds really we
just started using it.
The last 2 years, um, but I
would say to adequately supply
it to our districts and cover
our students. We would need
about 5 million to flow through
directly to our districts.
Mr. Chair, and forgive me for
For being flippant about it,
those are pennies in the couch.
Every 1% of our cash reserves is
$10,000 and we're talking about
1/20th of 1% of the cash
reserves.
To fix the problem for our
homeless kids who if any more
than any deserve.
Those numbers fast, but thank
you, Matt. I was a math teacher.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Right, Represent Garrett.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. As the state
works with organizations,
there's both private.
Organizations and public
organizations, are you able to
assist, uh, and I think of two
ones in my district, Seranname,
which has one facility in
Albuquerque is now building one
in my district, uh, Joy Junson
in Albuquerque, faith based, uh,
some of these don't take.
Public
Um, monies, but are you still
able to send people there to
assist them getting stability
and services.
Yes, the answer to that question
is yes. Under the McKinney Vento
Homeless Assistance Act.
McKinney Vento liaisons are
required to connect families
with the resource that meets
their current need, um, our
requirement is to complete a
family needs assessment to fully
understand the scope of barriers
that the family is facing. And
from that we identify the
resources in our community and
in surrounding communities that
can directly address the needs
of.
The family, um, and align with
them. What we don't want to do
is we don't want to provide a
resource to a family or a
resource list to a family for
them to go through, only to have
more and more um declinations of
service, um, because they lose
momentum to progress and to
work, um, to complete the work
that it is required from all of
us, the family and the community
to exit homelessness.
Thank you, and, and maybe
Crystal, this is also for you in
Albuquerque.
How many are homeless
adolescents without parental
guardian situations. Do you have
a number for that versus
homeless or housing and secure
youth who do have parents and
guardians that are responsible
with them.
Thank you for that question,
chair, and, um, Representative
Garrett, I appreciate that
question. Last year, Albuquerque
Public Schools did extensive
work to identify um our
unaccompanied homeless youth who
are without their parents and
guardians. Um, and we also
looked at whether or not they
were without support systems,
um, and one of the things that
we identified was that the
majority of our unaccompanied
homeless youth are without
support systems. They may have a
nice coach.
A great math teacher, a friend
that they met whose parents
allow them to sleep in the
garage or on the floor, but
they're not with the supports to
work through things like
driver's education, FAFSA and
college applications, how to get
your first job, how to open a
bank account, how to buy
groceries. So those students,
although an adult has somewhat
taken responsibility. They don't
have that support system. Um, we
typically, um, err on the side
of.
when providing direct numbers,
but we do believe it's about 15%
of those that we serve that are
in, um, unaccompanied homeless
youth. They oftentimes are
either rendered homeless or have
run away. We, um, under the
McKinney Vento homeless
Assistance Act, we don't need to
know why. And so that makes the
services that we're providing
very unique. Oftentimes those
youth will evade and um.
Uh, run from CYFD and because
they are fearful of
consequences. They're fearful of
consequences for themselves and
for their family members. And so
McKinney Vento provides a
service for youth who aren't in
that system.
In that way and so I think
that's really key when you're
looking at that number to
understand that these are youth
that are disconnected from CYFD
as well.
Represented by.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for the presentation, you know,
uh, M M Vento is very near and
dear to me. I served as a
liaison for my school district
for many, many years. I remember
when Dana first came on board,
uh, props to Dana, she is
awesome and, and, and she, she
really is passionate about what
she, what she does, so, so
please let let her know that,
that, that, that, you know,
props to her.
Uh, one of the things that, uh,
when I was the liaison for my
school district at the time, the
majority of our students and
families that we had identified
were um doubling up.
Uh, doubling up for a variety of
reasons, as we know, and so that
said.
When that was I think one of the
most difficult parts in
identifying the families, uh,
they really, they really readily
didn't identify themselves or
say I need help. They, they
don't, a lot of, a lot of folks,
a lot of families really, you
know, keep that to themselves.
It's a family matter, you know,
we, we don't want other people
to know that the situation that
we're in, and so that said, Mr.
Chair, you know, how, what
strategies do you use to over to
overcome that or to get the
families or the students the
unaccompanied youth to
self-identify.
Mr. Chair, and, um, members of
the committee and, um,
Representative Lara, thank you
for that question. Um, we work
extensively on building
relationships with our families
and our youth, and one thing
that I think is important for
you all to understand is that,
um, doubled up is very
different. Um, in our state, we
have to consider our culture.
And our personal decisions to
have multi-generational
households.
We have to respect those
decisions because that is not
Minivento, that's not
experiencing homelessness and
it's not an economic hardship.
At the same time, we do need to
know when it is an economic
hardship, and that requires us
to develop relationships with
our, um, students, relationships
with their families, um, and to
understand that what we once
thought of as doubled up is now
tripled up and quadrupled up.
Um, it's opening the door to a
studio apartment and seeing 15
individuals, um, that are living
in a studio apartment and
recognizing that we have to take
some time to work with the
members in that household to
understand who is on the lease.
Who belongs to what family and
what does a family unit look
like and how is it defined for
the individuals that are in that
space.
Um, that is a dedication of time
and resources and recognition
that relationships matter. I
fear that we can't identify
McKinney Vento liaisons in
districts or we're identifying
McKenny Vento liaisons who are
wearing numerous hats that we
are missing those students
because they don't disclose. In
Albuquerque Public schools, we
also
have a process where families,
um, can disclose that they're
living with other families, um,
in order to be able to access
their school services, and we're
working to get that to be an
automatic referral to McKenny
Vento so we can start those
conversations and begin to truly
understand where the members of,
of that household stand in that,
um, in that status.
Thank you for that. Thank you,
Mr. Char, you know, uh, I, I,
what you're saying it really
did, I remember, I remember what
that was like, and one of the,
one of the other things that,
uh, you know, was talked about
was transportation.
And my in my school district we
border Texas.
So we would have kids homeless
uh students that we have
identified that had to go to go
to Texas because there was
shelter there, but they wanted
to continue at our schools.
So the, the, I'd get in touch
with the liaison over in in El
Paso, and they were, you know,
they would coordinate all the
transportation. There was times
that, uh, you know, we would
meet them at the state line, uh,
to take them to school or to
bring him back from school, and
I remember the the the they
would send us whole school bus
just for one student.
And so it, it, it just, I'm
thinking about the costs that
are associated with that
transportation because we were
fortunate.
Enough to have the vehicles and
the certified drivers to pick up
the kids and take them to school
and take them back to the state
line and but that's something
that uh that is, is very
important and I'm glad you
brought that up because not only
in general with the school
districts its transportation is
so important, but having to
accommodate.
Our students who want that
continuity where their friends
are at, where they where their
teachers are at, that is so
critical and so important and
and I, and I want to thank
Natasha for that, you know,
bringing that to our attention
because that's so important.
Another point that I would like
to make, Mr. Chair, is I also
served as the migrant recruiter,
so I recruited migrant families,
uh, migrant agricultural.
Worker families and many of the
times, those families also
qualified for McKinney Vento.
And so I had, I had families
who, who, who were the inventor
program and they were also in
the migrant education program
and, and Mr. Chair and uh uh
interim director, uh, I would
like to ask that uh hopefully
next next interim, we can
actually have the folks from MEP
here and, and so we can learn
more about the MEP program and
and what what they're doing to
support the families because
many, many, many times MEP and
McKinney Vento worked hand in
hand to support our families and
our kids.
And I just want to thank
everybody for the work that you
do. I also want to, uh, say one
more thing, Mr. Cha is, uh, last
year, uh, I was sponsored house,
um, 389, Hospital 389 was the no
fee for ID, no, no fee for IDs
or for uh homeless individuals
and the original intent of that
bill was for our our
unaccompanied youth. That was
the original intent for that
bill, but we expanded it to
include everyone who was
homeless, and I wanna
acknowledge and thank my
colleagues that are here because
everybody voted.
To support that bill and it's
now in law and I I it takes
small steps, it takes efforts,
but I wanna give, uh, Mr. Chair,
everyone here, the props and
thank you for your hard work and
your dedication to our families.
Because
You never know that if you may
buy someone a a student or some
uh the families, you get some
some school clothes and some
hygiene products. What a
difference that would make for
them.
And it makes a huge difference.
The smallest things that we take
for granted sometimes are big
things for them and and it gets
them to where they need to be
and it makes them successful. So
thank you for all that you do.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator Pinto.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for your presentation. How
many of the students, um,
HawaiiPs.
Um, in my last conversation with
Dana Malone at the state, our
students in um Min Vo programs
over 25% of them are students
who also receive special
education services. I don't have
the answer for foster care, but
I would imagine.
And
And I think that's when it
because they've been out of
education for quite a while now.
Well, to me it's been a while
and you know part of that IEP um
when you talk about self-care.
And not having the facilities to
do it. Um, I don't understand
why, especially when you talk
about the intellectual
disabilities, emotional
disturbance.
Um, that the number's not
higher.
Uh, are we not evaluating them
accordingly, um.
Especially when foster kids come
in, is that even a process, part
of the process, um, when that
intake's happening.
I can't speak Charon,
um.
Senator Pin Pinto, um.
I can't speak directly for CYFD
and their process, but I can
tell you that in, um, under the
McKinney Vento homeless
Assistance Act. We are required
to expedite evaluations for our
students. We are still finding
students who have not been
enrolled.
Um, they've not been enrolled in
school ever, um, or they were
not enrolled in school since
before the pandemic. We're
continuing to find our students.
We advocate very clearly that
our students have a right to
intervention and services before
we, um, assume.
That they need an individualized
education plan, um, and that we
do have a responsibility to
expedite any parent request.
Or anything that we know is
going on for a student. We have
Challenges around disclosure.
Families who have kept their
students out of school, families
who are experiencing
homelessness, um, families who
have been part of the child
welfare system are very often
hesitant to share their
information and their concerns
about their children's
development, and we have to work
extensively as a school
community to identify our
students and their needs and
ensure that their needs are met,
and I do believe that we, um,
have some underrepresent.
but I think we are also at risk
for overrepresentation, um, due
to lack of opportunity.
And we need to address both of
those at the same time.
And Mr. Chairman and Senator for
students um who were in the
foster care system, um, our, our
first challenge is, um, data and
identifying those students. Uh,
we're working right now within
our Nova team to have an option
in our system where school
districts can actually identify
students who are in foster care
right now, a lot of that is done
with CYFD just letting the
district know that this
Student is within their their
custody, but the districts right
now are doing their own thing
and I, I identifying that
student within their system, so
I, I do feel the, the numbers
for foster care are probably
high, but we have to get that
data together and that's the
infrastructure that we have to
build in order to have that that
identity of our students to
track them and to get the
information that we need.
To know, even to be able to
answer that question with how
many are also on IEPs or or 504
plans.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I think that.
Unacceptable.
Especially when we say oh the
districts are doing this, but
CYFD is over here.
We're in the same state. These
are our students, these are our
children. This is our state.
I it's terrible. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Represents Terasas.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, thank you
for the presentation and really
all the comments from the uh
committee here. I, I, to, uh.
Senator Pinto's point, I was
just listening, yeah, I was
thinking if you're experiencing
the same things when you report
to CYFD that they go to the home
and basically make sure they
have a red a roof over their
head, a bed, and uh food and
then they dismiss it and go on
is, are you experiencing things
like that, Mr. Chair, where you
don't get beyond that point?
Uh, Mr. Chair, thank you, uh,
Representative, for that
question. Um, we're not
experiencing that, um, with the
data information and, and what I
was trying to explain, um,
they're getting the information
from CYFD to identify what
students are in foster care, but
if it's not in like our our Nova
system where districts can track
that, that's where the issue is,
um, we are definitely working
with CYFD and they have been
readily
Working with us to make sure
that data within both agencies
align and that we do have better
identification of our students
within the foster care system,
so I they've been very receptive
as I'm working with them.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I, and I,
I'm sorry, I should have
specified a moving on to
absenteeism is where I was. I'm
sorry. I just wanted you to
finish. I don't want to
interrupt you and that, that's
where I, where I was, my, my
question was focused on and I
apologize. I should have been a
little more clear about that.
Can you have an answer to that?
What?
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and
Representative, can you um just
tell me exactly what it was when
we have uh.
This absenteeism issue
throughout the all the school
districts. Are you guys
experiencing the same things
that we are here in our, in our
local area where our districts
are turning in calling COYFD
because that's their last uh.
I guess point that in the
structure of uh students uh the
attendance Success Act that
they're supposed to identify
that or identify that students
and send it, send that
information to COYFD and when
they go out there, CYFD goes out
there and, and my, from my
understanding, they, they
basically make sure they have a
roof over their head, food and
uh bed to sleep in, and then
they they can't move any further
than that. Is, is that what
you're experiencing,
you,
Representative. I, I do.
understand the question. Um,
unfortunately I don't work with
CYFD in that way. Um, so I, I,
unfortunately, I'm not sure.
Well, I'll just, I'm not gonna
beat this horse anymore, but are
you getting any resolve out of
calling COAFD to get students to
come back, is that really
helping? Is it being successful
in your school district?
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman,
and, and representative. I don't
work with the attendance part of
of pets, so I don't have an
answer to that. I, I don't work
with them in that way for
attendance.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Moving on,
I was looking at, uh, I had a
little confusion there when we
were addressing the homelessness
and then you had said, uh,
44,000 students that you
couldn't cover through federal
funds and then earlier in in our
discussion earlier today in
committee we talked about we had
approximately 3000 kids that we
needed help is that through the
state, on, on different program,
right? Is it a disparity in, in
the criteria that
Meets those two numbers because
I, I, I'm confused that one says
4000, the other one saying 3000,
one's a state program, one's a
federal program. Can you explain
that a little bit better so I
understand that.
I can definitely do that, yes,
um, I can, um,
Mr. Chair and representative, I
can, um, address that question.
Uh, when we're looking at
different, um, numbers,
different data that was
presented today, um, we're
looking at, um, by district, um,
Albuquerque Public Schools
identified 4000 students last
year, um, at the state level, we
identified over 10,000 students
and 4000 of them are in
districts that did not receive
funding.
Um, McKinney Vento.
is a federal act that's in, that
is, um, required of every school
districts throughout the state.
Um, and then the state program
provides us with additional
guidance and regulations and
support for that federal
program. And so I think that
we're, we're talking about
components of a larger structure
if that helps.
Yes, I just, I just, uh, didn't
understand that cause I was, I,
not that they misrepresented. I
just didn't understand. It
sounded to me like if we had
that focus of those other 1500
students we would really do well
and so I was just trying to
figure that out. So obviously we
need to expand this program a
lot more, Mr. Chair, I, you
know, I was looking at, at, I
was remembering yesterday's um
uh presentation by our, by our
superintendent here and uh this
uh McKinney Vento support
system.
And, uh, our, our school
district, this particular school
district that we're sitting in,
uh, so we're, uh, schools
received $16,0108 in 2324 and uh
15,000 24, 25 year and and huge
disparity in the numbers that
you're talking about.
To this 1555 students according
to that because I was looking, I
go, I remember hearing this, so
I started going back and, and
uh, and looking at, that's $393
for 55 students.
And I'm going, why are we so
different? Why are we not
receiving the funding that we
need here in our school
districts in rural New Mexico,
the same that um maybe our um
friends in, in Albuquerque, Las
Cruces, and maybe Santa Fe or
getting in in more of the urban
areas. Is there, do you have
anything to
You know, expressed on that.
Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative, thank you for
that question. Um, are, are you
referring to the McKinney Vento
grant. OK, thank you. Um, yes,
so that, that is a competitive
grant, um, that they, um, apply
for and it is based on the
number of students um who are
identified within a a district.
Uh, usually if you look at the
allocations for like a larger
district versus the number of
students they have. It's about
the
So we, we end up at the same
point that it's not enough
funding to cover our, our
students,
Mr. Chair, I just, um, prior to
this, I, I kind of remember the
superintendent also saying that
they were, uh, our school
district was, uh, you know,
needing funding from our local
mine Freeport, um, our car
dealerships and stuff like that,
everybody kind of pitching in to
meet those needs. So it's just
something that I think is
important to, to, it's obvious.
Something important to your
committee, something again, I'm
not on this committee. I just
kind of picking up what I'm
listening to the last couple
days, um, there is, uh, you
know, uh, obviously a lot of
need in our state and, uh, I
hope to see that get better and
so thank you very much for
expressing that. I, I last I
did, I didn't get any of that
data though for Kry schools
superintendent was here
yesterday, so I have no idea
what those figures were for him,
um, but from my understanding,
roughly that's the amount of
funding.
this school district has
received over about a decade. So
I was kind of shocked to hear
that and and so I hope that we
can find something to better
funds fund our schools, OK?
Thank you.
Thank you. Um.
And just for the committee's
information is I had invited
CYFD, um.
To this presentation, um, but
the woman that handles it wasn't
able to make it. Um, so I guess
that goes to my, my question for
uh Crystal is um what is your
interaction been with CYFD and
is the information that you may
need being shared and readily
available.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I, um,
service as in the McKinney Vento
liaison and so I'm not the
direct foster care point of
contact. However, I am in
collaboration with our foster
care point of contact, who has
established a biweekly meeting
with CYFD. Um, we are currently
working to continue to build out
what that collaborative
relationship looks like. Uh, it
does require quite a bit of um
communication and intervention
to be able to
Adequately serve our students.
And so it's something that we
need to continue to work on as
we build out that process.
And you're working on like a
formalized structure and what
that looks like with CYFD we do
have um a formalized MOU with
our school district, um, and
then continuing to build off of
that, um, so that as we identify
additional barriers or
challenges, um, we can work to
establish a relationship with
that agency that addresses those
specific challenges.
Um, and, and then I guess I was
drawn to um PD and Miss Van
about um family resource center
collaboration, um, and, and.
Have
There been any challenges with
these family resource centers in
terms of the services that they
had been providing or what they
had been doing and then taking
on this as an added
responsibility or how has that
worked? Um, Mr. Chair, thank you
for the question. Um, we were
pleasingly surprised that the
things that they're doing within
their resource centers are
exactly what we need to do and
can collaborate with them on,
for instance, um,
We toured the uh Roswell, um.
Center Casa and a wonderful
center and they had classes
already for foster parents and
to try to support foster
parents. Um, they were offering
classes to grandparents raising
kids, which was also something
within our bureau that we are
looking at supporting um
throughout our state. There's a
huge need for uh grandparents
raising grandkids, and so a lot
of the things that they're
already doing were things that
we
had different supports and
programming and process or
already had the programming for,
and so they were pleased to hear
that and it just really looking
forward to now that
collaboration and and connecting
families, you know, directly to
the state supports that are
available to them.
And thank you for that, Ms. Fan.
Um, and, and, um, Ms. Wilson,
um,
Has there been similar work in
Albuquerque to work with the
family resource centers, um, in
the McKinney Venno programs.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, in
Albuquerque Public schools, many
of our schools have family
resource centers built into
them. And, um, our McKenny Vento
team members do collaborate
directly with those family
resource centers, um, to ensure
that there are immediate
resources in the community. One
of the barriers for our families
is that those resource centers
are located in schools.
And if you're not connected to
the school, your access to that
family resource center, um, is
tied to that attendance or that
engagement with the school. So
that is one challenge that we
work through, um, and that is
one of the unique things that
we're able to do out of our
building, um, is to provide a
space for families who are
disconnected from schools to
start the process of
reconnecting, even if they're
not ready to go directly to the
schools. So it's something that
we're addressing. It's something
that we see as a need.
In our community, um, and the
collaboration has been key to
recognize that we, once we have
a student established at a
school, making sure they
understand that those resources
are now available on site at the
school. Um, another challenge
with that is that it's not 100%
of our schools that are able to,
um, host an entire family
resource center, so we have some
of our schools that have
clothing closets, others that
have food closets, um, but many
of our schools are challenged
for space to develop.
an entire family resource center
and we can remain a resource for
them as well.
Thank you all so much.
No other questions. All right.
Thank you all. We appreciate it.
And then, uh, Tara, we have a
letter for you, um, on behalf of
the committee members and staff
for your appreciation of the
work that you've done for us and
certainly your presentation and
all your work leading up to
today. So thank you so much.
OK
Yeah, yeah.
Mr. Chair, uh, before we get
started on the next presentation
or as part of the next
presentation as we get set up
here, Connor's gonna
sort us all out.
Thank you, Connor
Uh, just wanted to, so, uh, you
see in your agendas that, uh,
our, our analyst Annie, uh
actually is the one who
organized this panel would
normally be here to give a short
introduction. She couldn't make
it to the meeting. She wasn't
feeling well this week. And so
I'm gonna try to do my best to
substitute for her, um.
What you're going to hear in a
minute is a is a sort of a
combination of of of a couple
years' work, uh, part of the,
part of the presentation and
I'll and I'll let our presenters
tell you more about it, is gonna
sort of do a recap or a review
of some of the work that
happened last year and led to a
bill that was introduced last
session but was not heard last
session.
In addition to some work that
was done over the course of the
summer, all of this has to do
with school leadership.
How school leaders are prepared
in their, in our colleges of
education as well as some
proposals about changes to the
licensure system and again I'll
let, I'll let our presenters
talk more about the details but
talking about the the specific
needs that are different levels
of of school leaders require
both in training and support. So
understanding that principles,
for instance, maybe need a
different skill set or that
superintendents need a different
set of skills than just a school
site principal and
I don't mean just as if their
job is easy, it isn't, but that,
that each of those different
kinds of of leaders in the
school district level require
different skills, different
supports while they're doing
those jobs, and can we build a
licensure system that's more
responsive to being able to do
that. So I just wanted to give
that as a quick introduction,
and then I'll turn over to our
presenters and I'll let you
decide to Google first.
OK. OK. Um, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, my
name is Erica Hunt, and I'm here
on behalf of Ed RD and, um,
really excited to share with you
today, um, as, as John
mentioned, the culmination of,
of, um, 3 years of work that's
been happening in New Mexico.
Um, before we begin though, I do
want to recognize that this work
has been made possible over many
years by a number of, um,
external funders, including the
Thornberg Foundation, the Lanel
Foundation, the John F. Maddox
Foundation.
And the WK Kellogg Foundation,
and you're gonna hear a theme
today of a lot of people really
energized and supportive around
um school leadership work in New
Mexico, um, and, and this is
just one example. Um, today I'm
going to talk a little bit
though, um, you may remember me.
I was here two years ago, um,
with the Chamber of Commerce and
I was presenting on
recommendations from a landscape
analysis that we did. And you
can see the QR code on there if
you want to scan that, you can
download the landscape.
analysis, and I encourage you to
do so. Um, this was
commissioned, um, in 2022 by the
um greater Albuquerque Chamber
of Commerce. And what we did,
um, through ERD is we looked at
what is kind of the New Mexico
context. We went and interviewed
people throughout the state, um,
looked at what strengths can we
build on? Um, what are some best
practices out there so we're
really able to find some great
innovative work happening, and
then what are the pros and cons
to some of the policy options we
might, um, recommend. And so
what
recommended is a number of
things, but first is update the
compensation for school leaders.
Um, redesign and relaunch
principal preparation programs,
um, provide equitable access to
enroll, um, professional
development and increased pet
capacity.
You can see through this slide
right here that that a lot of
this work has happened over the
last two years, or as in the
process of happening right now.
Um, in 2022, 23, um, you
updated, um, compensation for
school leaders, so that's been
accomplished. And you funded the
full-time residencies through
the the grow, um, fund. And I
know that you heard a
presentation from Ped this
summer and um the status of the
residency programs. Um, so you
know that work is going really
well, and universities are
embracing the support that
they're receiving right now in
this. Um, in 2024, 2324, um,
We facilitated a preparation
task force.
And that task force led to the
recommendations for House Bill
22, which was mentioned
previously. We'll talk a little
bit more about the task force
work later on in our
presentation.
Um, we also did residency
planning and the recommendations
of the the task force led to the
criteria that PE used for the
residency model. And so, um,
through external funding last
year, um, prep programs were
able to go through a community
of practice with numerous
sessions that, um, that, that
got them the support, the
technical support they needed
for the residencies, and that
support is continuing right now
with those that are piloting the
full-time residency model.
Um, and you can see this year,
um, we've, we've got the
residency pilots, pilots going
on, um, and we, um, facilitated
another task force this summer.
The task force this summer came
out of recommendations from last
summer's task force, so it was a
continuation of that work and
that all of this is kind of the
culmination of what you're going
to hear today.
So what we're gonna share with
you today, um, I'm gonna give a
quick update on leadership
matters and why, although I
don't think I really need to go
into this because I do feel like
there is a wide support in New
Mexico around this. Um, I'm
going to share with you some of
the proposed ideas and you can
see I'll also explain, um, who's
been involved in these proposed
ideas, and then you'll hear from
Alexis Eslinger about
perspectives from the field.
She'll be able to talk about how
the field has really been, um,
weighing in on what you're going
to hear today.
And then lastly, you'll hear
from, um, Deputy Secretary
Castillo who's gonna talk about,
you know, how do we move from
recommendations to
implementation and, um, PE's
role with that.
So first I'm gonna begin with
why is leadership important?
And, um, rather than go into a
lot of detail around this. We
really just wanted to share with
you this one slide, and you can
see some of the critical pieces
on here. First, we know that
effective principles, um, lead
to improved student learning.
Um, we know that they retain
good teachers, they recruit
recruit good good teachers,
which is critical right now in
our dire educator shortage that
we're facing across the country.
Um,
They improved struggling
schools. We know that no
struggling school has ever been,
um, improved without a strong
leader at the helm. Um, they
also create the conditions that
enable the implementation of
teacher and school focused
initiatives. And I want to point
this out because, um, this
morning I heard, um, questions
on structured literacy and how
do we kind of sustain that work,
um, after, you know, you guys
are rolling out some robust
professional development right
now for teachers. How do you
sustain that work?
And I would say that comes down
to the school leader. The school
leader will be the one who will
be able to develop a school-wide
system of, uh, making sure that
it's implemented in every
classroom, monitoring how it's
being implemented, working with
teachers that are struggling
with implementation and then
making sure that new teachers
that come in are up to speed on
this. Um, so this is that
multiplier effect that we often
hear about in school leadership.
Um, it's also a cost effective,
um, but in my 20 plus
Years of doing this work around
um at the policy and practice
level. I often find that school
leadership is that afterthought.
We often are putting our
attention into to teachers. Um,
they have the direct impact on
students, but you'll get a
better rate of return if you
also focus on leaders. I'm not
saying not to focus on teachers,
but leadership is also
important, and I'll talk later
today too because we've also
found in this work that district
leadership is even is even as
important. So how do you build
that build that school
system and district system
support.
Um, I wanted to share this slide
right here too, because we know
that this is a problematic in
New Mexico is um the high
turnover that's happening, um,
in principals, vice principals
and superintendents. And this
data, um, we received from, um,
New Mexico, um, Coalition of
Education leaders is that um
over the last 3 years, 72 out of
your 89 superintendents have
turned over. Um, that's a higher
attrition rate than national
average. And so that just
Just shows that we when we see
that data, we, we, we, um, feel
that the field needs more
support that, um, that leaders
are leaving because they're not
feeling like they were prepared
or able to do the job and so
that makes, um, even more
important the work that we're
proposing.
Um, there is a state role in
this work, and you can see from
this, um, infographic right
here. Um, the strongest lovers,
this has been identified by the
Wallace Foundation through
research that they've done. Um,
the strongest levers that states
can do, um, as far as school
leadership is, um, school leader
standards. Now, New Mexico just
adopted new school leader
standards that are being
implemented with this evaluation
system. And I'm hearing really
good feedback on, on those
standards. Um, those standards
were also used.
Um, in the work that's happening
with the residency model. Um, so
the second lever is, um,
pre-service preparation.
And that's in this proposal. Um,
also license your policies.
Um, that's in this proposal, um,
funding and mentoring and
ongoing developments, which is
also part of the proposal we'll
share with you today. Um, and
last is leader tracking systems,
and I know there's a vast
interest among the state and at
PE with, um, data tracking
systems and so I think that's
something you guys are really
having deep discussions about as
well.
Now I'm gonna go a little bit
into the proposal, but I want to
note that, um, the proposal
comes out of, um, culmination of
this work, and it's only been
facilitated. This work has been
facilitated by Ed, um, RD, but
the ideas, um, how to do this
really comes from the field and
those at the table. And since
the task force convened this
summer at the end of the summer,
um, we've been having weekly
meetings facilitated by NRD
between LESC LFC.
and PE, um, as well as the two
co-chairs of the task force this
summer. And so these ideas of
like how, what could this look
like, how could we, um, fund
this? What could, how could this
be implemented have been joint
discussions that I'll share.
So first of all, I want to note
that this is a, a culmination.
It builds off of a house bill
22, which you guys saw last year
and you're familiar with, um,
House Bill 22 set the criteria
for the principal preparation
program approval, and you can
see the different requirement
there. I do want to note that
right now what's going on is
deep, um, development around
the, the residency, um, and so
universities have been really
engaged in this. These other
pieces around the curriculum.
The recruitment selection, those
kind of things would be work
that still needs to be
developed, but it won't be so
much of an ask because those
have been integrated into the
pilots or the community of
practice that we've been working
on as well.
So House Bill 22 says that no
later than July 1, 2026, um,
programs should be approved by
the department before enrolling
any new students, um, into these
programs. So what this does is
it really creates a cutoff date
of when, um, universities and
EPPs will have to, um, redesign
their programs under these new
requirements and be able to meet
new candidates. Anybody
currently in the system would be
grandfathered in, so they
wouldn't have to go through this
new requirement.
Um, and then this also creates a
new bureau of school and
district leadership at PED. And
so if you remember last year,
um, there was conversations
around the school Leader
Institute, which originally was
housed at um at at HED, um, the
higher education department, and
it hasn't, it has not had any
funding. It's been it's been
defunct for years. And so the um
proposal is to move it to PE and
um through discussions with PE
there's, um, um, support for
creating it into a bureau of
school and district.
Leadership. And what they would
do would oversee the following
programs, um, the licensure
program for aspiring school
leaders, mentoring for new
school principals and other
public school leaders, um,
intensive support for school
leaders, um, school principals
and needs of of improvement and,
and you see some of those
programs are already in
existence at PE and could be
used as models, um, professional
development for aspiring local
superintendents and then
mentoring for local
superintendents.
You can see here, um, the focus
of this proposal is on
development. It's development
for the needs of district and
school leaders, but we need to
frame it within something. So
we're proposing a framework of a
licenser system that replaces
the current teacher level 3B
license. Um, so this is not a
new concept to New Mexico
because it's building off of
what your teacher license or
structure looks like that would
include.
3 tiers, the first tier would be
an initial site administrator.
The second tier would be a
professional site administrator,
and then the third tier would be
super.
Superintendent. Um, but what
this does is, um, include
multiple pathways too, and this
was, um, uh, we had a lot of
conversation with the task force
this summer and how do we make
sure that we're not burdening,
um, districts with this that may
not, um, have somebody that can
step into the role. Um, how do
we work with, um, district and
school leaders that already have
their license, um, will they
have to go through this new
license. So I'm gonna walk
through some of the different
pathways so you
You can see how this is kind of
customized and meets the needs
of everybody across the state.
Um, first would be the standard,
um, standard license which would
be through approved in-state
programs. Um, you would also
have the option of the
alternative, um, which is
regionally accredited programs
and improved in state residency
programs.
Um, there is the allowance of
reciprocity and we had a lot of
discussions about reciprocity.
Um, this is for out of state
candidates who have prior
experience as administrator,
although the task force felt
very strongly than anybody
coming in from out of state,
should go through some kind of
mentoring induction program
where they learn the specifics
of being a leader in New Mexico.
Um, there's a this allows for
provisional, um, for candidates
who are enrolled but have not
finished their preparation
programs. Um, we do know right
now there are many provisional
candidates that sometimes may
not continue with their
preparation program and that
doesn't get um flagged and so
there will be efforts to really
try to guide them to finish
their program and what do they
need to finish that. Um, and
then also the waivers and the
waivers would be for districts
who do not have any license
applicants, um, particularly.
In some of our rural areas where
maybe you have somebody that has
a medical leave or needs to
leave in an emergency and you
have nobody on the bench. So
this would allow for that.
Um, this also allows, as I
mentioned, anybody in the role
right now is grandfathered in.
Um, uh, to give an example, a
superintendents, this builds
upon um continuing, um,
professional development through
this tiered structure. And so
they would practice with their
existing, um, license, but then
they would have the opportunity
to get, um, get new
opportunities through the
continuing education
opportunity.
So I want to show you a little
bit about the structure because
um through all of our
conversations we've been
focusing on how do we build the
infrastructure of support in New
Mexico and this um what we
learned in our landscape
analysis is a lot of really good
practices happening on right
now. And so it's kind of how do
we tap into a lot of these
existing things while creating
um a structure and support
among, um, PE. So you can see
this, um, visual right here
where the roll of pad really
will be um.
Establishing guidance around
this, vetting and approving
programs, monitoring and
reporting, and then aligning
with existing programs.
But the external providers, this
proposal is really set up so
that you are tapping into
external providers who are
either doing this work or
aspiring to do this work, so
they can be developing these
programs that are meeting these
standards. Um, so, um, this
could be CES and um the, the New
Mexico Superintendents
Association right now who has an
aspiring superintendent program.
Um, this could be the allowance
of that to be really developed
further and expanded, um.
And also we have, you know, um,
some universities that are
interested in superintendent
preparation programs, um, and
also, um, tapping into some of
the services that are happening
right now in, um, New Principal
mentoring that are not happening
so wide scale across the state.
Um, we worked on a timeline and
this is just a timeline to help
you see that we believe.
It is important for this work to
be, um,
Um, rolled out over time to help
build capacity around the state.
This will also allow for
opportunities to pilot things
before full launch and so you
can see here, um, a timeline of
what this could look like for
site administrative preparation
programs, the superintendent,
aspiring superintendent, um,
academies, first year mentoring
induction and then continuous
learning opportunities. Now this
tie line is developed to make
sure we have sufficient time and
support. Um, this is
Really geared to developing the
capacity at PE and also for
organizations that want to offer
this, um, and to allow for, like
I said, the piloting or
continuous improvement before we
want to roll it out full scale.
And, um, Senator Soz, you asked
for in a previous, um,
presentation for a
research-based recommendation on
budgeting, and so this is, um,
our recommendation for what we
feel like, um, maybe needed in
New Mexico around building this
um infrastructure of support.
And so, um, this does not
include the residncies, um, that
would be funded separately
through the growth fund. Um, but
this does include, um, funding
for PED's administrative costs
to build their capacity, and
then, um, as we, we call it
here, the outsourced, um,
programs and projects for how
they can build and you can see
this as projected funding we
recommend over the next 3 years.
Um, it does not include funding
for school leader preparation
programs too, um, which will be
funded by
sharing with you a lot of ideas
right now, and I want to share
with you, um, what does this,
how does this culminate? And so
you can see, um, first, uh,
slide right here, the first, um,
is talking about, um,
investments and leadership
development and we feel like,
um, investing in leadership
development in the way that we
are recommending, um, including
school leader preparation
programs, the aspiring
superintendent academies, first
year mentoring induction, and
then continually learning.
opportunities, well, first and
foremost lead to a decrease in
leader turnover. So what we're
trying to do first and foremost
is um get people into the
positions and support them in
the positions and retain them in
the positions. Um, by doing that
though, um, we know they're
going to feel more supported,
um, or graduates will pursue
leadership roles and leaders
will stay longer in the field.
Um, these improved, this will
lead to improved school
practices. We know that constant
turnover does not lead to
stability in any case.
in a school environment, um, and
this will lead to improved
student outcomes.
Now I've done a lot of talking
at you. I'm going to pass it off
to my colleague now, um, Alexis
who's gonna talk to you more
about um in detail about the
task force work and what they
did and then her perspective
from the field.
Thank you, Erica. Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, um,
I'm happy to be here presenting
to you today, um, about some of
the work that we've done for the
last 2 years, um, and in terms
of my perspective from the
field, I would share that I, um,
currently run an alternative
licensure program for teachers
and work closely with my
colleague Leanne Gandy. She
works, um, as our alternative
licensure preparation program
director for
LLD and leader, um, and there's
about 10 different programs
within that unit around the
state, and they've reached a
large capacity. There's always
interest. They constantly rotate
throughout the year. Um, I also
chair the deans and directors
group through which we call New
Mexico, um NMACTE. We meet
monthly. I co-chair that with
the dean from Eastern, Lee Hein.
I was previously a director at
San College in teacher
preparation for
I was on the preparation task
force, the licenser task force,
um, I'm a Deans for Impact
fellow, and I work closely with
these um institutions doing this
work throughout the state. So
the deans and directors group
who meet monthly collectively,
um, has sustained this work for
two years and without any
reservations, fully support,
making sure that there's a
difference in licensure between
superintendents.
And school leaders because of
the vast difference we see them
needing, um, objective one was
the residencies and developing
guidance for the pet on budget
allocations for these
residencies among all the
programs in the state and 2 was
to re redesign legislation, um,
and draft those recommendations
for the principal preparation
program to also keep teachers
growing and learning in New
Mexico, um, the work group
members are listed there for you
from each.
and then the observers as well
and consultants.
As far as the licenser task
force that was this last
summer's work, um, and it grew
and it was much larger in terms
of invited observers and
additional voices. There was
never a time that this group met
and it wasn't met with questions
and lots of different um agendas
from the field, truly, and
beliefs around what's really
important. One strong, solid
foundation that came out of
every meeting was that we need
something to differentiate a
master's level candidate.
From being um an administrator
versus a superintendent in
charge of other administrators
and multiple sites, as well as
the operational budgetary and
all of those pieces. And that's
something that the team in all
of its wide ranging
perspectives and lenses came
together well on. So as far as
the field, we, we gather once
per month, um, and we talk about
everything from what it is to be
facing the field in terms of
teacher vac.
vacancies and shortages to the
same that we see when we have 72
of 89, um, superintendents turn
over in a year and how that
unsettles a ship if they're
trying to right themselves. So,
um, and then if you think about
all the purpose behind why we
would want to look at a
restructure of this. Um, we all
came to the same conclusion that
we believe being an
administrator at the
superintendent level or at the
site level, assist.
at a sight level, special
education directors, those are
unique skill sets and training
sets that we really want to hone
in on to keep our state's
teachers where they are and grow
them and keep our leaders
growing as well. Um.
And so that's
Thank you.
Awesome, good afternoon, Mr.
Sherman, members of the
committee, Candice Castillo,
deputy secretary, and I'm
representing um PE on our view
of the task force recommendation
are teaching, learning and
innovation team had a group that
was part of all the work that
has been developed, so I'll have
promise you short um insights on
what our position is. So if you
heard and heard earlier as well,
leadership is definitely a very
important.
Piece of navigating any
profession. And when it comes to
our school districts and our
educational leaders. I think
it's very important that we call
out the fact that our
superintendents are in charge
not only of navigating a school
district with what sometimes I
like to refer as their
several direct bosses, which is
their educational um board of
trustees, but they're also in
charge of um ensuring that they
Being all their leaders that
they're setting the culture of
um their schools and that
they're center on a structured
and um evidence-based practices
that allowed them to really move
um students outcomes based on
that instructional insight that
they will bring to the table. So
ensuring that those task force
recommendations that we have
been hearing about how do we
move those um from
recommendations to
implementation.
Especially considering that we
have such a large amount of new
superintendents and what will
that translate in the future if
we don't take action with this
recommendations. So we have done
um.
A
