the need for out of school time,
which is really needed in this
part of um the state on this
side of the river, uh, to be
more specific. And we're going
to talk about equitable access
to out of school time and why it
matters in New Mexico and with
me today, I have Sarah Getler
from uh Boys and Girls Club in
Santa Fe. I have Tian James
Blin, who's the after-school
activities coordinator at Navajo
Prep. I have Dr. Leticia
atholeta, executive
for Health Leadership High
School and then Liz Salganek,
artistic director for National
Dance Institute of New Mexico.
And Sarah Gler is the chief
executive officer for Boys and
Girls Club, and she's running a
teen center in the mall in Santa
Fe.
Um, before we start, we want to
talk about um what out of school
time is and isn't out of school
time is before and after school
programs, summit programs, teen
centers and internships. And
it's really important for all of
you in the committee to
understand that it's not an
extension of the school day. I
know you have funded extended
learning for several years now.
Um, and after school is
different, it's more time, more
days and more dosage for impact
and extension.
of the school day as it is now.
The vision we have is that every
child and young person in New
Mexico have access to quality
out of school time, regardless
of zip code and income?
And I'm not going to go into a
lot of detail on this slide
here, but after school should be
different from the regular
school day. It should be
physical activity, uh, a hot
meal, culturally relevant
programming after school should
be academic enrichment. Uh, it
could be a sports. I want to
talk a bit about STEM, um, as
you know, in New Mexico, STEM is
a major um workforce need STEM
employees, and we have about
About 250 applications from
young women in STEM in New
Mexico for a scholarship that we
provide, and they all testify to
the fact that out of school
time, after school and summer
camps is the main venue for them
to be exposed to STEM, to be
recruited to STEM, and to stay
in STEM. It's the only place
where they find their own peers,
support mentors, and are not
told as very often in school
that they're, they shouldn't be
in advanced math or maybe.
Being asked why are you here in
this physics class because
they're the only girl. So after
school is a critical pathway for
youth in New Mexico for STEM
careers.
We do know um that almost 100%
of parents in New Mexico support
access to out of school time. We
do know that many parents,
especially in this neighborhood,
work 2 or 3 jobs and they need a
safe place for their child. Um,
and as you can see from this
slide,
In New Mexico, about 64% of
young women or young people in
out of school time have access
to STEM 85% are building
confidence and they meet their
peers, um, and they take part in
physical activity. And I don't
know if you read the last book,
um, about the anxiety
generation, um, which is talking
a lot about how children now
actually need to play to learn
and that through social media,
And tumor sitting in school and
too little interaction, they
become anxious. Um, so having
after school is a critical
component to get them back to
social interaction and thriving.
Um.
I know yesterday you talked
about attendance and we just
want to remind you that out of
school time is a major
contributor to young people
coming to school. A lot of them
come to school because of the
after school program, um, they
connect to um caring adults,
they get to interact with peers,
um, move, get a hot meal, and I
was told by the assistant
superintendent for attendance
here at Triscoll that some
students actually just need a
shower after school.
So after school, um, serves a
lot of needs um for a lot of
young people at all ages and it
matters for them coming to
school.
Here's some of the studies have
been done and in your package,
there's some more updated data,
um, but in 2009, there was a
study of Boys and Girls Clubs
across the country showing that
those who attended Boys and
Girls Club, they skipped school
a few times, increase school
effort, and gain academic
confidence and the other studies
are showing similar results.
I do not have to remind you that
um suicide rate in New Mexico
has gone up the last youth
resiliency survey showed suicide
rate being at 14%. Um, and the
federally funded after-school
program in New Mexico is serving
about 10,000 students. It's the
only federally funded program
across the state and the most
recent surveys are showing that
the students who participate
feel better about themselves
because of the program. It's
improving.
And enhancing their emotional
well-being.
Personally, I'm on the juvenile
justice board for the governor,
um, and of course juvenile crime
has been an issue lately. It's
been discussed at the last um
special session for with the
governor and we believe um with
support from parents and youth
that after school, out of school
time, teen centers are critical
to reduce crime, to keep young
people safe, to improve school
academics, but also to keep our
whole community
safe and right now we only have
5 teen centers in New Mexico and
our vision is that there's a
teen center in every community
in New Mexico.
America after 3 p.m. is a 5 year
study. It comes out every 5
years on what's the status of
after school in every state of
the nation. And in 2020, the
last survey came out and shared
that unmet demand for after
school in New Mexico has reached
an all-time high, and every
summer there's about 53,000
children looking to be in an
after school program or summer
program that can
not have access.
In total, there's about 124,000
young people in New Mexico with
no access to out of school time.
Um, and if we were to um
translate that into a number of
of a universal budget we need to
provide after school for every
child. We estimate about $1000
per child, which means we would
need 124 million annually to
fund universal out of school
time.
So some of the main um
Obstacles, you know, preventing
young people from having access
is that many programs are too
expensive, especially summer
camps, um, transportation is a
big issue here at the Triscoll
High School, one of the main um
barriers for participation in
more than 40 clubs that they
have here at this school is
transportation, and it's the
same for Rio Grande High School
and West Mesa High School,
they're all in the same cluster,
and there's no transportation to
get home and you can see, you
know,
Walking up and down this hill
it's not going to be very safe,
especially in the winter months.
So having transportation
available uh for any age is
really critical and I know a lot
of tribal entities and
communities, some of the budgets
they have proposed to PED for
afterschool program is 100% for
transportation to get back and
forth or to get home from after
school. And of course the the
other main barrier is lack of
programs, just period. Um, and I
know um
Atlanta has um
talked a lot about libraries
being a major player in
expanding after school in rural
communities.
So this might be where your
thoughts are right now, like
what are we doing currently. So
in New Mexico we have 21st
century community learning
centers, about 100 million from
the federal government
during E, during COVID with EO
3, the American Rescue plan we
had for the first time a boost
in out of school time with 6
million allocated from PED the
1% set aside and that's
sunsetting this September, so
we're gonna have about 40
afterschool programs losing
their program. One of them is in
Penny
Moscow, there's a story in your
packet uh from the community
schools coordinator and they're
losing their program that they
finally were able to build up
because of loss of this funding.
And of course, we are advocating
for PED to ask for an extension
for 14 months. We should have
millions of dollars left in S3,
but we have not been able to get
the final balance and um we
don't know if Pete is going to
ask for that extension, which
has to be done by the end of
this month.
K12 plus has ended for out of
school time and with your help,
um, we were able to get our 1st
200 million in in 2023 for the
school time learning, enrichment
for the summer and tutoring. And
what happened unfortunately was
that PD took 10,000 of that for
tutoring, so we only had 10,000
left for out of school time. And
this past session, the money was
removed and we were successful
in working with LFC to get 150
million back into the budget.
And then they took 8.5 for high
doses tutoring. So, again, out
of school time seems to be
competing with tutoring and
literacy and it really shouldn't
be a competition. It should be a
complimentary, comprehensive
plan, cause it, they all go
really well together.
11 funding that's not on here is
E ED have funding for license
out of school time for the
school-age children, and that's
about 2.5 million a year and
they're servicing 4700 children
through the license sites. And
we as a network, we work to um
train providers so they can
become a licensed sites.
So,
um, I know time is running out,
but I want to show you visually.
What happens with this money? So
this is 21st century, um,
communion learning centers and
the ESR sites, the orange ones
are gonna go away this year. Um,
and you can see it's all
concentrated in the Rio Grande
corridor. And our goal has in
partnership with PD been to
expand into rural New Mexico.
And again, here we're trying to
show you that we're not hitting
the areas of poverty in New
Mexico with this money, um,
those remain underserved.
And the same with educational
attainment, um, and this is a
bit outdated data, but this is a
juvenile justice arrest map. And
these maps are all live on our
website and you can drill down
to any community and see the
actual data. But you can see
we're not serving the majority
of children in New Mexico.
Another point I want to make
before I close is that the PED
strategic plan, um, in response
to the Yasi Martinez court
ruling has a section in pillar
4, that's focusing on expansion
of out of school time, which
leads me to then say we, we
should really put some money in
here, um, and the actual action
plan says to expand culturally
and linguistically responsive
after-school programs including
community and tribal-based
programs.
Um, and also to expand
community-based afterschool
summer programs and tutoring,
and it also specifies to provide
transportation to these
programs. So it's really
important that if there is
funding allocated that there is
some serious attention paid to
transportation needs in our
communities.
This is the um investment that
you all made 23 and 24, and you
can see that there's been an
expansion, but we still in the
Rio Grande corridor, but there's
been a bit more up in a
different corners in terms of
expansion. And if we do not get
this fund and reallocated this
coming session, these will all
go away. These are all sites
funded by um Ho2 in 2023 and
2024.
So I ask this year as a group is
not only from us as a network,
but we had a meeting with
multiple stakeholders is 20
million um for CBO's
community-based organizations,
um, which will serve an
additional 20,000 children and
then 200 million for LEA's. Um,
I mean, we'll make sure those
spunning parts are separated so
that providers has an
opportunity to do what they do
best, and that's
Schools also have an opportunity
to do what they do best, or they
can partner with providers and
that this funding is kept
separate from high doses
tutoring and literacy projects.
So that if there's not a
confusion as to what this is
for.
And it sounds like the music is
telling us that after school
it's kind of starting right now.
It'll it'll be sectarian
actually not quite after school
I know,
I know, I know.
But anyway, so before I,
before I, you know, pass it on
to the committee, uh the rest of
the panel here.
I just want to make one last
comment. You may kind of wonder
why isn't she asking for 124
million, which is really needed
in the state. And we have
concerns about PED's ability to
um push money out. So we really
believe that it's better to do
incremental boosts so that the
money actually gets to the
communities in time, but the
award letters are in time, that
they are being paid in time
because even with the the COVID
money, there were, there were
tremendous delays from PED. It
was a disaster.
really. So we want to work in
partnership with PD to make sure
there's there's a systemic
ability to not only get the
funding, but to actually get the
funding out to the communities
in a timely manner. Um, and we
believe if we push too hard and
it grows too fast, and we may
not even have the capacity at
the local level, so we need to
really be mindful of how, how to
be, how do we build this as a
system in New Mexico so that
there's quality, so that there's
follow up, so there's some
technical support and
Then we build on that as we move
forward because the need is, is
truly there and it's, it's
making a huge difference in
people's and children's lives.
So with that, I'm going to pass
it to
uh Doctor Archaeta, uh, and you
will hear some more stories from
our panel about why this is
needed and why we have such
strong faith in the impact of
out of school time.
Well, good afternoon, LESC
members, representatives,
senators, thank you so much for
giving us this time today. I'm a
little bummed that I don't have
Michael Jackson behind me. I was
ready to present with Michael.
OK, um, but thank you so much
for, for hearing us out today.
My name is Dr. Leticia
Archuleta. I am the executive
director at Health Leadership
High School. And I wanted to
start and begin by saying just a
little bit about and let me make
sure my slide is showing up
here. A little bit about
thinking of after school
programs oftentimes we think of
clubs or we think of tutoring
and although.
So yes, those are very
incredible and, and, and needed
programs. What I want to share
with you today is a little bit
about what we do at Health
Leadership High School that
extends beyond that. We do paid
practicums and internships, and
those paid internships happen
because of the out of school
time funding. I want to share a
little bit of a story with you.
This is our data we gather data
when we receive funding, we look
at data because we understand
that proof is in the pudding. So
we get data, not only from our
staff, from our students, but we
get data from Student voice,
right, because we want to hear
from them how was this.
Pivotal for them. And one of the
last quotes there you can see
some of the other ones, but one
of the last quotes that's there
is so incredible for me because
one of the students told me,
Miss, I cannot do a practicum
placement or internship. I can't
volunteer for that because I
help offset the income of my
home. And that's important,
right? Those are real factors
for our community and for our
students. And so with the out of
school time funding, I needed to
think about how we can be
supportive for our students and
one of the ways to do that was
to pay them for.
Practical placements and
internships so that they're
learning and having experiences
in real world authentic
experiences in their community.
So when I talk about theory to
practice. I'm talking about what
they're learning in the
classroom, the knowledge
acquisition that they're gaining
from the classroom and how
they're able to apply that. So
they're talking about nursing,
we're talking about phlebotomy,
we're talking about optometry,
but what does that really look
like and feel like for students?
And how do they see themselves
practicing in those particular
um places.
And so building the theory to
practice is allowing them to
have their practical placements
and internships in the community
at UNM Hospital at Presbyterian
at optometry clinics. And this
is where I talk about theory to
practice what you'll see here in
the data is seeing the knowledge
acquisition building for them to
actually have proficiency. So
we're seeing that, we're seeing
that in our common based
formative assessments.
Now, attendance. Attendance is
huge. When we saw when we were
impact everybody's been impacted
by the, by COVID and we saw that
attendance really, really being
impacted. And so what you want
to see here is these bars go
down, and that's exactly what
we're seeing at our school. And
what we know and what we're
hearing from students is that
they're engaged. They're engaged
beyond the classroom. They're
engaged in spaces and in their
community, and that's impactful.
That's what we want. We want
them to be able to see
themselves in those spaces. We
want them to have that hands-on.
Building. And this has improved
our attendance at our school.
Now, we talk about
post-secondary, we're, we're
finding out from our, our
community partners. What are you
seeing from the students, right?
What are they doing? How are
they building capacity in your
spaces as well, right? that give
and take reciprocity. And what
we're seeing is students are
being hired. They're being hired
after school because they have
the certifications, they have
the knowledge, and they're being
hired for summer programs. This
is important because students
are coming to me saying, Miss, I
can't be a doctor. I don't know
if I can be a nurse, and I say,
why not? And they say because
they don't look
like me. I don't think I can.
That change this changes the
dynamic for them to be in those
spaces and them seeing
themselves there and saying, I,
I can do this. This is something
for me, and that's important,
and we're also seeing our
community partners saying
absolutely I want to hire that
individual because they have the
knowledge base.
So
This picture here, this is our
why. This is why we do why what
we do what we do, and why it
matters. Why out of school time
funding matters for us. When we
think about education and we
think about educational
practices, we need to think
beyond our school building. We
need to think beyond our brick
and mortar for walls. We need to
think bigger picture. What's
happening in our community. We
know that there is a lack of
healthcare professionals in our
community, and we know that our
students are developing the
certifications, the knowledge to
be able
To be those for front runners
and leadership in the community.
So this is our why here. This
allows them to be in those
spaces with that funding and be
able to do the work in quality
way. Now, many of our students
are bilingual, trilingual,
right? So we have students who
are Spanish speaking, English
speaking, and sign Language,
American Sign Language, when we
think about our marginalized
communities when we think about
our community in general, them
going to seek health care. Who's
going to be those first people
to treat?
When we have individuals our
grow our own population, our
students out there who are able
to communicate with the
community in their native
language. That's powerful. That
changes the dynamic of this
work. And I'm speaking on behalf
of health leadership, but it's
beyond that. Many of our
students are going into
practices that are beyond the
healthcare setting, and that's
OK too, right? But they're in
the community doing the work and
taking leadership in these
spaces. And
So I, I thank you all for for
hearing us out today and for
giving us this opportunity to
speak because I ask you all as
supporters of this work as
supporters of education beyond
the classroom setting, beyond
the brick and mortar of our
buildings that we take action to
support leadership, our young
leaders going out into the
community and being able to see
themselves in the capacity of
the work and a strong and
meaningful way and being able to
support.
Um, answering the needs of our
community, supporting them, and
allowing us to be able to
flourish in seeing our young
leaders being strong citizens in
our community. So I thank you
all for your time. OK.
I'll go next. Hi, uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, my
name is Sarah Geller. I'm the
executive director of the Santa
Fe Boys and Girls Clubs. Uh, we
have 8 sites that serve in Santa
Fe as well as Las Vegas, uh.
In 2021, we opened up a teen
center that was in our Santa Fe
Place Mall, um, we were helped
funded by Eser Money. That's how
we were able to get going, um,
as, and now we have expanded and
we've been uh funded by HB 2
mons as well. Um.
2020 was a difficult time in
Santa Fe for youth on youth
violence, uh, to, um you were
gunned down when actually across
from the boys and girls clubs,
um, we knew we needed to do
something different. We had
primarily been serving ages 5 to
12, but there was a demographic
that was seriously needing more,
especially coming out of the
pandemic, so we opened the teen
center inside of Santa Fe Place
Mall. I don't know if you guys
are familiar with Holl.
stores, um, we're in an old
Hollister store which they
really get the team vibe, so it
looks really great in there.
Since our time of opening, we've
served over 4300 youth in Santa
Fe and surrounding areas because
on weekends they come there too
as well. We're able to feed
them. We have wonderful
programs. Um, one of the things
that we were able to discover
and how the kids were getting
into the teen centers, they were
illegally driving themselves.
Um, so we opened up a driver's
ed academy in there as well.
where club members get to get
that um for free, which I don't
know if you know or if you have
teams, um, driver that's really
expensive.
So we try and fill in gaps that
way, um, our teen center has
become so successful that we
knew we could do more. And so we
started um
Needing a place for tech, we
were recognized by Apple. Apple
came to us and said that there
are not enough coders, not
enough tech people coming out of
New Mexico and how we could fill
that gap. So we expanded into a
tech club right next to our teen
center. And since then we've
been um for the past since
January was our last opening.
We've been able to teach
Alecretes and Apple codes, um,
they learn about digital arts,
digital media, we're starting a
DJ program.
They have a film club, and then
they're also learning how to
code in there as well. Um.
It's been successful, but
there's not enough programs for
youth. We're also filling the
gap as far as attendance goes,
we're reconnecting youths with
schools because guess where they
come to ditch sometimes they
come to our teen center.
So we're able to feed them, get
them reconnected with their
schools, with their teachers.
We're starting together because
we're open 7 days a week till 8
o'clock at night, we're able to,
we started having a really great
homeschool community as well.
This helped us realize that we
need more trauma informed care.
So we have a licensed therapist
also on our staff as well that
kids are welcome to go to and
see, but she also does really
great um workshops with our
students as well. So
We need to keep doing more. Um,
we are in danger of, uh,
when we lose how House Bill 2,
of losing our funding, so we're
constantly trying to figure out
how to fill those gaps, how we
could keep going.
That's it. Thank you.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee, thank
you so much for having us here
today. Uh, my name is Liz
Salganic. I'm the artistic
director of NDI New Mexico, uh,
and I'm really grateful for the
opportunity to share some
information about the critical
role that out of school time
programming has, um, with us at
NDI New Mexico. Uh, many of you
may be familiar with NDI's, uh,
in-school programs, which are
the largest part of our work,
and for which we receive funding
from the
Department of Health. We offer
programs within the school day,
uh, in partnership with public
elementary schools in 30
different communities all across
the state of New Mexico, uh,
where we teach our unique
methodology using the joy and
creativity of dance and live
music as a vehicle to teach life
lessons that if you work hard,
do your best, never give up and
be healthy, that you will
achieve excellence in your life.
We are a 30 year old
organization and for almost all
of those 30 years we have also
offered.
out of school time, uh,
programming, even before we had
our own facilities. We did that
because we wanted to have an
even deeper impact on students,
deeper engagement with their
families, and long-term
mentorships that can carry you
through the challenges of
adolescence and provide positive
social emotional, physical, and
academic outcomes that can last
a lifetime. Our out of school
time programs began with what we
call our advanced teams. The
first one is called the SWAT
team, which stands for Super
Wonder.
advanced team for 4th, 5th, and
6th graders who started in our
in-school program. Eventually,
when we built and renovated our
facilities at the dance barns in
Santa Fe through partnership
with Santa Fe Public Schools and
the Highland Theater in
Albuquerque through partnership
with Bernlio County. We were
then also able to expand our
after school offerings, not only
to the students who are feeding
up from our in-school programs,
but to all children from, uh,
the Santa Fe and Albuquerque
communities of all ages. Today,
We serve over 8000 students a
year statewide and around 2000
of those participate in our
after school advanced teams and
also summer programs. Uh, our
advanced teams serve 4th through
12th graders and meet on
evenings and weekends. We have
those programs as well, uh, for
5 of our residency communities.
We teach all around the state,
um, and our residencies in
Socorro, Silver City, Artesia,
Roswell, and Taos also have out
of school time programming when
we do residencies in the
Those communities at our
facilities, we have between 60
and 70 classes per week for
students as young as 3 years old
all the way through high school
through age 18, and all of those
classes are offered on a sliding
scale tuition basis, with more
than 50% of participants, um,
uh, being eligible for reduced
tuition. Uh, the advanced teams
programs, I should mention are
free of cost to families, no
charge at all. And uh in
addition, we have summer
Programming 8 weeks of summer
programming at each facility for
students of all ages also on a
sliding scale. Around 35% of our
annual budget as an organization
is dedicated to out of school
time programming. Um, all of
these programs are built on the
same philosophy as our in-school
work, um, that we have so many
years of experience with, uh,
discovering that dance can be
used as a vehicle to teach
discipline, a standard of
excellence, and a belief in in.
that will carry over into all
aspects of students' lives. It's
through our after school work
that we really know we can have
deeper and really long lasting
impacts and outcomes that we see
affect all aspects of their
lives and that carry on into
adulthood. Um, we know this from
stories from our parents, from
alumni who we've developed a
network with over the last 30
years, parents who often
describe
Um, our facilities and our
program and staff as the place
that helps them raise their
children. Students who described
the facilities as their second
home, a place where they can
come that they know is
physically safe, emotionally
safe, um, and that is a part of
a really caring community. In
addition to the anecdotal
evidence that we gather, we have
uh rigorous evaluation that we
have conducted over the last 20
years.
Partnered with University of New
Mexico Prevention Research
Center and the Center for
Education Policy Research, uh,
along with partnership with New
Mexico Public Education
Department to gather data that
shows statistical evidence that
students in our advanced teams
programs have higher GPAs are
less likely to have chronic
absenteeism in school and less
likely to have disciplinary
infractions compared to their
peers. These areas hold true
after researchers control for
fact.
Such as gender, age, race, and
socioeconomic background. And
this data along with hundreds of
programs surveys that we conduct
every year for our students and
their parents, um, also
developed with these research
agencies really show us that
after school programming is
developing young people's social
emotional skills and well-being,
supporting their academic
success, their physical health,
and so many other positive
outcomes, including,
importantly, bringing a lot of
joy to their lives.
Um, some of the challenges that
we experience with our work in
the out of school time area are
um as has been mentioned,
transportation, um, and access
to the facilities, our costs for
running these programs have been
steadily increasing year over
year. Costs for maintaining
facilities for security, for
food that we provide students,
um, the cost of production
materials, wages and health
insurance, and the list goes on.
Our strategic plan includes the
vision of
Continuing to expand program
offerings for more and more
students in the after-school
hours and to deepen, uh, and
continue to improve and evaluate
our program outcomes. I thank
you for the opportunity to share
this information with you and
I'm very proud to be a part of a
great community of nonprofit
leaders and leaders in our
government and community, um,
who believe in the power of
after school programming for
youth in New Mexico. Thank you
very much.
Anani Adichie
um, good afternoon, um, chair
and representative senators, um,
I'm grateful to be here in front
of you today. Um, my name is
Tian James Berlin. I am Shinga
and at the Baskin or Danina from
southeast and south central
Alaska.
I work at Navajo Preparatory
School in Farmington, New
Mexico. Uh, I would do my
introduction, but I still mix up
the linga and the dinner when
I'm doing it, so I cheat, um,
but, um, I just wanna share with
you.
A deep love that I have for this
profession, for our field.
We have the opportunity to truly
connect with our students. You
know, I know teachers try, but
sometimes, especially in these
larger schools, you have so many
students in your classes.
And so with the after school or
out of school time programming,
we really have the opportunity
to get to know our students,
their passions, introduce them
to new things that might be
their passions. They just don't
know it yet. Um, and we really
get the opportunity to connect
with them and support them
through challenging times in
their lives. That's probably one
of the main reasons our students
come is for the staff. There's
all these activities, there's
all these programs.
But the staff take the time to
invest in them and get to know
who they are inside and out.
Uh, in our program and Navo
Preparatory School, we really
focus on 4 main things, academic
enrichment, uh, social emotional
wellness, uh, real world life
skills, self-efficacy skills,
however you want to put it,
college and career readiness,
all of those encompassed in that
category. And then, oh, I'm so
sorry, um.
And then our major area is the
perpetuation of the language and
culture. A lot of people say
preservation, but I'd share with
our students, we're not
preserving it. We're keeping it
going.
We're carrying it forward. It's
not being saved away in a box,
so, um, we're perpetuating the
language and culture at our
school and one of the biggest
areas we can do that is after
school. Again, in the class
time, there's only time for so
much, so after school.
We get to build on that so much
more.
If you came and visited us on a
Tuesday evening and just stopped
by. You could swing by our, our
hoan or our Hogan.
In the center of our campus. Um,
you'd probably hear somebody
tell you come in, come on in.
We'd have something uh
uh chilla or tea ready to go for
you to enjoy. There'd probably
be students on one side weaving
students on another side beating
or leather stamping or um we're
really trying to teach our
students all the different um
the material arts, so they
continually have different
projects going.
And then here teaching about the
culture depending on the season,
um, and then we usually in the
evening with songs, um, and this
is what our students have the
opportunity to be a part of
because of out of school time
programming because of funding
that for us at Naval Prep, we
get funding from the 21st
century community learning
centers grant through the Bureau
of Indian Education. So we're
not not under the state of New
Mexico for that grant in
particular.
Um,
So sorry, my allergies are
acting up,
um, but I just hope you all
understand and I want to try to
help you understand.
How crucial this programming is
across the nation, but
especially when it comes to
culture, and we don't only do
the net culture, we have a lot
of hickoria students at our
school, so we try to honor their
culture as well. Myself being
hlenge and at the Baskin, um, I
share my culture. We ask other
staff members if they'll share.
Um, but we try to give that,
especially since we're an
international baccalaureate
school. We try to share with
them the international
perspective of indigenous
peoples. And so allowing them to
get to know.
Our communities around the
world.
So, um, other than that, um, I
know I had so many more points,
but I at least wanted to give
you that opportunity. I'm very
much a visual learner, so I
wanted you to picture coming
into our home and getting to
know our students and how much
we all love the work that we
have the opportunity to do every
single day with our students, so
good.
I just want to add that Tijuana
is the after school ambassador
for New Mexico in the nation.
So, um, she has a special role
to advocate not only for native
youth, but for all youth. Uh,
and she has a vision to start a
network for Native American
afterschool programs for the
United States. So she has a big
vision not only for her school,
but for the whole country.
Anyway, thank you so much, um,
Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee for allowing us to
present a case for out of school
time in New Mexico. Uh, we now
open for questions and comments.
Great. Thank you so much, Mai
and the rest of you. Thank you
for sharing, uh, representing me
to Moya, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you, panel for, um, that
excellent, uh, uh, information,
I should say to is it Tijuana?
Tiana? OK, there you go. Um, I
wanna say that I did get to see
your Hogan. Uh, so I went to the
G2G summit and got a tour of
your new, um new a new uh
buildings for your, for, for the
full-time students that are,
they're gonna be there. And uh I
think that day that you guys had
just, um, butchered uh a lamb, I
think that night, and so it was
smelled wonderful and uh, so
yes, they did, they did, uh,
invite us in, and I think there
was some, uh, it was a
Summer program that was going on
right at that time, because this
was during the summer.
Um, and, uh, they explain the,
the, the students explained to
me what they were doing. And so
there was some, I believe, that
were weaving and the other ones
were starting on leather
projects and stuff like that,
and they were telling me the
background of it, so I really,
really enjoyed that because
there's so many of them that uh
how they expressed, um, that
they ran out of room quickly
because there was some of them
that go to school there, but
they had, they had siblings that
wanted to be a part of this too,
so.
Um, and, and that they wouldn't
know this much about their
culture without it. And and I
think that's huge, huge. So, um,
so it it is anyone that does get
to go to to Navajo Preparatory
School, you definitely have to
go see it because it is a very
welcoming place. Um, not to
mention some of my favorite
people there, so, um, um, so
yeah, thank you.
Uh, represent Roy Caviera.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you so much. This is one of my
most favorite, um, discussions.
Because as was noted, um.
By the first our first
presenter, um, and as noted in
your first few pages of your
handout.
All studies.
Indicate.
That the longer the children.
Stay
In school, not, not just with
school like.
Related, um,
Activities, learning activities,
but engaging with each other
before and after school.
It leads to.
What you mentioned here
increasing.
The kids' earning potential as
adults, not just earning though,
just.
Their potential as being
Uh, contributory adults because
they're learning collaboration.
They're learning to continue to
work as a collective, as a
community, they protect each
other. They defend each other
when, you know, when, when it's
wonderful to see them engaging
in the before and after school
out of school I'm at, I'm using
terminology for my day being in
uh early childhood development.
So, um,
And also all the indicators.
Show that.
These programs and this
attention that we capture with
our children.
Prevents having to take.
Punitive measures we're taking
support systems and placing
them, putting them in place as
opposed to when they become
juveniles or enter into the
juvenile stage.
We take punishment or punitive
measures.
My first question related to
that is.
Have you all in your particular
Individual work or
collaboratively.
sought out
The attention of our
Attorney General or district
attorney and our um.
All of those that are involved
in um juvenile.
Just supposed to be justice, but
it's more like juvenile
punishment arena.
Can you, that's my first
question.
Yes, so, um, I can answer from,
um.
And you may also have some some
comments, but as a network for
out of school time, we have not
had a meeting yet, but we did
have an opinion piece on the
opening day of the special
session in Santa Fe. And on the
front page was an article that
addressed the need to punish
young people and put more kids
in jail. And we are, we are
advocates for more teen centers,
more investment in youth, so we
can prevent crime and keep
everybody safe. So that's the
the engagement that we've had,
but of course through the
Criminal Justice Board, we are
advising um the governor on how
not to put more children in
jail, and for a longer time to
be punitive, but to invest again
in preventative measures and
even um the last survey that was
done with, uh, I think it was
more than 400 youth and parents
in the system involved with the
system of ju justice, they all
45% said number one thing was
after school that they needed
time between 3 and.
6 p.m. to stay safe for
something to do. And we are the
only state of there's 5 states
in the nation that do not track
time of do not crime and New
Mexico is one of them. So one
activity that we would like to
see is to know more about when
juvenile crime is happening. So
we can actually know more about
the need for out of school time.
And nationally, 3 to 6 p.m. is
the peak of juvenile crime, and
there's some outliers like
Hawaii, which is like 10 o'clock
in the evening.
But 3 to 6 p.m. is more or less
documented, but not in our
state.
Um, but preventative measures,
we know it's not only
Helpful to prevent crime, but
like you were saying, to keep
them on the track to be
productive and healthy citizens.
And it starts early, it really
starts prenatally, um, by 5th
grade, it's almost too late, so
it's really important to not
have the early prevention and of
course for the older youth as
well, but that kind of comes
more like my colleagues were
saying here in the career
enrichment, career pathways. Um,
and to get them back to school
like they're do see in Santa Fe.
to the teen center to ditch
school and they helped them get
back to school. So that's what
we want to engage in. And that
could probably be a summit in
itself to get the right players
in the room with young people to
talk about solutions because
putting them back or putting
them in juvenile detention is
not an answer.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and and
and you're absolutely right, but
that not very many people paid
attention to that op ed or to
these discussions, even our
governor. So our governor and
our law enforcement, um, I think
we need to be even stronger in
our message about how
prevention.
Um, is much more helpful.
Then, um, then punitive
measures. We don't need to lock
up juveniles. This is serves
absolutely no purpose, and I do
believe that there are a great
deal of of you have a lot of
references here and um.
I think we need to pay attention
to the studies and the data and
listen to you all.
Because you all are
demonstrating how effective.
Uh, after school, out of school
time, um, programs are
Demonstrating effectiveness, I
mean, what else we need to
listen to you. So, um, and it
starts with our language too. I
think if we start, stop
referring to our juveniles as
delinquents. I mean, my
goodness. What did you do then
perpetuating.
I mean, language matters and
that's associated with bullying.
Uh, words are associated with
bullying and language, and so I,
we need to just stop using that
language, and even if they use
it in the data or with the
collections, we need to start
demonstrating the use of with
some um
Perpetuating um or someone said,
we're perpetuating versus
preserving as another example.
So language matters.
Because then we continue to
perpetuate negative, um,
associations with our juveniles.
And so everybody knows from um
psychology, just basic
psychology that mantras.
And language matter, and they
They affect your
social-emotional responses. So
I, we could go on forever on
that. But I also want to point
out, Mr. Chair, the correlation
between
Or what we're doing with our
early childhood education
programs. There's a direct
correlation.
And
What we do with them and
introducing our young children
to music, to art, to um.
Uh, sensory.
Reduce sensory stimulations
versus.
Artistic
Developmental stimulation
because we know that some
children respond in certain
ways, um, and just a fun little
side story. I have a 2 year old
and 1 year old. I have 2 year
old and 1 year old grandson.
They're brothers.
And um they are enrolled in an
early childhood music class.
And you can see.
The way in which they have just
developed in preparation for the
two year old to go to early
childhood school at 3. The
motivation is school, but they
absolutely love music and I'm
going crazy hearing the Planet
song over and over and over
again, but you know, I'd rather
hear the Planet song than they
involved in sibling.
Hitting or rivalry because at
that age, that's what they wanna
do, they wanna, you know, that
that's just what they do, so,
um.
That starting at that point, if
we're doing this at that point.
And we understand and
acknowledge what the studies are
indicating, right? With
capturing that type of positive
early childhood development.
Um,
Teaching, then can you imagine
if we continue that throughout
their school and high school. I
mean it's so my final point is,
um.
Has to do with the paid
internships and career pathways.
Thank you for using the language
career.
Pathways. We don't, we want to
get away in my opinion, from
just creating job opportunities.
When you are geared towards
careers rather than jobs.
It's a much different way.
To invite you into adulthood.
And into being a contributory
community member.
Because it just has a different,
whole different expectation.
You're invested in yourself.
You're investing in your own
future. Someone yesterday in the
conversation, I keep going back
to Representative Mira Balmoya.
About trying to figure out how
to, how to keep our students'
attention in school. Well, this
is a real good example, the paid
internship,
right, is it gives them a way to
invest in their own futures, but
maybe again the language we use
and how we demonstrate that. So
anyway, I just wanted to point
out what I what I absolutely
believe you are doing on the
right, in the right direction.
And I hope that our state, um.
Can assist with the costs that
you related about the program
cost and transportation. But
overall, this is one of those
community collaborations that
works public, private, together
with what you're doing is really
incredibly important, so I just
want to commend you and thank
you very much. Thank you, Mr.
Thank you. Other questions from
folks?
Pinto.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee. Thank you for
your presentation. And I think
this is more speaking to what
Navajo Prep was able to do, um,
but a smaller school, I believe
you guys are under 400,
especially when we talk about
what's going on right now with
the threats, um, because I
haven't really seen any data
collected or really pose a
question on the students, how,
what's the percentage of
students that are not involved
in any program.
OK
You know, because in my area, if
there is a program, um, it's
voluntary.
Parents have to come in and
sign, sign the student up, the
student goes, um, because of the
transportation issue that
they're going to be the ones
that have to pick them up, so
they have to commit.
Where and how, I don't think
it's more of a uh for you to
answer right now, but I guess
more to ponder.
It's reaching those students.
And I know we talk about
juvenile justice, um, and
You know, that those, I don't
know how you would say the the
disciplinary action instead of
just suspending them and pushing
them away from the school, but
bringing them in.
How do we get there?
To make sure that they do.
are
Very welcomed back into
education, that we don't just
keep pushing them away, then
they go to another school, get
pushed away again, get pushed
out, get pushed out of the
district, go to another school
district, get pushed out of
there.
That's where I think we need to
really, you know, really take
the going down and go down that
road and um.
Figure it out, especially if you
know there's programs that do
help.
But we need a particular
student.
That
To bring them in. That is very
hard to do. Um.
And
Also that collaboration between
the school and the programs,
because you're saying out of
school.
So I'm hoping that there's not a
disconnect um there.
Uh, especially when we talk
about behavior of the children,
especially if a program or
someone in the program is able
to get through to the student.
Um,
That it's not becoming that it's
just not at school that.
posing a problem.
Yeah they do well at the program
that that connection has to be
made, that coordination, that
collaboration, so that the
student can thrive in both
atmospheres that they're in and
continue. But thank you for the
work you do, and I hope we um
kind of really figure out the
right questions to ask, so we
can, um.
Kind of hinder some of these
issues that are popping up that
are, are really hurting our
education systems as we lose
time for our students when we
have to close the school.
For a day or even a couple
hours. Well, thank you, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee.
It was very well Camiro you Mr.
Chair. Senator Pinto reminded me
of my, the second question I
forgot to ask on on the um page
uh second page.
Left column uh final paragraph
it says in New Mexico 87658,765
children.
In 124 communities take part.
I won't continue. What is the
unmet need? Do we know what the
unmet need is? Yes, so the
estimate is about 120,000
students. Um, and that's an
estimate, but, um, 21st century
is serving about 10,000
students. I just got the number
for house 2 this morning, and
they estimate about 114,000
students being served through
hospital to funding, but it's
not really documented. And then,
of course, we have all these
programs here at the table here,
you know, that
Parent fees, majority of after
school in the nation is is
parent fee based, um, so, but to
have a universal um access
beyond 21st century and some of
the smaller pots we've been
given lately we're looking at
about 120,000 students, um,
needing access. Um, and, um, and
again, the ECCD can contribute
dramatically if they could
license more sites and if they
can provide
Grant funding, they only have
fee-based licensure, meaning
that every child gets about $540
a month. But if they can provide
grants, um, then they can also
have license sites receive
grants and that can be a
different types of programming
and, and, and qualifying um
policies. So I think it's
important to look beyond PED in
terms of who can actually
provide and fund out of school
time in New Mexico. It could be
the Department of Health, it
could be CYFG.
Uh, through juvenile justice
funding. So I think even having
a a convening between these
different apartments that have a
hard time working together and
sometimes they do well, but in
this arena, they do not. So that
could be another suggested
strategy is to get different
apartments together to identify
funding pots and then how, what
kind of strategies can they have
to fund nonprofits or schools to
support students.
And they all have the same
mission and that is thriving
children and thriving
communities, so there shouldn't
be an issue of the why, but it's
an issue of the how.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I
think it would be very
appropriate if you're
collaborative effort, your
coalition all of um really
pushed for this convening as
soon as possible because we do
need to have all of the
departments looking at ways to
leverage, but we also need to
use that leverage in the public
money sector with the private
sector and the philanthropic
center as well, cause they would
love, I believe they would love
to contribute, be the third arm
in the.
collaboration. Thank you, Mr.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Senator
Pope.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I
apologize for missing part of
the presentation. First off, I
just want to thank all of you
for the work that you do.
Um, it's great seeing someone
from Navajo Prep. We had an
opportunity to be out there a
couple of years ago. You had a
chance to see some of the
students at the roundhouse
during the sessions as well, um.
And you're right, it's, it's
like a sense of family and the
folks that you meet and I, I
know that's why they love going
to school there. You know, I, I
just think this topic is so
important. It's not just about.
You know, the future.
Of our kids.
It's not just about the
well-being because in some cases
they don't maybe have that
support at home.
It's not just about them
learning about themselves. It's
really about saving lives here.
Um,
You know, my personal story, I
had to leave, you know, and go
in the military and
Learn a lot about myself and see
people that look like me that.
You know, went to school, had
careers, had different jobs and.
I saw that.
It's something that I didn't get
to see while I was just, you
know, in middle school and in
high school, so I didn't have
that motivation. And
unfortunately.
A lot of my friends and even my
family.
Got caught up running with the
wrong people.
Didn't get to see that.
And they're in the system where
they're no longer with us.
And so I really appreciate what
you're doing. I, I, um, you
know, this was mentioned
yesterday from Representative
Baca just.
What can we do to engage our
students?
You know, while they're here, so
they stay here.
But it's also about really
saving their lives and giving
them opportunities, so.
What represented Robo Caballero
mentioned that unmet need.
We have to meet them.
And uh we have an important role
and we have a role, you're
right. You have a role as a
nonprofits or private sector has
a role because we're all.
Involved in this.
And it's impacting what we're
seeing today in our communities,
what you see on the news, what
you see on the commercials,
right?
We're not gonna be able to.
Lock everyone up.
Or do draconian measures where
we just start treating.
Young
people.
As criminals or animals.
We're not going to be able to do
that. It's not right to do that.
We have to be preventive. We
have to show them the way.
Well, we have to be leaders
here, all of us, and your
leaders as well. So I appreciate
what you're doing.
And we just all have to work
together.
To get this done.
Um,
You know, when I go around and
even yesterday talking to many
of the students here.
Yeah.
They, some of them were nervous
to talk to me. I'm like, why are
you nervous talking to me?
They're like, well, you're a
senator, I never met a state
senator.
But I see more potential in them
than I have.
When I was growing up. I
wouldn't have had the courage to
come up here and
You know, do public comment to a
bunch of legislators, and
they're doing that.
And so
Let's just continue working
together.
We can turn this around.
We can also help those that did
get that support they had when
they were younger as well. Let's
not forget about them.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I think you other questions.
Right, um, again, thank you all
for the work that you all do,
um.
One thing.
That I've been
Concerned about for a number of
years is a rising cost, and I'll
speak particularly of sports,
but I think it speaks to a lot
of um after school activities,
um, in clubs and and what have
you, but um.
Yes, there's a, there's a famous
soccer player that played in the
United States, um, a few years
ago, it was Latan Ibrahimovich
and um he played for the LA
Galaxy and MLS and did really
well and then went back to Italy
where he had played before and
he gave an interview to GQ um
Italy, and in that article, he's
they asked something like, what
are you most surprised about
about the United States? And he
said, oh, the cost of like
putting my kids in soccer.
was ridiculous. I can't imagine
how any parent in the United
States is that is not of the
means that he had been able to
make, able to do that for um
their children, like it's
absurd, um.
And I know my niece and my
nephew have done really well in
basketball, but my sister owns
her business, has flexible
hours, can travel whenever, um.
Play basketball year round,
things like that. Um, there's an
article in The New York Times,
um, during the Olympics about,
about Norway and how in the
1980s, there's an oil boom, lots
of money coming in and what they
did was invest in.
Transportation for their
students, invest in coaches to
coach youth leagues, um, and
fostered this community around
sports and activity amongst our
young people, um, and as a
reason why you saw so many
Norwegian athletes doing so well
in the Olympics is that they
have a deep pool to draw from,
but they're getting like their
young people involved because to
them and the parents, it's.
Not coming at a cost. And I just
feel like in the United States
like we're moving in an opposite
direction where it's about
access to where even our high
school sports are starting, we
have students that won't play
high school sports because it's
not as competitive as what you
can do, um, playing for your
club team and club ball, um, and
I think we have that opportunity
since Senator Solz is in here.
isn't here um to say where we
should be investing our money
for our students in these
after-school activities, whether
it be sports, um, after school,
um, programs, dance, um,
cultural activities, uh, career
pathways, um, but looking at our
youth, but also who we have in
our community to actually do
this work to take on these
students um to show them the way
cause, cause, um,
As you all had mentioned, like
they're going to be the ones out
there taking care of us, um, and
doing fulfilling these functions
in society, so as much as we can
get them to be getting that
relevant experience, um, is a
worthwhile venture and certainly
something that um
We're here in the legislature.
I'll speak for a lot of us, or
at least myself, um.
Certainly willing to take on
because we want to be able to to
foster that next generation of
students coming up to, to be the
best that they can be and and go
into the fields that they, they
would want to fulfill. So I
think that's something in New
Mexico with the amount of money
that we do have, um, is, is more
than a worthwhile venture is
putting that into after school
programming to to foster that
culture to foster that community
of of.
Serving self-exploration,
community service within our
students, um.
But again, thank you all for the
work that you all do because you
all do the supplementary work
that we in the classroom, um,
need and it's a reciprocal
relationship, so thank you all.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, for the
opportunity, and I, I just want
to make one last comment. It
took 10 years for early
childhood to be universally
funded. We are 7 years in on out
of school time. So we are
estimating 3 more years and
we'll be there. So thank you
all.
Thank you all so much. Do you
wish, yeah, please. Oh yeah,
yeah.
Try not to slam it down. Um, I
just have one more request on
behalf of the after school
alliance as the ambassador, um,
we would really love to have a
representative on the after
school caucus, um, for New
Mexico. And so, um, if any of
you, I know it will take extra
time out of your lives, but it
would be deeply appreciated, um,
especially because
In New Mexico, we have one of
the largest representations of
indigenous students, so I would
love to see, um, more
representation there for our
communities. So goodness ssh.
Yeah.
Go certainly appreciate that
offer and uh John John has been
willing if, if members or
anybody listening is interested
in doing that, please let John
know and and see where we're at
and if it's multiple people and
you all can.
Arm wrestle, flip a coin, I
don't know.
All right.
Cool. Well, thank you all so
much. We really appreciate it.
All right.
So we'll go on with.
Item 12, I think we'd be all
right with that. Connor is here.
Denise gonna join from PED.
All right, Connor, please,
you're ready. All righty. uh,
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee. Thanks for having me
up here again. Uh, so it's time
to, it's time for everyone's
favorite part of these committee
hearings. It's time to review
some rules.
Uh, so let's get right down to
it. This one should be pretty
brief. There's only 3 rules, all
of which have are either repeal
or replace, repeals, or a new
rule. They've been all adopted
as of September 12, 2024. Uh,
you've heard about two of them
prior to this meeting in July
when director, uh, center did
so, and then you heard about the
universal meals rule both
yesterday during that
presentation as well as back in
May when it was first proposed.
Alrighty. So the first one we've
got, which if I haven't, sorry,
I haven't said this, it's behind
tap 12 in your binders in case
folks aren't there, but just
getting things started, you'll
notice if you remember back to
July, uh, the overview for NMA
6.65.4. The teacher leader
development framework. Most of
the language that you see on
your page has not changed, and
that's because the rule really
hasn't changed because it's
repealing a rule, that rule that
is attached to this is now gone.
Uh, and so it's a very
uh, refresher on this, the
repeal eliminates the actual
regulatory process by which PED
will administer the teacher
leader network, uh, for
licensing of profession of
teaching professionals in New
Mexico,
uh, PED has indicated there will
be no this repeal will not in
any way impact the operation of
the teacher development program.
It just removes this specific
rule.
So that's pretty much all it is
on that. It's pretty
straightforward. So if
everyone's good, I'll just keep
moving forward, or do you want
to pause for questions?
Yeah, let's take them all and
then we'll hold off questions
for the. All righty, sounds
good.
Next we have adopted rule and
Max 6.101.2, which is the fair
hearings and alternative dispute
resolutions uh related to
vocational rehabilitation.
Uh, this is repealing and
replacing a prior rule. Uh, it
was adopted in September 12th
and will take effect on
September 24th, 2024. Uh, and
just really quickly again, this
is a pretty technical one, but
very briefly, uh, it just
provides that general policy,
specifically the time frame.
For requests to be made for
mediation and fair hearings, as
well as the timelines, but, uh,
in which responses to those
requests need to be made. So
it's just providing a greater
clarity for people who are
requesting, uh, mediation or
fair hearings related to
vocational rehabilitation
services they may be receiving.
OK.
So that's there. Now let's go to
the more substantive one, which
is uh NMA 6.12.16 healthy
universal school meals. This is
a new rule, and this is the
adopted version of the proposed
rule that was put out by the PED
in April, and there was a public
comment period on May 29th, if
memory serves. Uh, so this had
been reviewed during our May
meeting in Bele Los Lunas, uh,
and I think the first thing
you'll notice is uh my rule
review.
That time was uh I think it was
about 3 pages. This one is 1.5,
and that is reflective of there
have been significant changes to
this rule. Uh, previously, there
had been two tiers of meal
quality improvement requirements
that school food authorities
could meet in order to receive
full reimbursement from the
state as part of the universal
meals program. Uh, with the
adopted rule in largely in
response to a lot from the
public comment that we heard
throughout the state, that has
been changed to just one set of
standards.
for everybody, uh, and those,
and that those sets of standards
have been pared back
significantly as well. Um, I
know there are folks that had
expressed concerns about there
being requirements for
composting, school-based
gardens, recess scheduling,
nutrition education
requirements, those are no
longer in the rule as it now
stands. There is one set of
requirements, one being 50% of
weekly meal pattern components
must be freshly prepared. Number
2 is the achievement of the
lowest level of food waste
through share tables and up to
20 minutes of seat time.
For K through 5 students. And
finally, the use of New Mexico
grown foods that those are the
three overarching standards.
There are further points of
clarification for each of those
standards based on the different
types of operations that schools
may have, for example, with the
50% of weekly meal patterns if
schools operate more than one,
meal line during the, during
their lunch period, there is
language to specify how they
approached that, in which case,
both of those meal lines have to
meet that 50%.
In addition, in uh, in the
departure from the proposed
rule. Uh, the adopted rule
outlines the specific annual
certification procedures that
PED will use to determine
compliance with this rule as
well as the actual documentation
that will be needed to be
submitted by school food
authorities in order to meet
these requirements.
And then finally the big one
that came up in public comment a
lot. Uh, the proposed rule
didn't have a definition for
freshly prepared, nor should I
point out to the statute, the
rule here does, uh, now define
freshly prepared as meal pattern
components that are prepared and
cooked for same-day consumption,
utilizing scratch cooking or
speed scratch preparation
methods. So we do now have a
clear definition of what freshly
prepared means for the purpose
of preparing universal school
meals in New Mexico.
So in terms of impact, there's 2
big things to think about. One,
in terms of the, uh, day to day
operational impact for schools.
Uh, it's the specific
requirements for the uh for the
operation of the program and
receiving the full
reimbursement. It's been
significantly scaled back from
the proposed rule. Uh, and it's
hopefully more manageable for
the schools across the state.
Uh, in addition to that, it
horror has to do with the
budgeting at the state level.
Uh, prior to this rule existing,
every single school
participated in this program, no
matter how they operated this
program, they were going to
receive the full reimbursement.
Now, there is a chance for
fluctuation in the overall cost
of the program year to year
based on how many schools end up
being compliant versus
non-compliant. So there now is
the possibility that some
schools will receive a lower
reimbursement compared to other
schools in the state. If they
don't meet these requirements
each year.
Uh, and, and finally with
technical issues, this is also
pretty brief, uh, you know, in
my initial report on this, there
had, uh, there have been several
spots where I'd mentioned that
the that the language in the
world departed from statute in
Senate Bill 4 Laws 2023 chapter
30. Most of those are gone. Uh,
the actual thing I point out
here and as I spoke about in my
presentation yesterday. This is
actually sort of an issue with
both statute and the adopted
rule potentially. Both say that
uh
Schools should permit students
in kindergarten through 5th
grade up to 20 minutes of seated
lunchtime. Uh, the problem
potentially with that is, as
I've heard from some of the
schools I've spoken with is that
say, a school lake reserve has,
uh, 30 minutes of lunchtime or
35 minutes of lunchtime does the
up to language make it so they'd
actually have to scale back
their lunchtime as a result.
This, that's something just to
point out for your consideration
as we enter the next session.
And with that, that's all I have
in terms of rules. Hopefully it
wasn't too brief, but happy to
answer any questions folks might
have, and then I'm also joined
by director Denise Terrazas of
Policy and Legislative Affairs
at the PED.
I I had a quick question about
um the final rule on universal
school meals, um, when it says
use of New Mexico grown foods is
that all for the.
50 scratch scratchers speed
scratch meals, is that in
general for everything, um, how
do we interpret use of New
Mexico
Is it, is it all the food being
served has to be um New Mexico
grown foods or is it like New
Mexico grown food should be.
Um
Sorry, our, our, um, take
precedent over.
Others, and if it can't be
found, then outsource.
the
Uh, Mr. Chair, so as the rule is
written and as the program was
designed originally, there is
the New Mexican, the separate
New Mexico grown program as
under the umbrella of the
Universal school meals program.
Uh, and the way that works is
it's a, it's an
It's not, it's not a requirement
for schools to participate. It's
a voluntary program they have to
apply for to receive that grant
funding to finance the
purchasing of New Mexico grown
ingredients. And so, uh, what it
lays out here is, uh, in this
rule is how these uh
participating school food
authorities may receive those
funds and incorporate those
ingredients is my understanding.
Thank you.
Question
Do you have a question,
Representative Robert Camio,
please.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chair, so
sometimes I wonder.
Um,
How these rules get proposed,
whether, you know, we actually
sit and watch children.
It.
From K through 5 and how much
time and all of that. So I have
some questions. I'm a little
concerned with the um adopted
rule on healthy universal school
meals.
Um,
For
So I have several questions. So
on the first page of the
summary, uh.
Explanation, um.
The up to 20 minutes of seat
time. The number 2.
So when we reduce
Time
There's always the danger.
That our children will not
complete.
They
Meal and thereby.
will not receive the full
nutritional value.
Of the meal.
We already know that these
children from K through 5 have
very limited.
Let's sit still time.
And there's a lot of motivation
that goes into.
Preparing them, uh, even from
before school like early at home
trying to get them to eat.
at a faster pace.
But there's distractions. This
is the age that's highly
distracted.
So my concern is that how do we
ensure because the whole point
of free lunches or universal
lunches for everyone, universal,
everything, right, is to help
promote a healthy lifestyle and
healthy living and also to show
what that means to our children
from a very early age. So what
are we doing here? Um.
In terms of those concerns.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Robo Caballero, uh, thank you
for the question. I think uh
that's kind of what I was trying
to get to with the technical
issues there is that the way
both the law and the rule are
written currently, it's a, it's
very specifically says up to 20
minutes. And so it gets to that
there's two issues with that.
Primarily there's that one issue
that we know that children in
grades K through 5 often have
trouble sitting still. I have
trouble sitting still on a daily
basis. So, uh, that's one
problem with that.
On top of that, we also know
that if one of the main goals of
this program is to reduce food
waste. There's a bit of an
inherent tension in there if
we're saying up to 20 minutes.
So, uh, that may be something
that we need that the
legislature needs to consider
about how that's written and how
that needs to be clarified
further.
Thank you. I was just trying to
get it. Yeah, you're, it's a
contradiction actually.
One, on the one hand, the food
waste, and then the other hand.
Anyway, so that's something that
I would say we, we really do
need to pay attention to it.
Try to figure out how to
respond. And then the other um
Uh, question I had.
So I'm not quite sure I
understand the number one.
Which is 50% of weekly meal
pattern components must be
freshly
Prepared.
Um, are we saying?
Then that.
Because again, going back to
nutrition.
And healthy nutrition.
We know that prepared foods are
not healthy.
Already frozen, prepared foods
are not the healthiest. They can
contain lots of preservatives
that are not healthy don't.
Down the road and in fact we
have
Problems with childhood obesity.
Childhood diabetes.
Uh, childhood asthma, which food
contributes to all of these
childhood illnesses. So if
We're not looking at the
components.
And the preparation.
Then we're not doing our
children any justice as far as
that's concerned. We're
preparing them for.
Um, insurance companies to take
a.
Great profit in the future with
our bad healthcare. So what does
that mean in terms of just the
daily kitchen and a school.
Mr. Chair, Representative Robo
Caballero, thank you. Uh, so
meal pattern components is, it's
one of the technical terms of
the US Department of Agriculture
uses for uh just the the various
food groups that need to be part
of a school meal. Uh, and so
when they're saying, I think
that really the reason that
language is built in that way is
to, iscognizing that it can be a
pretty high bar to say every
single portion of every meal
that is going to be served with
the exception of milk, is going
to be freshly prepared or speech
scratch cooked, uh, and so that
50% is to ensure that we are
providing at least half of the
meal being those meal components
being healthy and being freshly
prepared will also providing
some flexibility for schools and
also to build in some variety as
well.
So thank you very much, Mr.
Chair. So that means that
there's still that.
They can work within that
healthy realm of meal
preparation. OK, I just wanted
to make sure that that wasn't
restrictive, but
Just what you described.
So then the other um.
Question on the last under your
impact.
Um,
First paragraph, last sentence
meal quality improvement
requirements significantly
scaled back in the adopted rule
compared to the proposed
version.
Um,
What does significantly scaled
back me?
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair,
Representative Robo Cavier,
thank you. Yeah, so
one of the and this came up a
lot in public comment with the
proposed rule. The the proposed
rule had two levels of
standards. There was one that
was that had about 8 different
subcategories they had to meet
and there was that all had
varying levels and then you had
another step above that of
standards that had about 4 that
were a lot more stringent in
terms of meeting those uh.
A lot of the feedback that was
received from schools was that
both of those require both of
those sets of requirements were
quite were overly stringent. And
so, for example, some places,
some would say you can meet this
requirement by establishing a
schoolwide composting program or
you can uh have 50% of schools
in your school food authority
providing uh freshly grown
vegetables on campus, things
like that. So a lot of those and
also included requirements
around recess time as a
potential way to.
satisfy these requirements. Uh,
so when I say significantly
scaled back, they one took away
that two those two different
tiers, which caused some
confusion in that there was some
question of whether those two
tiers would equal different
levels of reimbursement, uh,
which they didn't, and so they
just made it one set of uniform
standards across the state for
all school food authorities.
Hopefully that made sense.
That does. Um, I just want to
make sure that.
In all that we do, this isn't
just to that particular point.
Then
We are very careful if you all,
all of us have monitored.
Just one month of all the
recalls.
Of food
All the
A recalls all the.
Chicken and all the.
A prepared lunch meats all the
frozen food, everything over the
just 3 months.
Um, our nation is in, in peril
when it comes to food.
And so the more we tap into the
resources, the natural land and
food sources that we have in New
Mexico, I think the better we
are gonna have a healthier
children, but I just want us to
be really careful that we're
not, um,
Scaling back to use your
language.
To accommodate.
Um,
Making it easier.
For the preparers at the risk of
our children.
Um, and the food, not just our
children, but everybody because
everybody in the school, all the
educators in the school are
subject to the same.
Um,
Danger if we're not careful. So
thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Represent memo.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you for your presentation. I,
for one, would like to thank uh
PED for listening to the public
comment and the what was the
proposed rule that was given to
us in June. I had a lot of
issues with this one is much
easier to swallow. Um, so thank
you for for listening and and
changing that. Um, a couple of
things are a little and it's
kind of along the same lines,
but I want to make sure that I'm
understanding it a little bit
better. The, the
Lowest food level of waste that
can be satisfied by two, by
meeting two requirements,
correct? So having a shared
table, so as long as there's a
shared table, you meet that
requirement, right?
And then, um, and then for
kindergarten, now you're your,
I, I agree the up to is a little
so would just changing the
language of a minimum of 20
minutes, um, what is, would that
satisfy it? Like what is it
because the up to means that it
could be anywhere up to that.
Um, but it, it like, what is the
verbiage that you're kind of
looking for that is not there
now.
Mr. Chair, Representative Mor
Beaumoy, I think that, uh, from
my conversations with school
food authorities, uh, it's, it's
sort of to your point. The
concern is that by saying up to
it is creating the possibility
that you could even have 10
minute lunches or 5 minute
lunches. I don't know that
that's necessarily happening,
but that is a possibility with
that language as it exists, so
potentially something like a
like a minimum standard could be
an option that could be
considered.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. So, so
is that in order to meet that
requirement as long as I have
that, that, that amount of time
and I have a shared table. They
meet the, the school system or
the LEA meets that requirement,
correct?
Mr. Chair, Representative Mel
Moya, that is my understanding,
yes. And then, um, thank you,
Mr. Chair, and, um, and Connor,
now the, for the homegrown
foods, I'm a little, um, I'm
kind of with Mr. Romero here or
Representative Romero, because
it's.
Is it that that I just buy the
beans that we cook from a grower
here in New Mexico and I meet
that requirement. Is it a
certain percentage of my food
that has to be New Mexico
homegrown what what is that? I
mean, if we put green chili at
least once a week, that's,
that's hopefully New Mexico
green chili, um, you know, is
that, is that does that meet the
requirement, or is there
something, or do I have to
participate in this grant
program in order to purchase
them in order to check off that
box.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Mirba Moya, uh, so as I
understand it, like the New
Mexico grown program, it is
separate. It is not, it is a
voluntary program that districts
can be part of, uh, and the and
I think the answer to your
question sort of lies in the
annual certification procedures,
part of this rule, where it says
that they ask for uh subject to
the available appropriations
from that grant program. Uh,
they ask for documentation that
New Mexico grown foods were
purchased and utilized to
improve meal quality. I think.
The rule as it's written is
meant to be, is meant to provide
that flexibility of saying that
maybe you'll incorporate green
chili. Maybe it'll be something
that you grow on your campus or
maybe it'll be a corn mush or
something like that. It's, it's
trying to create that
flexibility for LEAs to meet
that requirement. I think it's
trying to set that requirement
and provide the pathway to
incorporate those ingredients
without being overly stringent.
OK, thank you, Mr. Chair. um
Mr. Mrs chair over there,
co-chair, um, or so, um, so, so
it's not a matter of a
percentage as long as you have a
documentation is that you you
are attempting to purchase New
Mexico grown foods in in
preparation for the, the, the,
the meals, then you meet that
requirement.
Mr. Chair, Representative Moya,
uh, based on my reading of this
rule, that is my understanding,
yes.
Excellent, only because, um,
now, Mr. Chair, only because I,
I know often I, I get.
I hear the, the, the struggles
with, uh, especially my school
district, because what we think
it says and then what it's
interpreted in they they're made
to do, sometimes they're two
different things, so I want to
make sure that that is actually
out there, so we're not, um,
because it's a lot of this stuff
costs a lot of money and without
getting that reimbursement,
some, some, um, LEAs are already
in the red when it comes to
certain things and uh prepared
like freshly prepared food costs
more than.
Then packaged food, uh, so which
I would definitely rather have
my students or even my own
children to have the freshly
prepared stuff. But if we don't
get those reimbursements, then
that means that they have to dip
into other avenues in order to
get those. So, so definitely
clarification. Thank you.
Representative block.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Connor. Thank you,
Denise, appreciate you all for
your presentation. Just a couple
of quick questions about this
last rule. I know we're kind of
obsessing over it, but it's,
it's a good thing, right? So Mr.
Chairman Connor and Denise, I'm
wondering,
On the, on the part where it
says 20%, it doesn't seem from
what I'm seeing to say any shall
or must
language, it seems to be saying
achievement of low food waste.
is achieved by permitting
students in grades kindergarten
through 5 to have up to 20
minutes. So permitting, I mean,
I guess, could, could that
potentially be interpreted to
say, well, we're permitting them
to have 20 but we kind of want
to permit them to have.
30 as well. Do you think that
that language is kind of a gray
area that could be uh
Flattened out, so to speak, by
certain uh
school districts.
Mr. Chairman, uh, a
representative block, I think
I'll add to um what um our
Uh, or my colleague, uh, Connor
Hicks has talked about and I
think because the language is in
statute. I don't want to
necessarily give you any
verbiage right now without
looking at all sections of
statute, but of course, um, I do
want to make sure that we all
know we wrote up to 20 minutes
in the row because of what's in
statute, so I think depending on
what you all, um, would like to,
to include in there, um, we
would need to make that
adjustment or amendment, so.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for that, Denise. So
All right, so then continuing on
the on the statue or the the
promulgated rule, it has an
exception of milk on D under
requirements uh for 50% of all
weekly meal pattern components
being freshly prepared, so, so
I'm guessing so milk does not.
It doesn't count as fresh, is
that what I'm understanding
here, Mr. Chairman. Mr.
Chairman, Representative Block,
uh, that's my understanding as
well. So milk tends to come
prepackaged in those little
cartons, uh, and USDA does have
new nutrition requirements that
will limit the uh added sugars
that are able to be in uh milk
products, but they're based on
how the meal, school meal
programs typically operate.
There really isn't a way to
freshly prepare milk.
Totally. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you, Connor.
Yeah, I was thinking the same
thing. I go to the grocery
store, I get my gallon of milk,
and I'm happy for another week,
right? So I would think it's
fresh, but I guess we're, we're
not counting that. So then my
last question here is just
noncompliance, if a school is
seen to not be fully in
compliance, maybe they have 9
out of 10 things done on the
checklist. What is the penalty
for that district, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chair, Representative Block,
thank you. Yeah, so as the way
it's written, I, I do want to
call attention to the
definitions here because uh it
it is a tad confusing on this
point. So there's a federal paid
reimbursement rate, which
depend, it depends based on the
the specific demographics of the
school, but it can be, it's
typically about 40 cents around
there, uh, per paid meal that we
receive from the federal
government. Uh, and then there's
also a definition for the paid
meal rate, which is
The amount charged the average
amount charged by schools in the
state, uh, when I was first
learning about this, and I'm
sure folks might be thinking
about this, well, if we're
providing free meals to
everybody, how do we know what
we're charging because we're not
charging anything. Uh, if
students do go back for seconds,
that would incur a price that is
the possibility. They can go
through the line once and
they're guaranteed that meal for
free. Anything beyond those two
guaranteed meals per day, that
would incur a cost. Uh, and so
they use that, uh, and those are
reported by school food
authorities.
2 PED each year. Uh, and so they
use that to create a formula to
project out what it would look
like and what that average is,
which based on and then
potentially in the event that
because as we continue having
these free meals in the event
that schools stop reporting what
their average price is if that
were to occur. They have a
formula to figure out what it
would roughly could roughly be,
uh, and so as a deputy director
Laura Henry Hand said yesterday
that amount is about $3.15. And
so
Every single meal, uh, that
would that they would serve
during a year if they if an SFA
was determined to be
noncompliant, they've received
about $3.15 16 cents per meal,
as opposed to having that
percentage of, uh, a certain
percentage would be reimbursed
at the free rate and uh and then
a certain percentage reimbursed
at the paid rate.
Hope that was a little
technical, but hopefully that
made sense. Thank you so much,
Mr. Chairman. That, that
answered my question and uh
yeah, it's complicated, but I'm
very happy to see that some of
the language that I was kind of
startled by at the first draft
has been taken out, especially
regarding the, I think the farms
and the compost mandated, I
think mandating anything is, is
stupid in my opinion, in many
cases when it comes to a lot of
rules, because I don't think
that the executives should have
that power, but that's another
conversation for another day. So
thank you so.
Mr. Chairman.
Senator Pinto.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Members of
the committee, thank you for
your presentation.
The vocational rehabilitation.
Um,
So all we're adding is a shot
clock to it that was not there
before we're defining timely
manner.
Mr. Chair, Senator Pinto, that
is my understanding, yes, that
just clarifying uh for at the
outset of the process for people
they can know that this is the
deadline within which you have
to submit the request for
mediation or for a fair hearing
And also there for the for the
division, making clear this is
the timeline you have in which
to respond to that request. So
that is my understanding, yes.
Oh.
I think one of the things that
I'm not really sure how to
really ask this question, Mr.
Chair members of the committee,
when we talk about someone with
a disability.
Um, you know, time.
does not seem to
factor in some cases of
incapacity or um even getting an
advocate.
To
To, I guess, um, help you
through this process. So I hope
it's not really something that
was gonna work against him in in
that manner of fact of just a
denial.
Um, coming up.
Um, thank you.
Thank you, others.
All right. Thank you all so
much. Appreciate it.
All right, so we're gonna go to
our director's report.
Please, when you're ready. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Uh, I'm not sure
what's happened as the meeting's
gone on, it seems if you've
gotten a little more somber as
we're in a theater. I don't know
what's going on, maybe it's just
the the drama of it all. Um, so
the caffeine is worn off from
the fraternity potentially
that's it. It's it's been a long
couple of days and we appreciate
all your patience. We hope that
the meeting has been useful for
you all. Um, so normally during
these director's reports we'll
have a personnel update. I gave
you that yesterday, so we'll
skip
over that piece, we usually have
a small budget update for us as
to your own and our staff
budget, that's a little bit in
flux right now given the
turnover of personnel, we're
actually probably going to be in
better shape than we imagined at
the beginning of the year
because there's a little bit of
savings, we're trying not to to
bank up any cash reserves from
vacancy savings, uh LESC
um.
I will just point out very
quickly because I think it's
important that you all recognize
that your staff every, every,
uh, for every meeting puts
together a newsletter and this
is for you, obviously, but we've
also uh started to use this as a
way to, to inform the larger
public about some of the the
topics that either you'll be
discussing at your meetings or
that you've already discussed at
a previous meeting and so it's
one a nice summary of some of
those things for you all,
especially if maybe you
Able to make the meeting, but
also hopefully helping the
public to understand the work
that you all do and that we as
staff do on a monthly basis.
So for this month, again, you'll
you'll see obviously the letter
from from Mr. Chair, uh, some of
the uh analysis that Tim did for
the um assessment results from
PED.
Um,
A short summary of the um
implementation of universal
school meals that Connor gave
you yesterday, and then
obviously we always like to have
a a little graph or chart here
to to help uh to give people who
like that data and statistics,
something to look at, and this
is about that that cash balance
that uh topic that we talked
about yesterday. So if you
haven't already, that's in your
binders and uh for your for
perusal at your own leisure.
For, for this particular report,
I wanted to to focus
specifically on and I'm going to
stand up very quickly because I
forgot something.
So most of you may have already
heard or read about uh a recent
motion that was filed in the
Martinez Diazzi case, um, we did
not include a copy of that
motion for you in your binders.
This is it. It's 240 pages, um,
I'm gonna, I'm gonna tell you
about what's in it. If you want
a copy, first of all, uh, in the
electronic version of these
materials that's posted on our
website, there's a link directly
to the motion. So you're welcome
to find it that way.
If you'd like for us to print
you a copy, we'd be happy to do
that, but we figured you'd have
enough paper this meeting as it
was and so we didn't, we didn't
do that.
Um, so I'll go ahead and just
walk you through the uh policy
brief that's behind TA 13 in
your binders.
Again, this is a summary of this
motion, obviously a much shorter
summary than what you might get
if you read the whole thing, but
hopefully it'll it'll contain
all the, the important points
and, and if you have questions,
I hopefully can answer those as
well.
So the the first uh the headline
here obviously is that the
plaintiffs in the Martineziazzi
consolidated education
sufficiency lawsuit filed a
motion of non-compliance and a
request for remedial for the
development of a remedial action
plan, and they filed that in on
September 4th in uh first
judicial District Court.
Um,
The motion calls for LESC staff
to coordinate the planning
process for the development of a
of a remedial action plan.
This particular motion that I
would say 50% of it, if not more
actually focuses on um
Essentially the argument that
the state and namely the PED has
not complied with the lawsuit
and has not produced a final
action plan that was called for
in the judge's initial ruling.
For the purposes of this report,
I'm going to focus primarily on
a much smaller section. This is
the piece that I that I kind of
worked on. And this is the piece
that has to do with what the
what the plaintiffs are asking
LESC as a committee, and LESC
staff to do if the motion were
to be granted.
So the plaintiffs argue that
because PED has not adopted a
comprehensive action plan or
made made measurable progress in
implementing the court's initial
orders that a comprehensive
remedial plan developed through
collaborative approach to
planning is necessary to to
address the defendant's
constitutional obligations and
redress their ongoing failure to
achieve compliance with the
court's orders. That's directly
from the motion and you'll see
um that little pullout quote is
also directly.
From the motion, I thought that
was something that we needed to
highlight that creating this
comprehensive plan requires the
coordinated effort among
educational leaders, state and
tribal government officials,
education experts and advocates
and other participants in the
state's educational system, and
of course the PED. The reason I
pulled that out is um up to this
point, the plaintiffs have
primarily asked the state and
the PED to develop that plan.
And again, in, in the larger
motion.
There's a lot of recounting of
how the process of developing
that plan has happened at
various stages since the court's
ruling, whether or not PD has
actually produced a plan, it
talks a little bit about how
there was a plan, it went out
for public comment. They got
public comment, but then
actually never published uh a
final plan that was that was
responsive to that feedback. So
again, that's in the larger
motion.
Um, I wanted to point out here
that while the LESC and the
legislature as a whole have
worked to address the court's
finding through funding and
programs, and that we as staff
have presented to you a road map
to improving New Mexico's
education system, LESC members
and staff have not played a
formal role in developing a
comprehensive state plan. I
think that's important to point
out for folks.
If granted, obviously, the
motion would mean that LESC
staff would take a more central
role in that process.
Um, the motion also.
I think deservedly calls out the
committee and staff for its
expertise in education
specifically, um, further cites
that the committees and staff's
position as subject matter
experts and with a singular
focus on education as evidenced
in our plan, in our, I'm sorry,
in our annual report, right,
we every year develop that
report for you all and for the
legislature as a whole outlines
the
The issues in education and the
work that you all do during the
interim to address those issues,
obviously with um
Legislative and budget proposals
associated with that.
So the motion calls for a pretty
interesting timeline, um, it
would, it would, it would ask
the LESC staff to submit a draft
plan.
With in consultation with the PD
secretary by May 1st of next
year.
With the objective of fully
satisfying the defendant's
constitutional obligations by
the end of 2030. So it's
important to to know that this
motion calls for the development
of a plan that would essentially
um be played out over the next 5
years.
Uh, by, by July 1 of next year,
the state would have to present
that plan to the court.
And then if the if um
The if parties didn't agree on
some aspect of the plan, then
the court might have to take
additional steps.
I just want to be clear because
I think this is a misconception
I've heard and others maybe have
heard since the motion was
filed, that the motion does not
ask LESC you as members, or we
as staff to develop the plan.
The motion, the motion actually
calls for us as staff to um
To coordinate the process of the
plan. It shall identify the
state, the school district
officials, actors and agencies
whose direct involvement,
cooperation and assistance are
necessary for the LESC staff to
formulate for the state to
implement the specific actions
described in the comprehensive
remedial plan. So the way that
we understand it is if granted
the motion, LESC staff would
have to put people together to
develop that.
comprehensive plan that we as
staff and you as members would
not be responsible for doing
that unilaterally.
Um, obviously it's very
important, the motion also
specifies that we would need to
collaborate and consult with our
23 Indian nations, tribes and
pueblos.
That, that, uh, that red block
kind of separates out the the
various components that the
motion calls for that would be
required in the plan.
Uh, a multilingual or
multilingual, multicultural and
multilingual framework
that is uh culturally and
linguistically, linguistically
responsive.
A transparent, cohesive and
accountable system of delivering
special education supports and
services.
A system of curriculum
instructional programs and
assessment also that are
culturally and linguistically
responsive,
uh, a system to recruit and
retain high quality teachers,
administrators, and support
professionals, access to
broadband services and dedicated
digital devices for students?
Adequately staffed system of
students and family support
services.
And equitable finance system
that's sufficient, recurring and
predictable.
And accountability enforcement
system that tracks local
district expenditures of state
and federal funds.
And then a call uh that PED fill
its vacancies and increase its
current capacity with high
quality culturally competent
staff. And I think that's
referring primarily to the to
the court's findings that PED
was lacking in its oversight of
of programs and budget over
school districts. Again, the
motion requests the court to
require the inclusion of
specific actions and the state
actor agency responsible for
overseeing implementation,
stated separately for each year
from 2025.
2030. So the the motion is
really calling for a plan that
is very specific in goals and
timelines.
Um, and, and the state would
also have to submit quarterly
status reports beginning
September 20th, 2025. So that's,
those are the, the, I think the
substantive pieces about what it
would, what the motion is
actually asking the court to to
ask LESC staff and and the
committee to do. I wanted to
point out a couple of um
substantive issues that we saw
as staff, if, if this were to be
granted. The first, of course,
is um,
We do hopefully a lot of good
valuable work for you as it is,
and uh being asked to take on
something like this is, uh,
would be pretty substantial and
would probably require
additional resources and
potentially additional staff.
Um, the motion cites turnover at
PED as one reason that the
development of a plan maybe
shouldn't sit within the
department. And we just wanted
to point out to you on not that
you need this reminder, but um,
While the makeup of this
committee has been pretty
stable, that does not exclude it
from turnover or or leadership
change. And so that, that uh we
actually recommend here or maybe
be important for you to consider
or potentially the planet as a
whole, a larger state governance
structure that could contribute
to consistency and stability in
public education governance. And
that, that, um,
Consideration is actually in
line with other things that
we've brought to you in terms of
the possible um creation of a
commission. I know there's a lot
of conversations about state
governments as a whole, given
state governance as a whole
given turnover in state
leadership.
And then lastly, as I said
before, the, the motion has a
pretty aggressive timeline and
given where we are uh in
September and leading into the
session that that that timeline
seemed very aggressive for us,
considering all the other work
that we do. I do want to point
out here that this motion has
not been granted. We don't know
how long those legal proceedings
will take. We know that there's
some, some time for the
defendants to actually respond
to the motion and given the
history of
How long some of these motions
have actually taken in court, it
could be months before we find
out one, if it's granted, or to
what a final version might look
like. So I just wanted to say
that this is all very
preliminary.
I'm not gonna go over the last
section in detail here, but I
did want to point out, um, that,
um, both in our annual report in
the introduction to our annual
report from 2024 and um in that
larger roadmap, we've identified
for you these 4 large buckets
that we've been that we've been
working on educator ecosystem,
which obviously includes the
recruitment and retention of
teachers, academic design, we've
talked a lot about literacy and
we're going to continue to talk
about
Literacy, obviously math, and
all the other components of
academic design in the system.
Whole child education, we've
talked a lot about social
emotional learning. Obviously
our panel this afternoon about
out of school time supports fits
within that. And then those
overarching systems, including
data that we've heard a lot
about and the need for a
comprehensive data system for
the state for all of these
systems to talk to each other so
that we can really evaluate one,
whether or not they're working,
keep track of students across
systems from potentially early
childhood to post-secondary,
right, so these are these.
These buckets are things that
we're doing for you all, um, and
I, I guess I just wanted to show
that so that you can see that
there is some alignment in the
work that we've been doing and a
lot of the things that the court
is asking for in a in a
comprehensive plan.
Um, and so that that Mr. Chair,
I'm, I'm happy to stand for
questions.
All right.
Senator Stewart.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So.
Uh, John have has the state
responded yet to this?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Stewart,
as far as I know, um, they have
not responded in the motion
itself, um, it, it states that
the motion was unopposed by the
state as representative as
represented by the Attorney
General, uh, but it does say
that it was opposed by the
public education department, uh,
represented by private council
in in media reports, I've heard
that contradicted, so I, I can't
say for sure, but I'm pretty
sure that the that the
defendants have not actually
responded officially to the to
the motion yet.
So, Mr. Chairman, this really
does uh getting a little PTSD
here about 2 education
commissions that this committee
passed, um, I think it was 2020
and 2021 I could be off by a
year
uh, so.
Back when we were looking at no
time to lose, um, uh, an
education commission is what the
International Education Study
Group suggested that we end with
or that we promote, um, they
certainly did an education
commission in Maryland and in
Tennessee and Massachusetts, uh,
I think North Carolina, but I'm
not sure about that one, so
I think
I recall, um, the education
commission, the last one, that
was offered had.
I believe 26 members and 4 of
them were uh uh from the Native
American community and including
a requirement that a a Native
American member would at least
be the vice chair, if not the
chair.
Uh, so that that commission uh
got uh failed
I point to the pandemic because
that was when we were uh killing
bills merrily online, um, by
having um hours of public
testimony from people who didn't
really understand what we were
trying to do. As for amendments
but didn't have any amendments
to offer.
Uh, so, um.
I, I don't,
I don't like what they're trying
to do now. I, I really do think
that PED is the appropriate
agency to come up with the plan.
I frankly don't know what's
happened to their plan. They've
they've said that at several
points, oh, well, we're almost
ready. We've got a draft, uh,
uh, we're about to, to show it
to you and then that didn't
happen, so, um.
Uh, I do feel that the
legislature has been more
responsive, um.
Then PED has, of course we've.
Had the revolving door, um.
But if you look at the plan
components, uh, that you laid
down on page 2, so much of this
were either doing or we're about
to do or we've already done, uh,
so it just
depends on who you ask.
As to whether or not we're on
track to make improvements in
education.
And so, um,
You know, I suggest that we at
least look at at one of those,
uh, maybe perhaps the last
education commission to see if
we can offer that, um, because
to me that would.
Uh,
that would get it off of LESC,
um, it would be joined with PED,
it would be PED, we identified
the major players in both of
those bills that neither one of
they passed unanimously out of
LASE and then uh did not pass
the legislature, so I suggest we
at least do that as perhaps a
proactive step.
Um, while this plays out in the
court, I um.
I wish we had education experts
as lawyers. Uh, this is where I
worry about the difference
between people who really
understand and know education
policy versus the attorneys that
they contract with to, you know,
go to court over these issues,
uh, so.
Anyway, this is uh uh not real
good news in in my estimation,
so thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Resent Figaro.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I think
the Senator and your brief.
John, um, highlighted most of my
concerns and the timeline and
the workload are huge, um.
How
Our staff, how you guys could do
that by May 1st in 7 months when
two of those months are session
is, um,
Beyond comprehension.
But
Another part of it is, is the
legality can, does the motion
give
Any teeth to LESC to compel PED
to come to meetings to
participate in the efforts to
get the work done or in the end
would it be something that EESC
has to create anyway, in which
case it's not going to be
implemented.
So, so are there
Is there anything in the motion
that gives teeth to this effort.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Figueroa, I
I don't think there's anything
in the motion that specifically
calls out, for instance, giving
LESC or staff particular
authority to compel someone to
do that, um.
I would imagine and and I and I
should have said this at the
beginning, although I've already
said it before, but I, I just
like to say that I'm not a
lawyer. Uh, just in case
anybody, just in case anybody's
wondering.
Um, that the that the motion
itself is, is the is the
compelling document, but to your
0.1 considered common
consideration I didn't include
in the brief, obviously is, um,
That the development of a plan,
um, doesn't guarantee the
implementation of that plan and
it doesn't, you know, it doesn't
guarantee the, the participation
of all those folks that are
outlined in the plan only that
LESC would would, you know, and
staff would be asked to, to.
Coordinate, consult with those,
with those entities. Mr. Chair
and John, I think the comments
in here about the need for our
staff time and budget to do a
job that large is compelling. So
we, we're gonna have to figure
out if this comes down.
How to accommodate for that, uh,
because the work you do for us
between now and session and
during session.
Can't be overstated. We could
not do without you, so we can't
transfer all of your time and
effort to this other task, which
is essential. If the court
actually handed it over to LESC
and said, you do it, I might
have more faith.
In the creation of the plan, not
necessarily the implementation,
but in the creation of a good
plan. The other piece of my
question is,
Does the motion give any
guidelines? Do you have any
sense of
Would you be starting from
scratch, or would it be a speed
scratch effort from the previous
commission's work or the PED's
plan that did get some feedback
and disappeared.
How would you do it?
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Figueroa, that's a really good
question. Um.
So that I'll just say that what
my response here is is not
necessarily an endorsement of
the of the of the motion or
anything like that. I, part of
the reason that we included um
these 4 buckets and the work
that you all have already done
and and it's.
Somewhat alignment to the the
the components of the plan is
that I, to your point, a lot of
people have a lot of plans
already. And I think the
frustration here is that those
plans have not been um aligned
always, um.
Maybe they've been driven by
whether it's your committee
deciding to do certain things or
an advocacy group coming up with
a particular plan that that they
had particular concerns in mind.
Obviously the executive and PED
coming up with its plan, um,
In my mind, a lot of this work
has at least begun to the
senator's point, if not some
pieces, I think one interesting
Upside I guess, and not
necessarily that LESC should be
responsible for it, but the
creation of a collaborative plan
including multiple parties may
give folks the opportunity to to
actually say what has been done
and what's not been done and
write that down. I think part of
the frustration here is that
we don't have a Senator Sols is
not here. I was, I was hoping
he'd be here because he often
asks, how do we know when we did
it. And there's not a real clear
answer to that, because we don't
have those sort of
Specific goals and timelines
laid out. And so, um,
I guess to answer your question
is, I think there's a lot of
work that has already been done
that probably should be
recognized, um.
But whether or not there's those
clear guidelines, timelines,
objectives associated with those
and agreed upon by the larger
education um environment or
folks and stakeholders, I think
might be very valuable.
Thank you, John. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, I would end with
A statement of utter faith in
the LASE to do this and to get
it done really, really well. I'm
just concerned about the cost to
the other parts of the work that
we need you for.
Senator Maestas
Thank you Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Mr. S. I think that LESC
staff should just voluntarily do
it.
I'm just kidding.
No, because you guys are the,
are the experts, but no, thank
you, Mr. Chairman, couple of
things, um,
What is the site? What is the
site of the court cases? Do you
have it?
In front of you by chance.
The the court case number?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Maestas,
so the case number I do have.
It's D101.
CV
2014.
00793. Thank you. And who are
the lawyers representing the
Martinez Yazi plaintiffs. What,
what law firms do you know, uh,
Mr. Chair, Senator Ma, the
Center for Law and Poverty.
And these are the case number I
cited for you is the original
Martineziazzi consolidated
lawsuit. Mr. Chairman of the
Center for Law and Poverty
represents
The Yazi plants or Yazi and the
Martinez plaintiffs,
Mr. Chair, Senator Masas, they
represent the Yazi plaintiffs.
And as Mae, Mr. Chairman,
Maldive still involved with the
Martinez plaintiffs, or there's
kind of signing off on the
motions. Senator, they are still
involved as far as I know. I
don't know what they're, um,
their actual participation in
the.
In the processes
But this, but Mr. Chairman, this
was a joint motion, correct?
It's, it's not just the Yazi
plaintiffs, it's.
All the plaintiffs. Got you. And
then, um,
The Attorney General is is and,
and that office is involved
obviously, Mr. Chairman, what,
what, who are the, what's the
law firm for, for the PE?
Mr. Chair, Senator, um, I used
to know that off the top of my
head, and I have to get it, get
back to you on it
because.
Because, um, because Mr.
Chairman, on, on the bottom of
page.
Uh, 3, you know, it talks about
primary.
Primary focus, educator
ecosystem, secondary focus
academic design.
Like sitting in I had the honor
of sitting in Senate education
the last couple of years and
there was really no bills.
There were like
I'm presenting this bill that
will
Satisfied this.
This concern of the plaintiffs,
you know, I mean, it was very
few, few and far between.
And some of the stuff you can't
like really legislate like how
do you legislate, uh, the number
3, Mr. Chairman, strengthening
and investing, I guess
investing, strengthening and
investing in excellent school
and district leadership. So I
suppose we can invest.
We could mandate training and
mandate.
That superintendents can't get
fired in the 1st 6 months. Like
we could do some policy stuff.
But, um,
But some of the stuff you can't
just put on a, you know, can't
just legislate, but um, so I
think ultimately the executive
branch.
Uh, should be moving forward
with this and with legislative
recommendations.
But
Committee member grabbed one of
these bullet points and tried to
come up with a bill to satisfy
it. I think it would my move us
forward between now and May. Do
you know, Mr. Chairman, Mr.
Cena, is there a hearing set or
hearing date is not set yet?
Mr. Chair, Senator, I don't
believe a hearing date has been
set.
And, and Mr. Chairman, the, um,
Who is the judge now in the
case?
Mr. Chair, Senator, it's Judge
Matthew Wilson in First Judicial
District.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Other questions from folks?
Um, I mean, first I would say
that it's flattering that they
would call us out, um, for this,
and I think it's because, like
you mentioned, um, John is that
we have been making a concerted
effort to address some of these
issues, um, obviously with
varying degrees of success, um,
and it may not say like
specifically this, I mean it's
title, but we are moving forward
with things like pipeline
For educators for administrators
moving forward with um
at risk, um, after school
programs that we've heard from,
um, educator ecosystem, all
sorts of different things. Um,
and I think that's part of the
reason why we here are being
singled out with it, um, and I
do share some of the concerns
that were brought up about what
this could potentially mean for
um.
The work that we do here, the
continued work, um, the work
that we have done to this point
because we know that the plans
set forth by this committee have
been for the next legislative
session, but also 5 years, 10
years out, where we're going to
be in in in our education
system, so, so that's a little
bit of a concern and obviously,
we don't necessarily have a say
in that and we'll have to sit
and wait and see what the court
decides on this and in the
meantime, move forward with
The initiatives that we have set
forward um and continue the
discussion amongst ourselves
where we're going to go in this
next
um legislative session,
obviously a big part of that
will be um budget discussions
that will start tomorrow with um
our counterparts at the LFC and
moving forward with our
budgetary recommendations the
next
months in the fall. So, um.
Yeah, well, certainly interested
to see where our, our current,
our most current um PED
administration is on this motion
and get their thoughts on where
their plan might be for
remedying this because I think
as far as we are concerned here
is that um we have a plan, um,
and we've been implementing it
and we'll continue to move
forward with it, um.
But
Interim director, thank you so
much. I appreciate it.
Anything else from members?
All right, so a couple things,
um.
I'd mentioned that we'll be
meeting with um our LSC
counterparts tomorrow. Uh, we
will be starting at 8 o'clock
again, um, so tables will grow a
little bit, um, as we have more
members coming in, um, but LESC
staff will be picking up
binders. So if there's anything
members need from your binders,
please take them now because
you'll be handed your materials
for tomorrow. OK, so if you need
something out of your binder,
please take it now, um.
Also reception tonight, 5
o'clock at Mattucci's um
at 25.
Mattucci is 25.
I think once upon a time they
told us what that means, but oh
yeah, it's I-25. 0, there we go.
OK, so if we could bear traffic,
good luck, get an early start.
We'll get an early start, um,
traffic here. Uh what time is
it? I usually don't leave till
4, so if you have some minor
errands to run while you wait
out, student pick up here, um,
it's probably best, so.
Well, we'll see you all this
evening or tomorrow morning.
