You know, Billy the Kid casino
that came into this area, but
With all of it, uh, the whole
key is the economy and how do we
continue to go ahead and build
that. So I'm basically
indicating as we move forward
we've been there, we've
continued to deal with it.
Uh, we're always moving forward.
We're not going to go ahead and
give up and whatever we can do
to help, we really want to do
that.
State Senator Pete Campos
representing all the parts of 7
counties in northeastern New
Mexico and uh they were uh
represent Colfax, Guadalupe,
Hardy, Moray San Miguel and Taos
and so you can see that as we
deal with it, uh, the people of
New Mexico definitely count and
our small communities are very
important to us and again to
this area, we're going to move
forward and we're going to help
you rebuild. Thank you very
much, Mr. Chairman. Senator, you
didn't mention that you were the
leader in you rode a horse in
the horse.
races.
You're the outrider or the prey
to horses with the outriders. I
want to thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman. I was a long-haired
horse or a short haired horse?
Well, you know what, it was a
long tailed horse.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I am
Anthony Allison.
To my Apache relatives.
Good to see you all. Thanks for
the hospitality. I represent
District 4, which is in the
northwest corner of New Mexico.
You don't get no more further
northwest than I do, so we come
from there. Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. I'm
State Representative Joe
Garrett. I represent Northwest
Albuquerque, uh, the Petroglyph
National Monument is the
physical and spiritual center of
my district. It's a pleasure to
be here.
Hello committee and chair guest,
my name is Harlan Vincent. I
proudly serve District 56, which
is Lincoln and Otaro counties.
And, uh, I, I welcome everybody
here today and I'm really
looking forward to taking you
guys on a tour today to see
what's happened to our, our
county. And I just wanted to say
that we've been knocked down but
we're not down. We we've stood
back up. We're just limping
around right now and, um,
All the, the county and village
workers around here. I just
wanted to commend them because
they've been working tireless
hours and they're pulling things
around. Things are starting to
change, but, um, thank you for
being here.
Mr. Chair, and y'all, I'm uh
Senator Bill Sheriff from
Farmington.
OK
Mr. Chairman, good to be here
today. My name is Pat Woods. My
claim to fame is running wild
horse legislation in Riosa, New
Mexico, and it didn't go
nowhere. Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, uh, to
our brothers and sisters from
Mescalera State Senator Benny
Scheendo from Amos Pueblo's she
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, uh, to
our brothers and sisters from
Mescalera State Senator Benny
Scheendo from Amos Pueblo's
she's greetings in our language,
so, um, happy to be here. I
represent uh uh Senate District
22, which is kind of the inner
uh quadrant of Northwest New
Mexico. Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Uh,
thank you for having us up here
today. I am a priative and
thankful that this committee is
meeting here in Rodoso, uh, to
see firsthand.
Uh, the devastation literally
that, uh,
has happened that we need to
correct and a big portion of
that is, uh, going to be the
cooperation that the state of
New Mexico hopefully will bring
to the table as we do that. I am
State Senator Bill Burtson at
District 33, and my district
includes the northern half of
Otarro and all of Lincoln
County.
Uh, good morning, Mr. Chair and
Mr. Vice Chair, Mr. Sally and
others, thank you very much for
having us, uh, when I, um, leave
the South Valley, which is the
area that I represent, I love
coming to this community, so I
joined Representative Armstrong
and others and all the comments
here you're in our prayers.
We're here to see what how we
can help. We're so happy we're
able to allocate the dollars we
did and the special that just
happened, and, uh, we work for
you, so we're here to serve you
and we really want to help this
community just continue to
thrive as you have for many
years. Um, I do represent the
southern portion of
Bernallio County, been in the
center for about 12 years. I do
serve as the Senate Majority
Whip and on Senate Finance with
our chair and our vice chair,
and, um, very, very happy to be
here. Thank you.
Let me jump to, uh,
Representative Sanchez and
representing.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm Joseph
Sanchez. I represent District 40
up north. I live in Ririba and
I'm here at the bad kids table
with the repel.
The bad kids' table.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
members. Uh, my name is Candy
Spencey Zill. I don't like being
put in with the bad kids back
here, but, uh, glad to be here,
glad to see all the people out
here that are interested in
what's going to be happening.
Thank you.
Senator Rodriguez.
Good morning to everyone. I'm
Nancy, Senator Nancy Rodriguez
from Santa Fe, and I'm just, um,
happy to be here with you,
saddened to see the situation
you've been going through one of
the saddest things for me is
that he doesn't seem to be like
one time it seems to be
happening more and more often,
and that it's terrible, but
we're here to be a part of your
team to help you, um, hopefully
rectify this problem and do all
that we can together to, um, to
help you, um, make things
better. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
My name is Nathan Small. I'm
privileged to represent House
District 36, which is all in
Donana County. Uh, Mr. Chair, I
want to thank you for making
sure that we could hold the
meeting here, uh, this year, and
also, uh, you know, I was here a
couple of weeks ago when
Representative Vincent brought
leaders together thanks to
Mescalero for hosting them
again, and, uh, echo the
commitment we share, the funding
that, uh, we've uh been able to
put forward.
Um, and what we're doing here
today, which is here for the
long haul, uh, as we work to
revitalize and work with all of
the leaders here for a brighter
future. Thank you very much, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, and, and thank you
guys for having us here and
thank you for putting us up
Madam, uh, Governor, President,
we appreciate it putting this up
here and, and feeding us today
and, and, and I'll say it in
Navajo and Zuni if you want me
to, but uh I can speak 3
languages and maybe 4 in
Spanish, uh, so thank you guys
for having us here. I appreciate
it. I'm Senator George Minos. I
represent Senate District 4 to
Sabola McKinley in San Juan
County. I, I, I want to start
off with the economic engine in.
This county, right? Because if
we don't have the economic
engine in in any area.
Then
All the government pieces fall
off.
And, and so I think in what I've
learned in, in being down here
and I do a lot of GSA contracts
is if you don't have the engine.
There ain't nobody gonna be,
you're gonna be pushing the
truck uphill and it's
devastating, so I changed the
order, um, I think this is the
driver and then you're going to
hear about what they need to
keep that engine moving, keep
that economic stability in the
area because these, I think
other than the school district,
they are the largest employer in
the county I correct
Representative Vincent.
So Rick, you guys want to come
up and the county guys and city
guys want you. I know the
county's not on the agenda. They
are here though,
uh, county commissioner, the
president of Eastern, I've seen
him here. Ms. Gero.
President of Mescalero, uh, Ms.
Padilla, you want to come up?
But we're going to start off
with Rick and, and.
We need to add more chairs,
we'll add more chairs if we need
to. I think they got.
You will have to.
So everybody knows the mics will
squawk back if, if you have more
than one mic on at a time.
Um, so we'll have to turn them
on and off.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman. My
name is Rick Ball. I'm the
general manager at Riodosa Downs
Racetrack.
Uh, I can't tell you how much I
appreciate you guys taking the
time to come to this area to
support our efforts in this
county, uh, for the tribal
members and every citizen in the
area, uh, as everyone is very
aware, it's, it's been a
devastating process and uh.
But we have faith moving
forward.
That we can all come out on the
other side of this together and
we've been working together, uh,
the president of the tribe
myself, the county manager, the
mayor, uh, we've created a task
force here.
To communicate with each other
so that we all know what
direction we're trying to go and
pull together.
So it's, it's been a task, I
have to commend our commissioner
Mark Fisher, for putting that
committee together to get us all
pointed in the same direction.
So with that, I'd like to start
out with a little history at
Riodosa Downs, Riodosa first
started in 1946.
In 1959, the All-American
fratuarity was created and ran
for the first time, and it
continues to this day to be the
greatest quarter horse race in
the world.
Riodosa Downs is the home of the
Triple Crown.
The Triple Crown series of
quarter horse racing, the
Riodoso Rainbow, and the
all-American.
We are the Kentucky Derby of the
quarter horse industry here in
Lincoln County.
In this area
Riodoso has an annual payroll of
5.5 million and during the peak
of the season we employ over 500
people.
An additional 500 people are
employed in our barn area,
including such as our trainers.
Veterinarians farriers, exercise
riders, grooms, and numerous
others.
Every year at Riodosa Downs
creating a new market for the
quarter horse industry by
crowning the winner of our
Triple Crown.
Creates a new breeding prospect.
The closure of the track due to
the catastrophic events not only
affect our community.
And our village in our county,
our state, but it also impacts
other states such as California,
Oklahoma, Louisiana.
In Texas.
The breeding farms in those
areas rely on Rio Dosa Downs
racetrack.
Because of the product that we
sell on an annual basis.
All American sale company has
set records for the last 2 years
and we recently set another
record just this past weekend
selling New Mexico bread, horses
at our sale.
Some of the investments that are
made by
our breeders in this state are
astronomical. MJ Farms.
They are our largest consigner
at our sales. We sold over 5.7
million.
In New Mexico bred horses and we
were up 36%.
This year alone.
That shows the faith that the
industry has in Riodoso Downs
for us to keep driving forward.
We're here today to ask you guys
for support and assisting and
maintaining this product in this
county.
The tribes, we need your help.
Our economic engine of the
racetrack has had a substantial
impact not only on the track
itself, but the president and I
talked the other day, and I
believe you said 35%.
is currently they're down.
So
We need to sustain the product.
Not only for the near future,
but forever.
The National Resources and
Conservation Service has known
that we, we have a problem at
the Rio Dosa Downs racetrack.
The river that runs through the
middle of our infield.
Has also the main sewer line for
the village of Riodoso running
through our field.
We've asked for assistance
numerous times with the river
river and culverts have not been
maintained to any degree over
the years.
Last year, the NRCS claimed
stilt 200 ft east and west of
what we commonly call our twin
culverts on the west end of our
racetrack, which I'm sure you
guys will see today.
Only to silk back in and block
the culverts again within 10
days.
With that being said, we had to
be prepared at the racetrack
regardless of the 3 burn scars
that we had for flood
mitigation.
So we had equipment already
staged prior to the floods.
In order to keep the economic
engine running.
Beaver's Construction Company
and Tenor Ars Construction
Company had their equipment
there, thank goodness.
So when the floods came, we
didn't receive one drop of water
at that race track in the rain.
But the floods came and we were
managing flood and debris. We
managed flood and debris for
over 3 weeks.
We were the head gate.
To keep the sewer lines intact
to keep an escape route intact
and to maintain the sewer
treatment plant.
So we had to fight that for 3
weeks there while everybody was
getting in place.
Due to the burns and the floods
that we have.
We're asking for your support
and we need to
Maintain this vital economic
engine, but we need to get going
and we need to get going now.
The grocery seat tax that that
racetrack pays on an average for
an annual basis around 720,000.
We pay around $1.6 million in
gaming tax and another 1.3
million.
And purse monies.
To our owners and trainers.
Our bridge has been out, which
has stopped us from operating
for about 25 days.
And we're asking, we know that
nobody has the exact answer yet.
But we need you guys' support in
this place.
Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, who wants to go
next?
I'm sorry.
You done, Rick?
OK
Good morning. I want to thank
the legislative Finance
Committee for coming to the
Mescaller Apache reservation in
Lincoln County for this meeting.
It's really greatly appreciated
with the recent fires and floods
we have been going through for
the past 2 months. I must say we
have all been through a lot.
Many people have lost their
homes and all that they own and
many of these things can never
be replaced.
But we are still here and we are
still standing strong.
We must remember in the midst of
every crisis lies great
opportunity. And right now we
have an opportunity to build
back with respect for the river
and with the understanding that
every canyon drainage here is an
intermittent stream, the old
folks here knew the forest, the
rivers, and this land, and they
had seen fire and floods and
they knew where to build their
homes.
These forests were very open.
We had cooler surface fires that
moved about the landscape
keeping everything healthy and
in balance each creature played
its role in the ecosystem,
including the people.
As we live in this landscape, we
must allow the river to have its
space and understand that
floodplains are hydrologically
important and ecologically
productive areas.
These mountains are very steep
and very rugged.
Everything in these mountains is
rough.
That is the nature of this
landscape and the people that
call this place home.
We are all here living together
in this amazingly beautiful
place, but we too must learn to
coexist here, to work together
towards a better future.
When people go through crisis
together, they learn what is
most important and from this
crisis.
I have learned that all our
communities here in the
Sacramento Mountains depend on
one another for our livelihoods.
Our children grow up together
and we have forged long-standing
relationships and together we
will pull through this even
stronger than before.
We now have an opportunity to
build a more resilient community
by allowing the floodplain
ecosystem to function by
recognizing that our economies
are built upon the natural
resources of these mountains and
by acknowledging that our
communities are dependent on one
another for long-term growth.
We need to move forward as
partners for change. And in
these next few months, I am
really looking forward to
working together with these
partners here at the table to
restore our economies, that is
number one.
But also one of the things I
would like to focus on, you
know, once we get the economy
kind of in a good place, I would
like to focus on restoring our
forests around here. I don't
want to see these things happen
over and over and over, and I am
willing to do what we must do in
Mescalero on the reservation to
help make this a safer place to
live.
Thank you all very much.
Good morning. Mayor Crawford
here. Thank you so much for the
legislative session, holding it
here in our community because,
uh, as you drive into the
community, it may look like all
is perfect and well as usual,
but as you're going to see later
today, there is a ton of
devastation just over the ridge
and from certain vantage points,
it looks like it's hopeless. And
so we appreciate you being here
to see what we're working with
today. Uh, also, I wanna thank
you, and I've seen several of
you in our community.
Not just working on legislation,
the ideas, seeing the needs that
we have that actually throwing
in your back and helping us move
things, coming up with ideas,
helping us inspect in the early
on hours when we didn't know if
our bridges or culverts were
going to hold if they were going
to be breached. We had several
of you that went out and take,
took a look and sent his photos,
and we appreciate that and you
know who you are and, and so it
was really nice to see when you
guys come to town that you
really care about the people
that you represent, not just
In your district because some of
you, this wasn't your district,
but we're all New Mexicans and
so we appreciate that outreach
that you have. I want to echo
what, uh, uh, Mr. Ball said.
And also what President Padilla,
here we have two of our biggest
economic drivers in the whole
county right here at your table.
Um, and here we've lost the
track for a few days and you're
going to see the economic
impact. I know we're already
feeling it and hopefully our GRT
report will be in any day, and
then we'll have something
substantial to show you. I fear
next month's will be even worse.
So we're gonna have to look at
what is that impact do to us in
the 50 to indirect.
Uh, revenue that we've seen off
of this on economic studies
because we've identified years
ago that the track is an
industry cluster. It's just not
racing horses, people betting on
it, going to the casino is the
trainers, it's the feed for over
1000 horses, uh, you know, the
employees that you have out
there, over 1000 in full
disclosure, I work out at the
racetrack for the, uh, a private
club called the Jockey Club
Rudosa Jockey Club.
So, I have firsthand experience
in seeing what that place can do
for the community. Now then,
We were in a meeting with
President Padilla and others
where it was noted that, um, Ski
Run Road was out of business.
And that it was looking like it
was going to be December 31st.
Before we could get the road
back open. So not only would we
lose one of our major industries
but possibly too. And I want to
thank you guys, DLT Ricky Serna,
Secretary Cerna, for getting up
there, starting to work on that
road, those bridges, those
culverts to get that open. So we
don't miss all of our winter
business because folks, we have
not only a fire tragedy with
over 900 homes lost, that's not
counting out buildings.
With over 258 plus homes lost to
flood now.
OK. So it's adding up, we don't
want to add a financial tragedy
to that too, and we're already
experiencing that in some
fashion. We have local
businesses that need some sort
of respite that needs some sort
of income replacement. And I
know we've all come through
COVID, the American Recovery
Act, PPP, all of these things.
Uh, so it's not going to be that
I understand and I know we're
not in that place anymore, but
if the focus that you've given
us today and the ones that
you've given us in the past,
you'll see that it's sincere,
that we need to maintain our
revenue for our businesses
because they are the backbone of
our community. Now, the village
itself, we make our money as you
well know, off a GRT.
And so many of the businesses
that I speak to today and, and
over the last 22 months.
The revenues are off over 70% in
just an average. Some experience
much greater, some less.
So that is going to be a direct
effect on the village of Rio. So
being able to maintain strength
and to be here for our community
so that we can provide the
necessary things for the health,
safety and welfare of our
community. So those are things I
want you to take into
consideration that we are going
to need help.
And I don't know what that is.
You guys are a lot smarter than
that, uh, smarter than I am, and
I can tell you that just what
you guys did in the special
session was really appreciated
and somewhat of a miracle
because I didn't think it could
happen that fast. But you guys
pulled together and supported a,
in a bipartisan manner, and we
appreciate that so much because
the whole community is going to
be building back quicker than it
ever has before. So we have a
chance to make good Osso in
Lincoln County 2.
know better and stronger, but we
have to have hope.
OK. And we all know where our
hope lies.
I don't want to make that
confusion, but we're counting on
you to help us. We're here at
your disposal, whatever you need
from us, information, legwork,
it does not matter. We're here
for that, but our people deserve
the best that we can possibly
give them, and that's what we
expect from you because that's
what we expect from ourselves.
So we appreciate that, uh, what
you've done and, uh, I know that
one thing in the future just as
President Padilla had mentioned,
if we could talk about
legislation on how do we stop
these
Problems from becoming
catastrophic. Can we talk about
forest management, finning. I
know we've reached out to our
congressional representatives,
uh, Senator Heinrich assures us
that he's on the same page. I'm
excited that Laura, uh, our
state foresters here and to hear
what her comments are on these,
on these, uh, items as well. So
we appreciate everything that
you've done. You're in a tough
position. I know that we
supposedly have a lot of money,
uh, in the state, but there's
never going to be enough money.
This we develop a response to
these kind of catastrophes
because as one of you said
earlier, it's gonna happen in
another community before long.
So we need to figure out what do
we have to do? Do we have an
emergency task force is set up
at the state with funding that
can respond quickly because
responding quickly is the best
medicine.
For our people
So anyway, I'm not gonna take up
any more time, but we appreciate
you. We hope that we can work
together to fix the broken or
inefficient systems, which is
the federal government.
OK. NRCS was mentioned earlier,
FEMA is another one. If you want
to see a red tape and
bureaucracy. Join me later today
and the rest of the, the next
for the next 3 to 5 years
because it is mine numbing.
And everybody has the same
intention.
We all say
When we're sitting around the
table at the emergency operation
center. The goals are the same.
But the effectiveness.
We can't run a business that
way. We would be out of
business. And I know the
intention of the 100 million,
uh, that this legislative body,
uh, passed, was intended to be
very quick, but just because of
the way systems are, and I
understand them, fraud, waste,
and abuse. We all are aware of
that. It becomes ineffective and
then it creates false hope for
some folks. But I appreciate
what you've done. We've been in
conversations with DFA and I'm
gonna tell you what, you, the
state, uh,
Homeland Security, I saw Ali
here earlier. General Aguilar,
you guys have been amazing. You
have been the rock that we've
been having to lean on to work
through the bureaucracy that we
have ahead of us. So thank you
very much.
Just before we go to the next
one behind tab A is Rios those
uh.
And uh Lincoln County in the
village of Riodoso's financial
stuff.
Good morning and uh again, I
want to welcome all of you.
Thank you very much for coming.
It shows a level of commitment
and concern that uh
Quite frankly, makes me warms my
heart. I want to reiterate a
couple of things in the county,
about 938 houses were burned.
We think about 1/3 of those are
primary residences.
Uh, obviously the others are
not.
Uh, and perhaps about 220, 250
homes, uh, currently destroyed
or heavily damaged, not livable
because of the ongoing floods
from the burn scars. So think
about that as a county, what
that does for your property tax
revenues which the county
Depends on
For schools, for services,
things that we really do for the
community at large.
Uh, that's one piece.
The other is this economic
driver that we've talked about
which which is Riodoso and and
the communities that surround
it.
For instance, the district that
I represent, uh, is very rural.
But because of that, they send
many of their sons and daughters
to go to Riodoso to work.
That income is critical to keep
those little truck farms, I'll
call them for lack of a better
word, they're, they're really
legacy farms in the Hondo
Valley. Uh, a lot of those have
been hurt because of these
floods, because of all the
debris that's come through the
asses.
And there's the ses have been
heavily damaged, if not
destroyed, and will require
significant monies to bring them
back to life.
Finally, I want to mention this.
Uh, if you talk to the small
business owners around the
county, particularly in around
the urban interface.
They're talking 50, 60, 70, 80%
loss in sales in the last couple
of months. And this is really
their their time where they, you
know, they get into the black
for the rest of the year. Those
are gone.
Those jobs are gone. We've had
multiple businesses closed, even
outside of, of the Riodoso Downs
and, and village.
Finally, one other thing I want
to reiterate, the very eloquent
description and, uh, discussion
that President Padilla said with
respect to our forces.
This is a disaster that was
human caused.
Do you hear what I said?
Human cost.
We used to have a thriving.
logging industry in this area.
And we didn't clear cut because
you don't do that if you want to
have a next year.
In other words, the stewards of
the land.
The people that live on it and
make their living off the land
are the ones who are the
conservationists.
So smart logging.
Smart grazing reduces the
intensity of these fires so that
our firefighters
can actually put them out and
contain them.
I saw fires up in the Alto
region, uh, during the height of
them that were going a mile down
range and topping. Do you know
what topping is where they go
from the roof, they go from the
roof of the forest, one place to
another. It's not a ground fire.
And you'll see, if you haven't
seen them already, you'll see
moonscapes out there in that
region.
That's not management.
So I asked for your help and
re-establishing the logging
industry in this area, making it
legal for us to do that. That's
jobs, that's production.
And it's conservation.
So we don't have to go through
this again. Thank you very much
for your support.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Members
of the committee.
Um, my name is Ryan Trosper. I
have the honor of being the
president of ENMU Riodoso, um,
typically when I see you all on
that president in the back of
the room in December at a
meeting that gets to raise his
hand that I'm in the room. So,
um, uh, it's nice to be, uh,
with esteemed colleagues here at
the table today. One of the
things that I hope that you see,
um, that is very true of our
community when you go and tour
it this afternoon, you're going
to see resiliency.
And one of the things you'll
already see at this table is
local commitment that wants to
work together to figure this
out.
And that started day one, when I
was, uh, being evacuated and
wasn't in my home. I had a call
and it was the uh tribal council
on the other line checking on me
and checking on the college. It
was the mayor of this community,
Mayor Crawford, again doing the
same thing and the county
commissioners, and they're not
doing those things because
they're elected officials were
doing that because we're friends
of each other and we equally
care about our
Communities
And so, you know, as we start to
think about first resiliency, so
it starts with thank yous and
first of all, thank you for the
work that you did during the
special session as the mayor
talked about as that starts to
help our community and I also
would be amiss if I didn't thank
all the people behind me in this
room because every day they're
the ones checking the weather,
checking the flood status,
giving our businesses the
opportunity to survive and
thrive.
And so there's numerous people
there that have already been
helpful, not only, um, from you,
Mr. Chair, um, having people
like Adrian in the community
last week to get a pulse on our
community as well as the
executive and the secretary of
Higher Education reached out to
me. All of those people, this is
a relational state, and those
relationships must continue to
happen, not only for Riodoso,
Riodoso Downs, Lincoln County,
and Mescalero to thrive, but for
our whole state to thrive.
And so the first thing that we
need to talk about is resiliency
moving forward, and we know that
this event was unprecedented,
but unprecedented doesn't mean
unfixable.
And so that's the part that I
hope that you see this week and
into the future is how do we
work together to fix this crisis
to make our communities
stronger.
The second thing, which I know
is a broken record, but it's
true is economic development.
Uh, the members, uh, next to me
that were at the college last
week that started to work with
that task force that has to keep
going so that we can figure out
um locally how to help ourselves
and also work with you to help
us as well.
And what I mean by academic
development, it doesn't mean
extra duties on all of us. It
means help figuring out people
and all that can come to our
community and help us because
we're all taxed.
To our brink with everything we
do every day, and if you add an
extra extra duty, that's gonna
be an issue, um.
And then finally, you know,
things that I would, would say
is infrastructure, which you
know.
And infrastructure means helping
our community now and then again
helping our community in the
next 6 months.
And the thing that I would,
would close with is I'm very
proud to be the president here
and also thankful for the
resiliency of our students. We
had a summer semester in which
we closed for two weeks. And
when you do that, you expect
students to leave.
And what you'll see is that in
that time, we only had 7
students, I believe, leave and
we finished our summer semester
10% up compared to the summer
before, and we're still trending
on a good direction for this
fall, and I think that really
speaks to the resiliency of not
only the students, but also to
the broader community. And so
again, thank you for being here
today at the end of the mountain
gods. Uh, thank you to President
Padilla and tribal leaders for
hosting us on.
On your lands, and again,
excited for you to see our
community and I'm hopeful to get
to work here in the next few
months. So thank you again.
Mr. Chairman, committee members,
uh, I have the blessing of being
the last one to go. Pretty much
everybody else has hit it hard.
I want to welcome you to our
home. It's also your home. This
is New Mexico. I want to thank
you.
For all the support from all of
your districts, when you're
going through a disaster and you
see fire trucks and staff from
just about every map dot in New
Mexico showing up, uh, when your
people are tapped out, uh, makes
you feel real good. You're not
going through this alone. I'm
asking for that to continue.
Uh, today you're going to be
touring the damaged areas?
Um, there's time for mourning
the loss. It'll be very
striking. I'm asking you to put
the.
Your energy and to visioning
what can be and what can come
out of this, OK? We can't go
back.
Uh, between the fires and the
flood, it's taken away those
options. We're not going back to
what was.
we can go forward to something
that is much better, uh,
Wiser management.
Maybe we can set the stage for
proper forest management across
the country right now, if you
look across the western states,
the Rockies, all the way to the
West Coast. We are caught in
Einstein's definition of
insanity doing the same thing
over and over again expecting a
different outcome.
I live in what is called a
firewise community with
expectations that I have
defensible space.
I'm asking that the same thought
process be applied to
communities in the forest.
In the Rockies.
Um,
Why can't communities, why can't
the tribal properties
Have defensible space. Why can't
we be sensible instead of
watching our western forest burn
and then
The
I researched over 120 years.
Records
Of Lincoln County as far as the
fires and the floods.
And there's never been anything
like this. We've always had
fire. It was actually a tool.
Now because we've stopped the
natural processes.
We're playing by rules set in
other places by people that
don't understand the Western
force. We're losing our
watershed.
When you lose a watershed, you
lose the ecosystem, the topsoil,
you will never see these
forests, not in any of our
lifetimes, return to what they
were before these fires.
OK.
So it can be a turning point.
There will be more fires.
In more places, more
Towns and cities will go through
this heartbreak.
Uh, and until we wake up and
realize it's different. What we
were doing is not working.
We need to look back at what did
work, OK.
Um,
I'm the county manager. I can
tell you I've been in my
position for 2 months and 2
weeks I've been through 3 major
fires, 10 major floods and one
mass evacuation, um.
None of it was something I was
expecting or enjoyed.
I'll
But I will tell you that I saw
the cohesiveness of New Mexicans
pulled together to support the
county, the village, the tribe.
We had help coming from
Every corner of New Mexico. That
means a lot.
I'm asking for that to continue.
And helping us develop a new
future.
Help us to take
And make lemonade out of the
lemons we've been handed.
There's a huge learning
opportunity here, uh, my
partners and I, we welcome you
to our home.
We want you to see what we've
been through. We want you to
engage your minds in helping us
craft a new and better future.
Thank you.
Thank you. We'll go to questions
from committee members, uh,
So just remind ourselves we're
there's a rather large gathering
today. If you're a member of the
committee, uh, you'll get a
priority if you're an advisory
member
other than representing Harland
who's his district, um, we're
gonna
Prioritize those in that way and
try to stay on time. Uh, Senator
Campos, your first.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman. My question goes to
Mr. Rigba, the general manager
of Riodoso Downs, and I want to
get down to the, the crux of
what we're dealing with and
that's going to be the economy.
As we deal with the forest with
floods, with fires, with the
kind of things that are
affecting, uh, life around us,
uh, we also Downs definitely has
been, uh, a mainstay here for
the economy of not only this
area, but the state.
So, so my question really
begins.
What has been done so that you
can.
Get on the right track quickly.
And I realized that a lot of
these races now have gone to the
downs there in Santa Fe. I mean,
Albuquerque, but in dealing with
it, how quickly can we get
things restored here because I
keep hearing from all of you and
we, we're dealing with the same
thing there in northeastern New
Mexico.
How do we instantaneously get
back on track and people say,
well, it's gonna go and take
some time.
We definitely need to go ahead
and get back on track. So if I
can start with just a couple of
uh questions and brevity, Mr.
Chair, in terms of what is being
done to uh stimulate the economy
and to get the Riodoso Downs
back to where it needs to be and
what can we do to help?
I have to rely on my engineer
friend here.
Uh, by looking at the culverts
that are currently existing
today, um.
I'm being told.
That whether it be concrete
spans are an actual bridge
itself that the structures can
be put back in within 5 weeks of
each one if we get going. Uh,
the hydrologist and engineers
for Homeland Security, Jeremy
Class, um.
is looking at this, so that's
kind of where we're at right
now, um, there are also uh
debris removal, uh, is just
basically getting started in
Upper Canyon as well and down at
the racetrack and, and everybody
is assessing along the way of
the river, uh, because it's
we've got to stop the debris
from coming so that it doesn't
tear out what we put back. So
we're looking for
sustainability.
Uh, as far as the economic
portion of it.
We looked at for convenience for
our clients and our trainers and
owners.
To have the sales at Tingley
Coliseum in Albuquerque.
Um, number one, we could not
make that work because the
volume of horses that we sell.
So with Mr. Trotter, our owner
of Rio sedans, he was there, uh,
we thought it'd be best to bring
it back to uh Riodo, so Riodos
Downs and to number one, to help
with the economy.
And number 2, to bring our
customers back to a situation
that they're they're comfortable
with, um, I mean, for the
magnitude of horses that we
sell, uh, we've set sale
records, we've sold year before
last a horse for 880,000 Last
year, we sold a horse for
$10,000,000 so we're not just
dealing with, you know, the
average equine athlete, we have
the best of the best again, so
we wanted them to be back here.
And have them comfortable in
their surroundings and safe in
their surroundings and, and it
did, we saw a boost to the
economy last weekend.
Uh, hotel rooms filled back up,
the restaurants had customers,
but now this weekend we're,
we're kind of dead again, but,
but moving forward.
Uh, Rio Dosa Downs is a direct
impact of $600 million.
And an indirect impact of 60
million. So a total economic
impact for Lincoln County of
$120 million.
We've got a task and we're
accepting that task. We've taken
on something that we really
didn't want, but it's here and
we're going to be back with the
help of my partners here at this
table, Homeland Security.
So that we can get Riodosa back
on track.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I know
that there can be other
questions. I'm gonna go ahead
and do for the rest of my time
to the other members, uh, but to
move forward, the whole key is
how are we going to deal with
the the economy.
How are we gonna bring back, if
you will, the commerce that uh
was uh thriving here within this
area and then from there as we
move forward, how can we as a
state and of course the private
sector continue to go and
support.
Uh, the rebuilding of those
areas of this community of this
region that definitely need to
be uh be addressed and we could
talk about bridges and roads and
forest and uh water and floods
and the fires cause we're all
dealing with it now in the
state, various corners, but the
whole key is we need to get back
on track as soon as possible and
no pun intended. Thank you very
much. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee and presenters, I
just wanted to give you a real
quick timeline of what I've,
I've got to see so that you
really understand the full
impact. Uh, we had a a major
fire here that, uh, was
devastating. Then we have a
major flood that is devastating
and I'm sitting here looking at
our leadership through our
counties and our municipalities
and our tribes, and
And we have the best of the
best.
And they've made a lot of our
emergency a lot better than it
normally would be.
I personally watched, um.
I'll just start with the
village.
I watched their workers, their
leadership.
Tirelessly work over and over
and over and over for for months
and they're tired.
And they, they still get up and
they still go and try to get it
done.
I watched the Riddles and Downs
racetrack, do everything that
they possibly could.
More than they possibly could. I
would drive by the racetrack and
I would see it midnight, the,
the lights are out there and the
excavators are going and they're
trying to pull debris out of the
river, trying to keep that
driver going in Ridoso and then
I see the county and uh poor
manager camp right here. This
guy, he didn't even get a
honeymoon period in his new job
that he took with the county,
but I knew that he had the
capacity.
To handle it because I've worked
several emergencies with him in
the village of Ridoso and he
went straight to work and there
was no learning curve. He just
jumped in there and went to
work. And they have a great
commission.
Our leadership goes to work. Um,
I, I.
I don't know how many, how much
time I've spent with President
Padilla and everybody was busy
as bees making this happen.
And I look at.
How strategic this is, you have
your race track, the economic
driver that's driving 100 and
$120 million to our economy.
And I wondered how that would
how that looked in, in our uh
midtown area and a lot of our
business district. So I went and
started asking them.
And one of them was our local,
and I know they wouldn't mind if
I said it, so our local uh
cleaners.
That press his pants and and
wash his shirts and stuff.
And I said, what, what's the
racetrack gonna do to you? And
they said that's 50% of our
business and it's gone.
And you see the worry in their
eye.
And it's, it, it just gets into
your guts and when you lay down
at night, you're wondering how.
Can we
And I've reached out to several,
matter of fact, the majority of
you.
And the other y'all reached out
to me.
And I know that everybody's hard
at work trying to make Lincoln
and Otero County whole again.
Then we haven't even talked
about Foxworth Galbraith, our,
our local lumberyard is
destroyed.
That's where all of our, our
building materials come out of
all, all of it.
And um I'm gonna show you that
today whenever we go on our,
our um tour.
And
No money
They're not selling anything out
of there right now. They're
just, they're still cleaning up,
they're still in crisis mode.
Every time I think.
That these presenters right here
are gonna get a break.
And they get, they get to come
out of crisis mode.
And start working on economy and
stuff like that. They get
knocked back down and we get a
rain and I wanna say you, you
guys are getting really good at
cleaning stuff up.
I thought, I know you can clean
stuff up, but now you know
exactly how to do it.
So I commend you for that. Then,
Whenever we talk about ski
Apache.
So the racetrack is an icon of
Lincoln County, Sch Apache is an
icon of Lincoln County. And
then, you know, President
Padilla and I was talking about
um, you know, the road up there
and it wasn't gonna be put back.
Possibly until December 31st.
Well, that's, that's not
acceptable.
So just through and there was no
resistance but just through some
talks yesterday.
We all took a tour up to Ski
Apache and DOT is gonna go to
work on that and start working
on it to get that economic
driver going again.
So
I don't even know which one of
you to ask.
But the thing that's so
frustrating to me is we got a
lot of things going, but to the
panel.
Or even to the chair.
How do we get through the red
tape?
How do we get through the red
tape where we can get things
going right now today, and I
feel like we're hurrying up and
waiting on every single.
Um, federal and state agency
because there's so much red tape
involved.
And the bad part about it is.
Um, I know that, uh, Mayor
Crawford.
And manager camp?
Whenever we go to to uh
meetings, I tell people ease up.
There's a lot of people, you got
85 to 90%.
That are bragging on you about
what you've done.
But there's always that 10% that
punch you right in the belly.
And every time we go out there
and we start working, somebody
wants to punch you in the belly
and to have something to gripe
about.
Why
It, it, the, the griping ought
to go to the people with the red
tape.
And I think that they ought to
be front and center. They ought
to be the ones getting their
rear ends chewed out and not our
leadership.
So my question is, how do we get
through the red tape? How does
this committee get us through
the red tape?
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Well, we invited FEMA, but they
were told not to come.
So there's the red tape in my
opinion. Thank you, Senator
Woods.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I agree about the red tape when
this hit.
In the more Los uh
Las Vegas area. It was the same
story.
We're gonna pay, we're gonna
pay, we're gonna pay, and then.
When you talk to FEMA, they,
they.
You know,
I assure you we're doing
everything just as fast as we
can and it's never fast enough.
And you guys need money
immediately your, your, your
economic drivers down,
everything's down. You, you
need, you know, people are
afraid to come to Rio Dosa right
now. People are afraid to drive
by the town. I've had people
tell me, oh, we're gonna go a
different direction. We're not
going to go by Riodosa.
They're afraid you can't even
get through here on the road.
How crazy is that?
We, uh, I'm looking forward to
the, the tour because
It is a, uh, I will be able to
spread the word.
Through my eyes on what I see
and and where the help might
need to be taken and I know
y'all very well know where the
needs are. Um,
I, I know the
Eastern New Mexico University
down here is, is wanting to
start a program, uh, a rodeo
program.
Help attract students in here,
uh, many, many of the, uh,
A Mascaleros, many of the
different tribes, they, they
love the rodeo.
They, they, they love the
opportunity.
And if we can get a a good rodeo
coach in here. I guarantee you
you will increase the population
on that school.
It will help with bringing
students in and it's just like
any other sports program, you
need
You need something to draw
people to bring them in.
And it's, it's, it can be an
economic driver also.
But back to, to the
The bureaucracy, the red tape.
We constantly
Constantly put strings on state
money.
The strings on federal money,
and that's the exact red tape
you're talking about.
We are so afraid that someone's
going to get off with money and,
and not, not jump through the
right hoop.
And sometimes those are just
damn sure impossible. We, we, we
say, oh we got all this grant
money.
Damn, is anybody in here ever
wrote one of those grants?
It's, it's, it's not easy to do.
Uh, we were talking yesterday
and, and transportation
committee about some of those
federal transportation grants
taken $200,000 just to write the
grant, do the studies to do the
grants.
And then you're not, you don't
know whether you're gonna get
the damn ground or not.
So how, how is that?
Cost effective for you guys. How
much money can you afford to, to
put in studies and different
things to, to qualify for those
grants.
We've got an, in an emergency
like this, and I still say it's
an emergency we need to, to
loosen that.
That strings up somehow.
Uh, I would be interested in
getting with any of y'all and
let me know.
What's the big bind? Where,
where's a big
Where's a big restraint? Where's
the constructed.
Constriction there. So anything
you can help me with there, I'd
appreciate. Contractors.
We're, we're short of
contractors across the state to,
to do anything.
Um, NRCS.
That whole deal, you know, we,
we need to talk to the federal
representatives and, and see if
we can get some help there. So,
Maybe, maybe after this is over.
Mr. Chair, we could write a
letter after we see the what we
might do with the NRCS for
service, whatever, maybe we can
write a letter from the.
From the committee and push a
little on them to see if we can
possibly get up in those
mountains and, and do a little.
Diversion dams and different
things to help you with your
flooding areas.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Maybe we
can have the sheriff arrest him
for not doing their job.
Thank you. Uh, Senator Burt.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair, and
thank you all for being here,
um, I first want to say, Mr.
Chair, that I, I
Yeah
It is amazing to me, the people
you see sitting here and all the
folks that work with them.
This has been 24/7 3 365.
I mean, this is been there.
They eat, sleep and drink this
issue.
And uh.
I talked to the mayor, uh, the
other evening, and he says, uh,
I promised my wife I would spend
a day with her or something like
that cause uh uh that hasn't, he
hasn't had that opportunity.
Um, we have here.
The the people to make this
happen, we have the ability to
Bring this community back
together. We have
The people behind them to do
that. We, we know who to
contract. We have all the parts
in place, but we don't have the
money, the financing, and
Um, representing Vincent and I
had a bill that unfortunately
didn't get heard during the
special session where we could
have expedited that if FEMA
would just at least send to us a
an amount.
of what they are committing to.
Uh, Lincoln County,
Ala Ridoso and and Ridoso Downs
and wherever else, what other
entity we need to.
The state would have immediately
released that amount of funds,
uh, as it was needed to come
here and then when the check
shows up,
That would be replaced up there.
There's no 10%. There's no
copays, there's, there's
nothing. It was just a $1 for
dollar swap, but it, it
expedited the money release into
this community. Uh, we didn't
get a chance to do that
unfortunately. That's the, the
issue that, I mean, we, we can
talk about all this stuff. GRT
insurance, is anybody gonna be
able to afford insurance here
after all of this?
I mean, this is, I, I keep using
the term devastation, and that's
exactly what it is. It is on so
many levels, um,
The contract outside folks to
come in.
And the people who live here who
know how to get work done in a
quick fashion and oftentimes
cheaper than contractors don't
get a chance. They don't get a
chance.
To contract or subcontract on,
on these big contracts that are
let to clean up or whatever the
case may be.
So we can talk about that all
day long, but the bottom line is
money.
Money, money, we've got to
figure out how we can get money,
have it released into the hands
of this community so they can
start rebuilding, um.
Because they can help
themselves.
Uh, by rebuilding the GRT by
rebuilding the track, and making
sure the road to the, to the ski
resort is, is, is finished in a
timely fashion so we don't miss
a season. I mean, there's so
many things that can be done,
but it still comes down to
federal release of dollars and
I, I, I just don't know unless
we apply pressure from a state
point of view from the state
level to our federal delegation
and the FEMA, how we get those,
those, those monies released any
time soon, um.
We can do grants, we can, we
can, the, the state can help and
I, I quite frankly, I, I'm
hoping that in January in the
session, there will be a large
supplemental, uh, for this area.
Um, to help them move down the
road. We've done that in other
places around the state and I
expect the state to, uh, do the
same amount, if not more, so for
this area down here. So I'm
hoping that we can get that
done, but we need all hands on
board now to, uh, get, get FEMA
and other state or federal
agencies to release those funds
so we can go back to work.
And put us back together and
correct the GRTs, uh, figure out
what we can do to, to, to
protect our communities, uh,
maybe a quarter mile buffer
around the communities where
the, the local community has the
ability to say what they're
going to do and not to do with
that. Uh, there's just so many
things we can do, but we don't
do this again, we we're reacting
instead of being proactive to
get it done before it happens.
So I'm hoping, um, Mr. Chair,
that this
Committee will go to the state
proper and be able to apply a
proper pressure with our federal
delegation and through our
governor to get these funds
moving quickly so that we can
rebuild this community that
As you can hear, so desperately
needs it. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Garcia.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh
thank you for the presentation.
Uh, I'm glad you people are
working together that's the most
important thing of succeeding,
you know, uh, I've been
listening to the conversations.
And uh
You know, when the Hermit
Spitfire happened.
The government gave him $4
billion to uh bring it back up
and the the bureaucracy and the
red tape, there's still $3
billion sitting there and what's
really bothering me that they
have a deadline of November 14th
to use that money and it's not
gonna happen.
And I hope it doesn't happen
here in Riodoso.
Because that's the way it's
going right now, you know, uh,
like the gentleman always said
about uh uh Homeland Security
there or FEMA. They do not step
up to the plate. They'll tell
you what you want to hear. At
the end of the day, it doesn't
happen.
And uh the gentleman here, the
first gentleman here had the
best comment of everybody on
there. We need to do prevention.
Cause you've had these fires
Henry Dos before.
You know, and, and it happened
what, 767 years ago, I think,
and now again, and if you guys
don't do prevention and not
necessarily you, it's the
Forestry Service or a private
lands of the city of Mexico, not
letting you do any logging and
stuff. We need to address those
issues because if not, uh, this
conversation is gonna be had
again.
Down the road 3 or 4 years from
now, we're gonna be doing the
same thing in this catastrophic
because the people are hurt are
the people out there right now.
And if we don't address these
issues, Mr. Chairman, of how to
stop it. It's gonna keep on
happening and you know it's
awful what happened here and uh
it's devastating, but the key to
success here is prevention and
you, you hit it right on, sir.
Cause you know, the, these
fires, uh, they have no mercy on
anybody, but if they don't have
nothing to burn, they can't,
they can't go that route. And
those are just comments that I'm
saying, Mr. Chairman, cause uh
You know, I drove through there
yesterday and, and it's pretty
sad what you do, what you see
out there, and we're just
looking from the outside in, you
know, the people that are living
here that are struggling every
day.
That's that's been hurting, you
know, this $100 million that we
gave to uh Riodo it doesn't get
tangled up on red tape.
Because you know, that's the way
everything happens anymore and
you know the and uh the reason
for that, there is a lot of
abuse. People take advantage of
things that they shouldn't be
doing and that stalled the
system out.
But we need to get past the red
tape and was determined with
that being said, the most
important part of this, we can't
stop, we can't prevent what
already happened. That's there,
but we can prevent it from
happening again, and we need to
work with the Forest Service and
and the state lands to let you
clear it out or log it or
whatever it needs to be done and
needs to get done. Thank you,
Mr. Sherman. Thank you.
Thank you. We're running a
little bit behind Representative
Armstrong, and then we're gonna
go to Center Padilla and
represent a small and then we'll
see where we're at.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh,
just real quick, I thank you for
your presentation. Uh, thank you
for your teamwork. It's, uh,
it's hard to get a team together
in a disaster, and so we
appreciate that so much. Um,
I wanted to talk a little bit
about what Mr. Fisher talked
about, about
Let's bring back our forest
management in a way that um
could utilize, uh, economic
development across the state.
Um, I'm from Catrin County, was
the largest logging industry in
the state, uh, until issues
happened. Well, we've learned
from those issues.
We've learned from them. Let us.
Open up the forest in larger
portions.
Uh, what happens, Mr. Chairman,
and I've, I've griped about this
for many years, is they don't
open up enough of the forest and
so all the people that do that
kind of work, which is economic
development and jobs for the
county, jobs for the city, jobs
for the people in the counties.
They don't open up enough of the
forest to be able to know where
their next job is coming from.
Let's open up bigger plots in
the forest so that we can thin
so that we can do some logging
in a way that we've learned to
do logging better.
Uh, let's, um.
Talk about the anti-donation
clause.
I mean, that's a big deal in the
state of New Mexico. It's a big
deal in a lot of states. But
guess what, we, we navigated
that during COVID.
We navigated that. So let's
navigate it again. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Senator Padilla. Uh,
thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you all for your
presentations, um.
You know, I, uh, was pretty
involved with the, the issues
happening up in northern New
Mexico during that fire, uh, Mr.
Chairman, and I had to write, I
wrote a bunch of letters and got
a bunch of people excited this,
that, blah blah blah, and when
it came down to it, it really
was a money exchange issue, as
you've heard from many of the
people, you know, sitting up
here with me in this area of the
room, um, and, and it all seemed
to point back to FEMA. And so,
uh, very quickly, I know that
we're running out of time share,
but I wanted to add, well, so
Of course, we did what we did in
this special session. I'm very
happy to support that and help
get that through the Senate, um,
And I think it's a great sort of
starting point, because then,
yeah, we need to come back in 25
once you know more and you can
give us more information on what
you're going to need at that
point. So, so states, you know,
kind of moving some money around
to make sure we're helping you.
I know what the governor showed
up with with a lot of cabinet
folk and they were able to make
a rapid response happen that
way. But when we look at FEMA,
my specific question to you is,
do you, have you had the
congressional delegation in the
community talking to you
directly because they're the
ones that are going to be able
to
To help open that door, those
doors to FEMA, and, and if not,
then, then, you know, FEMA is
going to have a really big
problem with them. I'm sorry,
congressional delegation is
gonna have a really big problem
with FEMA. So what do you, what
is the congressional delegation
doing to help you get the door
at FEMA open and money flowing
that way. Does anyone want to
comment on that?
Well, excuse me, I can tell you
that we have had
Um, several of them here in
town, through excuse me, 3 to be
exact. We, we talked to their
field representatives. We have
one here today.
Uh, they're in contact with this
constantly. We tell them the
needs that we have with FEMA,
exactly what we're talking
about, whether it's phase 3 or
phase 2 of FEMA before they do
reimbursements or approve them.
How do we get through debris
removal, all the headaches just
hauling away debris has been and
who's going to pay for that? So
they have been active. We just
haven't seen a whole lot of
response from FEMA. You know, I
know that, and we're told that
there's pressure being applied,
um, conversations being had.
And we, we've even had FEMA one
here, uh, Diana, I think is her
name, she actually showed up in
the community, took a tour, uh,
as did the congressional
delegates, so they see, have
seen the devastation and then
the promises of we're going to
get on this, we're going to make
it happen. On it be ending up in
just a ball of red tape.
So we, we haven't seen a lot. We
are starting to see some
movement.
Mr. Chairman, committee members,
one of the big problems with
FEMA is that it is a
reimbursement program, not a
disbursement program, and that
is killing us. There is not a
most of New Mexico couldn't
sustain that county or
municipality, because that means
you have to have the money on
the front end to to commit
actions to be able to hire
contractors, uh, we were very
fortunate in Lincoln County that
we were able to shift some of
our rainy day fund.
For a new courthouse, we
But
Uh, to be able to use that
money, but to be quite honest,
we're depleting it quite fast
with all this going on and
having to meet the FEMA
thresholds for reimbursement
right now can put us 6 months
down the road for
reimbursements, which means that
our current burn rate, uh, we
will be in the hole, so we just
need to be able to get it
either disbursement on the front
end when there's a disaster of
known quantity. I mean, we
We know this is $100 million
plus.
Uh
Uh, right now we're in
reimbursement world, which is 6
months plus in the FEMA world.
So that's where our trip up
lies, uh, the worst part with
the red tape is going forward
and not knowing whether or not
you're going to be reimbursed
for 6 months. I've been through
the process several times. I've
seen FEMA deobligate, uh, two
years into a project where the
project went forth in good faith
with the expectation that it
would be reimbursed only
I have, uh, it yanked.
Years down the road and said no,
we're not paying for that. So we
do have some issues there with
FEMA. We also have some issues
with DHSEM, uh, we have not, uh,
that we need to work on and
they're working, they've been
great partners and great
support, but the truth of the
matter is none of your
communities have the physical.
Wherewithal
To
To support a disaster.
To deal with FEMA, to deal with
the HSEM, to deal with the
regulatory agencies that are
involved. I deal with every
acronym known to man in the
federal government on a weekly
basis. I can't my big complaint
is I need him to speak.
English or even a bit of Spanish
but not speak an acronyms.
So that I can understand what
they're talking about, and they
all have a different acronym
book.
So that's, that gets to be a
real pain, but um again a little
wound up here, but a lot of my
time I've become a professional
meeting set with a different
agencies, but it goes back to
the trap of reimbursement versus
disbursement. We're depleting
our resources waiting for
disbursement that may or may not
come. That's where the money
that you were able to get for us
is a big help, but we need to be
able to access it faster. Sorry,
I went on.
A little too long there. Thank
you.
Thank you. Um, well, Mr.
Chairman, can they just respond
very quickly?
Yeah, I just want to add to that
in addition to waiting for FEMA
funds, we've all incurred a lot
of costs, emergency response
costs, debris removal, and so
forth. So yes, FEMA, it would be
nice if we could at least, you
know, get reimbursed perhaps for
the A and B parts, the the
debris removal and so forth. But
also NRCS is reimbursement
based. We, the tribe, have been
approved for a little more than
$21 million through NRCS.
We're wondering how are we going
to start everything, I mean,
like, like he said, it's, it's
a, it's a lot to absorb for
these.
Us, these small communities, you
know, we are.
How do we start? That's the
whole problem. Everything we're
going to be getting is
reimbursement based. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, if you don't mind,
I'll be very brief, very brief.
Two things I'm gonna provide
you, um, we've got a housing
problem.
We don't have enough housing. We
didn't have it before the fire,
and now we're down. You heard
the numbers, right? These people
that lived in those houses are
are workforce.
They don't have the money and
the wherewithal.
To stay here, they can't even
work because they've been laid
off. So two things we have
Lincoln County Community
Foundation, which is a 501c3.
They're helping greatly in
helping these immediate needs
for shelter. They could be used
as a means to vet and and funnel
money to help out these small
businesses get through the next
6 months, let's say, till the
the new time we can get
Businesses in here so we don't
lose that workforce. That's,
that's the economic piece that
you guys could do, grants to
that foundation vetted properly
so it's not misused. That's
number 1. #2, housing. You guys,
we don't have the fund housing
from a public standpoint, we
have, we have developers who
could bring modulars here almost
immediately and using
understanding
The ROI could be make them in a
in a way that are uh affordable
by most of our workers. The only
thing that's standing in the way
are interest rates.
If you could help out, help us
out in terms of reducing
interest, so these homes could
be made available on a rent to
own or
straight out mortgage, this
could work, so the two
components are housing for the
people that need it.
It's done privately, but with
some help from an interest
standpoint at 78, 10%, you can't
make it. And keeping the
businesses open through the year
till we get a, get a tourist
season back.
Thank you very much. OK, thank
you, Chair, and I won't ask
another question. I appreciate
all of the comments. I think
they were all very salient,
wonderful points, but I'll wrap
up with this, Mr. Chair. um, and
it's more of a comment. So in my
business when I have a real
problem, if there's not a
process owner, it turns into a
hot potato, and my observation
for what happened in northern
New Mexico when they were trying
to get money moving in that
area. So just, you know,
something for you to consider. I
would demand from the federal
delegation that a process owner.
Be identified in FEMA and the
various federal agencies you're
dealing with, but especially in
FEMA because if not, it's just
going to continue to be a hot
potato. You're going to submit
documents to one side, your
left, the left hand and the
right hand's going to say we
didn't get them. So I would
highly encourage you to identify
and we can help you with that
too, uh, a process owner, a
project manager, someone to
point to specifically, that
every day they're eating,
sleeping, and drinking. How do I
help get this thing done and
move on to the next issue that
we have to deal with. Thanks,
Chair.
Represent them small.
Thank you very, thank you very
much, Mr. Chair. Thank you all.
Actually, my question really
dovetails nicely with, uh,
Senator Padilla, um, Deputy
Secretary Rye is here with
Homeland Security for the state,
the part of the package that we
did in the special session was
$10,000 to DHSEM, uh, in large
part to help individuals,
businesses, communities,
navigate this federal process
and try to speed it up. Uh, have
you, uh,
If we
Yeah, one,
I'm assuming we haven't sort of
signed anything yet if folks
have, that'd be great. But
working with Homeland Security,
utilizing some of those funds to
sort of get under contract some
of the technical assistance and
guidance that's gonna be helpful
because you've all said it very
clearly, getting started is key,
and even though there's some
funds that are ready to go as
soon as FEMA approves and some
funds that are sooner getting
Started, particularly in the mid
when there's catastrophes that
continue to happen,
understandably very difficult.
It seems like that money to
DHSEM.
is one of the best ways to bring
on technical assistance
capacity, guidance, whatever it
is, how is that process going?
Has it sort of not gotten going
yet? Is it promising? Is there
still work to do? That's my
question. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
We've heard discussions on it,
but just real quickly, I haven't
seen anything from it yet. I
know that it's being spun up as
we discussed that, but again,
it's in the execution and we're
hopeful that it starts soon.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
We're running behind Senator
Rodriguez. She had. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. I just wanted to
elaborate a little bit on your
point, um, having to do with
workforce housing and just a
point of information quickly,
Mr. Chairman, is that this last
session, the legislature, and of
course finance committees, um,
worked avidly at providing
funding specifically for that
type of housing workforce
housing. We talk about
affordable housing go, but
there's a threshold there by
which a lot of people fall
through the cracks to be able
to.
affordable housing. Those that
don't meet a certain level of
income and just pass it by $1 or
$2 they fall off the, the
system. So what we did is we
approved $175 million just for
that. And, and I, I take it back
because we carved out 125
million of that specifically for
the workforce housing and
working together with a mortgage
finance authority, the New
Mexico Finance Authority are two
different agencies here are
working
Get the rules in place for the
eligibility criteria we just met
with um the more the New Mexico
Finance Authority director in
another committee, and we talked
about this and the rules are
pretty much in place. They just
need the final approval from
their board and, and then from
the committee, uh, that we have
during the interim, and they
should be able to proceed with
that. So I think, Mr. Chairman,
that is one area that we made a
big change this last session for
this type of housing then you
should.
be able to, to have something
from there and we have the MFA
here today also, the mortgage
Finance Authority to answer any
further questions individually
if you do have some. Thank you
very much, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you. We're about 30
minutes behind. I have two
people on the list. They're
gonna do a, a one minute
question Representative Bell,
we'll start with you and then
represent Penu Grew and you'll
have one minute.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much. This is just, I would like
to address the whole committee
right there. What I saw taking
place whenever all these fires
started, uh,
Was the help that you guys all
received from the surrounding
communities here you cannot
surpass that in the assistance
that came about and
Everything that did take place
was beyond your control. I get
that, but I do, my question is,
whenever we're talking about
restoring the economic growth
here in Rioso.
It's
There are the two industries
we've already discussed that the
racing industry and the snow and
skiing.
But then you also have golf as
well.
I was up here working quite a
bit whenever all those fires
were taking place and it was, I
was doing everything I could to
see where help was needed. Mayor
Crawford and the county people,
they were doing an excellent
job. Sometimes there was.
Lack of common sense as far as
the federal agencies went, and
I'll just put that out there
right now because that seems to
be the case, OK.
Mr. Chairman.
Yeah, we'll see.
Our watershed is in danger
because of these fires, because
of mismanagement of our forest.
We saw
Whenever the little bear fire
took place, those trees are
still on the ground because the
wind has finally broken them
off. We've seen the McBride fire
what it has done. We've seen the
devastation from the Salt pork
fire and the South Fork fire.
Then came the floods.
And Mr. Chairman, we have to get
our federal agencies.
From sitting on their thumbs and
get busy to help not just this
community that the fires that
are taking place throughout our
state, because what is coming
back now is cedars, scrub that
deplete our, our, uh,
Our water part of it, our water
sheds, um.
Whenever we have forests out
there that cannot sustain the
wildlife.
There's a problem there as well.
So, Mr. Chairman, I think it's
up to us as
The governing body that we say
you State Forest Service, let's
get active. Let's get some work
done. I know that we are going
to be hearing from them later
on.
Whenever we are saying all
American Ridoso Downs.
That's an economic driver right
there, Mr. Chairman, and what we
saw, and I have lots of videos
on my phone because I was there
every time, those rivers came
down and literally were wiping
out the track and I do have to
Applaud the effort of Mr.
Trotter and Mr. Baugh and their
help in getting that thing up
and running we helped with the
evacuation of horses, not once
but twice.
We understand.
The economic force that does
affect Ms. Gero tribe as far as
our skis, ski season goes.
But we all have to work together
to get it done, but whenever we
have agencies that are sitting
on their butts doing nothing to
improve what we have as far as
our landscape in the state, it's
time that we did something
different, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you very much.
Thank you. One minute, we're
going to have to be quick
because we, we're at 2:30, we're
scheduled to go on a tour and we
get behind and everything is
gonna run behind the rest of the
day.
Hm.
Thank you, Chairman, um.
You know, one of the things we
talked about with, with uh um
FEMA and some of the other
departments out there. My dad
used to tell me the tax
write-offs are only good if you
could afford the expenses to
begin with.
And that's where you guys stand
right now and that's where other
communities it's it stood in the
past, and there are ways.
The way we appropriated $100
million in a special session was
incorrect. We could have done it
correctly and we could have made
more money available.
It was inappropriate. It was
done. It is what it is.
My question to to you with
respect to to
That money that went out has
Mner been in your office and sat
there and said,
We've got $10,000. How do we
need to spend it right now?
And if not,
Then we need M nerd up here in
the next presentation explaining
why they haven't done that. And
if they have.
I'd like to hear from you guys
on what that solution is because
I know the DOT is spending their
maintenance budget.
from district 2.
To help resolve some of these
problems and that maintenance
budget is going to be gone
because we don't know how to
appropriate correctly to our
DOT.
But I'd love to hear what DHSEM
with their 10 million has done
and committed and given you
today.
And what Inert has done and
committed and given to you to
date.
Because we are dealing with the
backlash from 2005 that still
hadn't been cleaned up by the
very agency you're looking to
for help.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. If you
could answer those, I'd be
grateful.
Nobody wants to answer that.
That's fine. You don't wanna
answer it we're, we're good.
We'll move on and, uh,
Do that. You know, I, I just
want you to know in, in the
special session in, in prior to
the special session
representative Small and I were
looking at everything from hold
harmless and GRT and trying to
figure out other mechanisms for
property tax because we know
what that's going to look like,
but, but those are large bills
and very technical bills and and
so we've looked at a lot of
things. We're already starting
to talk about how we build a
bill, a budget for these fires,
and if people look in the
behind.
Tab B and they look at the
insurance claims, they'll see,
see what's going to happen in
New Mexico with the wildfires
and see how part of the whole
state is red.
Um, and how we're gonna have to
deal with them in the future.
There, there's so many different
little issues we gotta do, but
number one for me is if you
don't have an economic engine in
your community, right?
Then you've lost your community,
right? This is the casino, this
is the downs, this is Buffalo,
where we're at today, right?
And, and so how do we maintain
those first, right? And how do
we build those back? And, and
what do we need to do? I mean,
we don't control the agencies,
the executive controls the
agencies and the legislature is
the is the funding mechanism to
those agencies. Now we can hold
their feet to the fire.
And and have them in front of
us, we can even have them raise
their right hand and bring them
under oath, uh, on what they're
doing and what they're not
doing. And so those agencies
better be responsive and they
better be telling us the truth
of what they're doing.
Because if they're not, they're
gonna come back to us in
September, October, and then
we'll have a budget hearing in
November.
On on their responses to this,
as it's my understanding if we
don't have an operational track
ready to go by April.
You're all shaking your head,
then the racing season is done
for the year. And you, and
you've been had the ability to
move one to Albuquerque, but
that doesn't help this community
restart, um.
And, and so as we move forward
tomorrow at 2:30, I think you're
gonna hear some more stuff. Some
of you may need to be present in
the room, um, we're gonna hear
the best practices for wildfire
and emergency funding and I
don't think we have any of you
guys on that.
Panel, but it would be sure good
to have you in the room when,
when we start designing and
building this out, uh, for this
next session and how we handle
that, so I, I think as we move
forward, you know, we're going
to be in contact with your
managers and say, OK, how, how
do we hold your, your GRT
harmless, the GRT numbers came
out last week for, for June.
They didn't really show much,
right? Your July numbers are
really gonna show what's what's
really trending in in the area
and how we help you with that.
And this goes to Mascalero too.
I mean, you're hit just as hard,
maybe not with the devastation
of the flooding and, and
everything, but you're hit and,
and just like Gal, we're
interlocked with the Zunis,
we're interlocked with the
Navajos, right? We're all in
this together and, and if we
don't work together to resolve
this, and, and we start picking
and fighting between them.
Um, but you know, to go to
comments where we funded an
agency for $10,000. Well, we
funded that really kind of for
statewide and we'll start
looking on, on how we have to
prioritize and mitigate that
money, and isn't enough money,
right? How do we do that? You
guys know how to spend the
money. You know what you need in
your community. Um, I, I will
throw my vice chairman under the
bus a little bit. I mean, his
wealth, his wife does oversee
NRCS FEMA, uh, and all those.
I don't know if we, I figured
that out, but I don't know if,
if anybody else, but I mean,
there, there's a key person who
is a congresswoman from New
Mexico who can help us the most.
I mean, we need to rely on those
sources and maybe we don't write
the letter to a congressional
delegation, Senator Woods, maybe
write it to to the to the USDA
who's in control of of FEMA and
NRCS um.
I know our federal delegation
has people here today. I've
reached out to Ben Ray. I
haven't reached out to too many
others because my relationship
with him is, is a little better.
And, and he's been watching it.
I, I know that and he has two
staffers here doing that, but I
mean.
We're going to have to figure
this out, in pretty much our
agenda for the next couple of
days is how we, how we handle
these things in the future and
how we handle property tax, but
I don't know how we get by the
anti-donation clause to rebuild.
The track.
And how we mitigate the track
from future events, right?
I think there's been talk the
last couple of days about
retaining upstream and
condemnation and who can do the
condemnation. I think DOT has
the ability to do condemnation
almost immediately, Charles,
right?
Yeah, so, so we'll look at that
and if DOT can do the
condemnation, then we'll we'll
assign them the condemnation to,
to retain that and rebuild the
track, but
I mean, there's a lot of moving
pieces that we're not here on
the ground, right?
Um, but you're always welcome
to, to Adrian, who works for the
Senate Democrats in, in Senate
Finance, and I think him keeping
his advised on how to handle
these and learning how to handle
them is gonna make it better in
the future, so.
I don't know if you want to add
anything before we close and
wrap up, but again, thank you
guys for hosting us, um, and we
appreciate you guys.
And appreciate all the work
you've done because the horror
stories of kids sleeping in the
dirt.
Because FEMA hasn't reacted to
housing.
It it is is horrible and and I
hope the press will pick up on
that a little bit and reach out
to somebody and say, hey, where
are these people sleeping, where
the housing gonna go? I mean, I
know CID was here last week
talking about condemnation on
some of these places and people
are living in places that need
to be condemned that are unsafe
and and how they're gonna handle
that so.
Thank you guys for your time. We
appreciate it.
You're more than welcome to
stay. We're going to talk about
insurance rates. I think this is
something that we started last
year.
Uh, about insurance and how
people get insurance because
everybody in the state of New
Mexico and and you guys are good
to go at any time. Everybody in
the state of New Mexico's
insurance policies.
are on the rise because of
wildfires.
I got denied on a commercial
property in the middle of Gallup
next to a fire hydrant because
of wildfires. So as these
insurance companies start making
these, these excuses of why
they're going to raise their
rates or not insure us. We're
going to start divulging into
this uh insurance on the
wildfires and how we handle
that.
Uh, we're gonna go update on the
South Fork next, uh.
Melanie and
Laura McCarthy.
I haven't seen Laura.
Lords
Yeah, she'll come in last and
then uh deputy secretary's
coming in and then DOT who's
gonna have.
DOT, who you're gonna put up,
Ricky?
And then Ricky, could you, do
you know that answer to that
question, maybe you could answer
that question. Does DOT have the
authority to, to claim eminent
domain.
And in an emergency, and maybe
you could get that answer while
we're sitting here somebody's
listening from DOT.
Who's gonna start us off, uh,
Melanie Elliot, who's gonna
start uh Melanie, Melanie is
gonna start us off, I was told.
I, I can, Mr. Chairman, just to
give you an overview of how.
We get things going. Good
morning, Ricky Serna, Secretary
for the Department of
Transportation, it's good to be
here. I spent a lot of time here
in the last couple of months,
um.
The Francisco Sanchez, the
district engineer for District
2, and so just to kind of uh
talk generally about what really
happens, I'll kind of uh.
Talk a little bit about how
we've learned from the Hermit's
Peak Caff Canyon fire and what
we've done there and how we're
using that experience right here
in Riodoso very quickly. And so,
um, in, in Moran San Miguel
County in the city of Las Vegas,
DOT has managed the recovery
efforts primarily not only on
our assets but on all local and
county owned assets that have
been impacted by the fire and
the subsequent floods.
And what we've done there is
rely heavily on governors,
executive orders, um, to
essentially manage the recovery
contract that is performing all
of the category A and B, FEMA
eligible work and that's
basically emergency work first
push, and restoration of roadway
access.
And what we're hoping to do in
addition to that beginning next
year is some private property to
debris removal and and it's a
lengthy process. But what we've
fundamentally done have done all
of that work for the counties,
the cities, and for asses. And
just to give you a sense,
because the group up here a
little bit ago was talking about
funding and resources at the
onset of the recovery work at
Hermit's Peak in Kaff Canyon,
the Department of Transportation
was spending $1,000,000 a week.
$1 million a week on Category A,
B, first push emergency
response, debris removal work.
It's significant, right? And so
if you take that relative to the
$70 million here.
For a fire, surely not at the
same magnitude, but you know
that that would cover you for,
you know, a short period of time
and even more so is like the
community's talked about we used
executive orders for that cash
flow, meaning that we had the
governor's executive order cash
on hand, and we were spending
and spending and spending and
like the community here, um, you
know, waiting months for
reimbursement, and it can be
quite discouraging for two
reasons. One is because you know
what needs to be done, um, and
in some instances you recognize
that it can't be done.
Because it's not eligible for
reimbursement, or two is, you
know that it can be done, but
you've just got to wait to
ensure that it's done exactly
the way it needs to be done for
reimbursement, right? And so it
can be discouraging and it
reminds me of a, you know, when
I was young, my parents used to
say that whenever they would ask
me to dust, I would break stuff
on purpose so that they would
just stop asking me to dust and
you feel sometimes with the FEMA
reimbursement process is that
there's a sense of obstacles.
That are aimed at not utilizing
them, and I've been in
discussion with my counterparts
in other states who have said
pointedly, our legislature
combined with the executive has
essentially said we're going to
fund emergency recovery and
response, and we're not going to
go to FEMA for reimbursement
because we don't want to
encounter the delays associated
with doing what you can and you
can't do for FEMA and those
states likely have far more
resources than we do.
And so just to ask for your
support on what to focus on,
there are some issues around
procurement that uh create
obstacles for us and I'll give
you one clear example. Right
now, the limits for.
Price agreements on this
construction work is $4 million
across the state.
And as I mentioned to you
earlier, we're burning
$1,000,000 a week, the contracts
that we have in Las Vegas for
this recovery work are in excess
of $80 million.
Which means that every time a
disaster happens like this, and
we have to bring a contractor on
board for emergency recovery
work. We have to utilize the
emergency procurement method.
And as opposed to having
multiple contractors waiting on
a price agreement that could
come in and do this work. And
that's something we've got to
get over and so we're already
working with GSD to figure out
how perhaps the existing laws
around emergency procurement can
be blended with price agreement
language so that we can use the
emergency procurement to
establish
Price agreements. But we're
sitting here now in a position
where every time there's a
disaster, we have to move
through an emergency procurement
to get a contractor on board and
we have to have the cash flow on
hand to pay that contractor to
do the work while we wait for
reimbursement.
And so to that end, the second
request is we need a bucket of
money waiting to do this work.
And I know that sounds, you
know, much like everything every
other secretary asks for a
bucket of money, but right now,
um, without the governor's
executive orders, for example,
at Hermit's P Caff Canyon, the
money that we're utilizing would
otherwise come from New Mexico
Department of Transportation
state road fund money we'd be
burning through state road fund
money to the tune of 80+ million
dollars.
To get this work done and
there's exposure. And so I think
what we need to accept as, you
know, a governing community is
that is every nickel going to
come back to us? I don't think
we can expect that. I mean,
after all, over the course of
several months, you all are
likely going to appropriate
special appropriations, one-time
appropriations, capital outlay
appropriations, money that
you're never going to see back,
that's gonna help this community
and others throughout the state
recover from disaster and
So when it comes, however, to
providing them resources aimed
at FEMA reimbursement. There's
very little room for liability.
And when there's very little
room for liability, there's more
time on the front and spent on
third party monitoring, signing
off on this, arguing with FEMA
over what project is good and
bad and not good and not bad,
and it takes a lot of time and
for communities like this, I
mean, I've spent last night with
the president of the tribe and
with the, you know, the, the,
the Sch Apache leadership.
You know, we're sitting around
saying, when you think about it,
It's going to rain here for
another month.
And then it's gonna start
snowing here in October, which
means that the window we have to
keep this community open for the
ski season, which is a major
economic anchor, right? It's 3
months.
You know, that gives us like a 3
month construction window to do
the things that we have to do
around flood and rain, and we
don't have days to spend and so
to that end, the third really
request is how do we support the
private sector during this
process, right? And you look at
an organization like SC Apache
and it's terrible to have to
stand up in the parking lot at
Skiapachi and asked the
president of the tribe, who owns
and operates this? Who owns the
property? Who owns that road?
Who owns this so that we can try
to wiggle our way into some
quasi.
Governmental relationship to
keep, you know, from closing,
you know, the ski season down
because we can't just hand them
supplies and resources that they
need. And so sometimes it's P3
type of projects, but more
importantly, it's how does
emergency response funding
support, you know, local
governments and we try and be
really creative with our
colleagues at DHSEM and other
organizations to say, how do we
package this in a way that does,
you know, not circumvent but
essentially meet the
requirements.
So, you know, public-private
partnerships without violating
anti-donation clause. So very
quickly, the agency
collaboration is really, is
really good from state forestry
to DHSEM running the EOC
National Guard AEA over the
course of the flood response
here, the agreement that we've
had with New Mexico National
Guard has been
We're taking care of our state
assets, which is primarily in
Mexico 48 and US 70, and we have
some problems there, um, some,
some major culvert repairs that
we're ultimately going to need
to do.
And so we're taking care of
state assets and right away and
the National Guard has been
providing back up to the county
and to the city for state assets
and then when the National Guard
needs support and back up, then
we come in and help them do
that. And so it's pretty simple
and organized. What we're
working on right now is an
agreement with the city and the
county to support a number of
bridge structures that have
failed. And a few of them that
have actually collapsed, making
it impassable. And one of the
difficult conversations that we
have is prioritizing bridges
based on whether or not that
community is entirely lost.
Partially lost or not lost at
all and which bridges need to be
restored more quickly so that we
can get residents back into
their homes either to continue
to live under those alerts or to
gather whatever things remain.
And so what we rely on is the
capacity of our district 2 team
here to help with everything
from bridge inspections to
immediate bridge repairs, first
push, road recovery, uh type of
activities. And so I, I just
want to close by thanking
Francisco and his team for the
work.
That they do the patrols here
for Rick Padilla, John Romero,
Paul Brasher, who tag team the
EOC and in some cases sitting at
the EOC 24/7 for days at a time.
Um, and I want to thank uh
General Aguilla and, and Jason
Bowie from DPS because together,
you know, from traffic control
closing off properties and
buildings and making sure we
have access during, you know, a
town shutdowns so we we all work
and of course Ali for her
partnership, um, but it's, it's
difficult.
To do, as you all are aware, DOT
does have resources that we
shift.
And because of the obstacles
that we face with reimbursement,
there are times where we make
determinations not to seek
reimbursement and to just
continue to spend money and do
what we have to do because it's
the right thing. But without the
procurement vehicles to have
contractors on standby, the
upfront bucket of money that we
need for cash flow and the idea
that we're not always going to
get every nickel re reimbursed
to us and what it takes to
support the private businesses
whether it's 0% loans for
recovery or what we, we find
ourselves spinning our wheels in
the mud a lot around how do we
make this look and appear in
package it to do the things that
we know are right. And so, um,
those are things that we're more
than happy to work with you on
moving forward from a policy
perspective, but um it's, it's
been, um, it's been a pleasure
working with this community.
They have their act together
and, and they have some economic
anchors here that if we don't
fix before, you know, the next
spring, um, they're.
struggle a lot with um
rebounding. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you very much,
Mr. Secretary. Thank you,
Engineer. uh, Madam Secretary,
or and or Madam Deputy
secretary.
We're gonna go to Ener next.
Great and great to see you,
state forester as well.
Great. Thank you all very much
and uh uh Mr. Chairman, esteemed
members of the committee, thank
you for the opportunity to, to
talk with you all today. Um,
first, I would like to give a
shout out to the brave, tireless
firefighters who helped fight
the salt and South Fork fires,
thank you for your service. We
hear that a lot. Um, I really
think that, uh, they deserve our
uh our deepest appreciation, um,
and let me
Also note our state forester
Laura McCarthy, uh, she has been
traveling, uh, was taking care
of her ailing mother. uh let us
know last night that she had
missed.
Her flight connection and was
going to be late being here
today, so I was late in the
middle of the night getting
prepared to testify today, um,
the, uh, I'll say up front. I'm
as a 20 miler on United
Airlines. I am much more expert
in flight connections and
missing flight connections that
I am in uh for the Forest
Service, so I'm glad that Laura
made it on.
Time, um, she is also clearly
doesn't drive the speed limit.
Uh, she, she got in uh just a
few minutes ago. So, uh I can
now turn it over to Laura, uh,
and let her uh talk about the
update on on Imner's effort on
on the salt and South Fork
fires,
is it work yeah.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair. Thank
you Secretary. Thank you,
members of the committee, um,
hopefully you have the slides.
Do you have them in front of
you? OK, I'm going to go through
them, uh, fairly quickly, uh,
but I'm also gonna bring you
back in time to, uh, give you a
little detail about the actual
fire, uh, how it was fought,
what it cost, and then, uh, what
the state forestry division is
doing in partnership with other
agencies on the
Recovery side. So on my slide 2,
you'll see a lot of data about
the actual fire which started on
June 17th and uh it was the
South Fork fire that started
first, and there was an
unfortunate perfect alignment of
uh that fire start with the
topography and the wind
direction, the fire moved off of
the Mescalero uh tribal lands
where it started onto the.
National forest and then onto
the private lands where, as we
heard earlier, 938 homes were
destroyed. The actual language
that is printed on this slide
comes directly out of the
incident management teams report
that they issued as a summary on
the day that they left town. Uh,
it was a tremendous firefighting
effort with more than 1000
personnel.
Managed by Southwest area
incident Management Team 5. So
these are people that are based
in Arizona and New Mexico for
their day jobs and our expert at
handling these very complex
fires. Uh, there were 21 hand
crews, 88 fire engines and 13
pieces of heavy equipment
deployed as well as pretty much
the whole arsenal.
Of aircraft, uh, it was, uh,
because it was June and a lot of
aircraft are based out of the
Southwest and there wasn't
anything else big on the
national scene in terms of
demands on aircraft, we had, uh,
pretty much everything we needed
to fight this fire from an
aircraft perspective, 288 flight
hours logged.
38 tanker flights, uh, and a
cost of 7.2 million going to the
next slide, you'll see the
progression of the fire, the,
the slide on the left or image
on the left, uh, is both the
South Fork and the Salt Fire,
which also started the same day
as the South Fork and you can
see in yellow the fire growth on
the 17th of June was
unbelievable.
The, uh, the team had made a
forecast of how far the fire
would get in 4 days, and it
actually reached that point on
the first day.
Just to give you a sense of how
quickly it was moving. The
orange shows the fire growth on
the 2nd day, and then you can
see uh after that, uh, the
growth was more limited. On the
right, you see the
jurisdictions. So the Mescalero
BIA lands are in
In the beige color, the green is
the national forest and the
white is the private land, so
the private land is the state
jurisdiction and both fires hit
our jurisdiction last, going to
the next slide, I've
Uh, prepared some information
about costs. Want you to see the
5 major categories of cost being
cruise, aviation, camp support,
equipment, and line personnel,
the most expensive of these are
the camp support and the
aviation, and then the three
columns, uh, these are the three
jurisdictions that were
responsible for managing this
fire. BIA was the lead agency
and.
The way we prefer to.
Prefer and in
Pretty much 100% of cases uh
divide up the cost based on the
number of acres that burned on
the jurisdiction of
responsibility. So our cost
share for this fire should end
up being around 24.6, maybe up
to 25%. That will be a cost to
the state of New Mexico of 5.6
million and out of a total cost
of 22.7 million.
Going to the next side, which is
the salt fire estimated costs
because while these both fires
were managed by one team. The
costs were kept separate.
The salt fire was 99.7% on the
BIA jurisdiction, so they will
bear.
Almost all of the cost and that
totals up to 6.37 million.
Now switching gears a little bit
as you go to slide 6. I've just,
uh, provided you with some
imagery of some of the impacts,
uh, from a variety of sources,
you can see the burned forest,
the burned homes and then the
flooding impacts.
As you go to the next slide 7.
I'm gonna take a minute here and
explain it. It does pertain a
bit to some of what's been
talked about already by the
first panel around management of
the forest and in this image
that was provided to us by Dick
Cook, who is the village of
Riodoso Forester.
You can see first in the
foreground a home that clearly
survived and in the midground,
you can see that the forest has
been thinned and while it's
scorched a little bit, it's
nothing like the blackened area
that you see up on the right.
When you look up in that upper
right corner closely, you will
also see the foundations of
homes that are no longer
standing.
Uh, I'll explain a little bit
more about why this is important
in the next couple of slides. So
if you go to slide 8, you can
see this is a home that survived
uh next to it, a home that did
not, the home on the left and
the property owner had followed
the village of Riodoso Ordinance
for the spacing of trees. They
had done that work and they
They had taken precautions
around the home itself,
including making sure that there
was nothing flammable right up
against the house, protecting
the eaves, clearing out under
the deck, and you can see the
results as well if you go to
slide 9, you will see pretty
much the same thing. We've got a
proper tree spacing. We have no
ladder fuels. That means the
fire is going to burn along the
ground.
They did the home hardening and
this is another house that
survived.
Just a few last things to cover,
slide 10 is about our recovery
activities we've focused
primarily on the South Fork Fire
recovery and what you see in
this image with the three colors
are the distribution of burn
severity, so the red is the
highest intensity burn that
corresponds pretty much to that
first day of very, very
fast moving fire. The yellow is
moderate intensity and the green
is low intensity.
Uh, right after, uh, actually in
the, while the fire was still
burning, and as we saw that
there was going to be a change
in weather with the rains coming
in, the discussions began around
the burned area emergency
response or BA process. Uh, it
was conducted primarily by BIA
and the US Forest Service with
the state as a partner and the
assessment was done on
An all lands basis. You've
already been hearing about all
the bureaucracy involved in
putting federal program money
onto the ground and the
post-fire, uh.
Postfire is no different, and so
while we can do an assessment
together, we can't do the
implementation together, uh,
because the authorities aren't
there for that to work
effectively.
Uh, the three phases that that
will come out of a bear process
are repaired to the immediate
fire suppression damage, that's
things like taking a doser line
that was put in as a control
point and water borrowing it and
maybe revegetating it, emergency
slope stabilization of soils
with mulching and seeding and
installing temporary barriers,
as you'll see uh on the tour
today, and then the
Long-term recovery, but we're
not there yet. If you go to
slide 11, uh, what the state
forestry division has been
focusing on is the hazardry
mitigation and in coordination
with DHSEM that is working with
FEMA's private property debris
removal program, we are trying
to match up uh state money and
state forestry programs with
FEMA and DHSEM effort because
this private property debris
removal will allow that program
will allow hazardry removal up
to 25 ft from the structures,
but what happens if a tree is
more than 25 ft tall and is
burned and is a hazard and is
outside, you know, it's, it's
the base of the tree is more
than 25 ft from the structure.
Common sense kind of problems.
So we're addressing that by
using the funding that was
appropriated through the special
session House Bill one to cover
that gap, as you'll see then
that's really the content of our
slide 12, as well, um, we are
doing some additional analysis.
And um looking to align our
understanding of the soil burn
severity and the debris flow
that's been happening and to
build that information into the
infrastructure planning that
DHSCM will be doing with the
funds appropriated in section 2.
Be out of House Bill 2 and uh
finally on slide not numbered or
very tiny number, uh, slide 13.
Thank you. Slide 13, uh, you'll
see the amounts of dollars that
are coming in, the 50 million
coming in from NRCS is a work in
progress. The state money,
again, we appreciate the Forest
Service has requested.
It's disaster relief fund be
appropriated at 100 million and
we're not sure if we're going to
need to draw on the farm service
agencies' funding. Uh, and then
finally, uh, more information,
just the names of our staff,
both locally here in Capitan and
out of our Santa Fe office who
are leads on this effort, should
you or constituents have any
need, um, to get in touch with
us for specific details.
Thank you, Laura. That's exactly
what I was gonna say.
All right, uh, thank you, Mr.
Chair. Members of the committee,
um, my name is Allie Rye. I'm
the deputy cabinet secretary for
Department of Homeland Security
and Emergency Management. Um,
I'm also the state director for
emergency management for the
state of New Mexico. So, um,
quick and and and short what
that virtually means is I am the
counterpart to the federal
government whenever they come in
underneath the underneath FEMA's
statue, um, so I do wanna, um,
kind of quickly address Mr.
Padilla's question.
Um, that he asked earlier about
who the project manager is,
who's the coordinating entity.
Um, that is DHSEM. So by
statute, we are the coordinating
entity for both response and
recovery. We work very closely
with our partners sitting here
at the table amongst other state
agencies to assist in the
response efforts. State Forester
McCarthy talks quite a bit about
her response efforts. I will, I
will quickly deinolate that, um,
anything having to do with
wildfire response, most
definitely all of that response
falls under.
Laura McCarthy and her, her
fantastic team and all the great
work that they do. We do work
hand in hand though because
there are many resources that
are required for a response to a
wildfire that do not fall
underneath statutory
requirements for, for Ms.
McCarthy. Things such as um
sheltering, evacuation, um, any
kind of other resources that are
needed to respond to the
disaster coordinating with
Department of Transportation
for, um, you know, their, their
assets that they have to remove,
you know, blocked roadway
flooded areas, things such as
that. One of the big things that
we did assist with this, for
this disaster is the Swiftwater
rescue teams that we're coming
in from all the other states
around the country to help
support this community, um, the
urban search and rescue team
that came in and did the initial
assessments for all of the
privately burned sites prior to
um debris removal occurring. Um,
those are just some, some quick
top hitters. We do quite a bit
more than just that. Um, we were
actually active.
to the state operations center
was activated from the start of
the incident all the way up
until 2 weeks ago when we
transitioned away from our
response and move directly into
recovery. Uh, I did have the
opportunity with General Aguilar
to address you guys a couple of
weeks ago up in city of Las
Vegas, so I'm not gonna really
hit on the uh the response side.
I'm really gonna focus on the
recovery side today.
With
um the transition that occurred,
we worked very closely with the
village in the Lincoln County to
identify their top priorities
that we really needed to focus
on in the next, the, the coming
months, the coming weeks, um,
and, and to be quite honestly,
unfortunately, um, the coming
years, uh, disasters are not
sprints. They're very much
marathons, um, as you can see
from Hermit's peakcalf Canyon,
we are still very heavily
invested in that area and we
will be heavily invested in this
community.
As we go forward. So with that,
I'm gonna quickly address the
top 3 items that were identified
as a priority for everyone. The
first one being housing, um,
DHSEM established a housing task
force that included our federal,
state and local partners, so all
come together to try to identify
resources, make sure that um we
have all of, uh, you know, all
of the facts, all the figures,
everything that is lined out
that is needed for housing to
occur. I know that
Um, the panel before us, um, and
even you guys voice that housing
does not move quickly.
And we would owe it 100% agree.
Um, Secretary Serna mentioned it
in his opening comments about
how there's so much red tape.
There's a lot of things to
overcome and uh we do it on a
daily. I will tell you, um, as,
as much as we would like to sit
here and say that we move
quickly, um, we don't, um, and
it's a, it's, it's, it's part of
the course and it's very
unfortunate because the people
who aren't hurting aren't us,
it's the community, um, it's the
one that Center Munos was
talking about living on the
floor.
Uh, uh, in a dirt area and not
having anywhere to go. So
because of that, New Mexico
Department of Homeland Security
stepped up and opened up the
white Mount Relief Center to
support sheltering. It's a $50
operation that is sitting right
outside of um uh the hotel, um,
oh my gosh, I just went blank of
the name. Um, here in Riodoso.
I'm so sorry. You guys will
probably see it on your tour
today. Um, but it included, uh,
sheltering ops, shower trailers,
um.
Bathroom stalls, community areas
for people to come in and get
food, washing and laundry
service for folks to come in and
get their, their um their
clothes cleaned. Um, plus a
number of other resources from
many state and federal agencies
to help people either apply for
FEMA services, find state
resources, um, you know, it just
kind of identify with their next
steps are. Uh, that is intended
to be a temporary sheltering
location that is never and has
will never be intended to be a
long term solution.
So because of that, we worked
very closely with FEMA to get
what we call transition
sheltering operations open,
which is what you guys would
know as the hotel rooms. Um,
those are paid for and funded by
FEMA for folks to move out of
that temporary sheltering
location at White Mountain
Relief Center and into a more uh
temporary stable location with
a, uh, you know, more roof over
their head in a hotel that is
paid for by the federal
government.
As we work through those
individual claims, we then moved
to what we call a little bit
more of a moderate shell drink.
Um, this is where you talk about
the mobile home units, the
travel trailers, working with
local vendors to put people into
maybe um already established
rental locations, whether it be
a house or a rental complex um
where the federal government
will then therefore pay for that
as well. That process is
underway. We are working with
many vendors here in the
Dosa area so that way we can do
the exchange, we call it direct
lease where FEMA goes ahead and
leases with either a rental
location, an Airbnb, a VRBO, um,
to put these individuals into an
actual home. That is intended to
last them anywhere from the next
6 months to the next 18 months,
um, we do have the option to
extend on that as well, um, as
we work for people to get a more
permanent location to live in. I
do want to keep in mind that
while they are going through
this process,
Um, we have state disaster case
managers. They're individuals
that have been hired to help
these folks through that
process. So when they hit a head
wall, when they're confused and
they don't know where to go,
where they need assistance on
their application where they
just need someone to talk to.
They don't have access to food
or maybe they need as, you know,
a specific type of clothing or
they don't like the current
sheltering location that they're
in those disaster case managers
worked hand in hand. They're
assigned an actual individual
that is with them from the
Start of the opening of their
application all the way through
to whenever they make their
final destination and they're
back in their home, whatever
their home may be, whether it's
a new facility that they build
or one that we assist with them
to find, to bring in mobile home
unit back onto their property
kind of thing. Um, those
disaster case managers are
currently funded underneath a
FEMA grant, um, but thanks to
you guys, we did receive funding
that we will be tapping into to
help expand that group so we can
offer uh definitely a lot more
hand holding to.
on whether it's with an
individual or even with a
business to help them through
the business process of finding
an SBA grant, um, or an SBA loan
or any other kind of um services
that we have at the state and
federal level.
Um, currently right now, just so
that you guys are aware, we do
have 8 disaster case managers.
They, most of them are sitting
over at the Horton complex if
you had an opportunity to drive
through. It's a disaster
recovery center that is a joint
center with FEMA and the state,
um, those folks are sitting in
there with many of your other
state agency representatives.
I'm sure they would love to see
you if you guys had an
opportunity to stop by sometime
this week.
The next thing that we're gonna
move on to is going to be um
debris removal operations.
Secretary Nerna talked about it
and so did um Steve Forer Laura
McCarthy. Currently right now,
the state has received 567 right
of entry forms. So what that
means is an individual has burnt
structure on their property has
burnt or or even flooded, um,
impacts. They need assistance in
removing that debris off of
their property. The state knew
that this was going to be a
burden on not only the
individual but also the local
community.
And so we stepped up and said,
hey, we would like to take on
this burden. We would like to
fund this operation for you guys
so that way that doesn't come
out of your coffers. We want to
be the ones that are monitoring
the groups we really want to
take that pressure off of you
guys. So we've worked with the
community to get folks to sign
up for this, um, from those 567,
um, EPA has come through and
completed the first round of
household hazardous waste
removal operations.
And now we have a current state
debris removal contractor and
monitor, and they're conducting
assessments on those properties
to go in and get all of that
debris removed.
Um, I will tell you right now
that that process is, is
operating. We've already
completed um debris removal off
of a number of properties and
we're are expected for those to
continue. Um, I know that
there's been a lot of
conversation too about, uh, you
know, the debris monitor, or
excuse me, the debris um removal
that was uh selected. I want you
guys to know that in our
contract whenever we we open
this up, we made sure that um
local vendors are the ones who
get
selected first. So even in our,
our main contract it is required
that any subcontractors that are
selected are verified and
approved by Department of
Homeland Security and RLD to
make sure that they are a local
vendor and that we're not having
other vendors coming in and
taking the money away from the
local economy. Right now, we
have 5 local vendors who are on
contract and they're expected to
increase that capacity over the
next couple of weeks.
The last thing I have is the
watershed and infrastructure
planning task force. Um, this
task force is meeting very
frequently. You guys talked
about it. The panel before us
talked about it. If we do not
stabilize the watershed if we do
not stabilize this community,
um, the impacts that they are
seeing and have seen for the
last couple of months will
continue on for the next 10
years. This uh landscape down
here is very unique. It is very
challenging and unfortunately
for this community, it means
that the impacts are
Even stronger and harder than
what they would be in any other
area of the state.
DHSCM is working currently right
now with a um hydrologist, um,
so that way we can start
developing a peak model flows
and watershed runoff so that way
we know exactly where the hard
hitting areas are so we can
start designing projects to be
placed in those hard hitting
areas and that way we can move
forward with, um, uh, you know,
identifying who would take care
of those projects, what kind of
funding are we needing? Who is
the, the ultimate, um, you know,
overseer.
Of that. One of the ones that we
are definitely working on is
currently right now, um, as
mentioned with the race track,
so Army Corps of Engineers will
actually be out here tomorrow.
They're gonna be doing modeling
assessment on those areas to see
what can be put in place to not
only protect the racetrack but
also to protect the community
that's down south of the race
track, so spaghetti flats is um
one of those communities that
have been looked at and, and,
um, is deemed to be impacted if
something were to happen at the
racetrack. So through that
modeling through that.
Technical assessment from Army
Corps of Engineers will go out
and place temporary measures
just to get us through the
monsoon season and then come
back in the spring time to put
in more permanent structures
just so those folks are
protected for the next 10 years.
On top of that, um, the governor
is requesting an advance
assistance uh request from you
say, so they'll come in and do
an entire modeling assessment
over the entire uh county and
provide, um, you know, pivotal
points in the community that
really need to be um protected.
Uh, this occurred in Hermit's
Peak Calf Canyon area. In that
community, they were able to do
16 projects we're projecting
that they're going to be able to
do anywhere from 8 to 10 in
this, um, but we look forward to
that assessment as soon as we
get it. We will share the
results.
With you guys so that way you
can see all the hard work that's
being done here.
A major focus for us right now,
which Secretary Cerna had
already hit on as the assistance
for bridges. So we're working
closely with his entity um to
make sure that we have
identified all the bridges that
have been impacted in the
community and how quickly we can
get those back up and running.
The quicker the bridges are up
and running, the quicker people
feel like they can go back home.
Um, they also, it also means for
our debris contractors who are
going in there and cleaning off
that private property, they have
access in and access out and
it's a safe mechanism for them
to be able to do that.
Um, the last thing, and I
promise I, I will, I will be
quick. Is the House Bill One
funding. So DHSEM is working
with the Department of Finance
and Administration so that way
we can get that $70 million out
on the street. Um, we are very
fortunate for that, and we are
also very fortunate that it is a
replication of Senate Bill 6.
and so we've been through this
process, uh, because we're in a
situation where we know what
we're looking for, we're able to
speed up um house one funding
towards hitting the streets a
lot.
than what we were able to do
with Senate Bill 6. We've gone
back through the flow process,
um, and we've cut out a couple
of stages so that way we can at
least get 50% of the upfront
funding out the door into this
community, um, and we'll be
doing that presentation with the
elected officials in the local
jurisdiction tomorrow afternoon
at 2 p.m. Um, I did share the
flow model with Scott Sanchez
and um he said that he will be
emailing that out to you guys
for you guys to look over. So if
you have any questions, um
please contact me.
Um, with that, I will hand it
back to you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, we'll go to questions
from members. Um, before we do
that, first of all, I guess,
thank you guys, right? Cause you
guys are the ones Ricky, um.
Our district engineer, I think
of his name, just a minute. But
you guys were the ones down
here, right, as state employees
and putting in overtime in your
employees, so we may not get a
chance to go see them, but you
need to tell them thank you, and
I, I think the legislature
really thanks you. I mean, you
make a shine sometimes, we
didn't hear complaints about
state agencies. We heard
complaints about.
Federal agencies, but uh we
didn't hear any complaints
about.
State agencies and.
Representative Vincent is
shaking his head in the same
way, he's like no.
We pretty much true, so you need
to tell your staff and, and
those guys, thank you. I mean,
they may not.
See our faces and get a
handshake from us, but you need
to know that we want to thank
him. So Representative Vincent,
we'll start off with you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I had two
questions for you. One is, um,
on the, the temporary housing
that you have set up at the
hotel Elegante.
Thank you.
You, there's still 500 there,
right?
Yes, sir. So currently right now
that it is open for 500 people,
right? Uh, currently though, we
only have about 13 individuals
who are staying in it plus the
Army National Guard, uh, folks
are deployed here. Uh, so we're
working with those 13
individuals to find them more um
stable housing.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Allie,
just, uh, just because.
Money is such a problem around
here. Well, we're spending $500
a month.
On 500 rooms.
We're occupying 11 for $5000
that is not spending money
wisely in my opinion.
And I think that we could find a
different uh location for those
folks to hopefully go and um
again, I'm not griping about it,
but how many houses could we put
in for $5000 a month when we're
only housing 11 people.
Just something to think about.
Mr. Chairman, and, and, um, so,
we, we won 1,000% agree with
you. Um, that facility is
actually closing on Friday, so
like I said, we're working with
those folks to get the 13
individuals and more stable
housing. Um, unfortunately, they
were uh uh precariously housed
prior to the disaster, so it's a
little hard with FEMA to get
them into housing, but working
at other state agencies to find
them other resources, um, so
that way we can send that back
home. Um, I do, I do wanna talk
about that though. We agree that
$500 was a lot of money.
We were worried when we
initially started that contract
2-3 months ago, um, when we
heard, you know, 900 people had
been impacted and had no homes
that we wouldn't have the
resources in this community for
people to stay. Um, you know,
our federal agencies come in,
our response agencies come in,
they stay in the hotels, they,
they kind of eat that up, and we
wanted to make sure that people
were staying close to home, um,
because that's hard, you know,
imagine losing everything and
now you're living in Albuquerque
or you're living in Alma
We wanted people to stay close
to home, so the state took on
that responsibility and and had
people stay here. As soon as we
started started seeing the
numbers dwindle, we knew that
that it was time for us to close
up shops. So that is, that is
happening this week.
Thank you for that, and you
know, somebody, I don't think
people are gonna stay in those
long term because if just so I
can paint a picture for
everybody when you walk into the
room, there's triple bunk beds
on one side and triple bunk beds
on the other side, and there
might be enough room left in the
middle to put everybody's
clothes right there and that's
it. So there, it's not gonna be
a long term deal. So I would
just say that um just for checks
and balances whenever people are
not standing those maybe start
taking those things.
out and, and reduce that 5
million down to only 500,000 a
month or something instead of 50
million. The other comment or
the question that I had is I, I,
I appreciate you working with
the village of Redoso on the
bridges because everybody's a
little bit sensitive on the
bridges and in 2008, we lost a
bunch of bridges. We received
funding for them and the bridges
have still not been replaced and
I just hope that we're super
diligent this time.
Around and we get the bridges
100% replaced.
Mr. Chairman, I have 1000%
agree. Um, I cannot rectify the
issues of the past, um, but I
will tell you under my
administration, the one thing
that I have told my staff and
we, we 100% agree with us
getting those bridges taken care
of. Uh, we're actually working
to see if we can move them from
the old disaster into the new
disaster, so then that way codes
and scanners are updated, you
know, it more costs are taken
advantage of, so we're working
very closely with our federal
partners and with our local
entities, um, to get those
bridges assessed because the
last thing I want
Do is have bridges that haven't
been completed in another 12
years.
Thank you for that. And
Francisco, I just want to tell
you, I appreciate you too.
Anytime we reach out to you,
always get things done and we're
to get it done kind of people,
so I thank you for that. Thank
you for the time, Mr. Chair.
Representative Garcia.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman,
thanks for the presentation.
First of all, I'd like to thank
DOT for all the work they've
done here in Riodoso and also in
the fires up in Mora in northern
New Mexico. Thank you for that,
Mr. Jack Terry. Um,
I just have one question that
will be for the young lady at
the end there. What are, what do
you guys do with the debris? Are
you giving this wood to people
or who is contracting it to uh
remove it?
Yes, sir, so that's a great
question. So we're working very
closely with our contractors to
separate out that debris. So if
it's flooded debris and it's
hazardous debris, it has to go
to an appropriate landfill site.
If it's salvageable debris, um,
we will be working to get that,
um, cut and split so that way we
can do kind of very similar to
what we did with Hermit's peacaf
Canyon and give it back to the
community. Um, I know that we're
working also very closely with
Laura McCarthy and her team for
the way that they will be
taking.
Do as well so that way we can
maybe do one overall mission for
all of the wood, um, instead of
like us DHSEM doing a mission
and state forestry doing a
mission. It's just, it's one
united force underneath uh
state.
Well thank you I'm determined,
and you will be given that
material, the wood to the
people, you're not gonna be
selling it, you're gonna be
giving it to uh
Community members, is that
correct?
Yes, so the last thing we want
to do is take away a resource
from this community, um, so
we'll be working on maybe like a
voucher program for people to be
able to come in. Um, I, I know
very much like Hermit's Peak
have Canyon, you know, folks
survived on that wood. That was
a livelihood for them, um, and
we wanna make sure that that
there's not a break in that
chain for those those entities
for those those vendors, so
working on a uh some kind of
system to be able to allow them
to be able to be a part of the
process.
Get reimbursement, get some kind
of uh funding coming through,
but then also make sure that the
wood stays here in this
community. Uh, one more last
thing, Mr. Chairman, uh,
On the debris removal of these
companies from New Mexico or are
they from out of state and uh if
they are from New Mexico, are
you uh
Giving
Multiple companies, uh, an
opportunity to do the work.
Mr. Chairman, uh yes, sir. So,
um, we require that all of the
vendors that were subcontracts
were within a 60 mile radius of
Lincoln County. So not only are
they New Mexican, they are also
local to this area. Um, they are
all, uh, currently right now we
have 5 and they are all, they're
all from this community, um,
and, and as soon as more vendors
want to be a part of the
process, they just reach out to
DHSEM we coordinate with the
overhead vendor and we get
The kind of paired together so
that way everybody has work
cause there is plenty enough
work to go around.
Uh thank you for that and thanks
for the presentation again and
you know, I just wanna make sure
that everybody has a fair chance
of uh of doing the work cause,
you know, there's more than one
company that needs uh the job so
if uh you guys are sharing it,
sharing the wealth, that would
be good. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you.
Representative Eel.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much. Uh, I too wanted to thank
Francisco for all the work that
they have done. I appreciate
everything you do for District
2. It's, it's remarkable.
As far as our bridges go.
Uh you have addressed that and I
appreciate that because the, I,
I believe the flood was in 2006,
am I correct there when it was
wiped out so many bridges and
hasn't been they haven't been
paid for yet. So that's a
concern of mine as well.
Uh,
whenever you're talking about
the acceptable or non-acceptable
to re-removal. I know that uh
Chavis County and the city of
Roswell has also taken in some
of that debris as well because I
don't understand the what.
What all does.
What sites do take
Just acceptable and
non-acceptable debris removal.
But I think that everybody will
be shocked and
see what Lincoln County is faced
with whenever they do the tour
this afternoon, especially going
up Gablin Canyon,
uh going up towards Ski Run Road
in that area. It, it's
Unbelievable.
As far as tree removable
removal, who makes the
determination. The question is
who makes the determination on
what trees.
Need to be removed or shall
remain in place.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Zell, we have trained foresters
out on the ground who are state
staff as well as contracted
foresters who make that
determination based on uh the
trees, um, position on the land,
uh, and it's a state of decay
and amount of burn.
OK, therein lies a problem, in
my opinion, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Whenever we
Well, it was very prevalent in
the Little Bear Fire with those
trees that are still standing
that now the winds are taking
down.
Uh, we have a problem with
erosion where these floods have
come down, but what are they
doing with these trees that are
being removed? Where are they
going?
Uh, Mr. Chair and Representative
of the Little Bear Fire was
entirely on the national forest,
and my answer uh did not cover
what happens, what happened in
the past on the National Forest
or what will happen with the
burned trees on the national
forest that was burned in the
South Fork fire. As far as the
state, uh.
Efforts to remove hazard trees
that present a threat to power
lines, to roads, to recreation
areas and to the homes that are
still standing as well as
properties where the owner wants
to rebuild, those are considered
hazard trees and uh I believe um
that Deputy Secretary Rye
already answered the question
around their disposal, Mister
Chairman.
A lot of whenever the little
bear fire burned, it, it
impacted lots of homeowners.
That did have private land, that
their homes were destroyed as
well, so I'm not really buying
into that answer right there.
The mismanagement of our forces
in the state of New Mexico has
been.
A dismal failure.
The, the management of it is,
excuse me, it's been a dismal
failure in my opinion, whenever
The uh
Watershed appears impacted?
It impacts everybody downstream
and I'm talking about east of
here and west of here.
Whenever we are talking about.
The uh temporary homes that are
there and there's only 13.
People that are living there and
we have people living down in on
spaghetti.
Uh,
Loop, flats that literally had
to be rescued out of that
particular area.
To me, that's a more, that's
more concerning than
What's going on by paying $5000
a month on these units that are
not being utilized by the
citizens that actually need a
place to live. I just heard a
story outside about a woman,
elder woman who is being paid
$600 a month for housing
assistance. Well, she's up there
at night, she's over.
80
And she's supposed to make it on
$600 a month living assistance,
there's a problem there, Mr.
Chairman. We could go on and on
about this all day, but.
You need to listen to the people
that live in the community. You
need to listen to what we as a
legislative body are saying
about we need to do something
about what our force are
actually doing to our citizens'
lives. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you all very much for your
presentation. Um, couple of
questions. First, uh, Deputy
Secretary Rye, really appreciate
the work that you're doing, uh,
you and your team, I think the
presentation we received in
Socorro was very instrumental
with Chairman Munoz and and all
of us uh helping dedicate the
additional $1000 which is sort
of the new one of the new
features.
Can you use that funding to work
with communities on the
technical assistance we know
that individuals and individual
businesses need that assistance
and that work and we want to
support that, but at the sort of
to get quickly like move this
process as quickly as possible.
Can you contract with technical
assistance and sort of
navigators through the FEMA
process at the community or
perhaps in partnership with the
tribe, should that be of
interest to them? Can you use
some of that money for that
purpose with those governmental
and sovereign in the.
Instance of the tribe entities.
Mr. Chairman represented a
small, um, we are currently
looking into that. Um, I will
tell you we, we don't see that
there's a problem with it. Um,
in fact, that's probably one of
our, our big plans with that
what we're, what we're doing
right now is kind of um seeing
what other resources are on the
table, making sure that we're
not duplicating benefits with
that, those, those funds, um,
because some of the other
dollars that are on the table go
for a lot longer than what the
$10,000 was allocated for. So
we're really trying to juggle to
make sure that we're maximizing
all of the funding.
That's coming in. um, but we
are, we are working very
diligently to get that $10,000
out. I will tell you that is a
huge plan of mine is to make
sure that we're helping the
economic recovery in this
community and get back on path.
Great. Thank you very much and
appreciate sort of moving fast
but not duplicate, not sort of
just spending just to spend. So
thank you for that. Please keep
us informed there, I think,
again, that was something that
really came out of what you all
were doing in community.
Our ability to respond quickly
and so I, I think it really
helps keep us together and moves
us down the road further just to
hear your progress and also any
challenges that come your way.
Um, switching, Mr. Chair, uh,
state forester.
Really appreciate this,
appreciate your slides. Couple
of quick questions. One, the
stride, the slides around sort
of the home defensible space.
Incredibly striking, you know,
in the worst fast moving
disaster, the, you know, you're
showing us here that homes that
had defensible space that took
out the trees near that home
site really fair, you know.
Did so much better. What's it
been like?
As you sort of engage more
broadly in the community, our
property owners sort of
ubiquitously saying, yes, this
works, help me take out the
trees by my house or my
property, are there challenges
there and, and are there things
that we can learn or or help you
on?
Oh
Mr. Chair, and uh
Chairman Small.
There's a surprising amount of
resistance of homeowners to take
out trees around their homes and
we'll see that I'm sure as we
drive through some of the
unburned sections of Riodoso,
uh, despite the fact that the
village has an ordinance and is
one of very few uh local
governments in New Mexico to
have such an ordinance, um, and
it's also a problem in other
communities around the state.
Where, um.
You know, we have cost share
programs that are federal in
nature, we have staff that are
uh funded through the bipartisan
infrastructure law who have been
pounding the ground, um, out
with homeowners and we still
face resistance. So, um, one way
to counter that could be through
a public education campaign,
other states have done that and
have found that to be
successful.
That the
Madam Secretary,
please if I could say something
on that to the, the numbers are
very staggering about homes that
are saved if they're hardened,
basically, and the percentage of
uh is is enormous and, and we
have been looking at the expense
associated with that, and, and
as Laura said, are, are going
out and listening, we'll be
going out and listening to the
community, but because of the
expense associated with
That I think we need to think
about how we deal with
homeowners who can't afford it,
OK, and I think that I think
that's going to be an issue.
It's a very, very important uh
to save those homes, saving
those homes means saving Rudoso
and other areas of the state,
and but we ought to be looking
at um uh what it means to not be
able to afford that, and we have
a very open communication with
our.
Representatives on this. We've
been talking with the
congressional delegation, and I
think that's an issue that they
might be able to address so.
Great. Thank you, Forester.
Thank you, Madam Secretary. That
gives us, I think, some really
too big and good things to chew
on, on how to help support the
education and Madam Secretary,
to your point, uh, making sure
that the, the safety and the,
the improvements are available
to all, um, second question,
Adam Forrester.
Um, for as we look at uh
watershed restoration and
recovery, and we heard the first
panel speak, you know, led by
President Padilla and all the
speakers really I think touched
on that appropriately, um, one,
just, you know, fire is a
there will be a role for regular
fire in a managed sort of way as
we move forward. I would you, is
that, I mean, that's.
How this sort of this our
mountains are made, that's how
they function. It does, there
are other management components
that are necessary, but some
managed fire is an important
feature.
Is that right? Mr.
Chair and Mr. Chair, that is
correct, and if you refer back
to my slide 7 where you see the
ground fire in thinned area.
That ground fire is behaving
very much as fire would have
historically before as
representativeel pointed out,
our forests became dangerously
overgrown. Good. Thank you for
that. Thank you. um, and great
to be able to see that on the
map. I know we'll see some of
that today. I want to point, you
know,
This really presents a unique um
The the land status in the
sovereign tribal nature of some
of the really the highest
elevation areas. There's a lot
of uh collaboration that has to
and could occur, it seems like
here in ways that um are
reflective of a large watershed
management approach. Would you
like there, it's not just one
stakeholder, it's not just a
federal ownership or what have
you, there's enough different
ownership and different.
Interests where although it's
maybe be complex.
There's a lot of stakeholders
that can work together here.
Mr. Chair and Mr. Chair, yes,
that is absolutely true, and
when it comes to the watershed
restoration.
We've learned a lot from the
Santa Clara Pueblo and their
post-fire experience after Los
Conches in 2011, um, as well as
the Cerro Grande fire before
that in 2000, and what we've
learned from that is it's really
important to start at the top of
the watershed, which in this
case, uh, there are 4 primary
watersheds that originate on the
tribal lands that are the ones
that are causing the majority of
downstream impacts.
And our preference is to work
from the top down. Got it. And
of course that's a sovereign
tribe that's a sovereign
decision, but I, you know, what
we're seeing here today is just
deep collaboration, of course,
our legislation, I think in the
funding really reflects that,
that the body overwhelmingly
approved, um.
And, and just on that piece, and
we don't have to go too deep
into it, but something that I've
learned, you know, we know that
active management, uh, in many
cases very important for
thinning is one of those things
that's important, it's
necessary, something that sort
of I've learned and I wanted to
sort of bring up and ask you
about is the, the, it's very
sort of place specific and even
slope specific and so if you're
a northern facing slope, you're
gonna hold more moisture. We're
seeing less
So, uh, with, uh, with our
warming climate and human caused
climate change. We have to adapt
to that and so um.
Like a north facing slope,
better maybe to thin that
they're still gonna hold some
moisture, a south facing slope
that moisture is gonna run off
very quickly and that um too
much thinning in a south facing
slope, you maybe don't have
enough recovery, uh, and the,
the, the sort of us wanting to
slow the runoff and and hold
water. Would you say that sort
of it's very sort of uh
Um
There's a lot of nuance in this
in that active management is
necessary, but that it's got to
be very detailed, uh, as we go
through that process and then
it's, you know, uh, a north
facing slope, maybe you don't
treat it the same as south
facing, that there's a lot of
nuance and and really detailed
work as we transition into maybe
a more active management.
Sort of phase and role.
Mr. Chair and Mr. Chair, yes,
there is a lot of nuance and one
of our problems.
With wildfire spread is the
continuous canopy and the more
we can break that up and uh
restore it to a patchy state,
which is absolutely what it
would have been uh years ago,
including through active
management that the forest
canopy not be continuous, uh,
that will be to our advantage in
terms of future management and
control of wildfires. Got it.
OK, thank you very much, Madam
Secretary, please.
There's just a and, and it's
goes to your point about the uh
the increased number of fires,
the increased severity of the
fires earlier uh fire season,
less water. OK, all of those
issues and sitting here
listening to this, um, in, in,
in, and, and I'm uh I've only
been doing this since May, but
there are a huge number of
cross-cutting issues and by
cross-cutting.
I mean, cross agencies, and I
think that it might serve all of
this with all of these changes
that are going on in the forest
and the climate, etc. etc. uh,
to have a task force or
something like that that looks
at the cross-cutting issues and
how do we manage those, uh, in,
in, in expedited way and what do
we say as state agencies to the
federal agencies about what we
need from them, OK, I heard from
the last panel, the expedited
reimbursement and how hugely
important that is if we could as
a united New Mexico state
government, go to the federal
government and say we need X, Y,
and Z. I think it could be
hugely beneficial to the state.
Thank you very much, Madam
Secretary, and that, um, you
know, Secretary Serna and
District engineer, I think the
the some of the requests that
you've made sort of a broadened
approach.
Uh, particularly in disaster
management. I know that's going
to be on the agenda and there's
been a lot of great work to uh
rethink both as, you know, uh,
Does that active disaster
response and also blue sky
preparation, um, so look forward
to that as we go through this
week's agenda. Thank you very
much, Mr. Chair. Sarah Woods.
We're running behind so we
quickly, quickly.
OK.
I may have missed it.
But are we going to receive a
pretty detailed summary of how
this $100 million that we put
out through the recent special
session, how that money is
flowing out. I it started to
flow yet and I don't need you to
answer a yes or no will be fine
and uh
Can we get those reports kind of
monthly, uh, so we'll kind of
see and we can, we can make
that, and please make it public
to the newspapers so that, uh,
the, the citizens of New Mexico
can see what we're doing, um.
The other thing, uh, we, we
started talking about the
secession of of plants on these
fire burns, and have we started
the aerial, uh, seating of any
of those yet. Is that a federal
program? Will that be a state
program? Well, how, how do you,
I think it's a federal type
program that's, that's done for
that.
Mr. Chairman, so, uh, it is a
federal programs done underneath
the NRCS, um, that request
hasn't been made yet. Um, we
We're having coordination within
RCS in order to get those things
accomplished. I can have a
better update for you in the
coming days. Yeah, because,
because, uh, I know we have to
wait to a certain period of
time, but we have to get that
stuff started, uh, so that we
can hold that that ground
together, uh, a little better,
and I know it's a complete
succession of plants up there
and as we go through the years,
we get a different.
Plant species coming in. So
it's, it's a long time
happening. That's why we try to
plant a few trees to help that
along and, and make things
better and we talk about the,
the communication between
federal and state agencies, also
the communication within
agencies, um, is huge and, and
not only in this instant, but I
have many, uh, constituents that
asked me about
state money, state funds, state
programs, and sometimes we do
not get that information out
very well. And, and we really
need to take a minute or time to
have more ombudsman's, uh, for
FDA, those guys to let us know.
The people in the audience know.
Where there's possible money
that they can apply for, and I
talked earlier about how hard it
was to ask for grant money and
and apply for those grants and
it's a tough deal and please,
please paint my
Total.
Thank you.
We're gonna go to, we got one
minute to get where we need to
be represented Pettigrew, and
then we're gonna go to
Representative Sanchez. So if
you got a question to ask it.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you all for sitting up here and
answering questions. I'm gonna
drill right to one of the
questions I received from a
resident up here looking at your
presentation, um.
On page 4.
The cost
Categories show 41% for BIA US
and the 30, almost 34 for for
service and then 25 for New
Mexico for the state because of
the private distribution on
that. And the question that came
directly from
So
Landowner and business group
here
was why
Is that being charged to the
state when the fire started on
BIA land and was fueled by 4
service mismanagement.
Why should the locals and the
privates have to pay for that.
That's one question. And another
question that came up.
I, I believe what I heard and
what was sent to me was that
there was um
Some potential cost share
programs for tree removals. So,
and then I heard another
statement that said that, you
know, we were having problems
with landowners not wanting to
do it, maybe because of the
cost, so if there is some cost
sharing programs out there,
maybe you could share uh some of
that or if Homeland Security is
gonna be part of that.
And
I think that answered the
question that was asked to me to
ask you guys. So with that my
chairman, I will be back to you
all and take those answers.
Mr. Chair and um Representative,
I'm gonna answer them in reverse
order, um, if you don't mind,
um, uh.
One, the.
The hazardry removal that is
paid for entirely is black
trees.
And if you have constituents
that um need help with that, I
would direct them to Nick
Smokovich, whose contact
information is on the last page.
He's our district forester based
in Capitan, as well as DHSEM,
uh, for the green trees, um,
There are different cost share
programs.
Uh, almost all of them are
federal because of the
anti-donation clause and uh
Representative Armstrong earlier
this morning, uh, pointed out
that there are perhaps some
things we could do to make that
easier for the homeowners.
Uh, as far as the cost
allocation. I love your
question. Thank you. Um, you
just made my life a lot easier
because every single fire we
have, believe it or not, um,
the, the US Forest Service
believes that um
They are protecting homes on our
jurisdiction, state
jurisdiction, and therefore we
should pay for all of the cost.
I kid you not. So, um I am uh
always uh fighting against that
and you just gave me a, a, a
really powerful argument. Um, we
do operate under a master
cooperative fire agreement. I'm
going to go through it in a lot
more detail tomorrow, but um,
the percent that you see on
slide uh on slide 4.
Or directly relate to the map
that's on slide 3.
Chairman, thank you, and I have
some other questions we'll take
offline.
Thank you. um, Ellie, let me ask
you some questions on the
difference between sentiments
and in a couple of years ago and
in House Bill 1 that we
currently did, the, the
executive emphasized some
comments about the legislature
and how the bill was done
incorrectly.
Do you feel that way?
You're gonna get in the hotspot
today.
Um,
that's where I
I Mr. Chair, I
Incorrectly is not, is not the
right word. This community needs
all the assistance in the world
that they can get and I mean,
let's be perfectly honest, even
if you guys offered $10,000
10,000 dollars is $10 million
more than that they they had and
what they're going to have, um,
I look forward to working
through with it with you guys
and seeing if there's any kind
of new bills that we can present
in January, uh, to, to, to maybe
offset some of the things that
we were thinking.
Um, I, I personally feel like
and, and this was a conversation
I had with Adrianne when we were
in Socorro, um, is that this is
a relationship and it's one that
I very much cherish and I think
that you guys have always been
very open and collaborative with
us, and that's one that I, I, I
look forward to going into in
January, um, so that way you can
hear our concerns and hear what
what we see on the ground, um,
but, but incorrect, no, sir, I
don't, I don't think so.
Good because her comments on the
executive message was rushing
through critical funding
measures
without
To be handled. Um, we know we're
gonna be here for a long time,
right?
And, and how are we going to
handle that and what's that
gonna look forward
uh small and I did talk. We're
gonna set up a subcommittee or
task force or.
I don't know whatever we're
gonna call it, right, to go
through some of this stuff. So
as we go into building a bill
for for next year. OK, what are,
what are our real needs, right?
I've seen the forester in Santa
Fe and I said, uh, my thoughts
is why don't we have a
