All right good morning everybody
we're gonna go ahead and get
started quickly
where we have our subcommittees
this morning really excited
grateful for the many
communities partners and stay
colders who are going to be a
part of those members what we're
first going to do as director
solely we're gonna approve last
month's minutes and then we're
gonna ask director solely to
give sort of a quick intro to
the budget guidelines we're not
going to be voting or approving
those this month but this will
give us a chance to think about
it early nowhere it is in the
tabs and
with that will go to director
salis uh can you point us to the
town for our minutes please
yes sir mr chairman if you
return to tab's k and m those
would be the approval of the
meeting minutes from june for
the full committee as well as
the subcommittee reports.
Excellent thank you so we'll get
to tab k here this is
first for the meeting minutes
can I have a motion for approval
of the june meeting minutes
movie senator gonzalez saying by
representative chat field is
there any opposition to that
motion seeing an approved and
now we're gonna turn to m
yesterday mr german
will go ahead and ask the vice
chair for a motion or
representative of dixon for
emotion on the child well being
subcommittee
report
okay it's been moved by reps and
dixon and saying by senator to
heal and center to biased and is
there any opposition to that
motion
and those minutes are adopted.
And then mister chairman and so
I will
the under natural resources sub
committee
um we've got those minutes here
can we have a motion to adopt
the natural resources of
committee
minutes
it's been movie represent
vincent
secondard by represent- uh by
senator of woods is there any
opposition to that singan we've
adopted our minutes director
sale
ok mr chairman on tab in are the
budget guidelines.
And so these guideline serve and
important purpose where they're
essentially a direction to staff
on how you want us broadly to
develop staff recommendations
for your consideration when
we're doing the budget
development.
And so they're not.
They're just that they're
directional it's.
If there's other phones
available use those first before
general fund as an example.
Here's budget priorities for the
committee you know education
health care things that are
going to increase personal per
capital income.
Things that are going to improve
access to health care things
that are going to improve
quality of life.
You know everything from water
to crime so broad direction.
A bunch of these are like
technical just updates.
The section that you see on page
wine this is the kind of the
revenue outlook that will be
updated after the revenue
estimates so that's why it's
struck out but there is a couple
of items that I wanted to to
bring to your attention.
To take a look at.
And then we'll probably have AAA
a briefing in between now in the
august
meeting when you'll go to
actually approve the guidelines
so you can ask further questions
the first is on page five.
Where we've made significant
enroads and compensation and it
kind of entering into what I
call kind of a a needed
maintenance fees the new pay
plan has been adopted by spo you
know we had managed that
contract to overhaul all the
different pay plans make sure
they are up to date for the
market rates consolidated and
simplified that's in place
spokespondered through the grow
to manage that process on a go
forward basis there's already
agencies trying to get out of it
saying we're a unique snow flake
for our our staffing positions
so we'll have to monitor to see
if we can maintain the
simplified system.
The next thing I want to turn
your attention to
is.
On page seven.
And this is kind of formally.
Adopting a strategy of if an
agency outside of work load
outside of basic inflationary
for their base budget once to
expand a program implement a new
program.
Replaced federal funds for a
program that may have been
eliminated by the federal
government or or funding pulled.
Steering those two the grow
process that you got a
demonstrate for a multi year
period that this intervention or
whatever you're going to do is
going to be effective before
moving that into the base budget
I think that will allow us to
further shrink the growth in the
base budgets you know we've got
a canava informal target we've
talked about of six percent is
affordable through the end of
the decade I think that's
probably under high end and and
could probably come down and
have especially at the tail end
of an administration with this
next budget cycle you're going
to be only funding this
administration's agencies for
six months and then a new and a
new group is going to be coming
in with potentially similar or
different priorities so not a
lot of pressure and on the base
budget as I see it but proposals
to kind of formalise
strengthening you gotta go
through and demonstrate success
before money gets into the
recurring base budget.
There's some tax expenditure a
discussion on page ten and
eleven.
What will find when we talk more
about the federal budget
reconciliation that if if folks
were thinking about it potential
tax package.
That may have already been spent
with how our tax code is lined
up with the federal governments
that there could be the craigs
got away in on this but there
could be hundreds of millions of
dollars worth of revenue
reductions that will occur as a
result of that reconciliation
bill that was just passed in any
end or just
narrative in discussion around
specific policy out policy areas
such as medicaid higher
education where were proposing
you know we are expecting
you know the report on the ing
funding
uh then we've talked for a
number of years now as a
committee on the need to move
the performance space funding
formula to actually meeting
certain goals as opposed to
market share so this is broad
direction the staff in addition
to the work plan that you
adapted to try to move in that
direction for those areas so
with that mister chairman i'd be
happy to answer any questions
are going to logistics for
setting up the subcommittee
great thank you directorsly uh
brief questions center to heal
please and then certain woods
and vice german.
There we go now it's plugged in
I wreck I remember that there
are limitations with the new
administration coming in it's a
six month rule half a year it is
these can only spend half of the
budget but I know that there's
some exclusions to that is there
anything that we need to be
looking at as we're preparing
the budget to make sure that
large persons are money don't go
into those exclusions that there
really are limited to half a
year
yes I think those are going to
be largely inadministrative
oversight as opposed to things
that you would need to worry
about as you develop house bill
to.
Great thank you very much center
trio center woods and by
the commission can you hear that
okay
i've been reading the
transportation on page fifteen.
And
I think this is one of the
action items that we better take
care of this next budget.
We either put this back in the
budget are we do something we
are.
Leaving these gahat guys high
and dry owner maintenance budget
right now.
So
I just wanted to bring that to
the top of the list of something
that ever serious and drives on
some kind of road in the state
and we need to do a better job
and funding that miss chair that
it's just my great two cents
thank you very much vice german
thank you charles on on the
budgeting guidelines for
compensation to staff and
vacancies can you get us the
numbers that are above the pay
scale that the study said and
how many people are about that
scale
that that will that the study
showed.
Yes i.
I don't have that off the top of
my head
there was not as many people
below the new minimums that
would need to be brighter so you
had appropriate seventeen
million.
That we had estimated going into
the session.
That would need to be bright up
to the new minimums and then
deal with a little bit of that
compaction I don't believe like
that full amount needs to be
expended fireless but folks that
may have been above I would need
to do some research and follow
up mr jim thank you and then and
then I want to see that in
benefits including that the
parent caused the all the costs
included in the in the benefits
I mean I didn't know this but if
you're stay employed in your
vacation you're actually
building vacation time.
Which is kind of ironic
and then on page seven rate did
we get an agreement with the fa
and love see on how we're going
to handle growing in.
Did you want meeting and get
that worked out.
They know she beated it last
year before so we need to still
do work if there's going to be
legislation but the the idea of
agencies needing to justify
their expanded program spending
we've agreed to administratively
and that's already been in the
in the process in terms of like
the justification that agencies
need to provide that's built
into the budget system already
so we've come to an agreement
with with the family and is that
going to give us enough
information in growth attract
that is a significant amount of
information and if the agency
will we will come out with the
score card probably in august
for the accountability plans and
if agencies are setting up the
kind of evaluation program to
answer that key questions of
whether it works whether they
have performance measures we'll
be able to sort of score card
that just like you have for your
agency report cards that this
agency is.
Either on board with the
accountability plan or they're
totally rejecting it you can
sort of tell right out of the
gate whether that might not be a
likely program to get funded in
the future because you they will
not have answered that question
and mister chairman and charles
are are we going to see this
workplan or some time now see
mister chairman that we're going
to see the group but we call the
junior two years ago or three
years ago or whatever we did it
in the grove or the last year's
going to start seeing some of
that score carding I don't know
if you have that on the general
uh interesting to distant your
comparison to see what we need
to look at what's happening in
what we need to look at and how
grow is actually yesterday mr
chairman we've got that set up
to monitor how that money's been
going out the door and we're
working on figuring out how
amongst all of those projects
they can come back to say what
they actually accomplished
before you go into the next
session.
And then i'll just jump mister
chairman grow quickly to fifteen
transportation I I think kind of
think dots of victim of their
own circumstance because they
don't have any money and then
all the sun they put twenty four
million dollars in a hundred and
seventy six million city and
counting project and last line
this and then there touting a
project on the border for forty
five million that they have
better money to imagine for
years they didn't get that job
done
I think that they prioritize
something during the session
that that the really cute their
own throats with in but it seems
to me that they can move money
around wherever they want all
the send they didn't have money
and they said they can have an
agreement to do lost limits
which is a hundred and seventy
six million dollars project for
the city in the county and then
all a certainly find twenty four
million to do that project so it
seems to me like they can find
money when they want to find
money and move money around but
but that they're kind of a
victim of their own
circumstances and then on higher
ed where is the hire edge study
that we did two years ago and
you know where that is in the
processing
mr chairman that contract is
wrapped
we expect that report to be
issued if it hasn't already been
issued with in the next week or
two we've been requesting copies
of it since june okay thank you
mister chairman great thank you
very much firm and yours great
flag
in uh chairlink representative
thank you mister chairman that
charles think for the
information on a direct your
attention to page number ten and
eleven related to tech
expenditures and rates when you
make mention of we mean that
have little to no capacity to
make any real movement in tax
policy in the state because of
what the fed is done this
foreign and they're in their
budget or and their recent bill
that was passed i'd hate for us
to have that party super from
this body from this people that
are on this table because of
what the republican party did in
the federal government and the
president didn't in the in the
federal government
and then we have delivered that
which doesn't affect people that
live in.
Many of our districts everyday
new mexicans what i'm talking
about and so with that being
said I look forward to maybe
messaging this language a little
more and looking at things that
we can affect more productively
in perhaps not in this committee
but perhaps in our revenue
stabilization and tax policy
thank you mister chairman mr
chairman for sure
whether or not you have a tax
package the amount of it
whether it's linked to what was
done in washington will be your
decisions
great flag thank you very much
and lent a great flag and will
work on the budget guidelines so
great preview members will have
additional follow up and
the
transfer folks to go into
greater detail okay with that
were right on time the public
safety working group is going to
be upstairs just so out of the
stairs or up the elevator right
upstairs where lunch was
yesterday
capital outlay will be here will
go ahead and break now for those
and go ahead and get the day
started thanks everybody.
But can have your attention if
we can respect the the time
frame we have this morning in
find our cease so we can get
this discussion started they'd
be great.
Uh.
The.
And folks for the discussion
this morning look under tab or
behind tab f
so that you can have the those
outlines at your finger tips so
it looks like we're all in our
seat and ready to go now when I
first think start by thinking a
miscar's well who is the
principle analysts for
legislative finance committee on
the capital outlet as well as
mister was the billing leaves
the director for the
infrastructure planning and
development division at DFA
thank you both as well as I see
on on tony or take a who is also
the counterpart that works in
our lfc capital out the division
that often times you see with
kelly around the building as
well so I want to recognize some
of the discussions that we've
had thus far some of many of you
have been here much longer than
than I have and I want to
respect that in terms of the
thing that you've worked on in
the past I I can recall some of
the discussion that i've had
with uh a gentleman that I
consider a mentor and friend and
someone that I trust in and that
is a center complex in our
discussions that we've had and
and how he reflects on his time
being at this point the senior
member in the legislature both
recognizing respectively the
house and the senate and how
he's talked about things that
he's seen in the past single
thing that he's seen work in the
past and things that maybe are
just the same and these are one
of those things this particular
issue is one of those things
that maybe has been just the
same that that we've been here
to year after year term after
term session after session as a
matter of this is just the way
it works and this is what we've
been heard it and it's going to
be tough if almost impossible to
ever change the process in
regards to doing something like
this and i'm reminded of the
discussion that center to
complete and I had yesterday is
that if you ever want to change
something for the better to make
bold change if you wish to make
bull change as a body is that
you have the united you have to
you have to put away the side
that says okay.
I need to protect mile I need to
do something for for for my
district I need to do something
for my party rather than that
you have to do something that's
going to be bold so that you can
unite and bring together for the
better of new mexico some of the
things they're in this case
policy development or policy
transformation we will talk
about policy transformation I
want to make sure that I that I
emphasize that i've never felt
more
united than I did with some of
those and I don't know if we may
have some of them around this
table that
that helped to negotiate the tax
per the the capital outlay
package this last legislative
session those legislators they
were both house and senate both
department republican and
democrat that stood together
really too get something good in
that in in that capital outlay
package that retained some of
that resource so that we could
affect larger projects and get
those larger projects done
within our own districts that we
know the best and i've never
felt more united than at that
point in my ten year as a
legislator and so I would look
forward to having that same kind
of of unity in this type of
setting as we move forward and
look forward to the work that
calling does the work that
wesley does the work in antonio
does the work that we all do on
behalf of work is did she went
back at home and those in in new
mexico as it relates to
something that is as important
as capital outlet in many times
the only large drink of water
that some of work in communities
receive in any one year in this
state
i'm i'm gonna read from a couple
of bullets several people points
that I have had job to give us a
little bit of a foundation in
regards to maybe how we're going
to look at today's discussion
really realizing that we're not
going to solve the problems this
morning but recognizing that we
have a couple of individuals
here in front of us that want to
help us to bring us to that end
so that we can maybe transform
what the capital process is
today.
And how it looks tomorrow and
into the future so recent
revenue surpluses have presented
the state with a large
opportunity to do really big
things in the capital program
for new mexico to make a big
dent in the state's
infrastructure needs and we've
seen that we we we've seen water
projects done we've seen elderly
projects elderly facilities
built we've seen schools built
are just recently we went to
muscaro we saw that beautiful
school being built we walked in
there we touched it it's a real
thing and for that community it
will be bring real benefits
making the most of those types
of opportunities will require
changes to the capital outlets
system period we have to change
this system under the current
system we are often spreading
the total money available too
thinly and underfunding projects
time year in year term after
term again and that was
recognizing noted by the
gentleman that spoke yesterday
from the burning of county
commission that they want to do
more they wanted to do focus on
this big project and less on the
smaller thinly funded projects.
This means that it takes too
long to complete projects or
they never get completed at all
and the price of inflation and
the inflation factor itself will
often times drags into a pit
where we will never be able to
fund this to have the projects
that we want to do for our
communities we're also
struggling to find larger
projects in many of our
communities that are the highest
priorities on local government
infrastructure improvement plans
these problems are most acute
for local projects the sub
committee's first hearing will
focus on the strategies to how
to improve and how we fun and
prioritize local projects in
order to improve their outcomes
this subcommittee will also hear
updates on major state projects
from the state agency leaders on
strategies from managing these
projects and current challenges
in construction furthermore and
finally before I hand it off to
both wedding calling.
My hopes for the day is that
sooner rather than later we
would like to have some type of
direction for the fund that was
set up by the twenty twenty four
law that was passed through HB
two fifty three the capital
outline fun
d f is looking for some type of
direction we are looking for
some time of direction so that
we can make sure that we can
direct them
and how to best utilise those
types of funds.
Finally reauthorizations vice
chairman when yours brings it up
time and time again and i'm with
you know man that real
authorizations tend to be one of
those things that has created
now I bet you were at seven
billion dollars plus of what
capitality dollars are in the
bank right now that because we
cannot find ourselves
to say no we're not going to be
authorized a project there has
to be a point in time where we
have to say we have to set up
strict and solid time frame
limits as well as we have to
make we have to make a
determination on that seven
billion dollars it's in in the
bank right now do we continue to
carry it over and hopes that
maybe will some day be able to
fund those projects or do we
direct redirect those funds to
something else and how do we do
that stuff love it it's it's a
tough low process it's it's
something that I want to make
sure that we work through
transparently though so that
those communities that have had
those moneys in their account
that look forward to that
project being done some day if
they can't do it they can't do
it and we can't afford to
condemn a role this money over
and over we have larger projects
looming that we could do a lot
of good in the state with so
that being set miscatch and as
cars will and mister billingsly
the floor is yours whenever and
however you wish to proceed
thank you
mr chair thank you for that
excellent introduction
as the chair said i'm kelly
carries well I work on capital
outlay for the lfc joined by
wesley billingslee he directs
the infrastructure planning and
development division at the f a
which you all created a couple
years ago to sort of sat a
foundation for some of the
improvements that i'm we're
going to talk about today so
wesley and are you going to cope
present you have the power point
behind tamp f.
A hard copy but it's up on looks
like about fifty screens and
here are two so
we'll go through it up there as
well i'm going to start by
cannot taking you through some
analysis to set some contacts
for why we're talking about
these things and some of the
problems were trying to solve
can I going to try to do it and
a little bit of a fresh way I
know you guys have all heard a
lot about this before and we're
going to
kind of talk about it with some
specificity to some of the
communities as well and then
we're gonna go through four kind
of focus areas for a potential
policy improvements and what
kind of stop with each one and
live room for discussion so that
it doesn't get to overwhelming
so if you go to the next slide.
So as the chairman said
we're starting out today and the
subcommittee talking about local
capital outlay and what that
means is that discretionary
appropriations made by
legislators and the governor
that primarily benefit local
governments
the slide is describing uh some
other way that some of the ways
that legislators use those
appropriations in that third
bullet you can see some of the
most common project types that
are funded with local capital
outlay and in blue are the
categories of projects that we
tend to see the largest overall
amounts go to every year.
I think it's important to
remember that local state and
the federal government all play
a role in building and
maintaining public
infrastructure but here in new
mexico the state plays an
outside roll um in subsidising
local infrastructure
improvements.
Next slide
so I also wanted to start out by
kind of taking a step back and
asking you all to think about
what are the goals of the local
capital outlay system when we
think about improving it you
know what we're ultimately
trying to achieve with it should
really be front of my and and
shape our solutions and where we
want to take the system so i've
outlined here
what sort of I think about
the goals being in an ideal
world's
would be happy to have some
discussion on that as well
so let's run through these real
quick first one of the goals I
think for all of you is to
empower every legislator.
At two have the ability to
direct funding to priorities and
their distract with a fair
amount of discretion you know
one of the reasons that capital
outlay is valuable to the
members is that for most of them
who don't sit on the budget
committees it's the one way they
have ability to really direct
some amount of funding to things
in their district and to can I
set the set those priorities as
they see them and collaboration
with the governments in their
district
beyond that some of the other
goals are to use state resources
to complete the most critical
and beneficial infrastructure
and capital investment
priorities and local communities
ideally those are defined
through a planning process that
we have called infrastructure
capital improvement plans which
are five year plans that local
governments do at um and kind of
establish funding plans for
their needs
we're trying to improve quality
of life in local communities we
are using state funds to
subsidies capital investments in
those communities to support
public service delivery
and that subsidy is often there
because some of these projects.
Maybe many of these projects a
lot of local governments
struggle to finance on their own
especially of the bigger stuff.
Um and ideally we would also be
using these projects to
facilitate and accelerate
economic progress statewide and
perhaps meet other policy goals
you know such as a public safety
health care delivery things like
that next slide
so what do we know about a the
extent to edge the current
system is realizing these goals
and what I would say is we can
have confidence that we're
meeting the first school through
the approach we take where a
certain part of money is divided
up equally in each chamber among
all the members on all the other
goals though are we meeting them
I would say the answer is maybe
sometimes but certainly not
consistently
and you know what we're going to
kind of go through in the next
series of slides I think well
drive home the point that the
system is really not structured
currently to service these goals
or support them and in fact it
presents a lot of structural
barriers to achieving these
calls
next slide.
Um so what are some of those
barriers first off the practice
of dividing available funding
among individual legislators you
know while it serves that first
goal it does make it challenging
to adequately fund projects
because the request you all
receive firefire exceed what you
have available to appropriate
and that often results in peace
mail funding or uh small amounts
provided to a lot of projects
that fall for a short of the
overall need to complete them
the system also has very minimal
eligibility requirements to
request and receive funding
that
contributes to increasing the
volume of request that you are
received and inhibits effective
prioritization of those requests
limited and inconsistent vetting
we've we've found over many
years of analysis on the capital
at least system that were
consistently funding projects
before entities are really ready
to spend the money and in some
cases before operational plans
are in place to support the
public benefits that the
facilities are intended to
deliver.
There is little connection
currently between that planning
process that local governments
do to identify their needs and
prioritize them and the
appropriations process and i'll
i'll show you some more
specifics on that and we also
see the capacity limitations are
a big barrier
at the local level of specially
and sometimes at the state level
two to use this money
effectively
alright next slide please.
Okay so this is just kind of a
reminder and I I wanted to
kind of.
Sat the stage for the amount of
money we're talking about and
sort of take you through where
it's actually going at the local
level
so
this chart is a summarising how
the twenty twenty five capital
outlay bill broke down between
what we call statewide projects
which is funding for century
state own staff state agency and
higher education projects
primarily on the local projects
by practice you put roughly
fifty percent towards the stayed
on staff and the other fifty
percent is divided equally among
the house the senate and the
governor for local projects and
then as you all know the house
and senate shares are divided
equally among their members so
for the past couple years what
that has meant is two point five
million for every representative
and four point two million for
every senator
you know that's a lot of money
maybe for you and me if we're
talking about improving our
house but it doesn't go very far
across an entire distract when
you're trying to do public works
projects I think that's probably
always been the case but it's
especially true now with how
high construction costs have
gone next slide please.
So the fundamental challenge
with those parts of money you
have you know two point five
million maybe four million for a
senator is that the request for
appropriations.
From those parts of money
firefire exceed the funding that
you have available and this
dynamic has remained true even
though even as our revenues to
the program have surged and
perhaps it's even gotten a
little bit worse you know I
think there has been this
perception sense the state has
been in the strong financial
position that the resources are
sort of endless but at the end
of the day you have still had
pretty small amounts of money
relative to the demand that is
out there and you can see the
scale of that in the chart on
this slide so those light blue
those like blue bars on the
chart are showing you on the
left total local requests vs
funding available so in the last
session you received nearly four
billion dollars in requests for
a direct appropriations for
capital outlay and the funding
you had available from the house
the senate and the governor was
roughly six hundred million or
only about fifteen percent of
the funding requested and this
is the essential challenge that
tends to result in a lot of
peace mail funding to give you a
more specific sense of that and
last year as bill we saw that
about forty four percent of
nearly fourteen hundred projects
in the bill received fifty
percent or less of the funds
that they requested so
essentially what we're doing is
we're providing some funding to
a lot of projects but not enough
and we're taking what starts as
a large amount of money and
making it very small max slide
please.
Um as you all are familiar with
and I have heard increasing
frustration from members on this
issue recently it is very
difficult for you to support
large projects with your capital
outlay
large appropriations from local
capital outlay overall our rare
and almost always require a
substantial support from the
governor
so you can see on their slide
that only five local projects in
the twenty twenty five capital
bill received appropriations of
ten million dollars or more and
those are outlined here only one
of these uh why the is all
received support from the
governor and only one was also
supported by legislators at a
significant level and that was
as as a result of the house and
senate working group that
chairman lente mentioned
that held back some capacity and
appropriate larger amounts to
complete funding for a project
towards the end of the process
max slide
ah sorry one up from this I
think.
Can you go back one yeah there
we go okay so I wanted to give
you a couple examples of
kind of how the funding for
local entities in individual
county is breaks down so it's
starting with burning leo county
because that's where we are
right now bernalyo county also
receives the largest overall
amount of local capital outlay
and that's essentially because
the way we allocate the money
money follows population
um or representation.
So are in twenty twenty five
local entities in burnio county
received a little more than a
hundred and thirty three million
dollars in total capital outlay
appropriations
and you can see a in those four
like blue boxes on the tab the
highest categories of spending
for local entities and burning
accounting projects.
That hundred and thirty three
million dollars was spread
across nearly four hundred and
fifty projects for an average
appropriation of a little under
three hundred thousand dollars
so again you can see that you
know we're taking a large amount
of money that in theory could
accomplish big things but what
we're doing as allocating it to
a lot of things at fairly small
levels so what we're doing with
that is getting small things
done not big things next slide.
Um and again just kind of an
example at the local level of
the fact that it is very
difficult to fund larger things
through the system so only a
little over twenty of those
nearly four hundred and fifty
appropriations work for one
million dollars or more and you
can see some examples of those
there and only two hundred
thousand dollars in total and
the twenty twenty five capital
bill was allocated towards tap
five infrastructure capital
improvement plan priorities for
the city of album so a very very
small amount.
Excite please.
Um another example I just picked
another county that was kind of
close to where the meeting was
happening at random so this is a
local capital outlay to lansia
county entered to use and the
twenty twenty five capital bill
so all local entities and
valencia counting it received a
just over seventeen million and
capital outlay appropriations to
twenty six projects for an
average appropriation of about
six hundred and fifty thousand
dollars and you can see the top
categories of spending and those
like blue blacks so that's a
little more than for burning or
county but in this case the
numbers can escued by one large
project in a county that didn't
receive very much overall
capital outlay
so the dynamic is essentially
pretty similar.
Next slide.
In valencia county there were
only two appropriations for more
than a million dollars you can
see those here including a large
one
for the hospital
that they're trying to build
there.
And in the yellow backs on the
bottom you can see that a nine
point seven million dollars in
total funding was in the bill
for a tap five icip priorities
for all local entities and the
county of five million dollars
or more and again most of that
is coming from that one
appropriation so again we're
seeing that those larger
projects that local governments
are prioritising are largely not
funded through the local capital
outlay process.
Next slide please.
Um so that's just two counties
but here's some analysis showing
you that uh these patterns and
problems are much more wide
spread so sixty percent of local
capital outlay appropriations in
the twenty twenty five bill war
for two hundred and fifty
thousand dollars or less overall
there are only a hundred and
thirty local appropriations for
one million dollars or more or
less than ten percent of the
projects
appropriations about five
million dollars are even more
rare there were less than twenty
of those of more than thirteen
hundred local projects who are
very very small amount and you
know what that suggests to me is
that there is a high opportunity
cast in the current approach
that we're taking to capital
outlay you know we're missing
that opportunity to use
these great surpluses that we
have to accomplish the bigger
more important things that our
communities are telling us when
that they need
next slide please.
Um so you know this pattern of
insufficient funding across a
large number of projects is one
of the contributing factors to
growing outstanding balances
that you i'll hear about from us
a recorder and I also just
wanted to make the point here
that among the kind of major
categories of legislative
capital outlay appropriations so
local statewide hire
adathorisations local projects
are the ones that have the most
outstanding funds the most
projects the slowest expenditure
expenditure rates and the
highest risk of and completion.
Excite please.
Again zooming out from those two
particular counties to look at
the system as a whole
again we see that what we saw
and those two counties is a
consistent problem everywhere
which is that higher dollar
local icip priorities are mostly
unfunded
so the
the table on this page is kind
of showing you the project types
that are on icip is the number
the total project costs that is
identified on icipies and
capital outlay to date for those
while capital outlay for the
last five years for those
categories of projects on acaps
you can see at the but you can
see in the column to the rate
that capital at least providing
a small amount of money to
these high priority higher
dollar projects.
More specifically there are over
five hundred and fifty projects
with total costs exceeding five
million dollars that were listed
as tap five priorities on local
icipies last cycle and three
hundred and fifty of those
projects or sixty two percent
sixty two percent had received
no capital outlay appropriations
to date.
Umm I think this kind of raises
two questions that I would post
to you
the first one is uhm assuming
that the goal one of the goals
of the system is to direct money
to these priorities that are
larger and presumably in a lot
of cases are going to deliver
bigger benefits to our
communities assuming that's a
goal one other things we need to
think about is how we can get to
a place where the capital outlet
system is set up to contribute
more to completing these
projects.
Another thing we might want to
think about which will talk
about more today is how we can
help in santa bus local
governments to.
Pursue other avenues for funding
these projects if it remains
difficult to do through the
capital outlay system and we've
that's a strategy that you all
have already been working on and
they think that we have uh some
opportunities to go further on.
Next line
okay so this is kind of the last
one in the intro and i'm going
to let ah wesley make some
comments as well before we move
in to the specific focus areas
we're going to talk about
but I wanted to end by
emphasising.
That the opportunity to do
bigger better things with our
capital outlay money
exists if we start to shift our
approach and you know the way I
cannot want it to frame that for
you was just by thinking about
the overall funding that we've
been putting in to the system
recently and that we may have
the opportunity to continue to
do
for at least several more years
so this is just showing you
how senate and local house
senate and government governor
sorry
local capital outlay
appropriations over the last
five years and then you can see
the total and the last buyer so
two point four billion dollars
that's the amount over the last
five years that we have a put
into local projects just through
legislative capital outlay you
know that's apart from other
special grant programs that we
have in the state that also
benefit local governments but
that's a lot you know we can do
a light for the state with that
level of funding and I think you
know that sort of overall what
we're talking about here in the
subcommittee and I will turn it
over to us leave before we move
on.
Thank you cali mister chairman
members of the subcommittee
so wesley buildings leave the
infrastructure planning um
division i'm at the fa and I
think what I want to start with
before I get into some of the
other items that call he was
mentioning here is kind of what
um our new division does I think
many of you kind of already know
a little bit of what we do but I
want to make sure i'm all of you
haven't understanding i'm real
quick of what we do like
telestated we were created in
twenty twenty four so we've been
um we've been up and running for
about a year now since july of
last year we have three bureaus
within our division one is the
planning and policy bureau that
opening a policy bureau helps
local entities and state
agencies with their icipies they
also help them with the question
air process that we have a dfe
i'm so we can get some more
information on the projects and
they also help them with their
reporting of their capital
projects and and reporting into
that our cpm system our current
are current couple of reporting
system and that and then they
also help with creating policy I
think there's different funds in
different appropriations that
have been allocated to dfa and
so part of their job is to help
with that policy creation
whenever those funds i'm an
appropriations are or to that
that are our agency the second
one is our funding navigation
and assistance bureau they have
an intake process where they
reach out to local entities and
i'm gather information on
projects to help them fully fund
some of their projects and so
the entities fill out the intake
form we gather information and
prove and provide alternative
funding opportunities for those
local entities you know we've
only been doing this for a year
now and we have a lot that come
through that with only one
person that is currently
reviewing all of us and so you
know I think she doesn't really
get job we we do have a pretty
good system in place to to
locate and find those funding
opportunities but again you know
some of those opportunities
aren't really what the local
entities want right there
federal programs that are harder
to harder to get harder to
report on hearted to manage and
so.
I'm part of that is helping
provide the technical assistance
to be able to do that and so
within that funding navigation
bureau we have that funding
navigator but we also have the
rule of frontier equity
ombudsman and their rule is to
reach out to those entities and
help them with that technical
assistance so that's what that's
the primary focus of that um
bureau and in our division the
third one is the federal grants
because they have been around
for quite a while a while now
within the fa i'm jumping from
division to division I think we
found them a good home within
this division one of their rules
to us also help provide
technical assistance to those at
the ties for federal funding
opportunities and so
they are now fully staff which
is great they have a staff of
five of your chief and and four
other employees and so they're
they're ready this next fiscal
year to take on that challenge
of of trying to help these
entities find those funding
sources especially federal funds
that are better still available
even with the current
administration there's still
programs out there that we can
tap into
so those are the three bureaus
in addition and that's eighteen
employees with industry bureaus
now and which is great and then
we have two other additions
within our our division one is
the community development block
grant program the program they
were there with local government
division before but we moved him
under our division to kind of um
helped streamline that process a
little bit better um a lot of
what they were doing was they
were working on tap out the
appropriations and and so we
wanted to make sure that we're
maximizing uh what they were
doing and then what the the
project managers with the
appropriation program were doing
so we split them up and in the
last two word capitally bureau
the capital bureau was still in
existence even with this new
division there were two
employees that that do that at
the handle the budgets for
capital outlet and so they are
now under our division as well
so twenty five total employees
on our division which is great
after only being around for one
year but we have a lot of work
to do um I think i'm telling
mentioned a lot of what we are
looking at within this first
part of the presentation I think
what I want to kind of focus on
is you know fully funding
projects I think that is key to
completing projects within our
state and.
And I know that it's difficult
with the way that the current
processes and so one thing that
we want to do within our
division is try to help with
that process they should be
coming to you afterwards they
shouldn't be coming to you first
they should be coming to us for
so we're looking on trying to
find better ways to do that
and to provide that meaning for
funding for those projects
they're already coming through
as for capital navigation we
just want to make sure we get
the word out there so they can
know that we exist and know that
there's other programs out there
to help fully fund projects i'm
in lastly you know use ipd
infrastructure planning and
development division to assist
with those barriers that called
receiving on slide five minutes
you know we can provide that
technical assistance to to
helping them find funding
opportunities and so we want to
be able to do that.
And so I think that's all I have
for this part and we'll be tax
teaming that the rest of the the
presentation anybody may call
as we continue with programming
note is kelly did inform me that
the last part of this
presentation this morning the
major state agency and higher
education projects discussion
will only take an hour so let's
go to eleven o'clock on this
discussion then we will need an
hour for the next one so that
being said we do want to look at
these four focus parts that you
you bring up in the presentation
and we will pause after each of
those to then do question an
answer and then we will keep
moving for uh
next soldiers.
Next slide please okay so these
are the for a focus
we're going to talk about and I
will move quickly into them but
as the chairman mentioned we're
going to talk about uh potential
uses of the capital development
program find um and in
particular this funding source
as a mechanism for pillaring new
approaches to prioritising and
funding local projects we're
going to talk more generally
about opportunities to improve
vetting in prioritization for
everything else so for member
share projects we're going to
talk about potential limits on
reauthorizations and then we're
going to talk about its special
grant programs and opportunities
to further incentivise those
first for a certain type of
projects in particular.
So are next slide please.
Alright so starting with the
capital development program fund
so we're just going to have a
couple sides for each of these
areas to leave lots of room for
discussion this one in
particular is building on
some discussion among this
committee last year
that sort of identified that the
committee was interested in
using this fund to pilot new
approaches for local projects so
my assumption is sort of that
that's still your will although
of course you can change your
mind and we could use it a
different way.
Um but you know assuming you
want to go in that direction the
next question is how and if we
want to do it and collaboration
with the f a that's a decision
we need to make sooner than
later for the twenty to get
ready for the twenty twenty
succession so next slide.
Um first a little bit of
background so has been two fifty
three in twenty twenty four
created a new capital
development and reserved funds
and a related program find which
is what we're talking about
today that bill had a few goals
at the first one was to
stabilize the states long term
dat.
The second was to diversify
revenues over the long term to
the capital outlay program and
to start to insulate it from oil
and gas volatility which before
this we had done a lot of that
for the general fund and we had
done nothing for the capital
outlay program which
historically has been almost a
hundred percent reliant on
revenue from oil gas
the third goal is to start to
shift the states capital outlay
system towards more of cash
based system rather than relying
so much on debt.
Umm and the final goal is to
create funding with mechanism
specific for planning and design
for projects which we have
struggled to do in the past
because of our alliance on
severance tax bonding so the
reserves fine is essentially
like a trust find it will grow
over time and make annual
district distributions to the
program fund which are available
to you all to appropriate for
the bill set up some general
statutory
criteria around the use of those
funds which are essentially that
they're available for
appropriation for planning and
design
and then also for a construction
projects of five million dollars
or less I the distribution and
start it already this last year
and there are fairly small but
they will grow and eventually
this this will become at least a
partial replacement source for a
seven tax date so would the
amount available this next
session is anticipated to be
about twenty six million and
then that will grow to fifty
million by twenty twenty nine
and over the long term we're
looking at it growing to more
like four hundred million
dollars per year next slide
please.
So the opportunity this presents
for a local projects
essentially that though that
distribution in the grand scheme
of things is still relatively
small um it does provide an
opportunity for us to pilot new
approaches to prioritising
badding and funding local
projects without impacting the
typical practice of member
share.
Um this could provide several
opportunities that address some
of the challenges that we just
lead out um so first it provides
the opportunity to identify and
fund projects with the potential
to advance statewide priorities
or address significant local
needs at higher levels of
funding than the current system
is typically able to achieve.
It also provides I think
particularly for some of these
larger projects the opportunity
to fees plan and design and
construction funding.
A and it provides us an
opportunity to develop an
implement vating system that we
kind of lack currently within
the legislature to improve
prioritization and ultimately
project completion which is
really where we want to get at
the end of the day
next late please.
So as I mentioned in a sub
committee that chairman yos
convened at the end of last year
we discussed various potential
uses of these phones and the
will of the committee at that
time was an interest in trying
to use this fund towards local
purposes
so the question now is how do we
want to go about doing that the
session last session you all
appropriate at the whole amount
to wesley's division at dfa to
support i'm completion of
existing capital projects for
which they'll be running an
application based grant system
for that appropriation.
And so it's an option to do that
again but we wanted to outline
some other options as well which
is what you'll see on the slide
and what will discuss in a
second.
So the first one is to direct a
lfc and dfa infrastructure
division staff to work together
to develop eligibility and
prioritization criteria for
these funds for a twenty twenty
six and then to open an
application process to local and
tribal governments and political
subdivisions for those funds
essentially what that would
produce is that a recommendation
from dfa that could come to you
all this fall for a potential
incorporation into the statewide
framework similar to what we
currently do for like senior
center projects or high red
projects in the statewide
framework.
You know I wanted to also put
out there that a review team for
this application process could
include some kind of legislative
representation to give you all
confidence at through left the
staff to connect give you our
confidence that this is a
collaborative effort between the
executive and the legislature
and that we're not fully
outsourcing those decisions to
the executive.
Alternatively you can consider
appropriating funds to the
infrastructure division to stand
up and application be a scrap
program for planning design and
construction for local projects
that essentially a course
outside of the legislative
session so you know that
somewhat similar just a little
different and substance from
what you did this year and
similar to what you do now for
like the recreation and quality
of life grants where you get
them an amount of money for a
purpose and then you say you
figure it out and make the
awards in the enter.
Umm alternatively we could look
at developing an application and
thating process within the
legislature only without
executive support
or if you are not interested in
using these funds for a local
projects we could also use them
to find out smaller state own
projects
and I will make a couple
comments and then we'll start
for a discussion.
And thank you mister chair
subcommunity members just kind
of wanting to to touch on on
point one a little bit and I
kind of what we could
potentially do with the help of
lfc
and and providing some possible
criteria for this fund I think
you know with working through it
we could make sure that these
these instead eligible for one
right making sure that their
political subdivisions or state
agencies if we so choose to
funds the agencies uhm also we
can help determine project
reading us make sure that
there's other potential funding
sources that are secured so that
they are you know adequately
funding these projects we can
also help with the project
details you know make sure that
there is a detailed scope that
there's cost estimates that
they're on the icip things of
that nature and then also make
sure that they're compliance
with house before ninety three
and the public finance calendar
i'm so those just ways that we
can help you know with the
process if we search use to work
with with the lfc directly on
and then there's some additional
considerations as well you know
we can we can we could have
points based on those certain
criteria that way you know we
can have a list of priorities
projects from the highest score
to lower score to present to you
while to fund during the
legislature similar to what
water trust board does with
their projects and we we also
want to look at insuring forty
percent of the funds or reserve
for the frontier and real
communities back at possibly be
part of our policy development
if we develop a policy for that
i'm so does just a few things
that we can work on with
developing policy and things
that were looking at when we're
developing the policy um that
way if it if those things are
you know appeal to you then we
can definitel.
I think we would need that
direction soon so that dfa could
stand up an application process
very quickly within the next
couple of weeks even um with the
goal of having
can I scored list of projects to
recommend by the end of
september in time for the
statewide capital outlay request
process which happens and
october.
Thank you thank you wesley let
open up the floor for comes and
questions it's beginning by left
representative to hunt.
They will come come down the way
thank you mister chair as I was
we're looking to to do these
reforms which we all i'm sure
we'll need.
Would there be a have you looked
out where you looked at as if we
were to prioritize in and kind
of look at the structure of the
model that the water trust board
does wesley.
How would
local legislators from region
regionally or in within a
district or be able to
participate in making those in
having a input because the
cricks of this is that as
legislators we get to
really influence our local
governments in our local and
they're within our districts so
to take that out out of this
prices I think is is really a
crux for us right now and the
way that we do things currently
did you look at that or is there
can you respond to that
thank you mister chair
thank you mister terror
representative
you know I think partly with
working with cali we were hoping
to do that through you know her
communication with legislators
with developing a policy and
process
um you know we also were not
open this up to all entities
throughout the state and so they
have the chance to apply for
these and we could potentially
even share that list with
legislators and that way you all
know who's applying for these
city pier funds within your
regions I was one way that we
could look at doing it um I I
know I think putting a committee
together similar to the water
transport we could do that I
think it just would potentially
prolong the process but I think
all things are on the table I
think that's that's why we're
here discussing it and so yeah
that's a good but that is a good
opportunity that we could
potentially do it that way as
well a representative if I could
clarify to
what we're talking about here is
only the capital development
program funds so there's twenty
six million dollars that is
available for certain users
night doing the same for member
share at this point so we're not
touching that process we're
doing something outside of it
with this new funding source we
have
that I think would allow us to
cannot stand up of adding and
prioritization system start to
find a way that we might be able
to fund some of those like
higher value high priority
projects that we are not doing
through the current capital
outlay process.
And then you know potentially at
some point like that vetting
system might be able to be
useful in the member share
process too but that was her to
be a future
thing we're not talking about
touching member share with this
specifically thank you for that
clarification however I think
this is an on route to that and
to better preparing legislation
and us really participating into
if we're really going to reform
capitally I think this is you
know this is.
A preparing us to do that's the
way i'm reading this anyway I
don't know if anybody else is
but that's the way i'm seeing
this I think that we need to
really look at the
prioritization if it that you're
going to be setting up for us
but to have a hands on.
Participation through with
legislators I think is pretty
essential so that we can then.
Make other changes and and have
better developments of how we we
we spend our capital out late
dollars thank you
thank you representative let's
move to representative of dunkin
pick miss chair
I may step on some toes here and
I apologize ahead of time
and I don't know who would be
able to answer this question
calling but
is there a reason the state gets
fifty percent then the governor
gets her share we get our share
in the senate gets there share
who set set up and can we change
that percentage
mr chair representative yes I
mean it's just practice it fire
predates me so I I couldn't give
you like the full history of
where it originated from
but it you know it's not in rule
it's not in statute it's just
common practice
that you all have followed
thank you think you were started
then if that's the case then why
couldn't we set up towards the
the governor gets sixty percent
and that would include the state
share and in the senate gets
twenty percent in the house gets
twenty percent we can do bigger
projects then as capital
sometimes I think that.
You know we do state projects
and it's to the detriment of
local folks and that's where all
those taxes come from is from
these communities.
And so I would like to see that
changed mister chair if there's
anyway possible wesley on uh
can you explain how you're
getting the word out to folks to
uh to go to your website what do
you do in there please thank you
mister chair representative and
we are actually holding
trainings in our communities so
I was gonna get to it let me
just make sure I have the exact
areas we have had trainings
already in our current overseas
dallas and close and so we reach
out to the cogs to help make
sure that we reach out to all
the entities in those
communities to provide different
trainings actually right now my
deputies are in rose well today
and then they'll be in policy
this week for the final two of
our phase one of our training
program i'm in phase one is
really just to kind of go for a
little bit of the capital
process and the budgeting
process and local government
division face to we're gonna
focus more on our new system and
training them on the new system
once that's up and running next
month so
that's one way that we're
getting the word out of others
our newsletters we have
newsletters that go out to all
of the local communities whether
it's a federal grants
opportunity or in the upper any
of the opportunities that we
have identified within our
division and so that's how we're
getting the word thank you
mister thank you very and then
the last question I have very
quickly is when we're choosing
these projects
for the local projects.
You know I want to make sure
that it's fair for the the
cities as well it is as is for
the rural fox and so I hope
that's taken into consideration
thank you thank you mister thank
you representative of dunkin
let's go to representative
chatfield.
Thank you mister chair
i'm looking where it says fifty
percent of the funding uh goes
to stayed on projects who
appropriate set funding.
Mr chair representative are you
all appropriate that funding or
so it just occurs through a
different process so um state
agencies and higher education
institutions are like the major
categories within that state own
stuff although there is some
local stuff in there actually
also that's administered through
state agencies but both state
agencies and higher education
institutions go through a formal
request process requests are
heard by committees that include
wisely and myself
and other folks and then within
lfc we do analysis on those
requests and bring a draft
recommendation to you all
in the fall usually in november
we take few back on it work on
it further and then another
version goes to the committee in
december and is adapted and that
becomes essentially the
framework of the capital outlay
bill
it is
further and negotiated to some
extent by a group of house and
senate members that are
appointed during session to
negotiate the overall package
with the governor but by enlarge
kind of like most of why it
lfcam a daps in december
steps and is what is funded for
agencies and high red
mister chair who are other folks
i'm just
like who are the local entities
that are is an agency
yeah so i'm for example like
senior centers local senior
centers are funded through the
statewide process
so the aging and long term
services department has an
application process can a
similar to what we're talking
about here where senior centers
go through the agency for us to
apply the agency makes a
recommendation that is bright to
the state agency capital outlet
hearings.
In october and then we
incorporate that into the
statewide framework development
also recently DFA has been
making capital requests some of
which are intended to support
grant programs for a local
governments an example of that
is recently requested funds for
emergency local projects and
public safety projects and we've
appropriated to those um in the
state white framework so those
are just a couple examples thank
you
I appreciate everybody coming up
to see us in muscuran I think
now you have a an idea of what
i've talking about when I say
we're remote we're not just
rural we are remote so the big
fear of every person setting
through here is that that we do
maintain a fairness uh I
represent six counties until
they till they
done our districts I had seven
counties in senator woods pretty
much overlapses so figured
forward I get to uhm in in the
peace well they're that gives us
maybe seven million dollars for
seven county 6 to seven county
so it's a million dollars a
county it's not very much in
most many of the solutions that
I fear might come down the pipe
accessor breaks that whereas
where someone in berlin county
their.
Might be in that same land area.
Many many legislators with many
many millions of dollars in so
we have.
Less money.
But those projects are just as
important to us as the bigger
projects you're talking about
look.
Reviewing the projects to try to
focus the money on the bigger
projects well maybe the better
projects is not the most
important to everyone and I I
also from the numbers i've seen
many many if not most of the
projects that are incomplete are
in the more populated areas are
in in the burning leo county i'm
a kirky those places and and I
don't know why that is uh maybe
the the uh.
Demand was greater there but in
many of our rural areas
where so start for funding that
I think he's been put on the
ground.
Uh it has been my district
because we get a list there from
time to time you probably make
it
uh galley there.
Uh most of our money's
spiercel uh as we go through
this process there are those of
us as you will know there are
certain here very concerned that
our member share uh.
Remains constant so that we're
able to do something.
For me many communities when you
represent
six carriers.
Thirteen school districts.
Uh.
Six years department
multiple communities it's not
easy but two hundred thousand
makes a difference.
And that is exactly what I have
told the communities in my
district is.
That's about your target we
might go together since there
was and I usually set down in
the other people that have uh
uh.
Overlapping to the area and
we'll try to combine funding to
complete a project.
But we don't get too big on the
request because we can.
Uh your ear reply mr chair
representative yeah so a couple
things I mean I think to your
point like big is a matter of
perspective so maybe in your
district you know a big project
is like seven hundred and fifty
thousand dollars a million
dollars which you still struggle
to find across six or seven
counties with six million
dollars in total so I think what
I would suggest is that
something like this is actually
an opportunity to start to
address some of those challenges
you know as wesley mentioned
I think one of the things we're
looking for from you all here is
you know first like big picture
how do you want to use this
money and if you need us around
an application process we need
to know that soon next level
like do you have certain
priorities you want that
application process to address
you know as he mentioned what
they've already done with some
of their other grant programs
that you all have appropriate to
them recently I think you did
this with the recoration quality
of life grants he can correct me
if i'm wrong is their policies
for the applications for those
programs say like you know forty
percent of the funds shall be
prioritised towards roll on
frontier communities
so that's actually away to
direct additional resources to
those communities that we can't
do through the way we approach
capital outlay because the money
follows population.
Um.
And then you know I also just
kinda want to point out that.
The
you know one of the interesting
things that I think the analysis
they presented to you in the
beginning shows is that you know
tear point big may be a person
matter of perspective but the
larger communities are actually
like struggling to complete
their bigger projects too
you know and here and brand new
county for instance you know
there's a lot of capital outlay
that goes to nonprofits and non
governmental entities too and
it's still true that the overall
appropriations are small you
know so the challenges are
slightly different but they're
kind of thematically similar and
I think we can you know through
doing something like this we can
start to try to find ways to
address
the the challenges and all types
of communities.
Sure one last question is try to
go fat can you give me an
example of an ing or a nonprofit
it is eligible to receive
capital outlet
after the type of my head like
nat super specifically but in
general so they can receive
capital outlay
for for instance improvements to
buildings that they operate out
of as long as those buildings
are owned by a local government
they can also receive
Presentation in regards to the
options that cali and whether
you're looking for and that's
the focus on capital development
program the the capital out the
development program fund so as
we move forward in the
discussions that's focused on
that and then will the these
other bigger picture things I
think will get swant be
continued good on those type of
rabbit holes so let's focus on
these as we move for thank you
and will go to represent dickson
next.
Thank you mister chair
thank you for the the reminder
owner keeping us focused on uh
each area as we go I appreciate
that and I just want to say how
much I appreciate the
presentation and your
introductory comments
and the data that you all have
pulled together to illustrate
the challenges that we're
looking at my question is
regarding policy option number
one.
Um I believe so.
Talking about well I guess the
the question is could we limit
the use of the funds uh from the
capital development uh in
reserve fund to simply planning
Projected to be fifty million
and twenty twenty nine i'm
curious if we have a sense of
how much money is requested for
the planning and design fees
statewide with this cover that
need and be a discrete option
and then have construction costs
you know done at a regular
capital out like thank you
mr chair representative dixon
certainly yes that would be an
option and I think that could go
you could accomplish that either
through number one or number two
I I almost might suggest i'd be
interested in wisely
perspective unless that you know
number two might be a little
better for that kind of approach
because the funds could be
available on a little bit more
of a rolling basis
and you know you could even do
something like appropriate the
funds for planning and design
and maybe also for a completion
of existing projects at this
point I think.
Rolling this out is going to be
a little bit of a fact finding
mission to like so to your
question of well that cover the
new
we don't really know yet
but.
Hopefully we're gonna find out I
don't know firstly as anything
to just real quick I mean we can
obviously if we create policy we
can update policy every year as
well so the first year could be
kind of getting what
applications we can from both of
those categories and then seeing
what the need is and then
changing it the next year which
is not not an option and that's
kalicited with option number two
we could probably roll into
things quickly quickly and an
option number one would have to
go through you are to to to
approve during the session cell
um those are just some of the
the pros and cons of one one
into but both I mean everything
is really important i'm you all
having to say is very important
as well
thank you thank you mister chair
I think having the rolling basis
is an important consideration as
well as we look at this because
you know thirty and sixty days
um while people do or you know
entities make their applications
in advance
the rolling basis means that
there can be a much more
thorough vetering and
conversation process which
sometimes
you know I think our sessions
are compact and don't
necessarily allow for the most
thorough
of research but thank you
thank you representative it's
got a center of on yours
thank you in other policy
options I think are good start
but then we're going to come
back to the to the legislative
side right.
That.
And who overrides the policy
options is the legislature
in so unless we do these
policies and statute in some way
shape reform rate requiring them
to do they're going to come to
us his legislators and see.
Now that you send her complete
or singer news also their own
senate finance in the in there
they'll change the capital
outlay bill or however it's
moving a long rank and do that
so I mean or we're going to set
these policies in statute so
that the legislature in
staff have to follow these
policies because it's not always
just the legislature in the
executors that are changing
cability there there's some
engling with employees that
changes capital outlet to and
negotiating so if we're going to
develop these policies in stand
them up and add another layer
bureaucracy to capital.
How are we going to make the
executive the state agencies
the legislature adhered to these
policies so that it streamlines
the system.
And we thought about that caller
wesleyan leslie you get a raise
this week.
Mr
senator money is yes we are
thinking about that and we're
gonna kind of talk in the next
section about broader like
vetting and prioritization for
membership projects
but to give you a couple example
of examples I think kind of
building off of what
representative decks and was a
suggesting you know say you
appropriate these funds for
planning and design and then dfa
essentially stands up grant
program.
You could then use that as a
pipeline for the capital outlay
process and consider putting
limits around eligibility for a
capital outlay that require you
know readiness before requesting
construction dollars so I think
these things aren't like
mutually exclusive and go hand
in hand
and again can I like what we're
talking about specifically with
these funds is kind of like a
new approach that canned it can
and forum and benefit the other
process as well yep and mister
chairman and kelly but it I mean
you're headed down the same path
again if you don't develop it
been a contractor if you don't
develop a policy of what you're
going to do and how you're going
to do it and then you come back
and see well where we you could
go to the grand program later on
we're creating the same mess.
Maybe even more layers and more
spaghetti in the system if we
don't have the policy seeing
this is number one how you going
to do you have to.
See if it's else bill rank we
have to prior toys in criteria a
criteria for the phones rate and
there's an application process
and of the legislature or the
exact doesn't fall that process.
And were not on border of the
process then.
We're just going to come back to
this other sheet I showed you
right because allegedly there's
going to come to me and say
I needed this money for this
you know i'm welcome where you
barker to the meeting today
because that's where the story
is going to come from.
If we if we don't fix the front
end you're not going to fix the
back in.
In we're going to continue down
that.
Horrible rab at holes I think we
do the grand kenyan with capital
outlet.
Uh.
In so I mean
if we're in and make
recommendations mr chairman.
Mean that the legislative
process I like the policy
options right I think they're
good that's a first start but
are we going to cotify these in
statute.
To go ahead in and move to the
cap this this first portion so
the legislature really
understands that
mister chair i'm thinking of I
think that is an option I think
what we want to do is ensure
that whatever policy recreate
and we work with you all to
create it um that we that that
is not going to need to be
changed i'm I think when we
create policy sometimes we
realize that there's some things
and they're that need to be
updated or change them so by
putting it in statute and
qualifying it I mean it's harder
to change it but i'm not seeing
that we shouldn't at this maybe
we should create the policy
first see how it goes and then
maybe a good or two down the
line see if that's worth doing
and today
in mister chairman in in
westline the legislature is
really not good at following
policy guidelines and neither is
the exact any exact you want to
go back to their they're not a
good fine here's the guidelines
or here's the policy right.
If we if we're going to clarify
it to make sure the process
works.
At the end of the day then
statutory it should be in
statute whether you come back
and amend the statute because
it's not working I mean
legislation I think is always in
the constitution should be
always in motion because we we
live in a different world than
we did him
eighteen seventy six and so.
I mean capital outlays one the
worst things I do in kelling
knows this I mean and will talk
about project in the killing
counting where the county took
money in this clearly says for a
domestic violent shelter what
they do when it bought an office
building and put off a specie
which is a clear violation.
Policies not going to have any
recourse on that.
But statutory there should be
recourse.
It in soul I I just want you to
think.
Policy is great but.
The legislature is not going to
policy because are constituents
going to come to us whether
they're in the sake yeah whether
they're a chapter house whether
whoever they are they're going
to come to us in say oh I need
this to do it that way well
that's policy is an issue just
should not a statutory.
Compliance issue and I I really
think you need to do the policy
option but I think you also need
to follow that back up with some
statutory reform that requires
us to to do that.
Cause at the end of the day this
is all costing everybody in the
state new mexico
I think i'm policy mister
chairman I think that something
that they should look at.
Developing within with in the
legislature to make sure that
policy is caught at fired to
make sure that we follow the
policy so thank you mister
chairman thank you center
percent of so to recaptain on
senator when your point then I
mean he he we can appreciate the
policy options you provided us
in the presentation page twenty
two but your focus then is these
are just policy options you see
it i've seen it we've all seen
it were we're not going to
follow in directions I mean it's
just as good as the paper is
written on right until it's
catified into law in regards to
this is the this is this is the
game plan this is this is the
bible is sort of speak
everybody will decide step
forward with this is so I guess
would be an option then if it if
it's twenty six million we
haven't right now and it's gonna
be twenty six million again next
year
to hold that in the bank letter
grow until we calify something
so that week we can then begin
to focus on not having people's
sites that we can move forward.
With the concrete plan that
people executive or
legislatively we cannot sized
it.
Do we have that time
mr cherry yes I mean you could
also appropriate the funds for
this year and we could like run
a bill to
put some additional statutory
criteria around the users of
these specific funds
as well as you know potentially
capital outline more brightly so
I don't think you necessarily
need to wait to use these funds
to put in some statutory guide
rails as well as senator when
you have says suggesting thank
you let's go back broke to a
center when yours but the number
two you're cranistatutary
requirement for the grant
program so this would fall the
scene so you need to forgot to
set this in policy but the other
thing is I mean.
On them on the policy options if
you're going to work with the
number one everybody throughout
there you know.
In its not just albert cricket
on their route sixty six
visitors center that doesn't
operational there's a better
incentive and through new mexico
that exactly the same story.
Right and so does need to be
part of the policies that
rebuild you something that you
have the app operational wear
with all insade the policies we
may want to add that that they
have the operational money to to
operate those things in the
future in the and if they don't.
Then they can revert back to the
state and be sold or something.
So thank you
thank you center munich that
move on then to center o'malley.
Thank you mister members
listening to the conversation
and
someone who knew the center but
has worked on the local level
especially
getting projects off the ground
that are a smaller and mostly
community development projects
and affordable housing those
kinds of things which don't take
big chunks of change but I was
to take big chunks of money but
it you know you typically they
are in the millions but not to
the extent of some of these
really large projects but the
impact that they have is huge
and they say that as someone who
represents berlin county which
is er brilliant county is is is
a community of communities we
have neighborhoods there all
have different needs are we have
infrastructure needs we have
declining information we we have
growth issues we have housing
issues we have all those things
and so
I don't I think that
and I certainly feel comfortable
defending projects that I would
like to see funded fully funded
and that means you know where
are you in the project have been
done design have you have you
you know who owns what if you
dealt with the issues of
easements and things like that
how ready are you to get
something done and I think it's
important that we be able to
defend those are so that we can
make sure that we have funding
predictability it's very
important for communities you
know what can we expect and we
want you know we represent a
constituency that wants to see
things are done so I guess the
issue about I guess i'm going to
respond to you know defense of
the eight hundred pound
guerrillas that we've been
referred to really counting of
that
we're you know as again a
community of neighborhoods we
have a lot of needs we take on a
lot of the health issues for for
the stage and definitely housing
issues for the state but um.
At some point I guess I would
like to know cause it seems like
we shift back and forth between
paying for a paying arm out
paying for things in cash versus
you know a separate response and
you know I think we see what
that's the philosophy
so at some point maybe we could
have that conversation mister
solica's i'm curious a little
bit about that.
But in the end we have to
deliver and I have to deliver as
a senator and I think we all do
and it's just what's the pathway
to do that and what and i'm I
also very concerned about
theirness I want things to be
fair but in the end that's
really I think that's the end
thank you mister chair thank you
senator let's move on to senator
the new
thank you mister chair good
morning calling leslie I I just
have a couple of things
I I
know I think we are all kind of
on the same plate page it's
capital outlet is very important
to us.
As it is to our constituents.
I want to make sure that we're
not.
Are we by doing something like
this I I feel like it's kind of
taken it out of our hands.
So like if we if you have a
selection committee for capital
outlay
would there be a group of
legislatures legislators on
there.
Um mr chair senator linear
so again you know this is only
talking about a certain type of
funds it's not taking away from
membership these funds aren't
currently part of membership
and it would be practically very
difficult to make them a part of
membership because it would be
like you know each of you got
like ten bucks and just in terms
of like allocating it it would
be almost impossible
so we're really talking about
doing something for the benefit
of local projects outside of the
member share process with these
funds and in doing so
developing new approaches.
Collaboratively between the
legislature and the executive to
vetting and prioritizing those
projects that then you know
could be useful to you all if
you wanted them to be or not I
mean that's that's really at
your discretion.
Um.
That said I mean to your point
you know if you appropriate
funds to dfa for planning and
design for local projects yes
you are you are to some extent
outsourcing the ultimate
decision about where those
planning and design funds are
allocated to them for that
twenty six million dollars
you're not outsourcing all of
your capital outlay decision
making to them
the legislature already does
this and a number of ways
through for instance that your
mark programs like the water
trust for the colonius
infrastructure find the tribal
infrastructure find and we've
also done it over the last over
years through special
appropriations to special ground
programs that have mainly gone
to DFA
that they have administered
through these application based
grant programs umm lfc has done
analysis on those programs and
found them to be largely
successful
and consistently more successful
than capital outlay at funding
things adequately and getting
projects completed in a timely
manner
and
that reporting that we have
brought back to the committee I
think you all have also been
largely satisfied with the way
they have stood up those
application presidencies to
insurer issues of equity that
some of you have been bringing
up so that's kind of the idea
here thank you and mister chair
I agree I think everybody's
pretty happy with you know the
wave things have folded out but
that's one of the things I want
to make sure that we're not
doing here is creating more red
tape so it's a longer process
and then is senator malley was
talking about where the ones out
talking to these constituents.
How are we gonna answer.
You know if if it comes back to
us in its.
It's not as high on their list
or they had a high on their list
and it's not there you see what
i'm saying is
I feel like it's it's taken the
decision making out of.
Out of this group out of this
body.
So that you you get to see it
first hand you get the list made
and then you bring it to us how
does that.
How does that process
are we just make it in a longer
process to apply for any capital
outlay even before it gets to us
if if I may then really so this
this process that we're talking
about today is completely
separate completely separate
from what we went through this
past legislative session with
your personal capital outlet
right in in the negotiation
process right what we're talking
about here is based on up on a
bill that I help response are
along with with representative
that sets up this capital
development program fund it's a
exclusive fun that helps break
away from what we went to do
during this past legislative
session and set up a fund so
that they now have at their
disposal an additional amount of
funding so that they can focus
on projects and getting them
done and so
it it's not what we're you just
went through this past
legislative session.
Okay thank you and and I just
you know I just try to take care
of of the processing and how
it's going to come to us and and
make our decision making even
more because I I agree we do
need to make some some definite
changes and then
and streamline the streamline
and not red tape it more so.
Alright thank you
thank you center let's go to
senator woods before we move on
to the next part of our four
part presentation thank you
mister chair on page six of this
first presentation.
It shows the statewide capped
out late funds and that support
were talking about here.
And I can't like the number one.
Option myself.
To set up that uh
to work together and develop the
edgeability and produce a power
of days these policies are now
that lfc goes around and look so
got a lot of these already.
And in
tries to there.
But this would put out.
A better framework under that on
how to do that and as it's been
said it's got be put through
statute or nothing will be
followed.
But.
In my idea the number one policy
option is the best there mister
chair thank you thank you center
woods we've come to the end of
our question and comments for
people that have raised their
hand on this matter with that
being set calling wesley if you
want to move to part two
okay next slide please.
Okay so i'm now we're going to
talk about more general vetting
and prioritization options for
member share
and a couple can I quick goals
of this discussion
why is to identify whether you
all have preferences on a
request deadline for this year
and in tandem with that when you
all would see your requests as
well as the information you
would like to receive with the
requests we also wanted to talk
more generally about kind of
nearer and longer term
opportunities to partner with
the fa
to potentially as you all have
talked about before provide
additional vetting information
to you on the projects you're
being asked to find within
different categories of need.
And then I also just kind of
wanted to mention that um we've
been working on training your
district staff and to
effectively support you all and
tracking projects to use your
sponsored reports and also sting
to train them on some of the
recommended that in criteria
uh that we suggest members
consider when they're fielding
new requests and kind of how to
find and apply that information
next slide please.
Okay so first of a request
deadlines and information on
requests i'm just going to can
oppose these questions to start
and then
hand it over to wesley to talk
about infrastructure division
current capacities in future
direction.
Ah and then all pass for
discussion again so last year
you all implemented an earlier
deadline for local capital
outlay requests that enabled you
to receive your less ever class
early in the sixty day session
and that also allowed staff
to provide carcasses with
essentially and excel to all
where the vatting information
that we're collecting with the
requests and was the first time
for the first time available to
you and sort of an easy to sort
fashion so if members wanted it
they could go ask for like okay
can you tell me other projects
that are related to an existing
capital request where I might be
able to earn existing capital
project where I might be able to
top it off and complete that
project can you tell me which
ones say they were made have a
cost estimate made by a
professional um or on an icip
can you tell me the ones that
say they have planning and
design complete etc.
So I think the question for this
next session is when do you
ultimately want to receive your
requests is the first week of
session sufficient would you
like to receive them a week or
two before session I think we
need to
think about that and kind of
give legislative council service
some guidance on that as soon as
possible so they can prepare
they kind of do a lot of front
end work on their end before
they can get those requests to
you
next what information do you
want to have easily available to
you with those requests.
Did anyone know that we had that
information available last year
wasn't useful what could we do
to make it more useful for you
is there information you're not
getting that you want to be able
to get that we could add as a
question on the request stuff
like that.
Um and then I think to senator
mean you says points
in the last discussion I think
thinking forward
do you want to consider adapting
any mandatory eligibility
criteria for capital outlay
requests that kind of serve as a
filter of you know certain bars
folks have to meet before they
can ask you for funding this
might be particularly relevant
for kind of new construction and
uh major renovation in
particular
next slide and i'm gonna turn it
over to wesley now thank you
calling
and so offer that what is what
is ip doing now you know with
our new division that we stood
up how are we getting the
information that we could
potentially provide to you and
so the first thing we're doing
is we're collecting meaningful
data
so we're we're implementing a
new ic system and and then that
I sip system doesn't be more
fields for the entities to fill
out to try to gather some more
data to see if there are
projects qualified for certain
federal funding or other state
funds that they can potentially
apply for prior to coming to you
um that is the goal is to get
them applying other places and
then coming to you if they don't
get those funds obviously
there's a timing issue with that
we know federal funds aren't
awarded immediately and so it's
just it's it's another piece of
infringement for you all to have
whenever you're having this
conversation and saying well did
you know that this federal award
exists and and and did you apply
for that federal word
we also have funding navigation
and so we're providing those
alternative funding sources for
them and also helping them
through that to that process.
And then also there's the cpf
that we just discussed and and
possibly going to that fund for
planning design or project a
completion first we're assisting
entities with all the compliance
reviews i'm right now you know
some of the entities don't have
their audits and and so what
we're doing is we are using our
ombudsman to help them through
that process that's contacting
the entity contacting the
auditor and trying to come to an
alignment and agreement on what
needs to be done to get these
audits completed because they
have a hard time accessing the
capitality if they don't have
the authors completed and then
regional capacity building
trainings which I discussed
earlier we're going out to the
communities and and providing
trainings on capitally and our
systems
so
what are our future plans what
are we looking at doing in the
future within our division
providing formal request by
entities to the legislature so
i'm one thing that we're looking
at trying to do is trying to you
know find the top priorities of
these entities and um having
meaningful presentations to you
are so you know what projects
are in their in their priorities
that's that's obviously really
hard to do there's over three
thousand at the tease in our
state so how do we actually see
the top priorities from each
entity so we're thinking about
how to do that trying to find
clever ways to do it one is
through you know a video or
something something that you
know we can send to you and say
look they put on this video this
is the top parties that they
want and have some meaningful
information for it
the second thing is provide
assistance with cost estimates
we're what working on trying to
find a way to do that whether
that's an RFP process um to our
division and trying to i'm
gather those individuals who can
help with costs estimates
because right now some entities
especially the smaller ones they
don't have the capacity to
create costs of it so they're
just kind of going and blind so
how can we help them with that
process i'm to make sure that
the cost of the project is the
is the two cost and they're not
discussing.
Um providing planning and and
designed funding first I think
this is a big one where we're
historically we've just given
you a big part of money to the
project and they haven't even
started planning to sign up so
trying to make sure that plan
designer done first before we
actually find those projects and
how can we help them provide
that or find that planning of
design money
and sure prior projects are
completed before funding new
projects I think that's also a
big one I think some of these
entities have lots of projects
ongoing and so they have
capacity constraints and so i'm
trying to help them finish some
of their projects first before
moving on to newer projects.
Do not found new projects of the
entity shows more than fifty
percent of funds unspent and
this is something that we can
help provide this data to you
all so that you have it whenever
they are trying to find funding
from you make sure you have all
the data to finger to.
Only fund projects needing
additional funds for completion
if they do not receive the cpf.
I'm also creating list of
projects for specific category
types and so that we we can find
alternative funds water trust
board is one where you know the
water projects can go there and
rose can go to the ground road
fund through dot and then there
are also some other funds for
broadband through the officer
broadband expansion so um you
know providing those other
opportunities for them and then
create an implement criteria to
assess entity risk and project
risk and i'll get into that i'm
in the next two slides but
before I go to those slides
another thing I did not put on
here is you know actually
creating a technical assistance
navigation tool working on doing
that and trying to launch that
by december so right now we're
kind of in the survey process
trying to gather the information
from the entities what kind of
technical assistance do you need
what what is out there that you
all are having issues with so
that we can provide the the
right technical assistance for
you all and and move you through
that process so we are doing
that like I said hopefully we'll
have a tool launched by by
december as our goal
are max like.
And this is just a a sample of
what we could do this is scoring
entities to assess readiness to
receive capital funding so kind
of going through these list of
criteria i'm giving them a
redder green score green meaning
that you know they have
everything in their compliance
to receive the funds read
meaning you know you should
probably use caution and
providing funding for for these
entities or these projects
because they either have
projects out there outstanding
or they aren't eligible to
receive any projects right now
because they they don't have
their audits and so that this is
kind of a tool that we can
potentially develop to help you
all use in the future if if you
want to
and then the next slide
it's kind of the same thing just
in kind of more of a outline
format it's it's similar to the
flight before we're you know you
could utilize icip to identify
high priorities and they kind of
going through a vetting system
on what those high priorities
i'm so not going to go and i'm
not going to read all of these
but that's kind of what this
most fight is outlining those
different criteria.
And that's all I have
thank you call you thank you
wesley the moneration of capital
outlay
has come a long way since the
both of you really took charge
of this and I thank you both for
what you've done up for the most
part anyone around this table to
get faced value that when
somebody came to us with the
request that it was just that
and I think that's what that's
what has lead us to having now
seven billion dollars into a
fund that is not spent because
there's a lot of projects that
they're not ready then they were
never ready so that being said
let's move the questions
comments on this particular part
of the presentation first on the
list I have said a senate when
yours.
Thank you but you know on this
part of the presentation the
deadline.
I don't know if that matters
right because we went to this
last session and and we've got
the deadline earlier than ever
before right the governor of
wanted it by the in middle of
november wesley something like
that.
In the legislature came up with
like the first week in january
and council service was still
making changes to the bill.
Before
we
jammed them and told him we need
the bill we're getting to the
end of the session but they were
they were still making changes
to the capital bill.
So I mean if we're not going to
change the entire process with
council service and some this is
the executive not getting us for
capital stuff to put in the bill
till the last minute.
So there is blame everywhere
around that if count if we're
not put a deadline for a capital
to be.
Request to be set.
And the bill to be drafted by a
certain date.
And not changed after that day.
These have to go hand in hand.
I know there's technical changes
that may have to.
Be amended but they were making
changes to members capital
request I mean what one or two
days before we had to have the
bill come out you're a committee
and where like where's the bill
where's the bill we're getting
to the timeline where forget jam
were not going to pass capital
in so I think that's a deadline
that needs to be set to.
The other thing west is is
incredibly changing from ipv to
like capital company outlay
police or something.
You have some big goals in here
and let me tell you the hardest
thing to find right now is an
estimate.
There you have to build them you
cannot find an estimator
that i'll go to work to give you
estimates that have their
technical expertise from a
project in.
Say had to new mexico which is
out by gallop to to something in
hards which is a completely
different scenario on a
different capital some I think
we need a role some of these
back I think you need to put the
burden on the person applying
for the capital and not on the
state.
They have cost estimates and
design because.
You know.
We show up with a bag for the
money and say hey let's go build
all their stuff right in
everybody comes with a dream
and says that all they get
capital then I can go.
Do design or I can purchase the
land and then we have nothing
after that because the other
falls after cliffing and go
through horror stories and
horror stories.
Cities in counties with the
exact same way we funded them
for their number one priorities
and then they don't use any of
it.
It and so when you build this
system was they think you're
really going to have to pull
back in and really.
Decide ok where is the burden on
the financial controls in the
management going to come from
that's going to come from the
person that's requesting it.
Because you're going to have a
staffer of c.
I need this I need to know whose
managing the project I need to
how much money span I need to
know what you're first I don't
really know if they get a first
draw a capital or they just have
to it's a reimbursement rate.
So how they're going to do that
who's going to do the audit and
complaints that's up humungous
issue across the board.
The staffing and expertise I
don't care what city.
County.
Whoever's doing it none of them
haven't the staffing near the
expertise right now I mean you
hear that from albert cricket
belief right.
They have
pick your number so much money
in cabality when we don't have
the engineer we don't have the
planning zoning department
doesn't have the architecture of
you uh
in soul
this is going to be that I think
for me the toughest issues were
were we going to put that
burdensome could it shouldn't be
the state it should be assessed
as the state to do that they're
the ones that want the money the
burden is on then to prove that
they have the financial controls
they have audit compliance they
have the policies and procedures
that this is free money.
You're gonna have to to do this
the transparency in
accountability may be a little
bit of what we need to do and
the risk management
tell me what the wrist
management section on on your
list
to me an idea comprehensive.
Can you go back aside.
Mr chair i'm certainly just an
increased management is just the
risk of the project or the
entity at a whole as a whole
that's all that really is and
and these are these were just
items put in place to kind of
give you an idea of what we can
do potentially if we if we
really put everything out there
and to try to get a really good
sense of you know compliance for
these efforts are for the
projects
and again we don't have to do
all these we can kind of pick
and choose ones that we want to
do I think when it comes to and
I and I agree with you on the
cost estimate I think what we're
looking at with that is their
smaller entities on some of
these um as well they're smaller
entities out there that really
don't have
the the expertise to do some of
these things but they still need
the need they saw the need in
their community so how do we
help those it might not be
through this or we might be able
to provide some assistance to
help with some of this and to
get them into a place where they
could potentially receive
funding and actually do the
project and so yeah it's it's
it's a heavy left and I think we
agree with you and that that
that this is really going to be
difficult to implement but what
else can we do if it's not this
other some other ideas that we
can put in place to kind of help
with that with this problems
well I mean
if this is your sale small
mutual domestic means two
hundred and fifty thousand right
for a line of replacement and
balls rate those are all
estimates that can be gotten
from the contractor rate
in soul if if estimates or cost
estimates can be gotten that way
before they have to do the
capital right then will know
what the actual cost of the
project and it's actual
reimbursement but
I just think if if we go to deep
into this.
We're going to get.
Right back to where then they'll
see it capitally failed right in
and so I I think that
we need to take a really hard
look at this mister chairman is
in the structure mean we're
using we're trying to use ai in
apps for costs estimating right
now right
and if you use an app for
estimating they're going to use
the national standard.
And they're going to use either
gordian or some estimating costs
and your estimate numbers may be
you know.
Six times higher than what the
actual cost is I mean if you
take
ces to use this gordian if
western goes in buys a flush of
alvers toilet at ease hardware
it's nineteen ninety nine gordon
i'll have it at sixty five
ninety nine
in so those numbers will run up
so that this is this is one of
the things where you want people
to succeed with the right amount
of money and how do we do that
and in so i.
I I think we're gonna have to
really missage how we we handle
this but for the the capitals
for legislators I mean if it's
the end of the year deadline in
december that's fine because
everybody goes to their capital
alley meetings for chapter
houses cities are counties and
they usually start in october
november some in january and you
go to their priorities and sold.
I think that that deadline for
should be made me the end of the
year deadline.
Um.
And then the date the date the
village drafted should tie into
other thirty sixty day deal
because they're there's changes
out to be made but they're not
changes that have to be made
that shouldn't keep us
preventing from doing our
homework when we're not in the
session when we are busy with
other things cause we have a lot
of other things emotion when
removing to capital outlay and
tax policy and bills in and the
budget
and so if we have a clear cut.
Ah understanding of what's going
to be in place it's it's up to
the people that want free money.
To make sure that they do their
job so they can get free money.
As it is bring money to them
there's no cost so thank you
mister chairman thank you center
points are well taken to the
comments on this section of the
presentation.
And i've checked with calling
we're going to push the higher
education back to forty five
minute presentation so we'll go
to eleven fifteen on this matter
and i'm gonna ask you to to lump
the next two sections together
then we'll do the questions and
answers their at the end thank
you
mr chair next next slide yep
okay so the next year we're
gonna talk about it is.
Uh putting some limits on
reathorizations next slide.
So some background on why we're
talking about this at all one
reathorizations have increased
in volume significantly in
recent years we saw doubling a
couple years ago and a doubling
again this past year the vast
majority of reauthorizations as
you can see on the table on this
page are to extend time beyond
either the standard two year
expenditure period for equipment
or four years for construction.
Umm in most circumstances while
planned projects that are ready
to go when they're asking for
a funding should not need more
than four years to expand expand
the funds and again I want to
remind you that the majority of
appropriations were talking
about are under two hundred and
fifty thousand dollars so we're
talking about it taking more
than four years to expand
relatively small amounts of
money.
Um.
And why are wire re
authorizations important you
know in the end the realth
aren't a huge amount of money in
the grand scheme of all the
outstanding capital outlay funds
that are out there though there
are a lot of projects
however the status quo is
essentially that you can ask for
a reathorization
there is no kind of benchmarks
you have to meet to get it a
member just has to sign off on
it
I think it's very hard for
members to say no there's not
really a good reason for you to
do that
and you can continue asking for
reauthorizations as many times
as you want.
Um what that means is that the
system is providing essentially
no incentive to the folks
requesting funding to do that
front and work before they come
asking for funds that we know
and a lot of cases isn't getting
done and as one of the
contributing factors to
the outstanding funds and a lack
of project completion so
the having no limits on
reauthorization essentially
creates a disincentive for the
entity is asking for a support
to get projects ready before
they seek funding for you from
you next slide.
Um potential limitations this is
again building on discussions
that you all started last year
so a couple options that you
identified that number of
members supported one allowing
only one time extension per
appropriation and for only one
year
again the saturday square is any
number of time extensions and
the standard extension is two
years
although I will say that the
governor has
recently been vetoing older
riots in the bill so those
vetoes have significantly
reduced the number of old
projects that were re authorized
multiple times that are already
in the pipeline alternatively
you could allow only one
extension but maintain the two
year extension period
and beyond the time extension um
you may also want to think about
whether you continue to allow
change of purpose free
authorizations where you can
move money from one
appropriation to an entirely new
purpose
so perhaps you could you know
allow for technical changes that
were the results of drafting
errors for instance but a not
not allowed funds to be moved
from one project to an entirely
different purpose in that
initial authorization period
next slide.
So assuming you are interested
and are pursuing some
limitations the next question is
how you would like us to go
about pursuing that for you and
there's a few options that we've
identified
the first is that um
this committee could adopt an
lfc endorsed proposal
that the committee requests be
taken out by legislative council
that legislative council could
than voda to provide the
legislative late legislative
council service with direction
on a how they are going to
accept or not reathorization
requests essentially what's
element eligible and how they
will draft the bill
which is where you know
something like limiting a time
extension to one year rather
than two years would come in
alternatively you all could
adapt how joint house and senate
rules that put limits on
reauthorizations or you could
put those limits into statue by
attempting to pass a bill on
this issue next session
alright next slide.
Umm finally
we wanted to highlight special
grant programs and
these are potential strategy to
further incentivise community is
to seek funding from these
programs before they
are go to capital outlay next
slide.
So we have a lot of these
programs that support it the
same type of projects and local
communities as capital outlay
our program evaluation team over
the has looked at these programs
and we have consistently found
that these programs have better
outcomes than capital outlay in
terms of funding projects
adequately and supporting
project completion.
I want to say that I think it's
a particularly important to
think about the strategy for
like critical infrastructure
that must have stuff in
community is that tends to cast
more
so things like roads water and
wastewater systems which is what
well focus on today
next slide umm this chart is
just kind of giving you a quick
idea of the potential benefits
to communities of going to these
other sources first and it basic
level it's because they can
provide a lot higher dollar
amounts to projects than you can
provide through the capital
outlay system so this is
comparing the average capital
local capital outlay
appropriation for water system
projects to the average award
from the water trustword you can
see that on average the water
trust word is providing multi
million dollar awards whereas in
capital outlay were still under
five hundred thousand dollars
for wider systems.
Ah next slide.
So the policy options here won
sort of what I would call the
structure strictest option is to
not allow local capital outlay
for water waste water and roads
at all combined with providing
one time special appropriations
to boost capacity in the special
grant programs that funds the
same projects
I sort of safter approach well
two after approaches
one we could start to look at
soliciting annual lists from
these complementary grant
programs of qualifying projects
that they can't funds because
they don't have the capacity in
their recurring funding sources
that year and you could consider
funding these qualifying
projects or some portion of
these projects cannot offer the
type of the overall local
capital at least part before
member and governor shares are
arrived at.
Alternatively you could continue
to make these one time
appropriations to boost capacity
and these programs for water
waste water and roads
and just in courage legislators
are to not fund these projects
with their capital outlay or to
kind of bring a higher level of
scrutiny to them if they're
going to find them
and if if you want to provide
that option and why us to work
with dfa and probably animal
fair to cannot provide you some
additional vetting information
on capital outlay projects
within these certain categories
we could look at doing that and
I will see if wisely wants to
mention anything in the mall
pies again thank you I think for
the sake of time i'll just want
to take questions pretty good
thank you thank you called we've
come to the end of this part of
the presentation so we're going
to open up for questions
comments first time I list we
have a representative of dixon
and then anyone else.
Thank you mister thank you for
the policy options uh the focus
on three and four
I am a fan of the most strict
suggestions that you come up
with
I recognize that others may not
be but I appreciate the fact
that there are other programs
particularly when we're talking
about uh water waste water and
roads
that you've identified that the
water trust board and some of
these other grant opportunities
are doing a better job funding
these program these these things
so it doesn't mean that
they wouldn't be getting money
but we can always do a better
job and be more efficient
so I don't actually
have a question I just want to
say that I support the most
strict options that there are I
support
making this a better and more
effective process and I don't
think in couraging legislators
actually works thanks
no do thank you representatives
and it's got a senator monos.
I agree with representative
we'll make that as a motion
you know reauthorizations are
are tough right and I think I
voted against the real site
thing started three about three
years ago rate seen we're just
wasting money and we're wasting
our time and we're just
continuing to go down the same
rabble but I I think there is a
special situations where you
need to do reass some may be a
language change that was wrong
in the bill because it came
drafted that way rate so there
is technical fixes that believe
that have to happen in reoff now
i'll give you the horror story
and you guys have heard about
the things that I am a toe for
eight years that never got bill
and kept getting reatherized and
reauthorized in reality
we we can do that anymore.
Putting restrictions on reass
and telling the money I think
when you when you revert that
money is going to be the other
big issue that I think you need
to include in there and why
should that money go
maybe it should go into that
steak wide cap out the program
right maybe you we know that
we're going to get hit between
their eyes with medicaid we send
it to the medicare trust but
we're gonna have to start
thinking about where the
versions come but restricting
them is going to be the most
critical thing to do because.
Yes like representative dixon
said we don't listen well as
legislators.
Um we want a piece of
constituent.
And i'm guilty of it you
and it does not benefit them in
any way she perform just keep
some chasing money that they're
never going to get
centered rodriguez may have been
the smartest legislator when it
came to capital out there.
Well she would appropriate a
capital outlay project to
someone in santa fe and they
only needed a hundred thousand
in the limit was two hundred
thousand should give them two
hundred thousand and then they'd
revert the other hundred and
she'd come back to the riof bill
and said it took someone else
for another project in and so
there is ways around the system
i'm
you need to think about how.
That happens it can't be really
ever again
if if there's technical issues
that they need to do I think
those in the reot bill should
happen.
But just coming time in time
again
you know the city is sanity who
didn't meet their authorities
for how many years have owned
how many times we are projects
from them.
And I was here but also here now
I mean the the new capital
building
I think that may be the longest
real project in history of the
state wesley you're smiling but
that being I know it's been at
least their ten years right.
You can answer if you want
so so the exact in the
legislature are part of the
problem to but the reot bill
if we're giving you something
free and it's no cost to you and
you do not have your ducks in
the role.
Why are you going to go cash the
winning lottery ticket you're
not just going to say just
extend the timeline and when I
get time out all do it so I
think that's
that may be the hardest part of
capital change it is the real
the other policy for the water
and responder and the roads.
We have.
Zero percent or one percent
loans that cities and counties
can go get waste water and water
money at that's free money one
percent a one percent longer for
a project is nothing.
Um.
And so I think they need to seek
those a water trust board we
added a hundred million or two
hundred million additional this
year.
Two hundred million m have it
pretty well all spent because
they better the project so well
and they did their homework and
they know where they needed it
to probably try to money so I I
think that just eliminate those
out there in last week yet to
maybe it's a small me child
domestic we can name on blue
water villager remark someone
that may have a categorization
to do that but we funded them
also with capital and then they
never used it.
And so that becomes another
issue.
But they'll waste water in the
water project should all just go
to the wire transport.
This just eliminator must do
some easy clean up their
efficient they do it correct
no one ever complains when that
bill goes through.
The roads got here's the here's
the problem with local roads.
It depends how big you aren't a
minister
and depends how much you're
connected in do tea because we
have the local roadmatch fun so
if you match ten percent and you
have a million dollars road
you're given a hundred thousand
dollars.
And if you're not in the loop in
the dots group.
You don't get that money galb
never got the money at all till
we start asking questions grants
has never got the money at all
we start asking questions in so
the roads may be a different
issue but you may have to limit
put a cost of capacity limit on
the roads.
They're they're not going to be
cheap but I mean there is funds
to do that.
You know.
Way last line is got a hundred
seventy six million dollars road
in and didn't have to put any
match up.
This can increasing but the
roads are going to be a little
bit tricker than that but I
agree with those two points in
in then the the reality capital
are just gonna have to.
What do they thank you mister
thank you center errors move on
to representative chapter
thank you mister chair monitors
keep on with a realization
conversation I I think we're
going to have to do something
that does not rely on a
legislator to not reauthorize
their own appropriation I mean
i'll step on sister muniosis
appropriate or mister chair not
a problem but i'm I cannot.
Refuse to reather as I am
funding there is putting my
district by me for a project
my folks that's important so if
I think it's going to be have to
be reauthorized by
you know a committee or this
body this committee uh something
other than than killing your own
funding it just it's on wise
that it's just
in a mo- must legislate not
going to do that i'm not going
to do that uh.
The second thing.
They're there a few years back
we have some funding put forth
for state grant writers uh and I
don't know if those positions
still exist or
what are they doing are they are
they helping now in this process
in the at all it's been like you
before last when we appropriated
funds for that.
Visa chair representative
chapter on that's my capacity
building grants
yeah though so that funding goes
out to the council the
governments and the council
government uses there was funds
to provide technical assistance
for all the the the entities and
in their communities and so that
those funds are being spent on
we are tracking those and we are
tracking to see on what they're
doing with those funds and
ensuring that they're using them
to help build that capacity in
their areas.
So which is share out say that
there is a very appropriate
place for them ago I have a
project it was not a capital
outlay project that is funded to
an agency and they just kept
dropping the ball drop in the
ball drop in all they just
couldn't get it up off the
ground in I was very frustrated
explained to the process too
many times uh ran on to your
local car geezed to employment
council governments uh lady at a
meeting I should keep please
please help me in a idea they
will just took over the project
in the
the folks at home were
extending that somebody shown up
to knew what to do the project
started in moving forward and
got off the ground uh the
case of the governments are
excellent at that that's what
they were created for I think
thank you mister
thank you representative chat
fill is good representative
henry
the arguments chairman
I think I need to make sure I
understand when when we don't re
authorize rises capital of funds
where does that money go back
to.
Ah mr chair representative henry
it depends on the source so
either if it was a general fund
appropriation it would revert to
the general fund if it was a
severance text find
appropriation I would revert to
the savings tax bonding fund
thank you mister chairman
is there a way I think one of
the things that would really
help me if because I I hundred
percent agree with the
reauthorizations that become
very difficult and then they
just sit there forever.
Is there a way to write a bill
to where I guess there's a way
to write a bill for anything we
want doesn't make make sure
doesn't mean to make sense but
does this make sense if we would
write a bill to say if they're
not reauthorized rather than go
back to the general fund and go
back to that original part we
were talking about at the
beginning of this discussion of
that twenty six million which
would go that away it stays with
least within the capital
outlay and could be
redistributed back to a
community maybe even the
community that just lost it you
could probably redistribute it
then to fully fund the project
maybe help is that something
that makes sense
mr chair representative uhm yes
for general fund in particular
there's kind of more
restrictions on
the bonding fund because there's
constitutional issues with it
going to the permanent phones
etc
but for general funds
appropriations for sure and that
is something this committee has
discussed as sending those
reversals to the capital
development program fund
okay mister thank you for that
and and I I would really like to
have help writing that bill
because I think that be
something i'm very interested in
in trying to get those to stay
within the capital to be
redistributed to make sure that
we're helping as many folks as
we can but then it's not just
stuck in suspension basically so
with that I thought I have
missed chairman thank you
representative thank you so much
that's good to senator woods
thank you mister chairman kelly
I really think we need to put
some kind of sideboards on this.
Uh.
Capital individual capitals.
We need to know when this
projects are out there we need
to know what the men will amount
that should be put in there.
We've got legislators that are
trying to be really good people
funding.
Five six eight percent projects.
Just so that they
you know i'm not I understand
that miss chair we we should
have.
On it vet these enough so we
know the minimum amount.
Before that project could be
funding.
And we've got to hardware that
the the computer programs.
That we can enter these figures
in if there's more legislators
during a project we can see the
humanity but all of this takes
time it's not an.
Those poor people and council
service that are trying to
make all this work is it's mine
baggling for them to try to
accumulate this information.
But we should make hard fast
rules if this is not.
Funded to a certain amount.
Then that funding.
This doesn't go.
And
to be too but ethernet.
Is something nobody likes but
that's all the way we're going
to keep down the underfunded
project that brings me to my
second point
we need to set up so much at
this point.
To struck paying up those
underfunded projects and get
them off the books and if
they're not completed.
Then re authorize that money.
We there's two ways to do it the
boost easiest way I know is if
we do real are before that point
in time we see it's underfunded.
Go and earn fund that project
and then if it's not done that
money start starting to be
spent.
Then.
Bring it back real threat send
it to another phone bring it
back general phone money put it
back in the general for whatever
we do on that end of it.
And ever legislator in here says
well wait a minute that's money
that I had that i'll spin it
should come back to me to
respind.
If you pick a bad project
you pick the bad project.
The night just my personal
opinion I know that.
I'm gonna catch a lot hill with
that but that's that's my
personal opinion.
When we do a large project for a
small town.
We have to remember that there
has to be enough rate payers
there to maintain an operate
that facility.
And that should be another thing
we look at we made a concession
for regional water boards a few
years ago and we should force
that to that.
If we don't have enough payers
in that particular community to
make that system function we
have to figure out how we can
combine those together and
nobody likes to give up that
local control but that's all the
way the system will work we
can't build a a more to me in
our system and then the repairs
can't pay the keep it up.
Um
but that's that's the main
things that I would like to see
the is far as the roads.
We have commissioners we have.
Date road commissioners we get
district commissioners we got
that.
Should know better than anybody
which one though.
And we're talking a lot about
the local roads.
You know.
Sometimes some down but that
legs get pretty warm with all
the smoke that gets blowed up on
major chair
and they can plead in and get
good answers but not much.
Not much happens.
And we really need to.
Hole somebody's feat to the
fire.
And that's why I keep talking
about.
The state road system we have.
For up keep on those roads and
how we prioritize those roads.
We have we have ever since i've
been in the legislature we've
been trying to do one particular
road from ross will detail.
And large and bad traffic large
bad.
Rex.
Large stuff needs to be done.
And it's always we're going to
do five miles here and far more
there the same thing on highway
fifty four.
The.
There's some stretches of that
rule I know that this is not the
meeting to talk about individual
cases.
But
if we are legislators
and we have particular places in
our district we have to try to
address on but those are a few
of the comments I have which
chair and I appreciate the time
thank you senator woods it's got
a representative of dunkin and
then finally to senator with you
thank you mister chair
i'm gonna
just state that I would like to
have a realitation in two years
i'm dealing with the
municipality that.
We've got accounts will member
that is just wrecking havoc on a
project that I gave capital
funding to two years ago and.
Anyway so i'd like to get the
project done it's a good project
and so i'd like to.
If I could get dip stick out of
the way then we could get that
done but i'd like two years.
Noted thank you representative
that's gonna send reputation
thank you chairman and thank you
for the presentation that this
was the one I was waiting for to
talk about and you have a lot of
people in the room chairman that
are responsible for this kind of
work at the local level some
really happy that a lot of them
are here so i've just gotten
really not a question unless you
want to comment on what i'm
about to say the first one is
yeah I mean a a three year
reauthorization with maybe a one
year extension I think is
absolutely plenty of time these
are very hard things to get done
I get it but maybe you need to
rework that project and make it
so that it can be funded and
have the political will in the
and enough members that are
going to help to help get it
done or whatever even the state
not this the new state office
building I mean I came here
thirteen years ago to this
legislature and it's been.
Cashed and rehashed chairman
when yours were three times that
I can think of myself you
probably know more and this cost
escalation is gone in ten years
probably three times what we
originally started talking about
so so if you can't get a project
done in in three plus one then
something's wrong with that
project and needs to be refund
everything refund and then
second I I kind of liked what
represented I think henry
representative henry over there
said the chairman on the where
does the money go maybe after
that fourth year I would take it
a step further to what he said
which is probably just drop it
back into and i'm being funny
i'm just dropped it back into my
bucket because i'm the one that.
You know.
Listed it for that project that
didn't get done and then that
allows me to take it and make
something else to be can get
done and I see you guys writing
that down III hope that you will
put that somewhere in here
because but then if i've got a
project they did get their you
know what together then then
then I want to go help that
project get done every year
after a rolling four years then
i've got another bit of money.
Maybe that's what senator with
the biggest was doing I don't
know if she was very creative
you know well love nancy but but
you're taking that money and
getting another large project
done suddenly I i've been i've
been sold on the fact that this
one particularly one needs to
get that so now i've got my
regular outlay for the year then
potentially and you don't want
it to be that way but
potentially i've got this other
bucket of money that falls right
behind it from either allocate
that you're to finish that
project that I put a lot of
money into that year so I just
want to make those comments
because I think that we're just
kind of we talk about this
at we've been talking about how
to make this better for thirteen
years that i've been here and we
just need a little tougher
approach which I can kind of
agree and I think we need a
little more um.
What we were elected and
responsible for this piece of
art of the show and so we need
to have more.
Authority I guess to just take
that money if it's not happening
and put it working at the thank
you.
Thank you senator as we close up
this part of the discussion I
want to first thank cali and
wesleyan antonio for coming with
the presentation full of data
full of of I think good policy
and good of good questions for
us to ponder as we look forward
to the future I want to also
think the leadership of the LFC
that includes chairman small and
vice chairman when yours for
allowing us to have the
subcommittee established so we
can discuss these things openly
transparently in front of an
audience so that we can make
sure that if there's a target to
be hit let's start aiming in the
start let's start getting things
done and so that being said I
would also like to follow up
that appreciation to both
chairman small and vice chairman
when yours by asking them if we
can have a follow up
subcommittee meeting at our next
lfc hearing so that we can then
respond to these policy
questions that both wesley and
cali and and don't you have
posed to this body and that's
that goes for those members that
are potter are a part of this
subcommittee so that we can take
it to the larger sub-committee
of the LFC so that if there are
policies that are presented but
they need to be clarified and
statute let's make that a point
if there is a discussion on the
authorization and you so you
want to see that money instead
of going back to the general fun
go back to senator whoever
made that first initial deposit
into that program where a
project go back to then then
let's talk about that but let's
let's give these two individuals
in front of us something that
would they can work towards as
you move forward into the next
legislative session time is at
this point maybe not of the
essence but it's absolutely
important that we be timely and
how we respond to them and their
request so that they have
direction on what they need to
do as we prepare to move forward
so i'm an opposed that to the
leadership here that we can have
a follow up subcommittee and
then also
that those members that are part
of this subcommittee we come
with
we come as a matters.
There we come with some concrete
suggestions that we can give the
staff so that they can make
something of this senator when
yours thank you mister I just I
just want to clarify something
so from today's comments killing
western guys think you can start
narrowing the scope from today's
comments to to come if there is
another some can be there
they'll be another subcommunity
in starting around those
comments we can start building
every month we haven't voted on
the framework for lfc so this
could go in the framework
as we move forward and maybe get
those comments in in the lsc
framework so that when we adopt
that framework it's sitting
there
and then you know.
Now you're scope a little bit
and start
somewhere rather than start
nowhere with a bunch because the
legislative let's like your will
push back I mean so everybody
may have a good point that where
we're gonna have the staff to
track
money that came back and now is
coming back in the system and
it's got to be moved in retract
again
that goes to the good of all it
goes to the good of all
in so on just narrow that scope
when you come back with it with
the less from maybe committees
comments today that they may
help us out quite a bit and
maybe look at statute
that would.
We can look at or draft statute
that we can look at in order to
calify some of this policy let
me make any other comments that
we can was well taken senator
did you if you was just gonna
say mr chair yes we can do that
near the scope based on this
discussion and come back to you
with a simpler proposal
and I do think it would be good
to kind of reconvene sooner than
later there's a couple points in
here where
at least if you want stuff for
next session it'd be a useful
for us to have direction before
like november december
absolutely and that and that's
absolutely the goal of this
subcommittee we want to make
sure that that we were setting
ourselves up not for failure but
for success obviously and so I I
would hate for for us to to
begin to think that we live in a
world where two point five per
house member and four plus
million per senate member is is
just going to be the norm I mean
charles reminds me that we're
going into some tough times and
if we don't set ourselves up for
success or certain expectations
up in regards to what is going
to be available in the future
then we're gonna have a lot of
people really upset with with
what we're doing now and that if
we can't set up these accounts
like at the water trust border
tribal infrastructure finder
even this capital outlet fun to
be successful then we're going
to have a lot of people
wondering where they're going to
get their money from because the
two point five just don't cut it
for members that represent three
four five six counties that's
just the fact and so as we move
forward let's keep that in mind
and and I want to just continue
to praise both calling and you
wesleyan and done you and the
whole lfcn administrative staff
that continues to help make this
successful mind you all in in
the audience that that we used
to not have any data at our
hands we used to just trust
where people would give us as as
bible and say this is what we
need and this what we need to
have funded and many times I was
caught up in that so that.
I funded projects that they
didn't even on the piece of
property that they had a project
planned for and so it it it just
sat there and embarrassing yes
for me but now that we have ways
to vet projects now that we have
ways and staff to make sure that
we can create success not just
for legislators before the
communities that rely upon these
projects to get done within the
respect of communities that's
going to that's going to create
success and hopefully that's
going to create a process where
we can draw down these funds
that are now exasted at ten
times over so that being said
cali and wesley thank you so
much for your presentation and
again tasks to the the members
of the subcommittee that we will
bring this back up at our next
meeting in los cruces so that we
can then give them direction
because this was absolutely
introductory to what we're
looking for for the future thank
you both thank you mr chair i'm
just gonna give a quick
introduction to the next panel
and invite an asilva up was
least going to stay here
um so behind the presentation
and there should be like a
purple sheet manual have some
briefing bullets
you heard in may so now we're
going to focus on sort of the
state on stuff we talked about
the local stuff in may you heard
a presentation on higher
education capital this
presentation is going to focus
on state agency projects which
you've heard less about recently
you do have some briefing
bullets on both state agency and
higher ad stuff on higher ed we
have started to engage with the
department and institutions on
the hire capital bell we ran
last year and the next iteration
of that and our goal will to
bring you more specifics on the
next iteration at a future of a
sub committee meeting
thank you
those are you on the next panel
please do.
Come up to the table and
whenever you're ready please
proceed as we do intend to have
this wrapped up by twelve
o'clock.
My name is anna silver and I am
the cabinet secretary for the
general services department and
everybody knows what's like
noise they infrastructure
division directly.
Thank you so much so a little
bit about the general services
department and facilities
management division
some fun facts about our agency
do we have the presentation.
Just wait for the presentation
to come up.
You do have it okay okay perfect
okay
so fmd the facilities management
division is a division within
the general services department
fmd owns and manages
approximately forty five percent
of all states buildings and land
which is an excess of eight
hundred and sixty bill eight
hundred and sixty buildings and
land holding statewide with an
asset value of approximately six
point five billion dollars
everybody knows that fmd owns
buildings but not everybody
knows that we also own every
state prison and are semitary we
also own two of the first day
cares in state on facilities
i'm turning to page three of
this is a description of some of
the services that the facilities
management division provides so
not only we do we do capital
projects and master planning we
also do a emergency is for our
facilities we also focus on
leasing facilities for agencies
because they are just is not
enough state space so we do have
a facilities that we leave state
wide some of the other
services that we provide in
santa fe and an albuquerque or a
campus operations so we have a
security program so we have
security officers we do building
and maintenance repair and
services custodial services and
not sure if you've seen santa fe
lately but and we have a
landscaping services so you
should see a big difference in
santa fe with all the
beautification efforts that we
have underway
we also do utility management to
and the energy conservation so
and we all know about the
capital projects it's the new
shiny toys that we do when we
receive an appropriation but
listening through the some of
the presentations and with mr
billing see in kelly.
Was when we find capital
projects we fund the project but
we don't necessarily fund it in
a whole stick map manner so we
fund the project but we don't
find the operations so we don't
find the maintenance that we
don't find the landscaping we
don't find the utilities we
don't find
the toilet paper and paper
towels things that we don't
think of what comes with a
building so just something to
know to that when you look
through capital funding and you
look through appropriations
something just to keep in mind
is that when you do fund capital
projects I keep in mind the
maintenance that comes along
with those buildings
turning to page form some of our
leases just a little bit about
our leases we have a total of
lease records of roughly three
hundred and twenty four with a
gross graphic of two point two
million score feet with an
annual rate of forty four
million dollars that's what we
pay and lease as every year and
just want you to keep that
number a minors with goes with a
presentation on our goals for
state owned facilities in the
next slide on page five this is
just a snapshot of just a few of
our facilities that we have in
least base and state space just
around the state so we have
every arm agency and every city
and um all of new mexico
whether it's a state building or
lease building
um looking at page six so some
of the things that we have under
way um and through uh our master
planning efforts we are always
looking at our leases and moving
our agencies from lease based
the state space this are just a
snapshot of our ten most
expensive leases one of which if
you look at a number four is a
facility and albert albacorki
known as the lamberton facility
looking at page six.
Page seven sorry about that the
ten most inefficient leases
on item number four this is a
building in santa fe known as
the fifth street building so
looking at page eight the reason
I bring both of those two
facilities up is because the
lamberton facility arm in slide
eight in both ah there's two
leases of mentioning lamberton
we have mood cyfd from lease
based a state space saving the
say one point seven million
dollars in least savings by
purchasing a facility here and
outcookie known as the pine tree
facility now um breaking story
you heard it here first we are
also purchasing the fifth street
facility in santa fe for cyfd
and we will be saving the state
are one million dollars a year
and leasavings.
Turning to page nine there's
been a lot of discussion about
the executive office building so
attacking a little bit about our
capital projects one of which is
you know
the topic that you guys will
hear a lot about this is just a
little bit of an update for
those of you that might be new
to the panel so in twenty
nineteen at the direction of the
capital building planning
commission the facilities
management division was directed
to do a master plan in a sound
of the focus was because of the
constraints in the capital being
that there is just not enough
space in the capital so we were
task with looking at state space
in um in our facilities and
looking at moving agencies from
lease based on state space so we
have twenty nine buildings and
sound of and a one point five
million square feet in um
building space the goals of the
master plan were to collocate
agencies with similar clients
and services the make the most
efficient use of existing state
owned facilities opportunities
to move agencies from least
based on state space and
opportunities to confolidate
agencies some of the agencies
that we are looking at moving
into the executive office
building are the secretary of
states office the state
treasurers office the state
auditor umm higher ad dfa and
the lieutenant governor's office
by doing that that would free up
space in the state capital.
Senator woods and here so when
he comes i'm gonna talk to him
about getting behind this
project
looking at the next page this is
where the executive office
building is going to go it's
west of the capital what we will
be doing as we're going to be
demoning the contract easy
peanut building and the case.
Turning to the next slide this
is a rendering we are just in
the design process for the
executive office building so
this is a rendering of the
executive office building
turning to the next page this is
the east for side of the
executive office building.
And turning to the next page
this is the north of side of the
executive office building there
is a little bit of discussion
around reauthorizations and this
building particularly being
great authorized several times
the reason this building has
been reathorized is because it
has not been fully funded um we
have been asking for a hundred
and thirty million dollars to
complete the project I will be
asking for it again as part of
our capital outlet requests this
year so
we have not been able to
complete the project because it
hasn't been fully funded a
status of where we are right now
we will be going we are
currently in programming we're
working with the agencies on the
design and um we will be going
back to the age board with the
design in november so senator
would you stepped out so
I don't want it to say that this
is a project that you should get
behind because it is going to
make space in the state capital
for all of you and um this
project in particular has been
not fully funded so that's why
we've had to reauthorize it.
They didn't believe it
letter present first.
Alrighty turning to page
fourteen just a little bit about
some projects that we have
completed and some projects that
are in the works so on page
fourteen this is the new vital
records building that we
completed in twenty twenty this
is a twelve thousand square foot
facility building and if you can
believe but at that time we
completed it with five point
three million dollars.
The next page on fifteen the new
medals facility this facility
was completed in twenty twenty
one it's a forty six thousand
square foot building and it was
completed for a nineteen point
two million dollars
on page sixteen the dps crime
lab this is a forty four
thousand square foot building
and we completed this and arm
twenty twenty three for twenty
eight million dollars
and the pinetree facility which
I think is of a i've highlighted
it today because of the
uniqueness of the facility it's
the first ever purchased design
build so we purchased the
facility for twelve million
dollars then we did a complete
renovation of the facility for
thirty one million dollars we
will see why if d d v s and eccd
into the facility and we're
saving the state roughly three
million dollars a year and least
savings.
Are turning to page eighteen
this is the veterans home and
this was a fifty three million
dollar project and it was
completed in twenty twenty three
sixty six thousand square feet.
Um turning to the next page
these are a few projects that
are currently under way we have
the literacy center that is
currently in design that is I
had a budget of thirty million
dollars and that's a fifteen
thousand square foot facility we
have the new forensics in las
vegas that is a hundred and
twenty three thousand square
foot and we are going to be a
requesting additional money for
that facility and that's a
hundred and ninety eight million
dollars.
Umm some other things that we're
doing is the state fair master
plan the fortbaird master plan
the dps reality training
facility the new metro facility
the better incementary sound
while and.
I would like to say through the
growth of our program from
twenty nineteen to today and the
partnership with lfc and dfa our
program has really grown and we
are now being assigned projects
that normally are not under a
perview one of which is the more
a courthouse and we'll talk a
little bit about that here and
then next slides.
I'm turning to the following
page regarding construction cost
and escalation is when I talk a
little bit about projects we've
completed a project that are
currently under way and the
climate that we currently are
under with construction
so looking at both national and
new mexico state economy from
covered until now nationally
speaking we have seen a
significant amount of increased
construction volume as we all
know just from monetary
inflation purposes we have seen
about a forty percent increase
in construction costs
effectively mostly just because
the dollar just isn't worth what
it used to be it just doesn't
buy today what about five years
ago when we look at the
evaluation of costs we evaluate
from are most recent economic
disaster prior to covered we
trace back to the great
recession and twenty ten and
post covered everything will
trace back to covered until we
have another major event which
could potentially be tariffs
however we don't know until what
that event is
but that is typically not arm
just helping mind works
eventually costs we think back
to the when costs were cheaper
and it's usually at a an
economic downturn.
The state of new mexico are
seeing a significant amount of
increase or economic activity
over the last four to five years
compared to other states most
states are not seeing this
growth between now and four
years ago a lot of this is
contributed to what is being
called the enland west.
That increase in population to
new mexico is a gdp expansion
which is great people are
relocating to new mexico that
increase though has brought a
host of economic benefits but it
also brings a light of costs
part of the gdp expansion is the
downstream effects of having a
lot of new factors of people
relocating to your state but the
challenges are now do we have
how do we house these people
health care education facilities
retail and utility
infrastructure to support this
rapidly growing population which
is the core as to why we are
seeing new mexico costs grow at
the pace they are growing as a
response to the population
influx.
If we look at the next slide
at the same time we are battling
with your trends which is not
specific to new mexico
nationally we are saying there
are real challenges to
construction labor we are all at
the end of a forty to fifty year
cultural theory that places an
extreme amount of importance of
going to college a lot of
studies have been done but the
millennial generation absorbs
the lessons of our parents the
lessons of our parents are that
you go to college if you don't
you are somehow and transitly
worth less than people who do so
there was a study done and
middle soda about seven years
ago no difference in income you
made the same amount of money as
a dentist and we asked the
thousand kids would you rather
be a dense or a plummer and
ninety percent said denise.
This tells us something
interesting things about where
are economy as headed because
ultimately the construction
labor problem is that solely a
financial problem we can
continue to increase
construction labor wages as fast
as we want but we will not stem
the tide of having more people
come out of the industry then we
have flowing into it because of
what our society has put
important on in the next um in
the last thirty years.
I'm if we look at the next slide
so what we've talked about is
we've seen the significant
growth and construction
approximately forty percent some
of the predictions and labor
costs which are projected to
continue to increase.
Continued population growth in
new mexico and national average
escalation and projects roughly
six percent
looking at the next page one
thing we have to consider is our
aging factor new mexico is the
second or third state aging
faster than any other state in
the entire country demographic
analysis shows that sixty
percent of the sanity population
will be retiring in five years.
For every one person we hire
three retires so what are we
doing about the aging factor a I
cannot solve the labor
construction wave and issues.
So until we can reverse that
trend we're going to be playing
musical change musical chairs
with our labor.
And we typed a little bit about
the construction projects over
the last five years so let's
move to the next slide so it's
not all doom and gloom so what
are we doing and how are we
controlling costs
so we have seen their
competition has shown time and
time again to be the number of
what the number one predictor of
the value of money in
construction it doesn't matter
what an estimator tells you how
much the project is going to
cost if you only have one bidder
then the project is going to
cost more when we were better
bidding the veterans home I knew
that we were going to only have
two bidders because there's only
two bitters in new mexico that
can better project and band a
project over thirty million
dollars and that's james and
bradbury and they hire the same
subs.
I'm turning to the next page so
some of the things that we're
doing is this is a project that
is in roswell and um in trying
to control costs
it is my feeling that the
architects are in these control
the cars of the mac there are
the ones to set the mac so by
working with andes and figuring
out unique opportunities and
unique ways to control costs
what we're doing is we are no
longer putting the max in our
rfps we want the industry to
call us what the cost of
construction are we also look at
the design and we are involved
in every single decision in the
design so when an a need the
size that they want to put brick
kind of building will say no
stuck goes cheaper or if they
want to put um certain windows
in the building of course we
always look at the most energy
efficiency efficiency uhm in
buildings but we want to take
into consideration special
designs and unique designs so we
strip all of that out and go
just to the basics
looking at the next page some of
the other things that we are
doing is we are creating a
database of project costs using
the current information
available to us through the
schedule of values provided by
the gcs so we are now requiring
all schedule of values and pay
applications to be submitted in
a document that we have
structured and it's in an excel
spreadsheet and it serves two
purposes one when they bid it
they have to bet it in a certain
format so we can bared apples to
apples on construction we take
that information we put it in a
database and then when that
contractor is then awarded we
take that same
same spreadsheet which has every
single line item for the project
and then we can then upload it
into a system and then from
there.
Then we can when we we do the
turnover of the project then
that helps us with doing the
preventative maintenance
schedule and putting all of our
systems into the preventative
maintenance program
and through this process it
helps us clean the construction
cost out available to us in
order to more clearly understand
or current construction market
statuses and help us make
informed decisions.
Um and then next on the next
slide
a little bit about procurement
so.
Everybody or when you hear you
might hear that
procurement is blamed for a lot
of things but one thing I can
tell you about construction is
um
to me I started in proparate I
started and state purchasing
division as a buyer and I think
everybody should have to do a
spd state purchasing book camp
because you learn so much about
procurement and which has helped
me with construction so we have
completely changed our uh
program and it starts with the
end in mind with the completion
of the project the turnover
price process and and the close
out process because what happens
as we complete a project but we
never talk about or think about
what it's gonna look like when
we turn it over for the
maintenance perspective and we
close out the project properly
well that is all started at the
procurement process by holding
our architects accountable by
holding our contractors
accountable we ensure that every
single project there has to be a
site visit so we can minimise
and foreseens we limit the
amount of change orders that we
um that we require so everything
starts at the procurement
process so that's something that
we have incorporated into the
facilities management division
and it's been a huge change and
has really been successful um in
some of our projects so for
instance the crime lab one of
the things that we were
successful in doing that project
came under budget four hundred
thousand dollars so although we
had a reversion because the
pride the appropriation was
specific to the crime lab we
couldn't use the money for
anything else so we were able to
revert that money back to the
general fund so although
sometimes your versions are bad
in in some cases they're good
too because projects are coming
in under budget in this case so
without um I will stand for
questions are turned over to
wesley.
Mr chair and she did a really
good job so i'll just stay here
for questions thank you both for
your presentation we will list
going right now and first on
that list is senator.
The.
Thank you all mister chairman of
what's going to ask you on in
reference to cemetery is there
is the new one in telstra not be
turned over to you
mr chair as center against yes
it
know mister chairman and when
will that happen
mr chair center gonzalez so
right now we are going through
the process that has to go
through state board of finance
we have to get an appraisal so
we have to go through um all of
the requirements to state board
of finance we are expected to go
to have all those completed and
have it done by september.
Very well thank you mister
chairman thank you and now if
you have an opportunity I don't
know if you have a visited
recent budgets are very nice.
Project that is really come
along with.
Thank you thank you senator
gonzalez it's got a
representative of chapfilled
thank you mister chair.
I would like to talk a little
bit about the mora courthouse.
Uh it's not in my district.
But I do work there quite often
getting older ships and various
records and files.
And are for for years we went to
portable buildings in nail as a
nice big building over there no
windows doors nothing to just a
shell on the building and just
very frustrating to me
this started even before hours
even elected
with their the other day that do
the same type of ownership work
in law and behold a poral
buildings are gone went over to
the to the new courthouse
winning they're all are happy
well I have I was not still
being used and I know we have
talked about
putting for some funds to finish
some
incomplete projects and if ever
there was a project there would
be a candidate for that I think
it would be this court house can
you tell me when was the first
money appropriate number one uh
number two.
What's the progress to date a
number three what does it take
to give those folks a real
american core house
mr chair of representative chat
filled um very excited attack to
you about this project so
it was originally appropriate I
believe it's twenty years ago
when I start doing some research
so it's been a while
we did this year receive an
appropriation of eight million
dollars from
from you also thank you very
much a recently did a site visit
with senator compossible on june
nineteenth actually for june
duties we went out there and
looked at the facility so
as such a given the assignment
and we are full speed ahead so I
can tell you what we've done so
far just in the few weeks since
that site visit so we have um
we're getting a structural
analysis on board right now
we're in the process of doing
that
we are also getting our own
architect on board and reached
out to representative here so we
can get all of the plans and
drawings from the existing
architect transferred over to us
so um we are getting a scale we
work with schedulers and dumb
estimators so that way we work
from the end of and we move
backwards so the goal is to have
this project completed by
december of next year the
designed complete by the end of
this year and construction in
one year so whomever's in a
contracted and whoever receives
the award will know that they
have one year to construct the
facility and they need to better
as such so if that means they
need a double team at if they
need to um whatever they have to
do they have one year to
complete the project so it will
be done by next year.
Thank you mister chair that
put my hard at rest
your aid represent chat feel
it's got represented dixon
thank you mister chair
thanks for the presentation I
just have a question on
i'm not sure which a page
nineteen I believe regarding the
current projects I was wondering
if you could provide an update
on the literacy center and the
stem institute
absolutely um
um mister chair and
representative dickson so
literacy center right now is
currently in design um the
design will be complete around
october time frame and the
project is scheduled to be
complete next year and of
november so
right now it's a full design
everything's going well it is a
roughly fifteen thousand square
foot facility and are we're
looking at
the capacity of roughly five
hundred kids and arm it's going
to uh it's I can tell you it's
beautiful
words kept describe is gonna be
complete unique and we will be
incorporating some um state the
art ai and other components as
well so there will be a ribbon
cutting next year so you'll be
invited to that thank you mister
chair and
um
is that is it still within the
thirty million dollars that was
appropriate mr chair a
representative dickson yesterday
thank you mister chair i'm also
for the stem institute could you
remind me what the with that is
in order that is mr chair
representatives and so the
literacy center folks on the
receipt and the steam institute
focused on science technology
engineering mathematics so we
just received that appropriation
this year so are the first thing
we need to do as we are in
negotiations with unm on the
land.
Which is the same process that
we went through with the
literacy center so we identified
the parcel we negotiated the
land but we can still move
forward with the design even
though we are the land hasn't
been secured so that's not going
to hold us from moving forward
with the design and
construction.
Thank you so much thank you
mister thank you representative
let's go to senator woods
thank you miss german.
And as good
good to see as well
couple questions
have we took care of the
predicament we have been sent a
fee with the case
mr chair center woods so the
requirement is that we include
the historic review board in the
design so we have created a sub
committee with the historic
review board and they are now a
working with us on the design we
go back to the board in november
for approval the design for the
demolition of the concedes so
that's the status right now
and so you've got plenty of
money right now to.
Go to that
mister chair senator woods we
have enough money to demolish
the case and the country teasy
pino building and um start the
state the same work
okay.
Did you discuss our own in the
state fair master plan
mr chair center was
you didn't
would you like to talk about
that just a little bit in what
my concern is with the law that
we passed or we're going to have
the state fair there what's a
plan for the state fair
itself
mr chair center would so we just
awarded the master plan contract
so we will be having or kick off
tomorrow so we are just in the
infancy cell more to come on
that and in that plan have we
discussed
are we gonna move a facility
with this con and not have state
fair what's the discussion there
and mister chair center would so
the
the assignment for the master
planners are to look at
relocating the fair and um come
up with some options for
relocating the fair and um
and then maximizing the use of
the current property and so
those are all the assignments
for the master planner but
um don't really have a lot of
information on that just yet
because we're like I said we're
just having to kick off tomorrow
okay
on
one more question mischair now
quit
when union
is thinking about building the
new hospital
exactly how much
play will you have in that
mister chair center woods a
higher education is
on the slide when you look at
the oversight and perview of
facilities management division
general service of department
all of the higher ed is actually
under the hired at institute so
we won't have any.
All right thank you michael
thank you center wood that's
that's like the shortest if that
would look like a took thank you
all come back to center goes go
to center per day every
okay thank you a chairman and
thank you secretarian and was
leave as do such a phenomenal
job your team is outstanding to
work with so thank you very much
anytime i've had a question I do
want to go to the sly that says
the current projects is chairman
and madame secretary this is
this is mainly for you are these
all the projects that that are
okay I didn't think so case is
current for I like there's no
way this is all the
internet myself I heard you say
no that's
mister chair as center party at
no we have over like four
hundred projects
since number one or two just
real quick then is who is
managing who's the project
manager of each one of the ones
were seeing and then is there a
variation for the other three
hundred and ninety can you give
us a little more color around it
absolutely mr chair senator
video so we have thirteen
project managers not enough and
arm for the literacy center of
that project manager is rob
ludichi for a
that project is a time
timps the deal
stay fair master plan there's
not a project manager as signed
to that because we're just in
the master planning efforts
the forty master plan the
project manager is joe adam the
dps reality based training
facility that project manager is
carlos bottom the dps metro
facility that project manager is
robling to the veterans cemetery
sound while that project manager
is simpson
the more of courthouse that
project manager is um carlos
I forget his last thing but not
both our markets carlos marcus
and the statement is institute
has not been assigned yet
because we just received that
appropriation.
Into the chair and and secretary
thank you for that and i'm so
thankful and and impressed that
you know all of everything
that's going on that's terrific
are those all those people work
for you or do they work in the
respective departments where the
swim line is for that work where
that building is going to go
mister chair and a center party
they all work for
there is a line of but they're
all under me okay and then the
last question they have the
insurers just you know for
public transparency and I did
this when I cheered the science
and technology committee for for
ten years or whatever do you do
take all this can I go to your
website right now and see all of
what you just described in where
the project is and what the
budget is and what the spend is
a blob advice and all they are
somewhere mister chair senator
pidea
website is um the projects are
on our website but because there
was a recent disconnect between
our sharepoint website and are
outward facing website is not
currently populating so that's
something that we're working on
right now but but it is if it
were it would be working that
way it will so we could easily
go as a legislator a member of
the community and click on the
dps metro facility in everything
dps metro facility with show up
in front of me okay great thank
you thank you center in this go
back to senator goods
thank you all mister triminana I
apologize they should apply
being a little bit more clear
but my question so the cemetery
will be turned over to you in
september but where you are your
office would also be in charge
of the operation of mr chair
senator
so i'm outside of santa fe and
albuquerque we have what are
called tenant agreements with
agencies that occupy the
facilities so for that
particular facility dvs will be
in charge of the operations and
we partner with dvs and arm any
improvements that need to be
made to the cemetery so they are
in charge of the operations
and though mister chairman by by
that I mean the actual.
Request for burial
mr chair of representative
senator gonzalez that will go
through department of better and
services depending on that okay
very well thank you excite I get
a lot of calls on that that when
it's hoping to be ready and so
they will be better that's a
different date for their right
think it was true
thank you senator dollars thank
you missile but thank you mr
thank you for your presentation
this morning and for answering
all the questions that we have
you know i'm i'll be honest with
you as miss silvers when I hear
about these projects and it's
usually in the midst of us
having to negotiate the capital
out the package in the middle of
the session and so I don't know
what's what I had we hear about
it but you know in terms of when
we ask for those of us that have
been able to be a part of the
negotiation team
we asked for more detail they
can give us as much as I think
is it maybe they give us a
superficial version rate and and
for me it's it's often not
enough and so when I think about
that the capital the capital
building is sanity right and and
i've heard about that for the
past several times they've been
a part of that that team and
it's always been discussed about
what the case is the case he
does exceed this right and if
you're telling us now that that
that issue is is to the way side
now and we can proceed for right
now that project has ninety
million dollars to its name rate
and so you're looking for
another hundred and thirty
million dollars to complete the
project of about that or that'll
equate to two hundred and twenty
million dollars correct and that
that'll complete the entire
project
and miseration yes and I want to
clarify something so umm the
case this issue will be heard
before the h board in november
and that's when it will be
result so up until this point
it's not yet but in november
will go before the hurt and two
second question that two hundred
twenty million dollars that will
complete the project thank you
and thank you for that
clarification and so.
Due to follow up then on that I
I want to just make sure that
we don't have a fees in process
to this right so we couldn't do
half of the hundred thirty
million dollars this year and
then the next the year after
right to complete a project and
i'm only seeing this because
we've come to a point now for
those of us that have been a
part of that team and and
whisken can attest to this and
so can represent dunkin that
when we're looking at a hundred
three million dollar lump sum
that means that the fire station
in the town of italy can't be
done because we're competing
interest right or that means
that the the curry waterline
could be coming online project
would never have been funded
because of this or anything else
right and so
how can how could be equitable
about this in terms of or maybe
realistic about this and we're
talking about competing
interests that is santa fe
versus the needs of certain
places in many cases that are in
rural parts of the state of mr
chair that's a really excellent
question so a couple things so
projects can be fixed
but just no one projects are
phased they cost more so that's
got to be part of the decision
making um that you are wall um
that's part of your process so
for this project in particular
we could face this project the
would demo the case
do the sitework and start
digging the the whole for the
parking lot and then it will sit
until we receive the rest of the
appropriation to actually build
the facility so the phasing of
this project doesn't quite
really make sense because it's
not something that is usable in
fees one there are other
projects there to arm that we
have and have completed like the
metal's facility in las vegas
it's the long term care facility
and we were able to phase that
and three phases so we completed
phase one we moved people into
the facility face to remove
people into the facility face
three week moved into the
facility so there.
Our projects that you complete
when you can complete
there are projects that can be
faced when you can complete a
section but one thing that we
need to be mindful of in
listening to you i'll during the
discussion is that when we
appropriate money and we phase a
project but that phase is not
completed I think that is to be
part of the decision making so
um just some things to consider
as you up look at state and
local projects fair enough and
then I appreciate that answer
and I I think that gives us that
helps us in terms of when we're
doing in this discussions once
again and I think this goes or
goes then into the
the geographical equity or maybe
like thereof in terms of of how
we're looking at spending
capital outlay dollars whether a
state wider even local and I
think moves forward into that we
keep going to that current
project's p done on page
nineteen and we talked about the
literary literacy center rate
and and it's gonna be centered
here in albuquerque thirty
million dollars injection and
all the cricket
does it help the keys in my
scare maybe for a two day fill
trip it it might right or does
it help the the kids that are in
in rator on or any other place
that
a days drive to here right I
don't know and then also the
discussion came up about the
stem institute and i'm glad
these these two things are
becoming a reality I really am
for our our children's stake
right percentage to do it's
gonna be maybe next door to the
literacy institute and when we
pushed back as as the
negotiation team for capital
outlet we asked what why
couldn't they be just combined
together to create this large
institute
we didn't get a good answer as
to why they couldn't be it just
had to be two separate
institutions I I think we're
we're we're looking again at
again is it is it geographically
equitable to have these things
centered in the albuquerque i'm
not here to do to create winners
and losers i'm here to create
good programs for our children
right.
And so when we look at these
types of things I mean I think
we need to be a little bit more
open minded in regards to me
where these things are centered
or or maybe do we need to have a
thirty million dollars at this
point sixty million dollars them
slash literacy institute
centered on the university of
mexico main campus I don't know
so as we look forward to those
types of things again that
treating not trying to create
the winners and losers here or
or want to create a fight but
these are these are the real
topics that we talk about as
legislators when we push back
against the executive in terms
of we need this this year if not
we don't get it then we don't
have a deal those types of
discussions because those don't
get anywhere they really don't
and so I appreciate the work
that both you and wesley do on a
on a daily basic that the as do
a great job but when it comes
down to making sure that we can
get something good for the
people in mexico we have to make
sure that we're being fair with
both the legislature and the
executive on behalf of other
people better the users and that
is a citizens of new mexico so
again thank you all that that
thanks to the to the committee
for their continued interest in
this matters we will continue
these discussions especially the
one related to
the strategies to improve local
project successes at our last
cruises meeting and I will ask
the vice chair and the chairman
for that time as we meet again
in a subcommittee so that we can
again
bring to them the decisions that
they're looking for so that we
can move forward on that
capitality process in a better
process so thank you again both
of you and for your time this
morning
upstairs lunch of stairs
optional tours optional tours of
this facility which is a brand
new facility just opened up
throughout lunch will be back
down here at one for a program
evaluation and then we'll be
doing a tour out of the gateway
center and will go over that
