Good morning thank you for
joining us
thinking that when I was the s
thank you for joining us for the
landramp committee hearing in
beautiful place as it's my first
time here before we get up and
to agenda items we're going to
do an introduction of those of
us who are here for both the
house and the senate and i'll
start up with my good friend
representative garcia.
We went on the other hand you
also
representative again garcia then
these three thousand dollars say
eh
immediate straight up and clue
yeah common eyes was the last
year that would get garment
economily or thing going to
knock money there there's some
broadway and these three thought
local money over eleventh dingo
downtown on neighborhood south
of central uh the country club
you look and go on a trees cover
your voin three score eh
irrelevant then go present those
there kind of chicago blue color
precincts on the west central
you're so you know the forty
hundred dollars the community
can comment somewhat and they
line on those being stress so
the sorry lone quality is now or
can I stop an establishment
there's the entrances er
combined there meet me me being
in make donor funding in the so
as the committee so permission
on order to participate but they
see band on this the committee
either is he turned off on
common company this value test
press yourself or more
silent on your last week so I
sped on the internet that the
school standing on the right day
come doors of status progressive
good good morning this to
chairman good morning everyone
i'm state senator jerry or t c
pino and my district.
Encompasses much of
representative garcia's district
it's uh it's been a privilege to
sit beside him through many
years of these committee
meetings and to learn the
history of landgrants we go to a
lot of national meetings for
different national council of
state legislators and council of
governments in nobody else no
other state has a land rent
committee that we have one is
basically miguel garcia's uh
doing and so we all that we have
this meeting that we have these
issues that were working on them
and that were making some
progress on so many of them when
people for years well that was
the historical art effects all
over we don't have to read about
landgrands anymore.
Miguel garcia never said that
never was willing to to to to
accept that and and so we still
keep working on landground
issues the vital part of new
mexico not just our history but
of our today and mister chairman
and i'm so glad to be here and
be able to join release one
meeting i've had conflicts with
the others but hopefully we can
we can get some more work done
thank you.
Good morning mr chair good to
see everybody i'm susan her i'm
from district forty one which is
most of the reba sand of all
santa fe and tales little
portions of that so i'm from the
north we argue over who has the
most landgrants I always claim I
do but we go back and forth on
this committee it's my privilege
really to serve on this
committee and and we've all been
taught from the very beginning
by three percent and of me girl
garcia who is the leader in the
house
and i'm pleased to be here today
and I want to thank you for all
of these things uh thank you
mister.
Good morning everyone i'm
matting a queen house history
fifty wearing us district fifty
it's a pleasure to be here um
i'm in my tenth year in the
legislature and i've been on
this committee the entire time
uh in my district before it got
redistricted i've represented
four lane grants months on
toyota and taking care and
cheaply.
And it was always
a pleasure to work with them a
pleasure to learn about the
history something I really
enjoyed and I really heated
losing them in redistricting
I was happy however to pick up
this area in san antonio dealers
hertes so I still get to
represent language and be
involved in the language
community and its pleasure to be
here.
The.
Thank you mister and thank you
all for avenues have already
enjoyed the best computers and
i'm reading the cookbook it took
me back to when I was younger I
was raising out tonight to
colorado in where reading the
part of the on a hospital which
never was completed um I guess
none of us survived you know
we're still here but it's one of
those things uh come to this
part of the state to see that
the langrates are still valuable
say in given the set yourself we
top round water through ditch
they're not tonight on in it's
important that we keep our
heritage in understand what our.
Ancestors have done to be able
put us on the maps of thank you
perhaps over the way state
senator dave the gages were from
lee county and back in their own
gas sector so we provided you
the one gas drive here today so
thank you for what you do in
this part of the state.
The.
Good morning represent stephen
lord this year my district and
now it has been
sorry represented mcqueens
district I was able to take over
his areas and they're very well
taken care of I have carnival to
the lead months on autory onto
he and i'm very proud to have
the land grounds I was just out
the yesterday's day san migal
and water procession and that
was amazing thing to watch I
love being out there I love
learning the culture in the
history but more importantly the
most important thing is that
there is going to be in a tanzer
in monzano and I want to let
everybody know me pull that up.
So at my daughter langrant
saturday october nineteenth
there haven't it's going to be
all day and started aid if you
want to see how that how that
all starts with the paying the
morning and how it ends up at
lunch around noon so I will be
there so if anybody's interested
please start by um and also I
believe that this I think it was
the this was added on with my
capital outlay money when I had
to see this thank you for
letting me be here.
Good morning mr
mister
it's a pleasure to be here and
listen to fantastic district
thirty nine parts of six
counties and I have several line
grants in my district starting
at semigell sound of a torrents
burdenly old in the mountains
and
see valencia and lincoln thank
you
and I believe i'll have a me I
am a proud native son of the
especially valley and I
represent new mexico senate
district five which includes
real rebuilt los alamos sanity
and sand available counties and
representative edit and I we
share a district we overlap in
some areas and i'm perhaps
served on this committee with
two cousins and one of them
happens to be senator or teasing
peter and I just want to make a
quick note that this will be the
last interim committee traveling
into committee that my premare
will be joining me and because
he has chosen that to run for
reelection and so I want to
thank you for serving as my
mentor in the senate and for
always being a sounding board
for me you always have a home in
the land ramped interim
committee and so whenever you
want to come and join us we
would love to have you
and the cookbook
and then i'd like to call up
madame president eh lucar candra
from the san antonio the lost
weather sland grapher said and
they believe you'll be coming up
with your board please come
forward and want to remind you
that when you speak or you do
your introduction you're
give us your full name since we
do have people watching on zoom
and for the records though we
were not the yes and i'm on
enjoy a piece of cheaper while
you're settling it.
Good morning to you all
german not had a meal thank you
for being here and committee
thank you and all of everybody
in the audience thank you for
coming today my name is kendra
the serra mattucy I am the
president of the sun antonio day
last week to sland grant I have
the honor of also serving with
two of my premise freeman um we
grew up together in pacitis and
we are now serving together on
the board for our line grant
and so
this morning we're going to go
ahead and I wanted to first
think all of you for all the
work that you continue to do to
represent our landgrants in new
mexico it's very important to us
all and it's you help us have a
voice so thank you and then I
want to also think the new
mexico language council without
them we would be
really kind of floating around
and all of the new uh
regulations and things we need
to do to comply with the state
outlies and so we're very
thinkful great as here today we
think her for being here or
total I have global any certain
they've all been great I hope in
the future if they need more
support and funding that you
guys will help them find that
because we need them to help
succeed and I know it they're
only for people and they're
helping a lot of landgrants so
you know we need them we need
their them to be supported uhm
and so I will go ahead and let
introduce you to our our board
um this is I was deemly serrell
and he started being as our
treasure and then roxyman toyota
serving as are secretary or vice
president doctor james gonzalez
couldn't be here today and his
vice president um and now I was
steam will give us a brief
history and then i've got a few
things that i'll share with you
it was
terminal your committee.
My car
mister chairman had a meo
committee thank you we really
appreciate the.
You know you given us to the
opportunity to be able to just
host this event it was
you know I don't I don't know if
that's if we've done this
historically before about you
know it so it will truly is an
honor and a privately trust to
be able to do to host you guys
and.
Once again my name is august and
I am the treasure of the sound
on your last work.
Um I was told to be brief into
the objective
to two things that I am very
probably my biggest challenges
but would I was someone to speak
a little bit about the history
of someone on your last word us
in order to to view
the history in right history can
be be viewed in three different
ways in my perspective just as
as time can
linearly
in a parallel setting and a
circular setting you know from
from a linear perspective the
sonyan donor let the last work
that's landrounds pre dates the
revolutionary war which took
place between seventeen seventy
three and a seventeen seventy
five hundred and seventeen
eighty three so are our initial
petition and our secondary
petition
war in seventeen sixty five and
seventeen sixty seven
from you know just if you let
that settle with a new we you
know it this is a historical
event just to know that we're
we're able to sit here as a
represent as representing
that long of over history of of
our landground there
we have a president here tony I
like knowledge tony for twenty
eight years he was our president
and he paid the way and in in so
many ways diplomatically.
Jester trading on the the waters
of bureaucracy and you know
really paving the way to where
we are today we have a lot of
challenges moving forward but
you know we look we lean on you
as as the head of
you know this this
this body to
you know assistance and we we
can't we can't do this honorable
and I don't know how long the
committee has been
established when it was
established but I I do know that
since then a lot of things have
transpired to for the better
meant of langrounds as a whole
as being statutory statutory
recognized as a as a union of
government recently
really just it was it was a
catalyst for us that you know
identifies us as it is a unit of
government a respected
acknowledged unit of government
and with that comes not just
challenges but
obligation responsibility and
and on the on the.
The thoughts of per of parallel
the history you know and
well.
The.
Do you have an inter- seventeen
second imagine that we're here
we're just settling is as a
language rural.
Were becoming.
Everything in anything that we
want to be we got this new
territory and then we got trades
you are going on in the east
coast you know we have this the
benefits of something new you
know I don't know i'm not sure
if a lot of people really know
the history behind the original
history behind someone don't
know the last word us and where
are our original settlers came
from the came from a place north
of deway which is in bernalio
around the coronator area from d
n north to all of the longest
was was owned by ontoin your
data and montonio good as was
the original petitioner and i'm
he he got into it in the debt.
And
he sold his property in order to
to alleviate that debt well he
had nowhere to go so in
seventeen sixty five the
petitioned
then.
Governor got you been
for for a
own property here in the
sanatonia the last word that's
here you actually at the time it
was on hold suncorp said the
last word us
which was the up reform just a
beautiful larry on.
You know
eventually a few years later we
ended up with numbers are kind
of all over the place the map
will show you up there fifty one
thousand.
I think fifty one thousand we
have a historical marker at it
are also count ground which i'm
hoping that at least some of you
if not all of you will be able
to go on our tour tomorrow and
there there's a place that says
we had an original hundred and
thirty thousand that's a great
differential from actual do
perceived and we don't we don't
know exactly.
But we do know that.
We do know what we have now.
In what we have now is really it
depends on building comparison
to what we had and
we know that we last year to the
four service we'll ask you to be
a ln we lost it at state
at national forest after the
court of private land claims
when we were patented I believe
it was an eighteen ninety four
we represented by a
general woman by the name of
I shouldn't see names but i'm
gonna buy the name of cathron
and during that.
A judiciation process
we had a a representative from
our or ranks or membership that
went on behalf of us too given
oral history as far as the
recognized boundaries and
catching he was a pretty pretty
swift guy
pre son and don't you the last
what it does he.
The.
He's he would be represented the
whole their own which was at the
time not a language it was
within our boundaries are are
our traditional boundaries and
he.
Establish them as he he
established a patterned language
boundary for for their home and
he got some out of it I mean the
only thing that we had back then
the only resources we ever
really had in order to be able
to.
P either representation or.
To pay for any types of legal
fees or taxes I mean that was
that was coming right because we
we taxes didn't come after till
after the patent really
but when we
were establishing or through
doral history our boundaries cut
catering stopped
the individual are are witness
or or a witness and said arm
week hold on a second
and he told him he can't go that
far because you can't go that
far north because that would
incroach upon their home
well he that property that he
was given property.
And it was part of our original
boundary when he established
that.
I don't give me a time frame
I could keep going i'm sorry
so when we are represented we
were stopped and we were told
this is how far you can go
and without encroaching and when
it was also done.
We received four thousand seven
hundred and fifty acres.
Of patterned property and that
was from the
perspective a hundred and thirty
two i've heard a hundred and
ninety two fifty one thousand
forty six hours so many
different numbers are out there
but you know in the great scheme
of things we really didn't get
much and
cathrone asked for.
What the only thing that we
could give return and it
happened to be adjacent to the
property that he had already
been given
by their horn for their
representation so he.
We got twelve hundred twelve
hundred and fifty acres from us
out of that four thousand seven
hundred fifty
and that property now it.
It's part of the diamond till
round to all of what was the
diamond
we have a we have a good section
there that is now beyond
it's kind of cool you know it it
it's it's an interesting
person's an interesting thought
to think that it's got its
fallen back into the hands of
the state
and all that was attaching I
didn't really didn't expect to
see to say all that but I
couldn't help myself
you know i've asked i've been as
many times why why I want to do
what i'm doing why want to
represent this language um it's
it's a dangerous position to be
honest with you there you know
window when you get
when you get a left it or you
become a representative of of
your membership through the
fault because nobody else wants
to be involved.
Uh through proxy then or not
proxy rather.
Trust us those of us around this
table fill your pain so yes so
but but the thing is you know my
point is when as initially the
there was a time frame where I
didn't know how to answer I
didn't know
I mean I don't know because it's
my grandpa would be proud of my
great grandpa would be proud of
my great great grandpa would be
proud all these people who would
be proud I could go back to
seventeen sixty five in and
beyond that and think of the
people that would be proud of me
maybe but it's really not that
it's it's the love that that we
have for our community you know
and it's within that love and
the happiness and the joy to
represent it there's there's a
sad story.
In the sad story is that we went
from a a huge amount of property
that we
we eventually got taxed
you know where we're trying to
you know
by the grease guard we will we
will be exempt from taxes we're
looking towards that that got
golden that end but right now.
We're still being taxing it was
that aided or outside edit but
it it was a cos in a fact
towards us losing a lot of
property having to sell cell
property in order to pay taxes
and on the bright side
this it's it's really is a
beautiful community
the of the properties that we do
have the user amazing we used to
have if you get into the
traditional some of the three
hundred and sixty degree views
are a stounding and we'd really
really really like to get some
of that back my.
The initial question when I when
I was president when I first day
I was I was elected I was asked
what you want to do what's your
goal what's your plan it was a.
The.
Sorry it was reclamation
appropriately
it's a property back
and.
The.
You know some some day I I voice
this to you guys as a committee
and item our voice is probably
unexpected by by my president
all asked for apologies later
because some day we're going to
lean on you
we're gonna
want to give you a a bit
something that's really been
going over my head I the
fortunate opportunity to be able
to lead a group on salaries a
group of men want to monitor
month on saturdays in this this
month I really have a one thing
on on my mind and i'm going to
share with the guys and it's
headship you know you you guys
may feel or may be viewed as
leaders.
But the reality is you know the
the hedge of the role of
headship predates I mean it's
you're talking about the danger
moses you know weak the headship
is is you're the head of this
council you're the head that we
look to to support this body
where we're we're we're just a
portion of the body we're making
stomach and when they're taking
stomach gets hungry we look to
the here to the council on
to fill that need to fill that
voice over many years or we
didn't have a head to look up
to.
We were a self sustaining body
with with presidents that were
fighting for a voice tony once
again they fought for a voice
for many many years they fought
to have some former
representation for many many
years and we have that and
my apologies for being long
winded by term I have your and
i'm super thankful once again
for the opportunity to be able
to.
Just host you guys I mean just
thankful for you guys and we
represent him he's
you know he is he has sponsored
us he's i'm now he has a focus
that's not
multi tentacles and you know we
were hoping to take advantage of
that
but
with that I will finally close
the
chairman how to meal and
committee
guess thank you very much
thank you
I have just a few minutes
thank you
so I wanted to thank you
you know we have a very deep
rooted history in place to us
and now we're in a time where
there are a lot of new things
that we are having to bridge the
gap and help our membership and
ask as a board to continue to be
in compliance and to make sure
we're following all the rules
that we need to follow
I think when the things that are
I got after watching my dad for
twenty eight years in the
position he was in
was that I had a lot of things
that came from him teaching
things and one of the things was
if you give a person of fish he
eats for a day if you teach that
person to fish he eats forever
and I think that now we're
asking for continued help for
you i'll to teach us to fish
teachers the way we need to
navigate the new systems that we
are now obligated to add here to
did be incompliance the land
grant council has been
phenomenal in helping us do that
but I think as volunteers I
think one of the thing and all
the landgrounds were a community
landground.
By the way we're not a private
landgrand so we're of a group of
people volunteers functioning
and trying to.
Learn and help people bridge the
gap from the old ways to the new
ways and then at the same time
maintaining tradition and
culture and so I think that's
been something that we are all
trying to help our community and
I know other grand languages
also step into the future but at
the same time keep our feet
planned you know we all came
we're all here because of all
those before us but now we're
part of this story that have to
help continue forward
some of the things I I did a
little hand out with a lot of
our concerns that we all have um
and I think one of the things is
a we need to learn how to stop
being I think with all of the
things were faced with a
compliance wise and things were
doing it's a very reactive
position and we would like to
learn to be proactive and and to
know the system and be able to
navigate it in a successful way
so that were not
always just meeting the next
deadline and doing the next
thing um in a week to have a
handle of of of it all and the
landroom council has been
fantastic but there are four of
them on staff and you know we're
we have a little language that
they're helping I think is it
is that are you nineteen total
land brands that you are told
twenty seven that they're
helping so you know that's it
that's a big lot of people for
them to be helping us all figure
that out some of the things
closer to home you know helping
us understand policy and
opportunities for our land
grants some of the things that
we were talking about that we
are hoping to
look forward to is.
Adapting our communities and
helping people step into the new
um we want to be able to
preserve our history
and and and share our culture
with our young generations that
are coming up we're hoping that
maybe we can figure out some
kind of funding to do a
documentary that is in our voice
and and tells our story and we
can use it as an educational
tool so that we have it for
future generations we don't have
anything like that and it's such
a visual world that we're in
right now it would be great to
be able to have that kind of
teaching tool to share with our
children and grandchildren and
also in schools or education
programs or situations like this
where we're trying to um share a
voice uhm
let's see sorry getting off
track you're a little bit one of
the things.
We've talked about is the
possibility of maybe doing some
kind of solar project
and uh I did a little research
and there's a website called the
climate and economic justice
screening tool and
because of where we are located
in place etes we are would not
be because of the social
economic surroundings are
landgrant would not be eligible
to my understanding and
I know that in other states.
Programs like these allow for
communities to self identify and
I would like to see for programs
like that some kind of policy
may be come out of our
eventually that landgrants can
self identify for projects that
they want to
be a part of and not be
taken as a an area that they're
in because we've got a lot of it
very expensive housing around us
and to qualify for some of these
programs we would need to be
able to self identify so and
it's just something el throw out
and maybe we cannot talk about
we're helping to eventually
improve our language officers
were in a portable rate now
which was you know it's been
there it's great we'd love to
make it into something a little
more permanent since we've been
permanent since seventeen sixty
five with like our portable to
be permanent
and
we would love to explore
affordable housing for our
membership in our children and
grandchildren and have them be
able to come home and I don't
know what that looks like
because we haven't figured that
out yet but you know having
something that that is either a
rentable you know space or
I don't know we don't know what
that looks like but you know a
lot of our kids can't afford
that we've got people going to
college and trying to make their
way in the world that we want
them to have a place to come
home to and so we don't know
what that looks like yet but
something we'd really like to be
able to offer to future
generations uhm and we have
worked a lot
with the fire with the four
service um this spring they have
a plan for doing some
prescriptive burning in our last
watches canyon
and our traditional use area
goes up into that area and they
shrunk it a little bit so we're
trying to get them to go back to
our original traditional use.
Boundaries
but we are working with them on
that and it and we are trying to
figure out how to keep our
waters save for the village of
place
they are on a irrigation must
secure and so it's a multi
faster water system hybrid it's
for domestic use and irrigation
and the springs lie the water
sources lie on land and it's up
above the village which backs to
national forests and also to
national first and um.
But we would like to figure out
fire buffers maybe for that
because if if a fire comes down
through the forest and
contaminates and jeopardizes
that water source our village
would be devastated so that's
something that's really
important to us.
And then as argue said we like
to work on continuing to get
back.
Land if possible and and it
whether that be stewarting land
that has been taken from us or
figuring out ways to utilize it
so that for the good of the
community
and I think that's
I think yeah I think that's
that's um
we with the other thing we would
live to see is a training I
think for our boards I know
there are spin some training
that is available but I i'm
seeing as
there's so much going on we
would love to have input as far
as advice and navigating the
legislative process
for our landground so think that
would be really I think very
helpful for us as we go forward
we really really wanted to start
teaching the younger
generations.
What this is and what it means
now to be a landground in new
mexico there's a lot that we
have to.
Learn and we want to learn and
we want to share and then we
want to be able to pass it on.
In a way that is productive
for them
um
and I guess now we can open up
the floor for a discussion is
that on questions
that any questions from anyone
on the board sender or tuesday
penalty.
Thank you mister president thank
you for the presentation of the
the information you gave us is
wonderful and this is a great
document to to be able to hang
on to as it has most of what
each of you spoke about
I had a couple of questions that
I wanted to get clear where do
you get your electricity now
from the from p and m from your
own pn so I I think wouldn't
this be wouldn't they qualify mr
chairman and and in those view
who worked on the community
solar projects wouldn't this
week and ideal location for a
community solar that wouldn't
have to be dependent on there
being considered within an
economically disadvantaged
census track but.
But if if if there is a the
definitely number of buildings
in offices and homes I think you
know working on a community
solar project would be something
that of all the languages
because of your contact nature
and the fact that you're you're
not on a honor corn the cool ups
it's tougher but with pn we
could you know it may very well
be possible to develop a
community solar project here and
I think one that would be
extremely advantageous for you I
just throw that out as some some
unless i'm wrong I don't think
you have to be economically
decided or stephanics on that
point thank you mister chair and
thank you senator for bringing
that up when we pass the
community solar act we actually
pass the
authority to the prc to develop
the procedures into put out the
standards and the bill.
Was limited to two hundred mhz
megawatts across the state
because of the negotiations with
the utility companies they
employed a contractor to do all
the work they have put out the
rfp so the first two hundred
megawaters of projects is
already contracted out and the
psy is going to recommend that
it's race to five hundred minute
megawatts around the state so if
the community
watches through their
legislators and through the land
grant council
the next round of our of peace
will be a a year or so out but
there will be another round of
our of peace
and then i'm sorry
go ahead and then I have it
about from the I had a question
I I just wanted to say a uh
someone you could contact is the
kid cars and electric court they
have done communities so there
are projects with picadis and um
a new one I think that was a
different thing and about you
they worked with northern so
they and and it's last time a
matter of getting the right
funding to put that together so
they work with major companies
that that you know by this for
you and then you do a long term
kind of loan rental agreement
but it's profitable for you in
the long run and will deliver
electricity to your local
community so louise rares as
ahead of that um i'll give you
his number on the break okay and
give him a call because they
have done that for uh built
community solars for different a
lot of different people and
they're they they're all still
tied into the funding mechanism
which is really what you need
help with the christmas energy
with someone that did it for
I think yeah with the pick it is
I I think also for northern okay
thank you
why just wondered we also were
landgrade offices are located
and you'll see that.
Tomorrow whippers able to come
and we lease out a building to
the local k u r p radio station
and it's a really wonderful
relationship as far as our
community goes because they have
it's an emergency bridecast
system that actually our
landgrant donated to the
radio station and that is how if
there is an emergency they will
be able to bride cast
the system is coming to date and
will be
expiring soon so that's
something that we need to
replace for our community but
the other thing is as I was
talking with the manager of the
radio station and we were
talking about if we were able to
have solar if there was an
emergency they would able to be
able to continue broadcasting
from that location to help
people get out because we have
only one way in and one way out
of place so you know it's
imperative that we have that
system in place and that it be
able to continue so that's
another reason that solar would
be fantastic for a community
any further question it's under
artistic and other issues that I
wanted to bring up
you're interested in a
documentary
brought to mind the woman who
who did the wonderful
documentary on.
Uh.
I think she did the one on a a
second.
And that was a reselling chapper
uh saturday I was selling
that
chap it is chocolate at you in
him at at the center for
southwest
thirty that's at the library her
offices are at the library unit
and the you know they they have
a lot of projects in mind but
they can also identify potential
funders and that might be a way
to to do that uhm the other one
that did the one on libraries
was been dates I think he did it
on on his you know he didn't
necessarily go through somebody
just it was very well done.
And then there were the one on
her niece settles actually
there's this whole series of
things that that can immediate
uh to colorado and you might you
may pursue a documentary on your
language through them
I I just think it's a history
that needs to be retained and
spread and and thank you for
being willing to work on that
thank you mister chairman thank
you senator and center guide
thank you mister thank you for
the presentation I want to start
with mister
and love your passion I love
your storytelling it make an
excellent legislator
in it takes the historical
knowledge to understand
but but I appreciate that thank
you one question I had and you
guys brought it up is preparing
the next generation how involved
or they really quick I had
knockled ahead traditional lands
now
the family lands in colorado he
had properly was solver at least
under contract all the animals
and everything was sold with
inner thirty day period of his
death you'll never get it back
but how is it you guys are the
kids engaged to younger
generation.
Um sadly not enough.
Um I was to.
To known but you know we're.
Unfortunately I I believe that.
You know this as market would
put it does younger generation
put this younger generation is
very much incentive base I mean
if you're if you're not
motivating and true something in
somewhere in other you know that
you know buddy what am I what I
get out of this you know a lot
of people are on motor via
debate what they're.
What they're going to get out of
it you know and.
Yeah I don't know how we
navigate that you know I don't
know how we encourage people
without telling them they're
gonna be going to get something
out of it you know so it's it's
it's really
which one by telling our story
just well yeah
I have a cookbook yeah when I
should renew not there you want
it but it brings up memories of
my childhood and so your stories
that you gave us the history of
here you know there you've
gotten better into so they have
value of their history so that
way that like so far in there so
and and and this is true you
know my my daughter called me
recently and and asked me he
does where those stories that
you wrote
you know and and it could she
wants to hear of joint share
that with her son.
But
in a week we mean we need to be.
Have an average venue of some
sort that that we can share I
mean it's we got a building we
got a we got a little.
I mean it's not even a big
assessment square footage a
little bit bigger and you know
it's just not conducive for a
lot of things it's not really
attractive and I mean if we
could I think it in this near
needs you know there's a lot of
ways to attract maybe the use
with some type of younger
interaction I mean there's but
we.
It's it's a slow process you
know and when you don't have
parents getting involved and
then you don't have the children
getting involved when you don't
have uh you know a hundred
percent or even a high
percentage of your membership
living in the area where you are
that's hard to have that kind of
can interaction that engagement
and you know it is a very
personal personal thing in a
week we can't just write a book
and tell him a story you know we
got to get him involved we got
to get him out there and.
You know but people don't want
to travel all the way to plus he
does to but if you know to to
conduct point you know we we
really need to be able to get
some form of.
Affordable housing you know my
unfortunately I I have a a
second home and my daughter just
moved into my second home she
couldn't afford to buy a home
over here I can afford to
to help my daughter you know
move here without that and
you know we all have that as.
As parents we we never get those
those those issues you know and.
How do you do that you know we
get we got it we got established
community before we can actually
feed the community a mister and
close and what i'd like to just
give you an idea you've got to
like the fire you've got to give
them hope you've got to give
some to fight for when you're
talking about traditional
boundaries.
If you could figure that out
with our total and find out if
there's a way when pushed back
on the feds for taking your land
this committee helped one would
letters and other things when
to may had similar issues.
That if it's.
Legalized in your original
paperwork even under spanish law
we're here first.
Not second where here first but
you have to build something like
that to get them interested in
the build at fire in their soul
so they come back and fight for
what's right fully theirs.
What that are you thank mister
common to that just that kind of
leans towards
you know that the landride
council I mean there there are
one of the but in my opinion and
they could speak to that more
than them any of us they're
understaffed I mean they do what
they can but they need help
representative lord.
So
first of all thank you turn to
decide what I want to cook first
if you can wait apple's apples
are not right now
I was yeah
so a couple things I want to
address we are finishing up a
letter sending to
are senators are congressional
about the federal level in the
congress woman up there.
Basically we're sending the
letter about the fire issues
because I am deeply concerned I
wrote the tram the other day and
we have a tin of dead trees and
on my side so portly according
to them to the force you
department there are more that's
inveating they're not quite dead
yet and i'm like or then why
don't we go in and cut them and
treat them so it doesn't spray
it spreading you can see it
spreading out everywhere.
I'm deeply concerned also
whenever i'm a motorcycle up up
to the top it is dance it's for
a very down so
the letter basically says in the
most nicest way please maintain
and care take the forest please
go in and send this out please
take care of the people please
don't screw up like you did and
the north and be very careful
when you're going to maintain
and caretake the forestry
department and and are for us
because it's important their cut
as fire it's going to burn is
probably gonna go up and over to
my district so it's it's a big
concern i'm writing that with
representative harlen vincent
because he lives in rido so and
is a firefriend or so we've
we've got that letter to send
out we're also asking two that
people be allowed to go back in
and countries
yes I know in right and that is
and that is what i've learned
with the language we want that
ability to go back in and do
that so that's one of the things
that were working on so
don't make sure make sure if
you're speaking sorry sorry I
didn't I just wanted to make a
note that there is a bill that
we've got are true
debt to reinstate our
traditional uses that would
include
firewood and would cutting and
you know my parents home they
have vigors from the mountain
it'd be nice for people building
to be able to do that again and
for firewood and those things
were taken away so we would love
to have our traditional uses
reinstated and hunting
okay you've got me on the
hunting part two thousand and
ten questions from the audience
but after during the lunch break
you can come and speak to the
representative.
Thank you I know that's a hard
topic because in the language as
would they tell me you know they
want to be able to go out and
get wood like they were able to
be for and I want to make sure
that you guys have that ability
to plus those force or too thick
their tender boxes right now and
we need to they need to be
thanded out and properly managed
yeah.
Anyway so I am working on trying
to get that that back to the
people are the other thing too
so the former headed the land
grad and carnual was moises
oh my god I love him he I can
sit down to talk to him forever
about the history of landgrounds
so there is a woman I just met
when I was at the fierces they
send the gall that she's doing a
documentary of carnull and so
i'm asking her because what they
did with it cause i'm on my line
is my father site is jewish so
they went back and they realized
there's a lot of verbal history
there's never been documented
and would have learned about the
langrants as there's a term
menace amount of verbal history
that's never been documented so
i'm gonna talk to her and ask
for cause you need to go and get
all of the language to go
through the history beginning
their time and each one is
different from another carnival
is very unique because of right
next to the city very different
everybody else so i'm going to
encourage her to please get all
the language and also a message
here she's going to be I asked
her to come and present at some
point because she's already
finished as documentary on the
landground and I don't I don't
know if anybody knows about it
but it's going to be out sound
so when I get that information I
will get it to you so that we
will all know at least we can I
think to be played at the.
Leader one of the theaters and
albuquerque when it's finished
and that's all ahead thank you
mister begin representative
representative mcqueen
thank you mister
mr chair and members of the
language just a couple words of
advice.
Uhm first of.
You're chasing resources chasing
money can be a full time doubt
yeah um there are there's help
there is a new state office
that's supposed to be helping
people rate federal grants
here we can do some things with
capital
the cogs uh the council's
government can be helpful in
writing grants so those are good
places to check.
Uhm I often also think.
You know rarely do we need to uh
invent the wheel there are other
groups they're doing things uh
like I know cheaply is working
on housing you know for for
errors and also working on the
tax issue so you know talking to
language council talking to
other languages you know talking
maybe to try it's your tribes
have been doing good things to
you know to see how they do it
and how you could adopt that and
then prioritise I mean you've
got a log of projects you
probably can't do more at once
you know so if you strategize
and sort of lay out you know
you know which are more time
sensitive which makes sense to
do first and then focus on that
and sort of lay out a process I
think that would help you get
them down and finally.
In a least in terms of capital
outlay
you need to look at like please
how you can phase projects I can
remember when I was a freshman
legislator and had a
representative real communities
down influence the county and
they came to us and they wanted
like six million dollars to
build the community center and
you I I didn't know one way or
the other but kelly for heart of
one of my colleagues uh sat and
down and said you can't ask for
six million dollars and I can
get six million dollars but you
could ask for five hundred
thousand and the other we could
you could pick in and we could
find that and you know it's ten
years later and they have a
tremendous community center with
a with a library in the wreck
area and the officers and
meeting places that they have
built over time.
Because they they figured out
how they were going to phase it
in and eight every year they
come back and they asked for
more and every year they go more
and they do more so that that's
also I think a really effective
approach at least man comes to
couple and I I mean I think
you've got a lot of you know
really great ideas and i'm happy
to work with you and talk to you
offline.
Thank you mister baker
representative representative
error.
Thank you mr clear and thank you
for your presentation I many how
many you guys have right now
many acres do you.
That numbers cannot
it's it's only an excess of four
hundred probably in the in the
four hundred and thirty rings
somewhere
where there is also an idea that
i've been floating and and I
will help you do this but uh I
think of a letter to the
congressional delegation asking
them to be you have blm lamb
with you and I you know a lot of
about it a lot of our languages
have hardly any
if you have four hundred I i'm
just going to tell you some have
none and ah so what I I would
like to do the language I need
to get certainly signed on with
you
a connection on delegation think
about having blm give a hundred
acres to each language that is a
jecent to a blm area you know
they they probably have more
package than they can use
given the who would the
administration is going to be
hopefully the timing of it right
and I think that could happen
and I think it's an idea this
time is come and I would
encourage that secondly
representative but queen talked
about the cogs have them had the
cogs work with you on kind of a
strategic plan you could do that
you kind of have it already but
you need to know what agencies
will fund these things in the
last agency I wanted to talk to
you about was the outdoor
recreation act and nonprofits
and certainly government line
tities can go for that funding
so i'm thinking for your
headquarters so I forget where
you can't your office you know
you might you might make a
recreation area and part of that
process is setting up
a new office with you know
bathroom facilities etc to house
that so so you can work you need
to work with in within a group
to see how you can kind of
capitalize on that so maybe you
build a park in a recreation
center for the community of the.
At the same time upgrade your
center and
you know you you will get a
fifty thousand dollars you can
apply for that now okay and and
ask your card to help you with
that fifty thousand will be for
the planning group and then you
need a engineering study to do
that they will pay for the
engineering study to do that you
know the third lines electrical
everything else and
do that plan and then the next
page should come back and then
you'll possibly two hundred
thousand to do the actual
facility so I just want it that
is there.
And so I just want to deal with
that mister chair
good I just
represented my queen I want to
let you know we did as far as
the taxes go and when let you
all know we we participated like
all of the landgransted and we
did protest our taxes this year
we have not heard back yet from
sound of all county we're still
waiting which I guess no news
can be good news sometimes
better we want to let you know
that we did that also and we're
still hoping like all the
landgrounds are that that is
something that is recognized
eventually.
Chairman you representative
however
how does the committee or from
your perspective view the
storeship of a potential
property plma otherwise not just
nor gifted but storeship as far
as.
In all language storing maybe
belong property here.
The.
Well
you know I I don't really know
the answer to that question I
was just I was just hoping that
bill and would give you a
hundred accounts each you know
and and and if that is kind of
within your design hopefully
that hundred acres will come how
you stood it now is
is really your car I think to
protect the properties you have
you probably have to look at
that are you going to get money
from them to do that probably
not i'm just going to be frank
but I I really wouldn't know how
to answer that question I
appreciate the question but I
don't know I don't know the
answer to it.
The.
Representative garcia.
Very good test one
my head's not working
with other please go cheap on
that
you know
there's water and coffee at the
very far and.
So if you go out the storages go
all the way down there's coffee
and then water or not only for
the committee but also for a
people in the audience and I
think that's what we have in our
lunch as well mister chair
you know we might be going over
the eleven fifteen time that's
been set for you but we can go
into our lunch.
In terms of really addressing
all the consumers that we have
so so don't feel kind of here
you know in terms of responding
because on the agenda we have
you cut off at eleven fifteen so
we we can go into our lunch hour
to kind of make up that
difference
I do want to
mention a couple of things one
um
I was still needed and gravel
job on your presentation and in
those first fifteen seconds you
could just see those better
flies kind of flowing out of
your stomach because he said he
would have never but you didn't
show any nearest in terms of
what you really represented it
was excellent
you know you have been a
political subdivision system two
thousand and four it's just that
it's taken some of our language
mister chair some time to kind
of really establish the
foundation the footing to really
exert the full potential of you
being a political subdivision
and that takes time you know it
takes resources to commitment
and dedication and
and thank you for bringing up
the history with the catering
cause that has been you know
sticking point with a lot of
loan grants in terms of how they
came to los their comments
we were last year mister chair
of about fifteen years ago
fourteen fifteen years ago I
told him was the president and
down and we had an excellent
tour the following day we went
to see your water system and
you're a second system
i'm sadly what he thought which
is like in the little cave
that was kind of real thrilling
and switch if you're a kid in a
candidate exploring that
so
but I want to ask is plus it
doesn't any municipality and
incorporate on the spelling nah
so basically your government is.
Sound of our county and
someone don't have a last word
for the name those are your
local governments down here and
so there is growth for the
language to really expound on
that political.
Empowerment.
You know and
you mention a couple other
things that's important
to where you you kind of
kind of emphasize that that you
you don't have the abilities to
resource as the kind of do a lot
of stuff and that uhm and that
this committee kind of can kind
of guide you indeed you in that
then the you know mister chair
and.
A lot of times the growth and
the empowerment don't come from
this committee
they conference programs and
projects that you all develop
that for example this
educational program that you
will touch down you know
we have funding at the
legislature it's called junior
funding and has a different
title now
but
you kind of put the the burden
on us to come up with an
educational program the thing is
that
you can develop a plan
you can develop a program as the
help that would look.
And if it's the development of
resources in terms of videos
etc that come out of that and
then you can kind of sell these
to different broadcasting
stations like
the public broadcasting stations
or the school systems or the
university so that they can
incorporate that in their
curriculum you can develop that.
You know but you have to have.
Kind of you you have to have you
you need to kind of have the
nuts and bolts of what that
educational program looks like
in terms of the need that you
want to address mister chair we
can't do that for you
but there is this funding junior
funding
and i'm going to contribute to
that if you're able to put
together a program before the
session starts to kind of assist
you and developing that
institutional prior because this
is an issue mister chair that
all the language reason that we
don't have a recolum in the
schools that we don't have this
that we don't have that about
landgrounds what the thing is
the only way things are going to
get changed in the school system
is that the language bringing
forth a program a regular
program because we're the
experts we know the answer now
of our language the institutions
don't that's why they don't have
any programming and and class
work in this or that on landrids
because they don't have the
expert easy exertises right here
you are you know that there's a
professor of knowledge right
you know and just a matter of
your brains in terms of the
leadership that can kind of put
together us a planner system so
keep that in mind you know and
if it's if it's just pen of a
development I think they're
going for it but if it's got
kind of a process in terms of
this is what you see
accomplishing.
Material a video be to see the c
you know whatever I that's
that's strategic and that's a
significant you know mister
charles so
housing
you know
at a lunch break I want to give
you the contact information for
one saturdays he is the
president chiles a language is
also chairman of the language
council
he's the language expert on
housing because they developed
thousand program and chilily.
They've got airs young one young
adults.
In their plenties in their
thirties that are living on the
grant because of this housing
project otherwise they'd be
living in a would get good or
real ranch or somewhere else you
know and the so we already have
a model housing.
You know in this crucial and and
to kind of take advantage of
that expertise that we have with
them no language in developing
these programs also mister
chair.
Are you that about that you need
training.
The thing is then you can put
the burn on us to figure out
what that is the thing is the
universal plan
on what twenty you need
the hong kamen.
Present that plan the language
council
and they have them then provide
resources that couldn't with
some of us
I mean if you're looking at part
of the training being the
history of this committee i'm in
particular.
In that training process you
know or whatever other experts
here you know can that for
example were similar to sick
penalties instrumental it was
his legislation the sponsorship
that brought about the community
governments program.
Where we have attorneys now they
can assist language with their
legal issues.
So if you develop training.
Plan.
Present that to the language
council and one terms of what
that entails then we have the
groundwork in terms of
addressing the specific training
and providing resources and
experts in terms of addressing
those specific issues that are
relevant
you know to those experts and
you have an old encompassing
training session
but has gotta come from you
know and the
you know and also mister chair.
The similarly blm is real
important.
The same with the forest is
really important
we have some language.
That in terms of their
traditional language boundaries.
These are nice especially the
bl.
Has been selling off their land.
Two tribes
what argument
traditional line boundaries are
our language.
Some of these nine grants have
no notice
what all ever that these
transactions are in the loop
something was elected as one of
those.
The blame went through the
process of
selling out part of the bill
portfolio to okay oinger.
In the language then.
Have one I owner.
The.
I have what information are
knowledge that that transaction
was going through and it was on
the traditional language
boundaries of the sentence with
the lack on your language.
So my suggestion is your chair
is that US a new governing body
in terms of the leadership you
need to have a sit down with the
blm
I said down with the foreign
service
take the original map.
That you have
taken map of the property that
you're currently having your
portfolio on the phone and some
makers.
And let them know that if there
in any way
going to involve their lands in
any kind of initiative be at
sale be it.
Partnership whatever that you
want to be given notice.
In our and then you need to have
also developer report with the
blm
because you need to kind of
state to them that you have
claim
that your claiming the land that
they hold.
As being part of your
traditional language and that
you want to
develop through the time a
process of winning back that
land they they are aware you
know and so we have to put the b
l am in the four service mister
chair notice
that you have not relinquished
your right.
To regain control on that land.
And that you're doing everything
in your ability and your power
mister chair.
Considering the resources that
you have at hand currently.
To make that happen.
You know and
and someone was language and
more languages have been real
slack with that and what
happened is what happened
incentive was a lot on ya.
They just are right sold out two
hundred acres to okay or window
you know without any of the
process that involved.
The village of the my or even
the santa cruz and yana language
to she my primary village
you know as well as santa as
santa cruz you're not within the
original boundaries of the sun
that was in the coming language
and
you know mister chair
i'm familiar with the blm in
this area thanks to
only to set on his presentation
that he did fifteen years ago
of the alam selling off some of
their lands to who
developers for what purpose
building multi million dollar
homes.
In this area
gentle fine the area
totally leaving out of
working blue color families.
About the market of the
properties in this area
so blm is complicit
entered at the gentle vacation
that's been going on in this
area.
Capital
recording in progress.
You know and our language right
now we're barely surviving with
our capital outlay projects
because the most that logically
just legislators can give is
fifty thousand
hundred thousand
but some of your projects and
i've been keeping history of
your projects for the last five
years some of your projects
entail over a million dollars.
And sometimes the legislature
can eventuaters can point a
meet.
At that prioritization in the
miniscule.
Funds that we get for our own
capital needs in our own
districts.
That's why I the one occurs the
language to really get behind
this initiative.
Of establishing the language
infrastructure fund which is
primarily capital outlay monies
that will come from a irremark
offer the service tax permanent
fun that's how we're funding the
colonial projects that I were
funding the water worst projects
that's how we're funding the
tribal projects this through
these error marks offer the
severance tax permanent fund
and we want them while the
langrades in their same tape
because now rang rants have
another pool of money to pull
from instead of just it's
legislators.
And that's what you need you
need a bigger pull of funding to
meet some of your some of our
languages are wanting to build
community centers in the one
point five million range.
In our and
community centers take a lot of
money I know that for a fact
mister chair.
It took a seven point eight
million dollars to build this
beautiful.
Senior center multiple percent
or a fresh call.
Seven point eight million.
Good thing we had governor
richardson that put in three
million of that and this
legislators put in four million.
You know and but it took us
eight years
put in so much money each year
for eight
to get it to that point mister
chair
I know we have to also when more
than a loss of the kind of
protect the funding from going
for another
purpose that wasn't in the
original funding the non against
burning of county but
you know mister chair I know
that I took a while and we cut
into our much break or are the
next presenter but
you know.
Where there for you
you know and in its and still
help you with.
The building blacks.
But the main thrust in terms of
the brains of what you want to
do that ideas and all proposals
then have to come from you
they're going to have to come
from line rent experts already
that are doing these things like
one santa with the housing
program.
You know and um and even
wait a month from can you
negotiate language that guys
written books
that's going that guy has done
films on the head he said
history in regards to the
development of land rants you
know so there's these veterans
that you can also.
An attack into the can maybe
help you develop the kind of
program that you want to see
that is relevant to here
sometimes it aware the pass.
This area so thank you again do
you have anything to add fine in
on it not then i'm i'm pretty
much done on my question in
message and okay and I want to
in the end of time because
mister needs to have to satisfy
for the indian affairs committee
this afternoon or one of you do
so if you can make your comments
brief sure
so we do it as far as an
education plan we have somewhat
of an education plan in place
doctor gonzalez is he is an
educator he's a retired educator
and he is putting something in
place we haven't really observed
it as a board to say that you
know we
agree with it but but our hopes
are so there is a pat plan in
place as far as the the acres
that we have a hundred and sixty
five vehicles it's pretty much
dedicated a watershed property
so that's
going to exclusionary to the to
the whole
and and that's about it
thank you thank you thank you
and I have a couple of comments
if you can stay seated please
and so first I want to thank you
for carrying on the heritage of
mercedes and ensuring that
you're keeping our traditions
alive in in your area and so
just too quick comments
especially valley high school
has a video program and what
they're doing to help the local
area is we're seeing that our
spanish language is dying in
northern their new mexico and
the delective in the espinal out
really by area is unique that
the spanish we speak is
fifteenth century spain spanish
and so at the high school is
doing as they're now starting to
go and film.
Elderly residents throughout the
county to hear their stories to
get quentis and their
documenting it as part of their
school program then they are
going to turn over to these jide
ties at videos to the public
library so that it states that
when you're talking about
documentary instead of thinking
big and going with the producer
and a director you might want to
start with your local high
school to see if they could help
with that project and then
another thing you talked about
board trainings I never really
thought about that and i'm
wondering if maybe as a group we
can start thinking if we can
then start hosting what would be
a landground conference where we
bring every land rap board
together where you get to meet
each other you get to fit on
what representative mcqueen
touched on which is affordable
housing is something one
landgrandstarted working on
instead of reinventing the will
you then meet with your peers
from other landgrounds where you
tell you what they're working on
maybe how you can join up their
bandwagon and I think a lot of
wrapped conference would be
great and if we had it hosted
three are two dollars area and
if there's a way I could put in
junior fund to ensure that that
conference had happened i'd be
happy to do that but I want to
think the three of you for what
you do and I want to think you
even fear comment back there and
will discuss more in the back
when viral and sprink thank you
and sir the other premail came
in which is senator linda lopez
and i'm gonna have her
introduced herself as I have
adrian ogils be coming up for
the next agenda
thank you mr chair good morning
is still good morning at linda
low person senator district
eleven which is the southwest
quality to burn all your county
thank you senator.
Peter looks like you'll be
joining us for this next a
portion of our agenda it's the
community governance attorney
program good morning gentlemen.
Good morning mister chairman
members of the committee
actually feel indulged me for
just for moment mister chairman
I too would like to just make my
personal thanks to senator or
tcp no he was my senator for
many years before I moved over
to deronice
good friend from hanging out in
the coffee shop and you're stuck
with me because of senator t
pino he was on my hiring
committee so
I just wish you all the best
thank you for everything you've
done for us
so
i'm the director of the uncentre
at the university um a school of
law we are a research and public
service center I know you won't
know exactly what that means
we've just celebrated at our
twenty fifth anniversary and I
think maybe are sixteenth year
as an r PS p so thank you for
your financial support all these
years
we essentially
take the research and public
service name very seriously that
is what we do we research water
and energy issues and we work
with communities from the
foreign fields up to the round
house
the judiciary the governor's
office and anyone who calls us
we work with all new mexicans on
wider issues
we got engaged in langrade
issues thanks to artoro and his
efforts he's robbed us in many
years ago and we've been very
pleased to partner with his
group and to offer some
educational opportunities to
students in the form of lunch
and learns we did two summers
ago we held a sake in langrade
summer class which was
oversubscribed very popular and
I want to think and regain our
turnover both helping build that
class and teaching that class
and I think it's something that
we could easily replicate if all
of us can find the time to hit
to pull it out again I should
also congratulate our turnover
on completing law
which is a a significant event
in he made a great mark on on
the law school community while
he was there.
We have held a landgrad c l e in
the past and that makes me think
of you this workshop being the
next step and we'll be happy to
support that in any way we can.
So let me give you an update on
where we are with the community
government's attorney program
just to give you the basics this
is what we call a loan for
service program and so
students who were moving into
the third year of law school can
apply for this program and we
pay off their third year tuition
their costs and give them a
really good living site and
currently the packages worth a
little over forty five thousand
dollars for that portion of it
and then they're guaranteed two
years of employment half of
which you all pay and have of
which the legal service provided
they go to work for pays and
they are required to provide
governance attorney assistance
to colonia's the same gears and
or lamp
and so we're really pleased
we've got
to practicing attorneys out out
in the world now there are legal
services working under david
bennett is and we have a third
year last student who has been
selected and is enrolled in this
program and pending her
completion of last school and
the bar example will be going to
work for david bennett it's next
fall so we've got three in the
pipeline right now
i'm gonna give you just a little
start certainly
on where we are in terms of the
sort of administrative
activities we at the attention
center are kind of the
administrators of this program
and I should actually introduce
myself as the chair of the
community government's attorney
commission i'm the the dean of
the law school's representative
in my friend peter covena who uh
I think you all know serves as
he d's representative and then
we have a representative from
the language community of
representative
from the assetia and from the
colonial committee communities
we're actually very pleased we
we having trouble making forums
because a few of our
representatives were older and
had some health issues had to
travel unfortunately to be at
our meetings and
recently got word that the
governor has um appointed a new
safety representative.
Uhm uh lawyer out of santa fe
some of you probably know andrea
dala cruise crawford and so
spoken with her issues
energetic and enthused and i'm
sure she's going to help us make
those corems and get her
business done which we really
really want to get the so
we have figured out how to move
the money that was AAA major
choice that we move the money
from you to each ed to the law
school to the bursers accounts
for a students and also we've
got an agreement now where the
money can be moved from you and
and to the legal service
provider to new mexico legal aid
in this case
we've got money moving and in
the right place at the right
time so that that was a
challenge but we're really
really happy to get that done we
promulgate at our own rules for
how the commission works and
and peters like the effort in
his garden the h e d regulations
in place now so I think we
really fully compliant with the
statute and with your intent and
have this program up and
running.
And an another point that I do
want to
set for the and just give my
thanks to and rekay for his good
work
in recase you all know is at the
age the department of justice is
treated have got to look at a
dogo division and he is extended
the offer to the commission of a
potentially providing us with
legal support that's actually
really reassuring there's even
though peter and I are both
lawyers you know when you're on
a commission you're not supposed
to be the commission's lawyer
and so i'm hoping that at our
next commission meeting we can
take a vote in take and repay up
on that action
so erm the commission is looking
at the statute and and where i'm
hoping to get a meeting called
in the next month before the end
of this month to dig into these
issues we do have a few things
in the statute that I think
we're going to come to you all
and and has to change
and you know just to make the
system more efficient
uh part part of the is that the
statute is laid out
responsibilities in a way that I
think we can just align a little
bit better so you know they say
maybe they need to be recruiting
the students well really makes
more sense for us at the law
school the recruit should so
just aligning things like that
is we we can make a work right
now but that we could do some
tighting up there
we
currently are our legal service
providers
are defined fairly narrowly and
one entity that that I think the
commission will probably vote to
ask you all to include as a
potential legal service provider
is and recase group is you know
having students be able to work
within the ag's treaty of court
look at a doc over division
would be really beneficial they
could be providing the same
services to the same communities
one of our difficulties there is
a matching funds for the salary
need to be non state funds and
so that the eliminates and
recase group right now so that
that could be I think a fairly
easy statutory fix and in a
really good opportunity to
provide another.
Forum for these students to go
and work and you know working
under end regard to be just AAA
a real benefit for any student
right out of law school.
Net now the hard part the money
so the envisioned program was to
have two students in rolled at a
time so there would be two
lawyers going out into the world
at a time and because they're
out there for two years we would
have two students and four
lawyers at a time if this
program was
And that I think we can since
staying that for about two more
years and then we're going to
start dipping into the red with
our appropriation and so you'll
see at the end of the hand out
there I i've given you two
numbers if we want to continue
in the next couple of years
enrolling one student at a time
in getting one new lawyer out
there every year are ninety six
thousand dollars your
appropriation doesn't need to be
bumped up much hundred and
twelve thousand dollars we can
keep one person out there at a
time if we wonder fulfill the
vision of having two at a time
we've just got a double that
amount two hundred and twenty
four thousand dollars it's my
understanding that the head
budget request is for the
standard ninety six thousand
dollars a year and we as a
commission are going to lean on
head to ask you to approve a
bunk there but if an opportunity
comes to plus us up and
committee perhaps not nothing
that we would complain about
which really be happy to come
and testify and fix that so
that's where we stay in peter I
if you've got anything to have
mister chairman is it can me
thank you for great to be back
and language many different role
no I think that's great they
think that even that ninety six
thousand dollars will.
B is very quickly especially a
salaries grab a costco off of
tuition and cost of attendance
not just tuition customer
tendence which is yeah all the
all the money to live as a
thirty six so
but does great presentation
thank you very much and thank
you all for having us thank you
really got a questions will
start up with senator or teasing
penalty.
Thank you mister chairman and
thank you both for the
information.
The I wanted to bring up two
things one does legal aid
provide all the match for the
existing students now when they
get out there and and would.
I mean we we now say it has to
be from the non state sources
but we could just say from the
department's budget or some some
language change that would make
it possible for the ministry of
justice or whatever it's it's
called now to ask for
their share of the measure
wouldn't have to be necessarily
non state money they were cut so
I think that that that would be
a pretty simple fix and I wanted
to ask about the.
Immigrant license
it seems to me that the
colonials are one of the ones
you spell out is is the eligible
that might really be uh I know
they're another entity to to to
start working with around the I
don't know about the center for
line party mostly
you know but that to some extent
the immigrant law center might
be the appropriate partner for
the legal representation quite
suggesting.
That's it was germantown thank
you representative editor thank
you mister chair thank you
gentlemen for your presentation
you know i've heard they're
running money through a UNM for
what every reason is a nightmare
is is that true.
Yeah you know III shouldn't
disparage my employers I guess I
I guess it's always hard to ask
these questions but people who
actually have to be accountable
it's a difficult it's it's it's
a bureaucracy for any way we can
make that easier I mean I i've
seen this happen I mean it is
nuts but what the hoops people
have to jump through to hire
contract
absolutely crazy yeah yeah it it
um presents a unique set of
challenges trying to try to move
things to the the u n a
bureaucracy but I I think in our
case we've got things in place
now
I think we've got the right
agreements we've got the right
people at you and i'm
understanding what we're doing
here cause that was really our
initial challenge what is this
who water land grants you know
that we have to deal with all of
those just with our
administrative folks but I think
we've overcome that challenge
with this program
that challenge remains with all
of all the other things that are
going on of course and and to be
honest I don't have a good
answer for you on it on how you
could help us make that more
efficient
that's just a little above my
paper
I I also understand instead of
you know I don't know what the
language should be but you know
it occurs to me that you as
would be really.
Prime candidates per foundation
money for private money so I you
know if we can make a match any
kind of
you know it's if non state works
that would certainly allow
foundations to come in but I
think you guys would be prime
candidates for being a farmer
foundation director and a and
you know this is going to be a
good year you guys let me just
tell you when the stock markets
are you know foundations have to
spend five percent of that money
and sometimes the and a year
like this year like this boy I
start talking to foundations
right away because because they
can't spend that five percent
fast enough it depends on what
their fiscal year is but there I
can tell you we'll be foundation
money out there and they will be
looking for for good projects at
that at that's close to chair
thank you mister chairman is the
committee yeah it is it is a
complicated issue it's very good
that we have the process is in
place now with a
and employer which was not you
know an easy to ask necessarily
mostly is heavy left sorry
I would also like so it was or
so a unique challenge for higher
because it's a very unique
financial aid system because
it's about the you know tuition
and well as a payment for for
service right as far as far as
salary half the salary so we had
to have a num- multiple buckets
and not
ways to pay them back so adding
more money into it would be
great so we need to create
processes all those well the
different habits would it be
easier if we took hed out of the
picture
I i'm serious they are you know
why do they have to be there my
value do they add really if they
if it could just come directly
to you you guys are the ones
that recruit not h e d and the
and every time you tie another
state agency to into into a
laugh.
Forget it's just another mass of
hurdles should jump through and
I see no reason for it to go
through
miss mr chairman is the
committee I mean I had that
considered be happy to do not
being part of it but I will say
that
we have meant many of your
service programs and other
scholarship programs and so we.
Do administer many programs I
don't I do not know if you
administrator was in the same
way so we do have a history and
knowledge there but yeah this
discussion of the loads that
you're course thank you
if I may mister chair just add I
I think the one function that
comes to mind that UNM would
probably be very nervous about
is that h e d enters into the
contracts for it with the
students and so at is the
enforcement agency if the
student still fulfilled their
obligations and they are used to
doing that they they you know
have other programs that they
enforce and I would suspect unn
general council would be
concerned about being put in a
position to sue former students
in such but it you know
certainly something we should
consider I think that's that's
great imagine thinking thank you
well I see no reason why you
guys can enforce this situation
I mean really that the more
players should get around the
table the harder interest I and
I and especially the agencies
dear god I mean you know I don't
know how many hed secretaries
this year I guess I I i've lost
just one hundred percent
well p d I guess hosting
appeared I i'm just saying.
The less the better it is is you
know and I you know when I too
legislation now my first side is
first student arm so if any you
know legislation agency I can in
the eliminate are the better.
Thank you for that any further
questions.
Representative of garcia
thank you mister chairman
thank you
and then continue the game peter
you were ten of a
normal meant hearing with this
committee for many years
and it ended a good job and it
mister mister chair
mary more and more cheery
that I I kind of want to kind of
honey in on your
recommendations.
Because we need to kinda make
a request of our staff of mark
to draft legislation
so
one of the first things that I
gather it was and
then if you can kind of make
elaborate in terms of what
what the
one.
What what one portion of the
legislation will look like is
the status changes having to do
with.
Hed
kind of
doing the recruitment
so what what would that
where would that change look
like in the statute what what
what
idea or what concepts can you
share with mark that were kind
of
I know
make that happen in terms of the
language changes that we need to
make
yeah thank you mister chair
representative I see so so with
that one I I think that's AAA
fairly easy change i'm currently
the the statute says that you
know hd is is the recruiting
energy and I think we would just
substitute UNM
for for a t d in that spot there
there are number of these for
example another one is the
commission itself is supposed to
enter into contracts with the
legal service provider
and
at this point we've really got
unm entering into that contract
because the commission itself
is.
You know we're just five folks
who come together we here you
know and until we can enlist and
rekay we don't even have our on
the legal staff so it in that
would be another simple language
change and uh
excuse me some of the chair that
so that the
the the entering into contract
language.
Um
right now what we have is say
that again right right now what
we have in statute.
In terms of that
so normal explain and say that
again in terms of
the entering into contracts
motion yeah so so the statute
right now contemplates the again
that the commission so the five
member commission enters into
the contract with the legal
service provider
because the commission you know
is this you know you're not
really set up to enter into
contracts and enforce contracts
and we don't have that muscle as
a commission
as we set this up we we had UNM
itself entering to an agreement
with the legal service provider
because that's a much more
stable situation that that is
something we can just simply
rearrange in the statute and
mister chair representative I
see I I think we can get in
recase help we've got our
toronto now is a full fledged
lawyer two more lawyers on the
commission I I think we're more
than happy to provide a good red
line version of the statute to
mister edwards get his input and
work with him with a a fairly
polished product from the start
okay
and
in it lastly I guess would be
the mister chair would be the
funding uhm
so right now we currently have
ninety six thousand annually
going into the program
and mister church you're asking
that we kind of increase that
two hundred and twelve thousand
for one or two hundred and
twenty four thousand for two
participants.
And are you
are you set up proposing that we
do that now in the twenty twenty
five session
mister chair representative
it would be great if we could do
this in the next session in a in
the upcoming session um I think
it's imperative we can done in
the following session and so if
if we can't get it plus that
through a committee process in
this session then you know we're
gonna need to coordinate with a
g d in their appropriation
request process and try to make
sure that the the larger dollar
amount comes to you from day one
but yes if if we could get it
done in this section well then
there will be set to go I mean
we can we can really feel
confident and enrolling students
in this moving forward
my my concern is you know we get
two or three years down the road
without the
augmented budget we're gonna
have to start in rolling
students every other year and
and we don't want to do that we
want to see legal service
providers out there in these
communities is as many as
possible as soon as possible so
much to chair so how can this
committee.
Kind of bring that commitment to
light in terms of.
The dialog with the hd.
In terms of.
Making something happen now in
the twenty twenty five or.
How can this committee
start the dialog in working with
hdd on getting.
Some commitment in the twenty
twenty six sector.
I mean what what role can this
committee playing in
facilitating that increase
commitment on the part of a d
either in twenty twenty five or
twenty twenty six but I think we
have to have a vision.
Like prone.
Mister chair.
This share of sangas here thank
you for the question
I brought this concern to eighty
d
obviously as an employee to the
and this year the appropriation
that was the press was ninety
six thousand um
I will I will ask and have asked
that they increase that number
of that number did the increase
number did not make it this year
through the process in in the
agency however I think a letter
of support from this committee
that I could take to the to the
leadership
to the secretary would be
helpful I think that putting it
on the radar is helpful I think
and and i'm going to report to
them after this committee
meeting are on this on that very
issue so thank you very much to
go back to your previous
question about authority within
the saturday how that can be
changed I think the best way to
think of it there are three
buckets there is that law score
hd and the commission and each
has and through the process of
the starting this program which
is relatively very new we
figured out the best way of
making it work and we may they
work and that is different from
the authority and how it's to
deal with out in the statute
which is about eighty d should
have the contract with the
student your name should have
the student with the contract
with the legal provider for
example um
i'm should do the recruitment
the commission shouldn't have
its rule of should have its
policies and rules for itself
but eighty d needs to have a
rural credit from the program
which both have been done so I
think laying all those things
out as they are now in existence
is
very helpful now that we know
that where so the different
authority should thank you very
much
representative and maybe what we
should do is have somebody show
up with either one of these two
gentlemen to pitch that idea to
see.
The.
So maybe we won't want to talk
about that off line on what we
can do then mr chair if we could
also
work on the letter
that mark I mean that peter can
take two a gd
I think that's a perfect path
forward in center or two
thousand and eight
is like a bat
so they're not what i'm hearing
is that we will send do I need
to then take a book if there was
there.
If it recommended reason
is there any opposition to a
sending that letter no
opposition will come
severe or teeth if you know for
a second that's higher earnings
or two questions
thank you mister chairman just
forget to ask a couple of things
that just curious about how many
students took that course you
said it was over subscribed that
was at seven to get a you know
exactly what was the three took
twenty seven turkey if I
remember correct I think we were
at twenty four really yeah yeah
it was over twenty more
certainly
and I will I will say that uhm
the the this really was a
validation of of our tourist
vision
when when I started at UNM and
and there was talk about maybe
we should do something for
landgrants the attitude was is
going to get one or two students
no one's going to be interested
this is an obscure little realm
of.
That's and had the case our
students are hungry to learn
more about new mexico I mean
there are new mexicans are going
to serve a new mexico this is
the place to do it and um and it
was a lot of fun it was really
great and on the point of
teaching lawyers land grant law
I always make the point that it
is one hundred percent ethics
when you're studying the way
lawyers treated language
historically and we.
The name catherine was dropped
earlier
you know when we do at the c l e
on blank grants I thought to
myself this should be all ethics
credit the whole thing
so it's incredibly valuable for
students to learn even if
they're not going to work for a
language just to understand
their obligations this lawyers
and mr chairman of mark remained
me that one aspect of the.
Of the legislation was the
development of of the curriculum
that you're used in that course
but also
somehow to share it with local
government is where some of the
people
you're doing c elite courses in
addition to we we've only done
one so far and and i'd love to
to to to do more
than the colleague that we had
out of current well the the vast
majority of attendees were
landgrad members they weren't
lawyers uhm which was which is
really cool to hold the sea
holly that doesn't have eventual
lawyers at its and if they get
in the over credits because they
become lawyers very soon and
send them to our director.
Let's start on this mister
chairman thank you the the
I think one of the more powerful
things for keeping this program
going and so on as as the as
these young lawyers become
involved in projects for you to
share with us and then with the
public what they're being able
to provide legal services to the
language to the sake is
hopefully some day to the
colonials as well means what
what are some of the things that
we can say see that happened
because they got involved.
Yeah we would be happy to
document that and I do apologize
our newest recruit missus with
about eight with uh
unfortunately had to go to work
today and I hope to join us
but but yeah bringing them
before you to to tell them tell
you their own stories I think
would be hugely valuable.
Yeah.
Very good now he didn't be so
just a comment we did meet one
or two of the students last year
and what actually was a graduate
of massive easter high school
which is in my district and to
hear her talk about how now she
can tie in which is doing based
on stories and the landrab that
she learned growing up was
interesting to see how she sees
two sides of entering land rents
are protected so with that
gentleman I want to thank you
for joining us today you're
always welcome back peter
atlanta grab because I know you
were here for several years and
he's a picture or an ornament
and so since
answered christmas is just two
months away we'll see you
answer without we're going to be
breaking fifteen minutes early
and so lunch is going to happen
now we're going to take a quick
reasons for lunch we're going to
come back or next presentation
is scheduled for one fifteen pm
