For the record, please.
OK
Wonderful.
Yes, and I did hear someone
asking for us to speak closely
to the or into the microphone,
uh somebody through hearing the
special hearing needs.
Are you there?
Somebody they're calling on Zoom
on that screen on the back.
OK.
Thank you.
We just want to make sure we
speak loud enough for people to
hear.
All right. OK.
You can proceed.
Good afternoon, chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Felix Chavez, like you
guys just heard, I'm an LFC
analyst.
And um we are here to review the
request for the judicial
standards commission. It's
agency number 210. It should be,
should be behind tab too.
The judicial Standards
Commission received a $48.9,000
or 4.5% increase above its F by
24 budget for FY 25.
The judicial standards
commission's budget requests for
FI 26 was $39.7,000 or 3.5%
increase over F525 operating
budget.
These increases provide funding
for pay for pay increases for 3
staff members that qualify for
the judicial branch compensation
initiative and the projected
benefits that go alongside audit
rate increases and for building
leasing increases also included
in that are the costs associated
with sending 5 of the 13
commission members of the
National Center for State
Courts, judicial ethics
training, and the costs
associated with sending attorney
staff members to the national.
Ethics trainings and the
conferences related to that.
With that, we stand for
questions.
OK. Thank you very much for
that. So we're gonna do is go on
to the uh
To the uh people here in this
nice gentleman presenting before
us so you can be next.
Thank you, madam. I really don't
have anything to add to this
report and for questions.
OK, that was easy considering
what we came out of been able to
see out there.
There are days so this is great.
I like this committee. I know
my.
OK, thank you. Any questions
from the committee, uh or
comments?
That you're looking for yours,
your handwritten notes.
One moment.
Oh
All righty. Well, I think we're
gonna just let you go and fairly
easy here. We've got the
information. We have all the
paperwork from you and our staff
and we appreciate your work so
much.
Thank you very much. We're gonna
be looking at all of these
things together how you request
together pretty soon. This is a
hearing that we can know that.
We're both on the same page as
far as what the needs are. Thank
you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
OK. Let's get started as you can
proceed.
members of the committee. My
name is Scott Sanchez. I'm the
analyst for public safety.
Um, right now we're gonna be
reviewing the request for the
Department of Military Affairs,
which is agency code 705. You
should be able to find this
information behind.
It includes the Mexico National
Guard and also present with me
is uh I'm sorry, Major General
McGil general Mexican National
Guard.
And also acting secretary of
Homeland.
the Department of Military
Affairs is funded primarily
through federal funds.
And general fund appropriations.
In many areas of the budget,
state funds are used to match or
leverage federal funds.
requested a total budget
increase of 3.1 million for 26,
including a $1.7 million base
budget increase.
1.4 million in expansion
requests.
Requests include a $2.2 million
dollar increase in general fund
revenue.
Increase of approximately 22.9%
in the basis they requested an
increase of almost 850,000 from
the general fund.
Including about 310,000 to match
federal funds for the job
challenge and you challenge
academies.
agents requested expansion
totaling $1.4 million to augment
recruitment and retention
efforts by hiring a tutor for
the Armed Services vocational
aptitude battery or as.
And recruiting statements.
Expansions also included a $1.1
million dollar increase to
formalize a summer challenge
program the agency this year.
And that my remarks.
proceed.
Uh, the adjutant general, um,
with me here today is uh greater
General Nathaniel Corker. He's
the new, uh, deputy adjutant
general who replaced General
Herrera, who's moved on, uh, to
veteran services and so, uh,
you'll.
You'll see him a little, a
little more often in some of the
committee meetings hopefully
over the next few years.
Um
I uh
Before, before I got to talk
about our appropriation, if
you'll just give me a minute, I
wanted to let you know, um, so
about one o'clock this morning,
uh, I woke up in Boston and uh
and I flew here to be part of
this meeting and so in the
committee.
So, I don't expect you to feel
bad for me, but if I get up and
start talking to people that
aren't in the corner,
um.
You know why?
Um,
very understanding
but um but I but I wanted to
start with, uh, with the
discussion this weekend, and
mostly
To thank you for what you have
done and what a difference it
happened to me.
At 3 o'clock in the morning on
Saturday morning.
And so a couple of years ago,
the legislature allow us to
change the state law to allow
for us to put National Guardsmen
full-time on state active duty.
In order to do mitigation work
for emergencies.
If you go back to the summer in
Rio, so.
Uh, the National Guard found
itself, uh, with about 12 people
that were on that program at the
time of the fire started.
Uh, as we did all the things we
didn't really, so one of the
things that we found ourselves
doing that first weekend was um
Swift water rescue.
We weren't trained for swift
water rescue.
We had big trucks with big
tires.
Uh, and we figured out how to do
it with some of the teams that
came in.
In the, in the
Back weeks following what we did
in Rio, so because we had those
people on active duty.
We sent the swift water rescue
training.
Um, by chance I 9 20th um
engineer company is
headquartered in Rossville, New
Mexico.
On Saturday, uh, they were doing
drill.
The guys from the search team
that was swift water rescue
training happened to drill in
Roswell.
And so when this event started
to happen Saturday night.
Um
Our guys almost instantly went
out the door.
Uh, even though the armory
itself was also flooding.
At 3 o'clock in the morning,
some of our servants with water
rescue guys were helping the,
the Roswe PD or the Roswell Fire
Department in Midway, which is
midway between Roswell and
Dexter.
Um
They spotted a gentleman, a 60
year old gentleman who was in
the water being taken away by
some fast moving deep water and
the initiated their training.
And pulled him from that water.
They would not be able to have
done that, and that man would
likely not be alive today.
Or for, for not for your support
in allowing us to do this
program.
It, it saved lives this weekend,
and I just want to thank you for
the guards that did it were
brave.
Um, the training and the things
that they're doing are amazing.
But you allow them to do that,
and so you should patch results
on the back for, for putting
that program in place and
allowing us to do it.
Um, and
A little more money would help
out but uh we'll talk about that
next.
Uh, so I, I'll quickly go
through uh what our requests are
and what the priorities are, uh,
I think it's slight number.
3, it talks about uh funding
priority number one.
Uh, which is the job challenge.
Um, we had, we had 35,
apologize.
so
So funny priority number one job
challenging. One of the things
I'm gonna, so the expansion is
about 22%, um, seems like a lot,
um.
Especially from listening to the
center when you speak about it
earlier.
Uh, what I'll tell you is that
some of this expansion isn't
isn't.
Like expansion.
Uh, and, and the reason why I
say that is priority number one
job challenge increase of a
million dollars. When we started
the job challenge program and we
agreed to do it as a state 3
years ago, we knew what the
costs were going to be.
Um, the, the majority of the
cost or already in the general
fund, a million of it, I believe
because we were in the process
of doing construction was put
into capital outlay.
Uh, in, in, in supplemental
funding.
Um, but it was always part of
the base cost, so we've got a
million dollars in additional
funding over the last two years
to support the requirements in
the state match for that
program.
What we're asking for in that
million dollar increase in his
priority is for it to become
part of the recurring budget
because it's just a part of the
overall state match every single
year.
If that makes sense.
Um
If you, if you switch to slide
number 2, number 4 priority
number 2, we have a, a base
increase of personal cost in
category, um.
There's a, there's a lot of
discussion in the other room
about, um,
200 category reversions.
Um, and so this year, um, I had
uh
Our, our budget folks and our
CFO kind of work through.
figuring out our money and, and
something was pointed out to me
that that was incredibly
important.
Um, so for, for 20 years, uh,
for 2025, uh, we had anticipated
payroll costs of about $6.6
million.
Uh, in the front.
Um, we requested 6.2 million.
Um, what we received in the
session last year was 5.8.
And so we started the year.
About $740,000.
Uh, in the hole.
Um, and so what happens when you
do that, especially with, with,
with military affairs is we have
the master cooperative agreement
which requires me to meet every
bit of the federal match and and
budget for it at the beginning
of the year.
And so when I'm short money,
I can only take it out of what
is 100% general fund type stuff
at the beginning of the year.
So I started the year off about
$750,000 in a hole. What we're
doing with EO money and stay
active duty activations is going
to help it a little bit this
year.
But it becomes very difficult
over the span of a year to
track.
How you get from $750,000 in,
in, in the rat at the beginning
of the year.
get to, um, you know, being in
the black of 1000 to $200,000.
This year our version was about
$260,000.
Um, what, what, uh, what I think
we have to figure out, and I've
asked my team to the task and
see if we can get a contract to
work through share, uh, what I,
what I call, uh, we need
somebody to call it something
better than this, but it's a.
Something that that is automated
that looks at what payroll costs
are on, on a, uh, payroll cycle.
Uh, looks at what you think
anticipated costs are at the
beginning of the year and where
you started, and then as the
Allows you to know when you've
gone into the black, and you can
start to spin from that either
fill vacancies that you don't
have or move money around to
spend it in an efficient way
that helps the agent.
And get to what many, many
agencies find ourselves at, and
I did this last year in late May
and saying, hey, we have like
$500,000 that we've got to
spend.
Um, and we spent the majority of
it, uh, for things that that we
needed, but probably not for
things that I would have if I
had the ability to do it in
January or December, and so
we've got to figure out how we
do some of that.
Um, if you flipped a slide to
the next funding priority, uh,
which is, uh, um,
Or base increase in 300 to 400
category. When we started the
state active.
Uh, we asked for about 1. $1.6
million. We got about 750,000,
but we had an agreement with the
LFC to take what we spent in
search and rescue money,
including a helicopter uh
equipment costs.
Uh, for doing search and rescue
and pay for it out of that
750,000.
We, we budget about $250,000 a
year in 400 category money to
cover for that.
The problem this year, uh,
because I started the year
$700,000 in the hole in 200
category.
Cause I can't borrow the money.
Um, to move it over.
Uh, because I'm already in debt.
Um, and so the, the request, one
of the requests in the increase
in 400 category, which is 400 of
the 400,000, uh 250,000 of it
is, so that I can have it in the
right category, um, so that even
if I start down in the 200s, I
can actually spend the money for
what was intended for.
Um, the, uh, the other increase
is $100,000 in youth programs
money. So youth challenge um is
75% and Jobs 75% matched in
federal funds. Uh, they pay for
The great majority of that
program, which does amazing
work. There are some costs that
I can't uh cover.
Because they, the federal
government doesn't agree to do
it.
And so I can buy them uniforms
and boots.
I can't buy them athletic shoes.
And so we have kids, um, that
come in, uh, and, and they do a
lot of physical training.
Um, they get in great condition,
but they come in wearing
whatever shoes their parents can
afford to put them in, and in
many cases they're inappropriate
for what we're asking them to
do.
Um, I've been taking money out
of our, out of our, uh, 400
category, which is pretty thin,
uh, to buy uh running shoes for
them, so that they can have
proper footwear. They ask is for
$100,000 so that we can take
those costs that the federal
government won't agree to help
pay for that are necessary for
that, those youth programs, uh,
and be able to do that for them,
those athletic shoes is just one
of them. We spend about $200 to
$30,000 in two cycles in a year
to ensure their outfit it was.
issues because as you may well
know, kids are hard on shoes, so
one pair of running shoes for 22
weeks doesn't quite get it.
Um
The uh
The, the other increase that
you've seen in the 300
categories is simple, uh,
revenue from PED PED pays for
some of the meals uh for the
Youth Challenge program that
just allows us to increase some
of the costs.
Um, and then there's a, there's
a small increase of um
Uh, I think it's $20,000
because the federal government
used to pay 100% of the
vocational programs we do with
those kids, so EMT training, uh
welding, auto shop, those
things, uh, they are now
requiring us to do a 75, 25
split.
And so just that's just the
increase to cover that for those
programs.
Um
If you can turn over the
funding, uh, priority number 4,
that's the recruiting and
retention expansion that uh that
Scott talked about.
Uh, so some of that is ASAP,
perhaps some of that is, is, is
being able to provide referrals
to guardsmen who bring in people
into the guard.
Let me tell you what just
happened to us. Um, we're about,
um,
500 soldiers short on the army
side of where we should be.
We just ask for and competed for
uh a, a new drone program that
the National Guard is, is um uh
putting in the states.
Those drones on top of being a
great technology jobs for
guardsmen provide an amazing
amount of imagery that we could
use in this state for fires.
We, we were in the finalists for
that program.
What cut us from the program was
the fact that our strength, uh,
was low, and, and they didn't
think we could fill it.
And so having a strong guard
means the ability to, to bring
in for structure that is
relevant to the state.
What we're hoping to do with
this referral program is to
bring our strength up so that we
can remain competitive.
Um, funding priority number 5 is
the youth, uh, the, the uh youth
challenge summer program, uh,
that the governor asked us to
do. So this summer we did a a
pilot program with uh with with
money, we just kind of found
laying around in various places,
uh, at Jimmy Carter Middle
School, the intent of this was
to provide a uniform presence in
the summer, uh, for kids that
were in at-risk area in the
hopes of getting to them before
we lose them. And as we all
know, we're starting to.
our kids, and we're losing them
at that middle school.
We had 35 kids participating in
this program. We leveraged the
literacy program because it was
funded. So they did 4 hours of
literacy, they did physical
fitness every day. There were
guardsmen there every single day
with them.
Um, we had them go out and do
what I called hard things, uh,
every Friday, repelling.
Um, water survival training,
things that brought them out of
their comfort zone and start to
build confidence.
It's a tremendous success with
those kids. The parents loved
the program. The guardsmen that
participated loved the program.
This expansion is uh the ability
to do
That program again next year,
plus another program uh likely
in the Albuquerque area and then
we want to try to see what a
rural program looks like.
Um, and so this would actually
provide the funding mechanism
for us to be able to do it. So I
can't, I can't use full-time
National Guardsmen.
Uh, who are, who are, uh, paid
for a federal purpose to do this
program. We can get away with a
little bit here and there when
you start to expand programs, it
becomes difficult. So this money
on top of a statute change that
would let us tweak to bring
people on stay active duty to do
similar things with youth
programs.
Uh, would allow us to, to expand
this program, um.
The schools loved it, uh, the
schools that we're talking about
expanding uh with it are very
excited about it.
And what I found with youth
programs is there's a
significant amount of money
amount of money out there and
resources that help youth.
There's just nobody put bringing
them all together in a coherent
way that provides a larger
impact.
Um
Our guardsmen are really good at
doing those things. And so
that's uh that funding priority.
Um
Oh
The specials are fairly
self-explanatory on the next uh
slide. Um, so I'll stop there
because I know you guys are
Um, running behind and I'll
stand for questions.
Thank you, General. We were
having some problems with the
webcasting. I think this is
backing up maybe I need to move
back. Can you hear me back
there? Thank you. I think there
were blue lines, blue and pink
lines going up and down the
screen. That's all we know. I
was informed, but I think the
staff is working on it. OK.
Thank you very much and the
people here though, even if they
can't walk, but can't they even
hear what we're doing? OK, thank
you. All right. um, thank you,
General, for your presentation,
for all your work and you know,
all.
that you have mentioned here,
uh, they're wonderful programs.
I, I hear you every time you
come before our committee and
there's just so much need.
great. I think you're very
reasonable, as I've always said
it, and very resourceful, and I
appreciate that very much. I'm
gonna defer to members of the
committee before I make any
other comments or questions. We
have Representative Harlan
Vincent.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, General Aguilar, and
if you were to get paid on
performance base.
I'd write to check today.
Because you've been in Ridoso,
you've been in Lincoln County,
not just one time, I don't know
how many times, and I don't know
why we're so prone to fires,
freezes and floods, but we just
are.
So, um, I wanted to give you
some public accolades on that.
One question that I had whenever
you are.
Whenever you are dispatched to
an emergency.
And there's been a state
declaration on the emergency
when you attach yourself to that
declaration, do you get paid
back?
From that declaration or is that
just on the state?
Yeah, so, uh, uh, Madam Chair,
uh, Representative Harlan.
Depending on whether we get to a
federal declaration.
And so, um, like in Rio, so,
yes, um, we, we generate EO
money that comes separate from
what DHSEM gets and so we'll
draw from a separate pot of
money in a different EO, um,
that's what we use to to to
really bankroll the operation,
uh, and then we track everything
that we do.
That goes back to DHSEM and so
when it's FEMA reimbursable, uh,
we submit those reimbursements
and then, you know, later on, it
comes back to the state, uh, in
some cases, uh, when it's an
emergency that doesn't become a
federal declaration, then uh the
EO money essentially doesn't get
paid back to the state, but we
use that funding. As you can
tell from, from the size of our
budget, we just don't have the
cash on hand in order to be able
to, to just pay for it out of a
general fund. And so we don'
with the exception of the er
teams that we've got that about
5000 $600,000 that uh that pay
for two full-time people, and
it's budgeted for about 18
seasonal.
Um
What, uh, what we are doing is
uh putting in a notice of loss,
uh.
Out of the Hermit's peak Caf
Canyon.
Um, money, uh, to fund about $4
million a year regard to do
mitigation work there cause
they're having a hard time
getting contractors to do some
of the work. We'll send them up
there and that's what they will
do. We'll have probably a 4, so
between 35 and 50% of that
funding gets secured, uh, that
will be working all of the time
on that.
And then of course they become
the surge group that we can send
almost instantly when there's
another emergency and then they
just shift to a different type
of funding.
Madam chair.
Thank you, Representative Harry
Garcia, and I'm sorry,
representative, I didn't see
your hand earlier if you is that
OK?
Thank you, thank you.
uh
General,
thanks for the presentation, you
know.
I have the honor of going to uh
Roswell the general a couple
years back for the youth
challenge.
And you know, that is such a
good deal. You mentioned that
you have saved a life.
In the, in the
A flood and uh
Roswell, well, and do that you
challenge, you saved a whole
bunch of lives.
You really have, you know, I saw
myself there when I went.
I was 18 years old in Vietnam.
And I saw all these kids.
And I saw myself there, I said,
whoa.
You know, somebody's helping
these kids out, cause, you know,
they fall through the cracks and
then we lose them.
And that's very, very important
what you're doing there and then
these are just comments to the
general, uh, you know, I want to
thank you for all the help you
did in Rios.
All the Halton Roswell and all
the, the fires here in northern
New Mexico.
You know, you're not forgotten
and these people will always
remember you. Thank you, thank
you, madam.
Thank you, Representative, one
of our biggest supporters for
veterans. Thank you. All right,
we have Senator Sheer.
Thank you, Madam Chair. On the,
uh,
S
The performance members.
Performance measures.
static just took me out.
Um
So on here, uh,
Amount spent on state state
active duty operations for this
year, $1.3 million. Is, is that
what you're talking about?
We're
You were talking about having
active duty.
People doing that, uh, New
Mexico things is that this
number here, uh, Madam Chair,
Senator Scherer, no, that, that
is the funding that we spend um
related to state active duty. I
don't think it covers EO money
either, so uh when we activate
folks or what we're calling our
community emergency response
team or certain guys that are
working full time. Um, that's
the funding that comes from
that.
Um, when I was talking about, so
we've got active garden reserve
and military technicians that
are paid by the federal
government to to build readiness
for the nation, um, they, they
are, you know, that's their
purpose uh for that funding. And
so we, we have to be, I have to
be very careful about how I use
them, cause I, I fall out of, I
fall into a purpose violation on
the federal government side. And
so, um, they even on emergencies
like in Roswell, we did an
instant, uh, immediate response.
All, everybody went out, did
what they need to do, included
our full-timers, but as, as
things settled, I have to pull
them back and put them back into
their normal jobs and use uh uh
soldiers that are on state
active duty, but that's that
metric.
So I was just looking at
