legislation, uh, 11 person
commission was appointed the
commissioner served 4-year terms
and can be reappointed and
Commissioner Flores is, uh, if I
can ask her to introduce
herself, uh, and, uh, how she
came to the commission. Sure,
Mr. Chair, committee members,
thank you for, um, thanks for
that.
Thanks for taking the time to
listen to our presentation. My
name is Jacqueline Flores and I
sit here as a, a law office of
the Public Defender state
commissioner, um, I'm also a
practicing attorney. Um, I've
been, um, here uh in the legal
system at uh for my entire legal
career, I went to UNum law
school. I also was a sitting
judge for 11 years.
Um, I came to the commission
after um uh Senator Mimi Stewart
appointed me to the commission.
And since I've been on the
commission, I've been
responsible for overseeing the
contract council, um,
subcommittee, and so I've had
some time um educating myself
and becoming aware of the issues
related to contract council at
the uh public defender's office
and essentially, um when
indigent clients or in indigent
citizens are charged.
with criminal offenses, they're
entitled to have um legal
representation, even if they
can't afford it. And so what
they do is they go to the public
defender's office and they
apply, and before they can be
assigned to public defender,
there needs to be a conflict
check essentially to ensure that
um there's not perhaps somebody
else who's been maybe a
co-defendant or a witness in the
case who's otherwise been
represented by the uh lawfice of
the Public Defender, and if they
do find that there's a conflict,
which would certainly cause a
issue between the attorney and
the client, then that client is
contracted out to outside
counsel.
Um, when that happens, then, um,
there's a whole group of
contracts attorneys, usually
private attorneys who contract
with the public defender to
handle those cases.
Um, my experience on the
committee has shown that uh over
time, we're losing many of those
experienced contract attorneys,
primarily because of the pay
structure that we have in place.
Um, at this point, we've got a
pay structure that relates to
that that um is a flat fee. So
attorneys are paid a flat amount
based on the charge. And um
we're
Considering and working now on
transferring um the pay
structure from a flat fee to a,
to an hourly rate.
Which is certainly in line with
best practices nationally, um,
it also makes more, it makes
sense in terms of ensuring that
competence counsel is provided
and good legal work is provided
as well and compensated. Um,
before I came in, I was talking
to this amazing team, and I
should tell you that the team
that that that represents and
that's here today to talk with
you, is one of the most amazing
teams that I've ever worked
with, and I've had the benefit
of working with many amazing
teams, including many great
judges. But this is definitely a
start.
team, and you can have
confidence in what they bring to
you. Um,
But I was telling them earlier
that when I leave here, I'll,
I'll be uh working on a case on
a homicide trial that starts in
a couple of, well, 10 days, I'm
afraid. I guess I'm a little in
denial that it's starting soon.
And I will be working around the
clock really probably to prepare
that case. And if I were a
contract attorney based on the
amount of time that I'm working
on this case, I probably would
be compensated at about $15 an
hour with the current pay
structure.
And not that it that would
affect whether I do good work.
I'm, I'm certainly committed to
doing that, but I'm just
suggesting to you that the
current structure probably uh
it's just not something that's
sustainable.
Um, I know it's probably not
part of the ass today, but I
just wanted to bring that to
your attention that it probably
will be at some future time
cause it's certainly time to
address all of that.
Um,
I just, I appreciate the time
that you've had here with us,
and I, um,
It's really nice talking to you
all.
And um
thank you and thank you. So Mr.
Chair, um, I'm not going to go
through the handout you all have
in front of you. There's a
couple things I want to point
out and first to introduce some
of the people here, Deputy
Chief, uh, Randy Chavez, uh, who
is deputy deputy Chief fortract
counsel, so he's in charge of
our contract council, which is
all the attorneys in rural areas
and uh the conflict attorneys in
places where we have offices.
General counsel Adrianne Turner.
Our CFO Debbie O'Dell, uh,
Deputy Chief, as you may know,
Philip Laragoitee,
uh.
Uh, or human resources director
Ronald Herrera.
Uh, and our deputy director of
Policy Administration, Teresa
Edwards.
Uh
Just, well, the chair isn't
here, but he said something this
morning, which I just wanted to
uh come back to, which is
there's been a lot of investment
in behavioral health and uh
public safety. And where is the
needle been moved? And let me
suggest to you that the needle
has been moved at the public
defender's office that we
considered um money that you uh
that you give to the public
defender's Office as an
investment um in community
safety. And I think when people
think about public
safety, as most of the
presentation this morning is,
it's about law enforcement, uh,
and it's about prosecutors. Uh,
the public defender's Office is
important in the administration
of swift and certain justice,
not swift and certain
prosecution, but swept in
certain justice and there's a
constitutional right to a
defense attorney, but we have to
make that real. And it's not
just every individual of our
approximately 70,000 cases
statewide that we have. But it's
also working with
The system because we don't want
to see our clients come back.
When we have a client, we don't
want to see them again as
clients. We want to see them in
our small communities when we
pass them on the street, uh, or
I see their father and the
father said, thank you so much
for, for helping my son. He's
doing really well, um.
We put in a lot of work
systemically to make that
happen. Um, I'd asked that this
announcement of what we call a
warrant, uh, a warrant workshop,
uh, as you know, there's been a
lot of money that's been given
to you, uh, law enforcement and
district attorney's offices for
warrant roundups. And I, I think
it's important for people not to
have warrants and to come to
court, but so many thousands of
people on warrants are people
who are just confused or scared
to come in.
And so what we have started
doing is warrant workshops in
the communities. This one is
next, uh, next month in Burnley
County at the main library. Uh,
the last time we had one of
these, we had the International
District Library in Albuquerque,
and we had, I think it was 83
people, uh, come in.
Uh, to take care of the wants
that represented 120 some cases,
and in almost all of those, the
warrant was canceled. Um, this
is not done by ourselves. We do
it in, in collaboration with the
district attorney's office, they
have somebody often there or on
call and a judge on call. So
when somebody comes in, we can
get our, get on our computers,
talk to them, have that warrant
canceled, sometimes the plea is
worked out right there on lower
level cases. Sometimes they'll
just dismiss it, they'll look at
it and say, look, this person
came in, they haven't been in
trouble for the last 2 years.
um,
or sometimes they just set it
for the next year. And now that
person's come in and they're not
scared to go to court anymore.
Uh, we have done that within our
existing budgets. So we're not
asking for a lot of extra money
for that, but what we're telling
you is that with the personnel
we have, we are not just
representing individual clients,
but we are trying to improve
community safety. If you look at
our performance measures uh that
have been reported to you. I
think the needle has been moved.
Those are, uh, improving in
almost every category. Uh, we
are severely understaffed.
Um, based upon any
recommendation from the American
Bar Association for Public
Defender Workloads, uh, and
you've heard about our workload
study and then our five-year
plan, and our newest project was
creating this uh plan to go to
hourly rates for contract
attorneys, uh, right now, risk
management rates, which is the
attorneys who were paid to
represent the state in civil
matters. They just increase
their rates and the minimum
payment is $150 an hour. Uh, and
it's all the way up.
to 225 an hour, I believe. So we
are looking several years in the
future to try to get to a point
where we can pay an hourly rate
across the state, and that will
help staff, especially rural
offices, uh, and it, it will
bring in the necessary personnel
to do this work. So we're not
just lawyers, we're
investigators, uh, we're social
workers, we are the staff who
live in the communities of 13
offices, uh, where we are and um
so.
We, we'd be happy to stand for
questions and uh I know that
it's gonna be a long afternoon
for you.
It it might get really, really
long
Questions from committee
members.
Represented Dixon.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair, and
thank you for the presentation.
Um, I would like to refer to the
handout, um, and I appreciate
you highlighting the um the
warrant workshop and the other
uh sort of innovative ways,
innovative and collaborative
ways that um the criminal
justice system can work
together, um, because, I mean,
that's low cost and, you know,
it helps.
A lot of people. So sort of
along those lines, um,
In the base budget request, I
wanted to flag um and see if you
could just touch a little bit on
the uh need for investigators,
social workers, and core staff
and how that um helps with swift
and certain justice. Sure, Mr.
Chair and Representative Dixon,
uh,
So if you look at one of the
handouts on our vacancy rates,
if you remember, like every
other state agency early in
COVID, we were at a 20+% vacancy
rate and for attorneys, it was
about 28%, I believe. Uh, we are
now.
At an agency-wide vacancy rate
of 10.9.
Uh, and our attorney rate is
15%, which is still, I think,
pretty good for state agency
lawyers, uh, our court staff is
6.3. Investigators and social
workers can do a lot of the work
that's required in a criminal
case, reviewing discovery, um,
making phone calls to treatment
centers to try and give
alternatives to incarceration to
a judge or to argue for pretrial
release and so it's cost
effective for us to add non
Attorney, corps staff positions
like these, uh, to our
to our offices. And also, we
need to hire them on contract
for attorneys that are on
contract with us. So I, I think
that investing in not just
lawyers but the staff is one of
the best ways when we try to
find that mix, where we can get
the work done in the best way on
each case across the state.
Thank you. Um, thank you, Mr.
Chair. And to follow up on that
specifically.
Um, when there's a client who
comes in that might be best
served through a diversion
program. Um, am I correct in
that public defenders are
helping to make the placement
calls and try to find.
Places for them.
Well, Mr. Ty and Representative,
there's, first of all, there's a
range of diversion programs as
Representative Reeb knows is a,
a former prosecutor. So if we're
talking about pre-prosecution
divers and for instance, in
Albuquerque, that's a program
run by the district attorney,
but there has to be, somebody
has to enter based upon
consulting with their lawyer,
which in 85 to 90% of the cases
is a public defender, whether
contract or us. So yes, we are
involved in that in going over
the discovery with.
Uh, we also do a lot of our own
referrals, not just to that, but
for instance, there's law
enforcement assisted diversion
programs, um, we work with
those. We are, there is a public
defender on the board of almost
every treatment court. So you
heard about treatment courts and
the need to put more people in
those. We agree with that. They
have to be effective treatment
courses, they have to be
something that we trust is in
the best interest of our
clients, but there is a lot of
time that's spent by our staff
attorneys, um, for instance,
some of them
every Friday afternoon. I mean,
that's almost 1/10 of their
workday. So yes, we're involved
in this.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, 2 more questions, I think.
Uh, recruitment and retention.
Um, that's an area that, um, you
know,
The legislature has invested a
lot in uh law enforcement as
well as, you know, we did some
pilots to support um public
defenders and district
attorneys, and I was just
wondering if you could give an
update on how that's working and
if it is a successful or useful
tool.
Yes, uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, it's been really
Really useful. Uh, a lot of
these recruitment retention
bonuses go through the local
criminal justice coordinating
counsels. Um, but it has been, I
think that's partly why we have
a fairly low vacancy rate, um,
not only through those, through
recruitment and retention
bonuses, and by the way, with
many of these, we require people
to sign a contract to stay if
they're going to come. And if
they leave, then, you know, we,
we collecting money, but, uh,
you know, they do this on a
promise of staying most of them,
uh, we also pay rural uh
geographic differentials. So in
some parts of the state, we pay
an extra up to $7800 a year for
attorneys to practice in these
uh hard to serve or hard to fill
areas because the vast majority
of the lawyers that we hire come
from out of state. I mean, it's
a sad fact that, you know, UNM
graduates less than 100
attorneys a year, we get maybe 5
or 6. So we have to aggressively
recruit.
Out of state, um, and, and bring
people in, and we hope that when
they come here, first of all,
they work for us forever if
they're good, but otherwise,
they settle in these rural
communities and provide a range
of legal services to that place.
Great, thank you. That was
actually my last question. I
lied.
Thank you. Any other questions?
I don't, I don't see any be, but
I'm looking at at our, our stuff
here. And so we've increased pay
from 2020 for, for public
defenders' salary from.
62 to 84.
That, that's a big jump in the 3
year period. I mean, that didn't
solve the problem. Well, Mr.
Chair, it's solved the problem
in that our vacancy rate is
lower, but as one of the chart
shows here, the number of cases
being filed in the courts is
increasing pretty.
Substantially, uh, and we are
now well above what where we
were in uh 2018, 2019. And so it
gets us closer, but as you
remember from the workload
study, we, we need a lot more
attorneys than we have now. So
it's solved the recruiting
problem and a lot of the
retention, but it doesn't
Address the substantial
workloads that already existed
for us. But you can't hire, and,
and you just stated that fact
that you have to hire from out
of state. You're getting 5 from
in-state and your recruitment is
is tougher than that. So I mean,
you're in a.
Uh, you probably didn't hear
this, but we're in this labor
market issue where the.
People are aging out and people
are not going to go to work and
there's not enough people in
the.
In this supply chain to go to
work.
And and I don't know how we're
gonna, we can't solve that
problem.
I mean, we, you can put more
money in there, but it's gonna
sit as funded FTEs, vacancies
because you can't hire that
right. Well,
a couple things. First of all,
I, I think we've shown that we
can, and partly is by paying
more, but really it's just
paying to be competitive with
other state agencies is is where
we've tried to get.
Were you included in the pay
study?
I don't, I don't believe so.
They're not included in the pay
study.
OK. Uh, the, the other answer,
if I may, Mr. Chair, is that uh
one of the things we're working
on is that they're actually be
fewer cases coming into the
system. I mean there's so many
drug possession cases that are
being charged that I don't think
really move the needle on
community safety and we defend
those cases, we spend a lot of
resources, so if we can work
with our criminal justice
partners to really focus
resources to bring down the
number of cases charged to where
it's really only the people who,
who are a threat to community
safety and not the people that
are, you know, have.
health problems, um.
That would help too.
Well, I might disagree because
we need to get those people into
the system.
Only way to get in the system is
to get him in front of a judge
or somewhere, right?
So that we know that they need
help, not just.
Give away a handcuff and let him
free because we got to figure
out that a lot of that's our
problem. Today, they may not
occur the crime.
Moral they may commit a crime.
But if we don't get them entered
in the system in some way, we're
never going to get the system
stood up to help the ones that
it created a crime.
And so
The the courts, the police is
the first.
place that they're gonna see
him.
Talk to him.
And if you don't get the person
that never committed a crime,
and just got mental health
issues walking down the street,
and the police officers called
out cause they yelled at
somebody or or whatever. I mean,
that's gonna be our first entry
into, to mental health.
A lot of it may be other crime
issues, then, then it changed,
but I don't think you should
just say, oh, we're not gonna,
we're not gonna hear these cases
that because they they were on
drugs or they didn't, they
weren't really a bad crime,
fixing mental health problem, I
think it's a full blown system
and you got to figure out how
you get them entered into the
system.
The, uh, that comment didn't
really work for me.
Can I just one this year.
I, I think that we can find ways
and we are in some places to
actually get that done before
they get to the criminal system,
before they get to the police.
Albuquerque Community Safety,
for instance, is an excellent
example. I think there's
something in Gallup. I saw that
in Farmington, I think I read an
article today that they're
expanding their lead programs.
So those are non-prosecutions,
and they don't work for
everybody and we completely
agree that it doesn't, but
having a larger, a greater menu
where we can divert people,
perhaps even before they get to
a jail.
I think can be effected.
I mean, I think it's worth the
conversation.
And, and then, uh, I, I mean, we
increased you from uh 50, I
don't have my glasses, 56
million to 777 million, 20
million increase over three
years. And, and so other than
the employee shortage, you seem
to be doing fine.
If that's a question, I can. Um,
it's kind of a statement because
I'm looking through the FTEs and
but Mr. Chair, I think we've
shown that, first of all, again,
we needed to get there for
swifter and more certain justice
and that we have shown that we
can fill those businesses, so
we're asking for a substantial
additional FDE, but with this
vacancy rate, we've spent the
money and I think we spend it
effectively.
OK.
No, I mean, if you're spending
the money and you're using it
and you're getting the job done,
but I mean, I don't wanna
overfund you and then say, oh
well, now we overfunded you, and
you're, you're not successful.
It's a problem I'd like to have.
Thank you.
A problem we try not to have,
but we try to make fun of
everybody where they can expand
slowly and not rapidly and then,
then things go awry.
Uh, and this is interesting to
me.
The warrant flyer.
And and just out of curiosity,
if I had a warrant, I went
there. What toiletries would I
get? Handcuff keys.
Not in the gift bag.
I'm just, it just interests me.
It's uh much of it, Mr. Chair.
So first of all, let me say that
these understand the process.
Don't go to jail. We can keep
you from towing your car and
everything else, but I don't
want the toiletries like the
well, it's some of them are,
I'm, I'm told there's some of
our donations from our
employees, but, you know, a lot
of the people are homeless. And
that's why they haven't come in
on warrants. And so sometimes
they just come into the the
public libraries, and we start,
we did this first at our
offices, but not that many
people really want to come into
a big building and so now we're
going into the community.
Uh, to do them, and people come
in and we didn't have the
toiletries at first, but then
when we realized people actually
need that stuff. This is the
point of contact.
So, I, I think it's kind of
whatever we can get together and
scrape up, but it's also a way
to just to bring people in
saying, look, we can help you
with different things. And and
what were the numbers when they
did that? Like, I mean, I'm
probably slow in the beginning,
but once the words spread on the
street, I mean.
You know, Mr. Cherry, you're,
you're exactly right. So the
first couple of times,
especially when we had did them
for two days, um, the first day,
there's almost nobody. A couple
of people come in, kind of look
around, check it out, and then
the next day all of a sudden the
word has gotten out that you're
not going to get arrested if you
come in. Um, and so a lot more
people have come in. The last
time we had it, we had 83 people
come in and took care of 120
some uh warrants on cases.
And again, the DA collaborates
with us and the, the courts
library and the courts have
their own safe surrender
programs in courthouses around
the state too. I think these
things have been effective, and
it's different from, you know,
law enforcement going to
somebody's door, which creates
this.
You know, I think a dangerous
situation a lot of the time. So
that, that is necessary also and
some people aren't going to come
in. We know that. But when we
can bring him in, I think it
helps.
And like what were there, I
mean, other than misdemeanors.
traffic violation or some other
small violation. There were no
other.
There were, I think, out of
those 83 120 some cases, I was
told there were 20 some
felonies, um, there were a few
that the DA said we're not gonna
agree to cancel the warrant. So
we, I, I think our contact with
those and I wasn't there for
that day, but it is directing
them how to turn themselves in,
if they're going to do that, and
us re-establishing contact as
their attorney because generally
if there's a bench warrant, we
haven't had contact with. OK.
I answered my question don't see
any other questions?
Appreciate your time.
Thank you. Thank you.
So we'll cut the DA's budget so
you'll have more money.
Let's see who is first um.
22, if you want to go to
numerical on the first.
We're gonna start an order, so
are we gonna start with Marcus
or Marcus, you're gonna call him
up independently.
Where's our map, so we can just
start.
So usually I try to start with
people that have to travel the
furthest to go back home.
So if you guys want to come from
The furthest distance it's gonna
come backt Marcos, do you know
that? If you want to come back
up and they want to get back
home, that that's fine with me.
Yeah.
This is not a courtroom, you can
approach it anytime
you'll have to call me your
honor either.
You.
You're gonna start and then
But we can run through these,
so.
Mr. Chair, committee. Good
afternoon, Marcus Montoya, a
judicial district attorney and
current president of the New
Mexico District Attorneys
Association. Thank you so much
for allowing us to be here to
present. We are hoping that the
majority of the presentations
from each district will take no
longer than 10 minutes. Some may
take a little bit more, but we
anticipate being out of here in
about 2 hours. Um, with that,
I'd like to introduce the
interim administrative Office
director, former a judicial
district attorney, Donald
Gallegos, uh, who was my
predecessor, um, and
and has been taking care of, we
have
this
office, uh, during the
transition, um, until DA Tedro
becomes the full-time permanent
director beginning January 1st.
And so with that, I will
surrender the floor to uh
Directors.
Just before you start or behind
tab 3 in there in
tab 2 under district attorneys
in there in sequential orders
you may have to flip back and
forth for the members.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman,
uh, members of the committee.
Again, my name is Donald
Gallegos, and I am the current
interim director at the
administrative offices of the
district attorneys, having spent
a career as a district attorney
before. I wasn't sure I'd be
coming back to this uh committee
in this capacity again, but here
I am and I'm glad I'm here. Uh,
as DA Montoya said, I'll be here
through um December 31st. And
then when uh
Current district attorney Rick
Tedro will take over.
The rings. So I'm going to go
just real briefly over the uh
the ask.
That we are proposing this year
and I want to introduce
Philammon Gonzalez, who if you
shoot any questions at me that
I'm not sure of, and I get that
during the headlights look in my
eyes, I will be calling on him
to fill in on anything.
So I would apologize for that,
but having been in the rings
only since September, I'm not
100%.
Knowledgeable on everything. But
I can tell you, and you have
before you is the request that
we have, which is a $5,257,500.
It is a different, uh, increase
of about 1.8, and the biggest
reason for that is the new case
management system that we are
hoping to roll out in June of
25. And
That is something that's
probably needed to be done for
some time now, so I wanna thank
you all for looking into that,
um, having spent my career with
the
Are developed case management
system. uh, there was a lot of
really good things about it, but
I think now we're gonna be
getting into new technology with
a proven system.
That has been used, um, but it
is expensive, and I think that
the money spent upfront is going
to save money in the long run,
especially since other agencies
are going to benefit, such as
public defender and the courts,
all the police agencies and
other agencies that we um work
with such as tax and rev uh
regulation license licensing
division, the Department of
Justice, Insurance fraud. So,
Uh, that again would just help
us in the long run.
Um, the other, uh, area or the
other ask is the 361.
1600 for um
Office 365, I think everyone
knows what that is, even the
folks like me that aren't that
very tech savvy, uh, just off
the 65 is just you have to have
it if you're in any kind of an
office.
Um, we're also asking for an
increase in the training and
position, um,
This is because in the past, uh,
our training used to be funded
by fees that were statutorily
passed, those
Statutes have been repealed, and
so we no longer collect fees of
uh pre-prosecution or worthless
check or those kind of things.
So we do need some help in
replacing those revenues so that
we can put on effective
Training. I think everyone knows
that prosecutors, investigators,
prosecutors especially have to
have a certain amount of
continuing legal education.
Reddit, and it's up to the AODA
to make sure that they get those
to put on the training for
those.
Um, I believe, finally, there is
$250,000 to cover monthly
charges and what this is, again,
is related to the, what we call
e-prosecutor, uh, the company
that handles that is JTI, which
is short for General
Technologies, um.
something.
I can't remember what the I is
for, but anyway, general
technologies and um so this
helps cover that.
And uh I guess with that.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, I, it's, it's a
pleasure to be back in front of
you. Thank you for all the work
you do on behalf of the
citizens, and I will stand for
questions.
Questions
Representative Chatfield.
We're gonna go through
individual DAs in just a minute,
so if you have one over the
overall budget.
I, I think this would be better
for the overall budget.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
You know, this morning,
We had a review of the criminal
justice performance and
recommendations.
And uh
Thank you for being here.
I know you just, you've just
been here a little while.
Uh
One of the things I did during
this morning's presentation was,
I Googled what is the most
dangerous state in the United
States.
Guess what it says, New Mexico.
So we're sitting here.
Deciding funding, we, we, uh,
Added quite a bit of funding
into the
The state police budget here a
few years ago.
Uh, we've been funding the
courts and you all.
Tell us what we need to do.
You make it where we're.
Instead of being first on that
list where we're last, uh, we're
last on a lot of lists that I
don't like, but we're first on
that list, and I, you know, it
said in the
Yeah, and, and you can hear
anything, but in the thing that
I, that I got back when I
Google, it said that Baghdad was
safer than Albuquerque.
So
Tell us what we need to. Are we
not sufficiently funding the
DA's.
What, what do we need to do to
get on the bottom of that list
instead of the top. Um.
Thank you, Representative, that,
that kind of um
Takes it outside of what I'm
here for today, but I can't tell
you that I've been a prosecutor
since 1993.
And I also did some time on the
National District Attorneys
Association, so those, I can
tell you, those questions are
not just in New Mexico question.
There are question across the
nation. Um,
And I can tell you that.
If the criticism is you just
can't throw money at this
problem.
I would counter that this is one
area, criminal justice is one
area where it does need to be
funded.
You need that over time for the
police. You need the money for
the crime labs. You need the
money for the witnesses and the
experts, you need the money for
the courts. This is one,
area that I think in most places
in the country, you're always
gonna hear it's underfunded.
Is that the answer? There are
think tanks all over this
country that are looking at it
and I don't know that anyone's
come up with it. But I can say
that as far as New Mexico is
concerned, um, again, this is
just a personal, um, you can't
go wrong if the money's there.
It's gonna be money well spent.
So, Mr. Chairman, I think that
was a good answer. It was not a
criticism. I honestly am asking
you, are we funding you enough
to do the job.
Uh, we're trying to figure out
where we need to, you know, we
have one purpose here, and
that's to fund.
Or not fun.
Where do we need to put our
money to clear this to cure the
problem. It's not, it's not a
criticism, it's, and it is a
funding question, it's just
like, we're trying to
understand.
where our money is best spent.
So New Mexico is not such a
dangerous place.
What I will say, and of course
it's subject to disagreement is
The selfish answers is if I'm a
district attorney like I used to
be, oh, the DAs need more money,
obviously.
But I think everybody knows in
here that you can't fund the DAs
without funding the public
defenders without funding the
police agencies, the crime labs,
and the courts.
So, if one's funded, they all
have to be adequately funded.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So I
actually have a question about
um high-intensity drug traffic
area grants, um, and I don't
know if it would be better
suited for a specific
Um, District attorney's office,
but
So if you know the answer, um,
or you can suggest that I wait.
Um,
I was curious about um I guess
how many offices?
Have the Haida grants.
Um
sort of who's working on that. I
do not have that information
other than when I was DA I do
know that tells currently the 8
or Taos County at least finally
got heed designation but not
either of funding.
And so there's two facets to it,
but I do know there's places
along the border, on the 5th, I
believe the 6th.
Uh, I think even 111, but I'll,
I'll, I'll defer to them too.
To answer that question.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
I'll, I'll definitely follow up
because one of the concerns, um,
that I know Representative de la
Cruz and I have had, um, over
the last several years is the,
uh, the fact that the state of
New Mexico cannot access uh the
federal sharing, uh, funding,
um, that, you know, usually is,
is part of that work. So I'll
follow up on that. Thank you.
Thank you, Sarah Woods.
Just a quick question. I, I see
in the analysis down here that,
that you maintain a, a pay plan
outside of the state
classification pay system, and I
understand
We may have an antiquated
State plan.
Can you give me some idea how
much over
Over the state plan, you have to
pay for attorney, sir.
I mean, that's the main cost
isn't it, just hiring, just
incentivizing people to go to
work for you. That is a good
question. I don't have the
specifics. I'm not sure, Mr.
Gonzalez does, but what I can
tell you, the senator, is that
District attorneys, uh, much
like public defenders offices.
Are, are, uh,
What would you say training
grounds?
So we get a lot of good
candidates fresh out of law
school or maybe even out of
private sector.
But they don't have trial
experience.
So they come to us, they get the
trial experience in the private
law firms or even some
And I don't know when the last
case study was done, but even
some
State agencies and even federal
agencies can pay on a heck of a
lot more.
Um, so as far as the specifics
on the numbers, I don't know how
much more we pay or don't pay,
but I can tell you that's one of
the unique things about district
attorneys is we train them.
And someone else takes them.
Well, I guess if you train them
right, will you train them about
the law and, and that's what
it's all about. And so,
Uh, I was just wondering that. I
just saw that particular Senate
in our analysis here, and I was
just wondering, you know, we
have a lot of agencies that
are telling us that
We're not classifying right.
We've got our pay bands all
wrong and
And it says here y'all just,
you, your plan is outside, so I
felt that kind of.
Funny, Mr. Chair. Thank you very
much. Thank you, Senator, and
the reason it is outside is
because that's the way it was
set up, uh, statutorily way back
when. And Mr. Gonzalez, do you
know when the last case study
was or DA Montoya.
25.
OK, next time just come to the
mic cause otherwise we might get
text that they they couldn't
hear your name or your comments
next time.
Right, that's it. We're ready to
start with.
start with? Who you're gonna,
we're gonna start with, the, the
8th, Mr. Chair, just cause I'm
sitting here, yes, um, and so
I'll invite to the table my
district office manager,
Victoria Bransford, and my chief
financial officer, Paula
Cisneros.
So you're being handed a
colorful um 6 page, uh,
presentation. I will not bore
you by going through each of it.
It's for your review as you see.
Appropriate
But you're good. OK, and so
Marcus Montoya judicial district
attorney. I do represent Tulas
County, Union County, and Colfax
County, um, I would like to
thank this committee very much
for all of the appropriations
and help and listening and
hearing and satisfying a lot of
our needs, the recruitment
retention, uh, you've heard from
every agency, I'm sure, and
continue to hear it, uh, it is
shortly staffed, that is a
national, uh, problem.
Um, but I'd also like to thank
our analysts, Mario and Felix,
who are coming to my office
meeting with me, having lunch,
and understanding the needs of
the 8th. Uh, I will just go
ahead and get straight to the
ask and the ask is an
approximate 5% increase over our
current operating budget, and
that is specifically designed in
the 200s, uh, and that is to
expand for lead investigator,
which was my ask last year, and
I'm here asking again for it
because in times of
Mass, um, hysteria, such as a
Red River shooting in the middle
of the streets, it's hard for my
office to get a grasp and really
coordinate a lot of the efforts
in corralling a lot of that
information. And so, um, I, I
don't want to put it in the
universe, right, but there are
more and more shootings, a lot
of more juvenile, uh, gun
violence, and so I would like to
investigator who is able to
actually do law enforcement work
rather than um getting a
subpoenas and, and, and being a
glorified.
Paper pusher, if you will, um,
they will oversee the other
three investigators in the
district, uh, coordinate a lot
of efforts with law enforcement,
be community outreach and school
outreach, because we do want to
get into the schools a lot more
and be a little more prevalent
and uh and present in the
schools because of the rising
juvenile gun violence and uh the
other ask which I asked for last
year, again, it would be for the
victim witness coordinator, um,
similar in a similar vein when
you have so many victims, and
I'm gonna use Red River again
we were having hearings where we
were
We weren't even able to
Find the contact information for
those who had been shot,
injured, and killed before the
hearings, and so a victim
witness coordinator is able to
work with not just our within
our own agency but with other
law enforcement agencies, other
victim advocates, advocacy
groups, and really look to
corral a lot of this, but what
also supervised my current uh
victims assistance, we are the
only agency uh statutory
obligated to comply with the
Victims' Rights Act, and so we
can't miss that. We've we've got
to do a good job of, um,
informing and being a voice and
elevating.
The victims of the crimes in
this state, particularly in my
district and so that was, would
be $8 immediately higher and
spent uh well spent, um, we're
not asking for anything other,
uh, in our 300s or 400s, those
are flat, but that is my ask.
Um, one thing I would just like
to share with you for the
recruitment retention, what my
office is doing to think outside
of the box is we are, we have
created a junior DA program, so
we are in the schools, we're
bringing in students. Uh, we are
a class credit for them in high
school, for
through seniors, they come to us
once a week. They spend 6 hours
with our agency, they learned to
read research, write, speak, and
they meet with our legislators,
they meet with our elected
officials, they meet with our
law enforcement, they meet with
our community leaders and policy
makers. They come into the
office, they speak with judges,
they speak with lawyers, they
oversee hearings, they learn
what it is to have respect for
institutions such as this body,
the, the, the courtroom. And so
it is a professional school and
the way I see it is if I can
reach 50 students a year.
Over a 4-year term, I've reached
200 students to teach them what
it is to want to and how to
become a professional, whether
it's dental, medical, lawyers,
legal, hopefully, if we're able
to instill that energy in them,
they go to school and they come
back to serve the communities
because part of the recruitment
part is nobody wants to move it,
well, they can't afford to move
to house even if they want to,
and it's hard to get them to
want to live in Ratton and
Clayton, um, just because of how
rural they are in the life that
it offers. Um, that being said,
um,
Again, thank you. I'll stand for
questions.
Questions from committee
members.
See that who's next?
Thank you, Mr. Chair and um that
will be the 12 judicial
districts.
Good afternoon, um.
Chair representatives, senators,
um, my name is Stacy Mattson,
I'm the CFO for the 12th
Judicial District Attorney's
Office with me is the district
office manager Jessie Grajetta.
A key extends his apologies for
not being here this afternoon.
He is um wrapping up some other
important things post.
Very try on sentencing of an
officer involved shooting last
week.
Um
I'll get right into it. Our
overall general fund budget
request for FY 25 is $5.6
million which is approximately
8% over our current budget.
This would include a $66,000
increase.
For our last victim advocate
position that is currently grant
funded.
Um, our intention is to move all
of these pieces, all of our
cramped, um, funded victim
advocates to our general funds
so that we can ensure that we
will always have those positions
available to provide to our
community and the victims
advocate aspect.
It also includes a $98,000
shortfall in our high of funds,
um, we currently are
experiencing about 157,000
shortfall, but we have used
vacancy savings and will
continue to use vacancy savings
to make up the difference
between that 98,000 and the
157,000.
All of our increased requests
are associated with our 200
categories this year. We did
have a reduction in our 300 and
400 categories to help offset
that.
I would like to speak to the
fact that we currently only have
3 attorney vacancies for our
office that's.
A very impressive change for us
over the last 3 years. We have 4
legal assistant positions and
two part-time positions that are
vacant.
that I stand for questions.
Questions from committee
members.
Let me ask you on the height of
funds, that's a federal grant
for drug trafficking, correct?
Uh, Mr. Chair, yes sir, that is
how many cases are you guys
prosecuting for drug
trafficking.
Mr. Chair, I am not sure I'm
gonna defer to the DOM on that
one. I mean we have about, uh,
Mr. Chair, we would, I would say
we have about 360 cases the last
time we checked the drug cases.
And if I may, um, touch a little
bit on Haida, Mr. Chair, um, the
Haida, we are HIDA funded, um,
we do have to attorney
physicians and one support
staff. They are not 100% um
Uh, funded, um, and we have been
told from our experience that um
Haida is moving more for
enforcement using their funds
for enforcement more than what
we call the operation of the
ladder. So to hope that answers
some of the questions on Haida.
It's not 100%, um.
Funded for those positions.
Uh, and, uh, and those three
cases, that's all for
trafficking, correct?
Are they in possession?
We do have some position. I did
include some possessions. OK.
Any large posses uh track of the
team that we need to.
I mean, you, now's your time to
change and that's your grant
permit was going away. I mean,
it's interests me that it's a
federal program for drug
trafficking.
I haven't heard about it before.
I haven't ask John what our.
kind of mint. So, high intensity
drug traffic area. Yes, and we,
we, Mr. Chair, we have had that
grant for a while, but like I
said, they've been moving um the
goal from what I hear is that
they want to move all those
funds for enforcement, um,
rather than operation of the
ladder.
OK, thank you. Any other
questions?
Seen onto the 5th.
Thank you. Have a good day. Save
your trip home.
It's loose.
Good afternoon. I'm Mr. Speaker,
members of the committee,
District Attorney Diana Les from
the Fifth Judicial District. I
have with me today my CFO Diana
Switzer, and my district office
manager at Brent Kelly. I first
I just want to start by saying
thank you for the work that you
do. Thank you for the funding
that we get for the 5th, um, and
I can maybe tell you a little
bit about uh how to, I recently
took over the had a board
position for the district.
Attorneys, um from uh DA Tedro,
uh, and so, uh, it's a little
bit less than half of the DAs
that are uh part of the Hada,
um, but, uh, our ask, uh, first
of all is for what I refer to as
cloud storage. It's the acronym
is NOS N I C E, um, it would
allow us to put all of our video
audio into the cloud. Right now
we're on servers.
And our servers are always full.
Uh, we move things to external
drives, uh, every week and back
and forth. I am we are have lost
some videos that law enforcement
no longer have, uh, so that's a
huge concern. We did get funding
through our CJCC for that, but
we asked for this funding from
from the committee last year,
we, and we did not get it and so
we've got that grant, but that
will be only a one time thing,
so we, we would need to
continue.
To fund it going forward and
it's about um 100 and
3,095,195,000.
Uh, the other thing would be
we're asking for 3 additional
FTEs. These would be support
staff positions, and we are no
longer using the uh RICO uh
program QCP for scanning. Um, it
wasn't working for a little bit
with um when we'd had our hack
with AODA, we had some issues
with that. So we didn't renew
our contracts, so we're manually
scanning, um, and if you look at
our handout on the last page,
uh, it'll show some of our
stats. You'll see that our
case numbers, uh, as you're
hearing continue to go up. I,
and it is a huge time issue to
for staff to be scanning, uh,
documents that we get, um, that
don't come in digital.
Um so we're asking for those 3
positions in the funding for
those. We're also asking for the
difference in our 3AA funded
positions, um, our general fund
covers about 95,000 of those
three positions, um, and
I
And I can talk a little bit
about, um, I read stats, um, and
I will just stand for any
questions. Thank you.
You represent Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I
really like the, the breakout of
um.
Figures the the caseloads.
Um, that you've provided. Um, I
actually have a question on the
pre-trial interviews.
Um
Is it possible you guys have
information, uh, where you would
be able to break that out, um,
to let us know if those
pretrial, any of those pre-trial
interviews were conducted with
children.
Um, Mr. Speaker, uh,
Representative, uh, not today,
but we could. I'm, and you will
see there's a disparity. I'm, I,
Lee County, I'm, as I often say
for any of you who've been
around for a long time, you're
probably tired of hearing me say
it. We're ground zero for the
public defenders' new projects,
and they demand pre-trial
interviews of every witness
listed on every witness list in
every case. So the private
borrower has joined that parade.
And so we, I, I have a full-time
staff person. I pre-trial
interview coordinator that,
that's all they do is schedule
those and then uh record them. I
have another person that I'm
part time does part of that as
well, um, because one person's
not enough in Lee County, but I
have had to create those
positions and fill them in all
three counties, so I have a
full-time pretrial interview
coordinator in each of my three
counties and that is all they
do all day every day.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you. Um, our pre-trial
interviews, uh, constitutionally
protected or it required?
I, Mr. Speaker, Representative a
pretrial interviews are a
Supreme Court rule, and we're, I
believe we may be one of only 2
states that requires them. I,
and if we don't complete them,
our judges suppress the
witnesses and they give us
deadlines, kind of like what's
going on with the case
management roles and some of the
districts, we have a very early
short dip on uh to uh initially
get those done.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you. Um, you know, that is um
interesting. um.
I find it um
Disconcerting that we are one of
2, maybe 3,
states that um allow um
Pre-trial interviews, uh, and
that it's, uh, costing you
additional staff. Um,
Thank you.
Sinners.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Diana and Miss Luce.
Um, I, I, I do like the format
you put everything in, and just
a couple of questions earlier,
uh represent Chatfield was
talking about how do we fund
you?
In, uh, how do we do?
Well, uh, we're asking you to do
a lot. You look at the map, the
areas you
Have to manage in its long
distances, but one thing that
came up when I was reading here
outline is your increased crime
due to transient workers, uh, as
you know, uh, they're in units
from mayors and Sons. We had a
truck stolen. They went and
pulled off doors off in Hafield
Company, stole a bunch of
electrical wiring and parts with
our truck, at least return my
truck.
undamaged
But I know that that when they
did the fingerprinting and other
issues, they couldn't find any
detail.
So we thought, just looking at
them, they're transient, but do
you know how much increase that
has brought you with the people
coming in and out just crossing
through the area, Mr. Speaker,
Representative, I don't have
stats on that and we don't have
any way to track that. um, what
I can tell you is you can look
at the case load right now and
you can see Lee County had
dropped down, uh, last year and
our case loads were lower in Lee
County and they are back up.
That tells you that probably the
oil field business in all
related industries are good.
Good. I'm, and so that that's
what happens, but we, um, we, we
don't have any capacity right
now to track that, that sort of
statistic, and I don't know that
the, the courts do.
I appreciate that. I, I, I wish
there was a way to track it the,
the reason for these gentlemen
were on camera, made 2 trips
with my truck to get plenty of
Looped, uh, but it's just one of
those things, it's hard to
manage the amount.
Uh, there's times I have 20
people at my front door for
American Sons at 6 in the
morning looking for jobs. They
can't speak English.
But they're there and they're
wanting to work, so, uh, if you
don't give them jobs, it creates
other problems, but I just want
to see if there's a tracking
mechanism on that. I appreciate
it, Mr. How you?
Representative Sariana.
Thank you, Mr. Mr. Chairman. Um,
thank you for your presentation.
Um, as far as your, um,
cloud-based software. Are you,
is your system connected to the
state network?
I representative, um, I mean,
I'm sorry, Speaker, I'm
representative. I'm
We're part of the case
management system, uh, but our,
all of our audio video is stored
on servers. And so right now
the, the DAs as a whole, I don't
have cloud base. We'll go to
that when the prosecutor comes
along, but um, the cloud-based
storage as I understand it, and
I can be corrected by my fellow
DAs or from uh uh director Daos.
I that we're still gonna have to
pay for the separate cloud
storage, uh, that will
work in conjunction with that
new e-prosecutor. It's not part
of its system, it's another
provider and I believe that may
be Axon or Evidence.com. We
chose NAS after doing a
comparison, uh, because it was
created for attorneys, uh, for
practicing in law and it, it is,
it is very user friendly and
helpful, and so, um, that's a
platform and it is compatible
with our new system of
prosecutor.
I did speak with the
representative, uh, when I was
out at the where they had a
training set up on it.
And Mr. Mr. Chairman, do you
have cybersecurity and all that
in place for this?
I just, Mr. Speaker,
Representative, it will have all
of that security, it will be
part of what we're paying for,
uh, certainly if we were doing
something on our own, right,
that would be the huge risk and
after the hack we had no one
wants to relive that. That was
a, a real process for
prosecutors.
All right, thank you.
Thank you.
I'm gonna jump out of order just
because there was a,
never mind that they'll tell you
if they want. We're gonna jump
to the uh
Of
first, right?
Thank you. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, members, um, good
afternoon. Thank you for jumping
out of order. Um,
It's an honor to be in front of
all you all.
Uh, I think I'll start with just
some something basic.
The number
200
And 50.
250 people.
Is the number
And we have convicted for murder
since I've been DA in the 2nd
Judicial District.
Through plea agreements or
trial.
250, that is a sobering number
obviously. It's an amazing
number.
The reason I'm able to do this
Um, and hold this many people
accountable is because the work
that you all do here on this
committee and in the entire
legislature. I know that during
this upcoming session, we will
debate laws on crime and
continue to debate laws on
crime, but this right here,
funding the district attorney's
office.
Makes more of a difference than
I can tell you than anything
else I can think of when it
comes to fighting crime in
Albuquerque, and I am so
grateful to this legislature for
continuing to increase the
funding because the reason we
can convict people of homicide
is because we have more
prosecutors, more prosecutors
equals less cases per
prosecutor. When I came into
office,
We had an average of 50
homicides per homicide
prosecutor. That is just way out
of line. We now are down to 24.
That's still a little bit too
high. I want to keep reducing
that. We have to keep producing
it. We are, we are coming out of
COVID a few years back, and we
are starting to hold people
accountable. The more people we
convict, the more people of who
commit violent crimes, the more
often we'll send them away to
prison and get them off the
streets and make our community
safer.
That makes a huge difference.
When I got into office,
January of 2023.
We had about 78 attorneys, I
believe was the exact number.
Um
Now, since then,
We've hired more than any other
private law firm, more than any
governmental agency in the state
of New Mexico. We have hired 73
new attorneys. We have actually
have a support staff that we've
hired of an additional 92
people.
This is what makes a huge
difference, and I'm continuing
to ask you to continue to fund
this. We are asking for an
operating operating budget which
starts with the idea of a 0%
vacancy rate. I can get there. I
have 6 prosecutors wait in the
wing. I've stopped hiring right
now because I've run out of
budget to do it. I want to keep
hiring lawyers. That's the way
you make a difference in crime,
and I know it's working.
No victory lap by any means. We
got so much to work to do in
Albuquerque, but we are
starting, and I can tell you
from what crosses my desk. We're
starting to turn this big ship
when it comes to crime in the
ocean. It's gonna take some more
time and a lot more work, but
we're getting there. So I'm
asking just basically fund all
of our positions and then we're
asking for an increase, um, as
well. And so the total um and I
have, by the way, my district
manager Andrea Martinez and in
Chief Deputy District Attorney
Josh Boone here as well. So if I
say something that's not
correct, they will at least
elbow me and tell me to correct
it. We, we are asking for um a
$5.5 million dollar increase for
all funds.
Which would equal $39.5 million.
This is a 15% increase over FY
25. I'm asking for, like I said,
a 0% vacancy rate in a base FDE
expansion. This expansion
includes 4 attorneys.
To support staff.
Um, and one more security
position for our office.
Um, we also want to expand um
our DV domestic violence team,
our domestic violence numbers
are still just so unacceptable.
We have, um, far too many
domestic violence cases, this
team will focus on victimless
prosecution on enforcing the red
flag laws that this legislature
has passed and really making a
dent when it comes to that. Um,
As I mentioned, just a little
bit more stats, this gives me an
opportunity to brag about the
people that work in my office.
Not only 250 people convicted of
murder oursaki unit, which is
our cold case rape team has
convicted 18 people on cold
cases tied to 37 rape cases.
We're clearing that backlog. We
sentenced an APS bus driver to
30 years for 3 rapes he
committed back in the 1990s.
This is a hell of a, a team that
we have our cold case rape team,
and I'm very proud of it.
Diversion, um, diversion, we
continue to have a
very robust diversion program.
Obviously, there are some people
that would never be in the
criminal justice system if we're
not for the fact that they're
addicts.
And we are diverting people and
we're having success 438 people
have successfully completed our
pre-prosecution diversion
program. We have a total of
currently of 825 clients. Retail
Prime or utilizing the laws that
this legislation, legislature
passed when it came to organized
retail crime. We have currently
38 aggravated shoplifting cases,
45 aggravated shoplifting cases,
10 organized retail crime cases,
and we've now entered
appearance, which is a
Shift in our office's policy
since I got there, of 885
misdemeanor shoplifting cases.
That means officers are on the
streets and not in the
courtroom.
Pre-trial detention, pre-trial
detention has been a big issue
in this legislature and
obviously around the state when
it comes to crime. We are close
now to a 60% consistent 60%
success rates. That is not high
enough in my mind, not even
close. We don't file one of
these motions unless we want
someone held, but we in this
office have filed more pretrial
detention motions than any time
in history.
CSU
This legislature funded an
enormous amount of money and
we're putting it to good use.
You funded $10 million a couple
of years ago, and I'm very
grateful for that this
legislature and the governor did
that, and we, we were able to um
spend that to good use. You've,
you've got perhaps a handout
from me which details
specifically what CSU has done.
Um, I do want to just mention a
couple other things. Um, whereas
the organized crime commission
was, was, and there's a sheet on
the
organized crime commission. It's
the 3rd page you have of our
handout.
That has been funded entirely
through my office. I'm asking
for a special appropriations
request because of the good work
they do, we need to expand that.
We have saved hundreds of
migrants. We have disrupted tons
of stash houses. We have made a
real difference. Finally, I'm
asking for a supplemental
request. We need to continue to
keep our prosecutors. We need to
continue to, to retain them. We
need to continue to hire them.
That's what this supplemental
request is for together with
expert witness and
um transcription fees. Yes, it's
a big ask.
But we are getting stuff done in
the 2nd district. I, I think all
the DA's are getting things done
with an overwhelming caseload,
but I can tell you because
you've been abled us to hire
more attorneys, we are seeing a
real difference, and I'm asking
you to continue that. And I just
want you to know you were
generous last year. We don't
return a lot of money to the
legislature, we use it on what
we asked for, and that's what
we've been doing so far, and I,
I just wanna say thank you to
all of you and answer any
questions you may have.
Questions from committee
members. We don't have your
representative Dixon, go ahead.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, with
organized, uh, retail crime, um,
So the Walgreens, um, that I
Go to in Albuquerque, um, is now
closed, um, and I think suffered
from a lot of um issues with
shoplifting. Um, so you are
feeling like that law is making
a positive impact.
Um, we're giving you a, a tool
to use.
Guest 12, the retail community
together with law enforcement in
our office has never worked more
collaboratively together, our
website, we go out and give,
give training on how to use a
checklist, all the evidence we
need, and anecdotally, I can
only tell you anecdotally,
retailers are telling us that
it's getting better. It's by no
means acceptable to see anybody
walk in there, but it is getting
better, and I know that because
of what we're seeing.
And yes, so that law is very
helpful. We are aggregating
cases that are normally
misdemeanors, turning them into
felonies, and we are getting
some pretrial detention motions
granted on prolific shoplifters
that we are actually filing on
because of the economic harm.
They are, they are creating in
our community.
It, it, thank you, Mr. Chair.
It's nice to see um sort of
positive impact and uh
collaboration across entities.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Representative
Dela Cruz.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, DA Brigman.
Um, there was quite a bit of
discussion this morning around
crime issues in the city of
Albuquerque.
And comments made apparently you
can Google it.
It shows that Albuquerque is a
more dangerous in Baghdad and
Sri La Juarez.
I've not Google that. I'll take
them at their word. Uh, that
being said, can you speak to
that and maybe causes,
historical or otherwise.
Obviously, you can't discount
the the economic and and social
Issues that people
have. However, I will tell you
that fentanyl is a large driver,
a large driver of crime.
We cannot prosecute our way out
of the fentanyl issue.
The question was asked about
trafficking cases. We have, we
have currently prosecuted 690
drug trafficking cases, we will
continue to prosecute every
single person that puts poison
out on the streets. However,
when it comes to the addicts,
We can't simply try, we try to
get them diverted, we try to get
them into a treatment.
But I would respectfully suggest
there is not a coordinated
effort in this state on how to
deal with the addiction
treatment that's necessary. And
that is really, we don't have
enough people doing it and the
people that are doing it as much
as they're busting their ass,
there, it's not coordinated
enough and so fentanyl is a
large driver. I would tell you,
and you all know this because
you, you've seen me be very,
fairly outspoken about it,
juvenile crime is a major issue.
Juvenile crime with guns, and I,
and I bring those issues up just
So, obviously this, this
legislature will debate all
those things, and I respect all
of that. But, but I do believe
fentanyl is a big driver. I
believe the juvenile crime is
too high of a percentage of the
crime we're seeing, especially
the violent crime we're seeing
right now. Um, I, I'm
I'm still high on Albuquerque.
We're, we're gonna get there.
We're gonna turn the, turn the
tide. We really are, and it's
because of the people I work
with every day that I feel that
way because I know how dedicated
they are, and we just need to
keep doing the job and keep
grinding it out and holding
people accountable.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Um,
The
Can you find
About 3 strikes laws. I know we
don't have that here. There are
several states that do.
Can, can we apply 3, we don't
have time.
I'm sorry. Give us your opinion.
Hm
didn't expect that question this
morning.
You, you know,
um, I'm always leery.
Of
case of, of having laws which
force a specific result, no
matter what the facts might be.
You've and I know I remember
hearing about the, the 3rd
strike that somebody stole a
pizza and they're in for life.
That is an absurd result, if you
will.
But I do believe that there is
certain things if someone
continues to do commit certain
violent crimes that, that is
something to consider, to have
some minimum mandatories, um,
but then again, I'm also someone
who supports judges' discretion,
right? So,
It's, it's a tough call. I
don't, I haven't thought about
it enough to give you a better
answer that, and I apologize,
Mr. Chairman and Representative,
for not giving you a more clear
answer.
I think he was German it was.
It's predicated on along the
notion of these violent crimes.
Yes. Thank you.
Thank you.
Um, we don't have your
supplemental.
You know what that's about. Yes,
it's in DFA, but DFA hasn't sent
it to us. It's 1.5
and
500 of that is specifically for
expert witness fees and
transcription fees.
Meaning we need to transcribe a
tremendous amount of stuff that
goes on in our office, pretrial
interviews, etc. Expert witness
fees are extremely important as
well. The million dollars is,
is, is basically for retention
to recruit and retain.
More
Laws. We have lawyers who are
ready to go to work for us. We
have lawyers from out of state
that want to come in and work
for us. And
I'm very proud of that fact, but
I want to be able to do it.
So that's why I'm asking for
something, 1.5, a supplemental B
deficiency from last year. No.
Mr. Chain, it's not your last
year's supplemental.
No, uh, Mr. Chairman, that
number should be in it. Martinez
addressed you,
uh, there is no deficiency from
last fiscal year. This is a
supplemental request for FY 25
and so that would be to recruit
and retain the current talent
that we have at our office.
Yeah, so then that should be
submitted as a special, not a
supplemental.
A, OK.
We'll, we'll submit it any way
you want.
Yes, Mr.
Chair.
Yeah, harder.
Um,
So why aren't you adding in that
to your base budget.
Instead of asking for.
It should be a special, but it's
a supplement. So, um, Mr. Chair,
I, I, I guess we weren't clear
based off of the way that we
submitted the um budget last
fiscal year because we submitted
a deficiency. We also submitted
a supplemental similar, of
course, it was
Much more for the same reasons
to recruit and um retain, but
for this fiscal year, um, we're
doing the same thing, but for a
lesser amount.
The Felix
Get with them and, and let's put
it in the base budget instead of
a special.
Especially if it's gonna be a
recurring cost and not just a
one time.
Corporation, so we can get that
fixed and clarified and, and so
you submitted your supplemental
to DFA and DFA never transferred
the supplemental my correct?
We're still working on it.
I have trouble doing it on.
Mr. Chair, you're gonna have to
say your name because I don't
know you.
Mr. Chairman, I'm, I'm told by
uh Joy Simon who's, who's
working that right now. We, we
have the numbers but the details
are still coming in, so we're,
we're in the process of getting
those from DFA Mr.
It's exactly same when you see
that causing trouble.
Um,
so yeah, so I think if you're
gonna, if you're gonna claim
that, you should claim it in in
your base budget, correct?
Especially with FTEs in.
And not include a special
supplemental cause then you're
gonna come back every year to us
and money is kind of drying up,
especially reoccurring money. If
I may, Mr. Chair really quick on
that. We did factor that in with
our um FY 26 appropriation
request. So the supplemental
would just cover the, for the
rest of this fiscal year and
then with the request that would
carry forward.
With um the needs that we would
have.
Well, that would be, that's the
explanation we would need to see
cause we haven't seen that and
so we're
Guessing. And so that's why
we're trying to figure that out.
OK.
OK.
How many cases, let me ask you
this, how many cases were
dismissed for lack of evidence.
I don't know that I have that
specific number, lack of
evidence now. I know last year
not collected correctly whatever
couldn't be charged because the
evidence wasn't correct. We
didn't have the evidence,
witness didn't show up, however
you want to list them. OK.
That's what I want to talk
about. So, Mr. Chair, if you're
talking about the broad thing
where witnesses don't show.
That's a lack of evidence. We
don't, we can't have somebody
testify. We don't very rarely, I
don't know the number. Do we
have the
I don't have the number off the
top of my head, but I will say
this, we're not seeing that as
far as as much nearly as much as
in the, in years past as far as
documentary evidence, we still,
of course, see domestic violence
and that's why we're doing a, a,
a victimless prosecution if you
were not victimless, but without
the victim prosecution because
we still have
Problems getting people to show
up. And so we may launch a case
in a preliminary hearing, for
example, and then dismiss it
because the victim doesn't show
up, and then the victim comes
back at us and really wants to
prosecute and relaunch it. Those
are moving numbers. I will get
that number to this committee as
soon as possible.
Does our analyst know?
That that's the number we're
gonna want to track because if
If it's evidence, and it's true
evidence, the police didn't.
filed the report correctly. This
was in the LFC briefer crime
report I read.
And where they're not getting
the evidence correctly, so the
DA can't charge because they
don't have the evidence
correctly gathered.
I mean, the witnesses a
completely different scenario
when they don't show up. I mean,
you can't force people to and so
I want to know the number of
cases that were dismissed
because for whatever reason.
And then then did the total
number of cases and then the
total number of cases prosecuted
and that'll give me a good
baseline.
See what's happening.
We'll go with those numbers for
you, Mr. Chairman. Any other
questions from committee
members?
See none. I apologize to
everybody else, but Mr. Brigman
can explain why.
I'll explain it to all the other
DAs. Thank you, Mr. Thank you.
Uh, thank you all the 7th.
That's well more see back there.
District attorney.
the wrong
Judge
Thinking the judge in reserve.
Mr. Chairman, I am not the 3rd
DA, but I was asked by the, uh,
3 DA to stand in for him. He was
unable to be here. Uh, we're
doing the 7th, they're doing
you. I'm the 7th, yes, OK, I
didn't, I don't know where the
3rd came from.
Here on the 13th.
Where I knew in the 77, OK, very
well.
What you can do the next one,
OK, I'll do the next one
afterwards. I'll do mine first.
Uh, I'm Clint Wellborn. I'm the
district attorney from the 7th
Judicial District, which is
Catherine Sierra Socorro and
Torrance Counties and I have
with me my CFO JB Maldon. He's
been with us for 29 years and I
also have Julia Aguilar, uh, my
financial manager, and we've
asked for a uh
Modest increase.
In our budget last year we got a
5.4% increase, which we very
much appreciated that very much
helped us to uh retain attorneys
and get salaries up to a point
where uh we could keep people,
encourage people to stay. And
this year we're just asking for
1.35% increase, which is 52,400,
and most of that is for uh to
cover costs, increased costs and
salary and benefits, and then
also drink some small increases.
to contractual services of
$11,200.
And uh
Right now
I think all the DA's officers
are having problems getting
attorneys were, I think what the
problem is we're seeing a
smaller and smaller pool of
attorneys, uh, I watched the ads
and the bar bulletin, which is a
publication given to all
licensed attorneys.
And firms, private firms are
starting to advertise their
roading firm, firms that
typically people are beating
down their door to get jobs at
US Attorney. And so I think we
have a smaller and smaller pool
of attorneys, which creates a
problem where we're all fighting
over the same attorneys.
Um
With that, I'll just stand for
questions if anybody has
questions. Questions on the 7th.
See then, you're gonna go to the
13th.
Or the 3rd 3rd I think 3rd, OK,
Mr. Myers couldn't be here in uh
CFO can be here either today. So
they asked me to present their
budget. They're asking for a
flat budget which includes a
1.4%.
Uh, vacancy rating, which was
included in that. And at that
current levels, they're going to
have to have a senior trial
attorney position, would it have
to be kept vacant, uh,
I don't know a lot of details
about their budget, other than
that.
But I will say that there's a
newly elected.
District attorney there,
Fernando Wailas will be coming
into office in January, and I
don't know that he might look at
this budget, I don't know if
he's had an opportunity to look
at this.
Budget yet, but he may make some
additional requests, uh, based
on what kind of uh things she
wants to do with the office,
what kind of plans he has with
the office, and I don't know if
I can answer any specific
questions. I know Mr. Macias,
uh, is a former state senator.
Uh, he's a former district
judge, a former county manager,
so I'm sure he's well acquainted
with the budgetary process, and
he may have to come and uh ask
for modifications to this
request. I don't know. I just
asked the committee to keep that
in mind.
We will keep that in mind. Any
questions for the 3rd.
See none. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you for filling in for
him. We're going to the 9th.
But
9th, 10th, and 11th are up.
In that order baseball batters.
The batter already left, yeah.
We strikes you out is over with.
Uh, good morning, committee or
good afternoon committee. Uh, my
name is Quint ray. I'm the
district attorney in the 9th
Judicial District, which is
Curry and Roosevelt County. I
have with me my CFO Steve North.
um, we, uh, received an increase
last year. Uh we're very
grateful for that. It's allowed
us to do some things. We have uh
hired some new attorneys in our
office. I'm proud to say that we
only have 3 attorney vacancies,
which in the 13 attorney office
sounds like a lot, and it is,
but comparably it's, it's a big
increase. Um, so we're very
thankful for that.
Uh, we are asking for a 4.7%
increase in our budget, um, that
is mostly to help pay for uh
salaries and we're trying to be
competitive in our rural area,
um, but if anybody has more
particular questions, we'll
stand for questions.
I mean, that's a, we're hearing
that over and over and over
again, right? And, and, uh, I
get it, right? I mean.
Nobody wants to go to Gallop and
be an attorney, right? Well, and
it's tough because Clovis is
such a wonderful place. I just
don't understand it, but you
know, Marillo, the wind never
quits blowing. Yeah, we brought
some wind with us. Sorry about
that. I, I, I just, I don't know
how we resolved that, that
problem. I, I mean, it is, and
you guys weren't here we're in
this conundrum of the population
growth declined for the last 15
years, and, and it's gonna get
worse and worse, so.
Well, and I, I'll tell you, Mr.
Chairman, we have tried a couple
different things. Um, we did a
digital marketing campaign.
Put quite a bit of money into
that and really thought it maybe
gonna do something. We got 0
applicants to get everybody
together and think if there's a
pilot program that we could try
in these right for short term
world recruitment or something,
what that would look like and
see if it pilot program would do
that, so you make sure you kind
of put that on.
Injected one Marco comes back up
and I don't know who's see him
there, but maybe we figure out a
pilot program to try to fill
those and see what happens in a
pilot to your pilot program and
grow or something, figure out my
recruitment and retention, so.
That's our our most success has
been with giving people to keep
people is to give them more
money to recruit people, pay
them more money.
And it, you know, funding money
plays a role in, you know, we
always say this job is not about
the money. We do this for the
donation to the community and
giving back, but $1000 a year is
$100 a year, and we can get
people with that. So, that's
what we've been trying to do.
OK. Thank you. All right. Thank
you. We're gonna go to the 10th,
Heidi.
Good afternoon. Oh, sorry, chair
and ladies and gentlemen, it's
really cool sitting in front of
you today. Um, I remember coming
here in 8th grade when we come
to tour the Capitol building, so
it was a bit of nostalgia coming
today. My name's Heidi Adams. I
was appointed to the 10th
Judicial District Attorney's
office back in April, so I'm
very new. Um, I appreciate all
of our senators and
representatives from our area
being here and being a part of
this and all of y'all. So thank
you for being here today. Beside
me is
What is my savior since taking
office as my CFO Jennifer
Emilio.
So she has helped prepare the
budget today and has helped kind
of outline what some of our.
Um, request
are and what we should be
looking at going forward. We're
requesting a flat budget in the
300s and 400s, we would ask that
um we have a budget increase in
the 200s of the 44,500.
And I, I'm gonna be a unicorn
today and say that.
We have no vacancies.
Knock on wood, um, I've been
lucky since taking office. I've
hired two attorneys,
unfortunately, it was from
within the state.
But I'm happy to have them.
We've also filled, um, our other
vacant positions. One of them is
an underfill. It was much
needed. We are also asking for
an expansion today, uh, for an
information technology
administrator position, it would
be for 86,300, as you know in um
everything we do nowadays, it's
all technology, and we don't
have anybody in our office that
can do that. We used to have a
senior investigator.
that would stay weekends and at
nights and fill that position,
but he's moved on. So we're at
the mercy of AODA and they're
awesome and amazing, but they're
understaffed as well.
So we're asking for an in-house
position.
Other than that, I would stand
for any questions. Thank you.
Thank you. Any questions?
You did have a vacancy until you
were appointed.
I had,
I had, yes,
sir,
I had, I had, yes,
yes, sir. Congratulations. Thank
you, sir. Thank you. Thank you.
The 11th.
Vision vision.
One,
I'm sorry, no, that's.
We're gonna do the 11th Mr. Tro.
The retiring Mr. Tiro.
Santa Fe.
Now you are take, correct me if
I'm wrong and you're taking
over, correct? Yes, sir. You'll
be presenting for 11 and 11 a
budget you will soon control, so
be prepared. Go ahead.
Now the bearer of bad news, Mr.
Chair, thank you for this
opportunity and thank you for
all your services, as you're
aware, um, I will.
The done being the district
attorney after 16 years up in
San Juan County at the end of
the, at the end of this year,
it's been the job and honor of a
lifetime.
Um, I've thoroughly enjoyed
working with all you throughout
the years, even during those
terrible recession times when we
Watched our budgets disappear,
and everybody did and it was
rough. And then on the rebounds,
and how you guys have helped us
build
Build up our budgets again, and
it's been really helpful. Um, I
can only echo what you've
already heard, so I won't.
I'm finding different turns the
bus that.
Um, I am happy to say, and I
have with me today my CFO Amy
Hahn, um, we are transitioning
the DAA elect as Jack Fortner
from San Juan County. Um, we've
been doing a transition. I
actually had him sit down with
Amy, my CFO, to look at this
budget that's been presented to
you all. So, I'm happy to say
that's been going on. I'm also
happy to say I'm sure that when
Mr. Fortner gets in office, he
will see that.
We'll start to see some other
stuff, and so he may be asking
her in the session for a little
bit of changes, which is
understandable with with the new
DA coming in. Uh, but with that
I'll stand with for any
questions.
Representative Ellison.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I just noticed in the 2nd
districts.
OCC's success reports.
They mentioned the seizure of
170,000 pounds of illegal
cannabis.
I, I imagine your office was
involved with that as well with
the New Mexico State Police.
That happens just in my
backyard.
And I'm just wondering what you
did with offenders.
chair.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative
Ellison.
That cases.
I'm not gonna say it's unique.
It's, it involved a lot of human
trafficking that was going on,
um, a lot of them are Chinese
nationals out of California, who
we have a very strong feeling
that they were trafficked
themselves. So the actual
offenders, a lot of them were
victims as well.
Um
So, and under the
Cannabis rules for New Mexico,
there's not much to do on these,
besides fines that could come
through.
So, at most, we're looking at
some misdemeanors or a couple
people, but a lot of our
offenders who were working there
were actually trafficked, uh,
victims. So there's not a lot of
charges coming out of that, but
we did just.
There was a lot of marijuana
destroyed out.
Thank you for that, and Mr.
Chair, uh, do you think this was
a continuation of what happened
in Shiprock a couple of years
earlier.
Do you think this is just a
continuation of that?
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Ellison.
Different, different group.
Um, a lot of the same time.
There's a Chinese tie to it.
So
From a national threat.
Potentially yes, but it wasn't
directly related to the couple
years ago.
Not the same actors at least.
OK, Mr. Tier, so am I reading
that there was quite a number of
deportations.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Ellison, I'm not sure. A lot
went back to California, where,
where the Chinese nationals were
from, and I really couldn't
speak to what was going on after
that, once they were back in.
OK, Mr. Chair, uh, so is that
operation still continuing once
they complete complied with New
Mexico laws.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Ellison, as of this point that
that operation is done.
So, um, and that always, that
started with tips coming from
like the water flow, people in
the water flow area and the
water's coming off the rivers
and stuff like that. So as of
now that
That investigation and that
operation is come to a
conclusion.
OK, Mr. Mr. Teo, thank you.
Thank you for doing a good job
on that. Thank you.
Thank you don't see any other
questions. I, I mean, I ran a
bill last year for the 11th I I
think we go, do you go by 11 a
or 11, or is it vision 1 and 2.
Mr. Jarrett's 11 Division 1 and
11 Division 2. So Division 1
being in San Juan County,
McKinley being in Division 2.
I mean, we have a problem. We
know we have a problem, we know
that we have a DA that only has
one staff attorney. There's 600
cases that are going to fall
through the cracks at some
point.
Um, it's gonna be a collapse of
the system.
I ran a bill last year to
oversee that and didn't get a
message, um, but I need to
prepare you guys, um.
Because I think that budget.
As to transfer it to you.
I think you're gonna have to
take.
Over and manage a portion since
you're almost our closest since
we're both elevens.
And and so
I'm asking for your help.
I'm begging for your help.
Uh, because
Victims need uh.
Be their day in court and the
criminals need their day in
court too.
And we know that it's not gonna
happen. I mean, RDA has sued
the.
Magistrate judge and the
magistrate judges sued the DA
and it's, you could write the
soap opera box about it. And so,
We can't let
That issue stop what needs to
happen in in the judicial branch
of government.
So, I know the, the new DA is
dying to get a pay raise and
And
he calls me at 6 in the morning,
um.
So, I, uh, please, if you could
help us with that.
And please, if, if we need to
prepare how we handle that,
could you start thinking?
Sorry to burden you with that,
but it's something that's
happening in, and it's just.
has to be fixed.
Um
It's not the voters elected
them.
The the system has crashed. They
re-elected them in the system
still gonna crash, and the only
other way is to, to, to move
that to the different skill set
that can manage that, so start
thinking about what that looks
like and, and what, how that's
gonna work and let's visit a
little bit. You guys are shaking
your heads, but you're probably
gonna cuss me when you get in
the car.
But I, I, I just wanna give you
that and, and, and I'd
appreciate working together to
help us resolve this issue till
we get to a point where we can
bring it
back to Galvin manage it on and
I know everybody in this room, I
know Marco and them were in
Gallup. I know the Attorney
General has made trips to Gallup
to offer help, I know
everybody's trying to help us,
but it doesn't seem to be
working and, and so I'm just
appreciative that you're shaking
your head yes and not just
getting up off the table and
leaving, so.
Thank you guys. All right.
And Mr. Chair, I was asked to
cover the 6th if you wanted to
address, you're there.
So 11 and the 6th.
With
All
right. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Again, I am not Michael
Reenteria, uh, district attorney
3 I couldn't be here today.
However, he does represent the
6, which is Grant, Luna, and
Hidalgo counties, um, there,
there was a handout that was
presented earlier. Hopefully you
have it. It's
Mr. Ren was nice and only did a
little one page for you, so
there's not a lot for you to
read there, but um,
Uh, I will say this, there,
there will be a new DA down
there beginning in January, so
I'm sure that a new DA once they
get in, that's gonna be DA elect
uh Norman Wheeler, um,
Maybe be coming to you during
the session for some changes
once he sees what needs to be
done. Uh, however, at this time,
District Attorney went to Rio is
looking to get a.
Uh, to unfunded positions, one
program administrator and one
senior investigator position
funded.
And also looking for two more
senior investigators for a total
increase on for the budget on
that one of 168,000.
Um
With the Adol stand for any
questions.
Questions from committee
members.
Oh
Thank you.
Thank you appreciate your time.
Appreciate your service and
thank you. You're not leaving
us. You're just changing titles.
Uh, next we have the 4th.
I think I'm correct. The 4th.
The 4th second and the 11th is
already done 6.
4th, 2nd, and 13th.
4th, 2nd. 0 no, we did the 2nd.
13th in the 1st and we'll wrap
up.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman,
and uh members of the committee,
Senator Campos, Senator from our
district. Um, my name is Tom
Clayton. I'm the district
attorney. It's my first term
with the 4th Judicial District
have been prosecuted 20 some odd
years, um, we represent the, the
counties of uh Mora, San Miguel,
and Guadalupe.
And uh I ask is uh our current
operating budget is 4.9. We're
asking for 4.916. So essentially
a flat budget, um, but I did
want to touch base, um, we are
having issues regarding our
staffing, not support staff
because I have a very solid
support staff, uh, within the
district attorney's office. It's
attorneys, and I think you've
heard it from all, all, um,
across the board, I think with
the exception of the second, Mr.
Bregman is uh
are blessed to have a lot of
people within his office.
Unfortunately, us in the rural
parts of the state, we don't
have that kind of um resources.
I have 11 FTEs for attorneys.
Right now I have 5 plus myself.
And as the elected DA I carry a
full caseload, and that's not
unique to to just my district or
the districts as well are uh uh
attorneys are carrying a case
load.
Um, recruiting is the issue, and
that is something I'm not sure
we have an answer for that at
this point, you know, I I I I
welcome a pilot project of some
sort, to try to see if we can
recruit, but I don't, I, I, my,
my belief is that we're not
generating enough lawyers within
our own state.
Uh, the law school, uh,
generates probably about 100
attorneys every year, and we're
all, um, seeking those same
attorneys.
Um, and
I don't know what the answer is,
um, but I think that's one of
the things I think we need to
look at, uh, see if we can
increase the number of
individuals that can come out of
our law school. One of the
issues that was questioned was
talked about is uh substance
abuse. I, I echo Mr. Bragman's
comments that fentanyl is a
continued problem within our
communities.
Um, it's, it's just.
Um, this afternoon, this morning
rather, we sentenced a drug
trafficker in our community.
He had 450 pills of fentanyl.
Uh, he was sentenced to prison.
And I think that's, that's the,
the Senate the message I want to
send out to our communities will
address substance abuse in the
form of diversion programs,
those individuals that are
addicts.
But if you peddle this poison,
We're gonna be sending you to
Department of Corrections to be
dealt with.
Um, and so I think, um, the
overall issue is, is, uh, how do
we fund the criminal justice
system and it does include, I
was here for part of the
presentation for Mr. Bauer, uh,
the Public Defender's office, in
our district, we do not have a
public defender's office. It's
all contract attorneys.
And it just there just isn't
enough lawyers.
Throughout the state, and that
includes the public expender's
office, the district attorney's
office.
And in, in the law enforcement,
we're looking at uh an increase
across the board.
We stand for questions. I do
have my, my CFO Cristina Chavez
here, my district office
manager, um, Cleo Gonzalez and
Will stand for any questions.
Let me just ask you one question
on the lawyer pole, and this is
just a thought process so you
guys can think about it. If we
created a giant pool of contract
lawyers.
And pay them, you guys know what
that I'll say the wrong number
and then everybody would be mad
at me.
We created that pole and
Sent out to areas, right? So
there was one giant pole you
could pull 3 from.
Handle a certain case or their
specialty was a certain case.
And then they had to go to
Gallup for the same specialty
case, I mean, with that
functionality kind of work if we
had this.
We could gather 50 to 60
contract.
Lawyers and say, here's the pool
and here's the pool of money and
you help
Mr. Mr. Chairman, yes, I, I
think as part of our management
of our, we have 2000 cases
roughly year that we, um.
A prosecute and currently I am
using contract attorneys. I have
2 that I'm using, uh, retired
attorneys, um, then we, uh,
signed them a number of cases to
handle on, on uh for the, the
fiscal year, um, I think access
to a, a pool of attorneys would
be
Um, at least a remedy. I don't
think it's a long term fix, but
I think it would be a remedy for
us to deal with in all of our
districts. Um, we're small,
we're a small, uh, district by
way of a number of attorneys and
in the community itself, the
contract attorneys, um, that are
doing the public defender.
They're small, so they're having
to reach out the attorneys
throughout the state to handle
on the public defender side.
Maybe something along the lines
as the as the Mr. Chair, that
you're suggestion would be
something we could do. The
dilemma is gonna be that.
Right now we're in the virtual
world.
And hearings are being held
virtually, and I can tell you
our public defenders who are who
practice throughout all of
northern New Mexico are are
conducting hearings in Taos,
Rato, Santa Fe, Las Vegas,
Guadalupe County, Santa Rosa,
and they're able to do that
because of the virtual ability
to do so. Once we get back to
in-person hearings and that's
going to become the dilemma. I
think we're still gonna need
Just like we need bricks and
mortars, buildings for uh
facilities, we're still gonna
need actual staff attorneys.
On, on staff with the attorneys,
the DA's office.
But I, I like the idea of access
to uh uh uh an attorney with the
possibility of handling someone
on contract.
You guys, uh, you guys will have
to figure that. I'm not, I'm
just throwing ideas in the
dartboard. Don't take me, take
me for an expert in any way,
shape, or form.
We go from health care to
hospitals to be
in the realm of 8 hours and so
I'm not an expert in any field.
I'm just throwing out through
processes the ideas that you
guys need to think about.
Um, Senator Gonzalez.
Oh, Mr. Chairman, no, thank you.
um, I think your idea is so.
You know that um maybe you could
um.
start as a pilot.
But uh, let's go to the small
school districts also do for
contracting for.
Services that are very hard to
bring to their district.
Especially in the area of
special ed.
So they form a pool and then
from that pool just uh.
You know, to the different
requests, but I think it's a
very good idea, something that
we could be trying.
Thank you.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
Chair. Of course, members of the
committee, to our district
attorneys and uh DA Clayton,
thank you very much for being
here. A couple of things, uh,
this district attorney, I'm sure
the other ones that are here
with us, he spends a lot of time
in the community, so it's not
only uh with cases, it's been
there uh to help our children,
to help our youth to uh provide,
if you will, a very positive
example, and I really commend
you for it, along with the
thoughts and ideas and I like
the idea of maybe a, a pilot.
Program, something that we can
uh truly uh sink our teeth into
and that would possibly be, how
can we expand, if you will, the
UNM Law school is were thinking
with UNMH in terms of, of our
medicine. So that's, that's one
possibility. And then the other
thing is we uh as we tie all
this together, how can we go
ahead and enhance, if you will,
our programs within our school
systems so that we have more
young people interested, if you
will, in the law, so, uh, Mr.
Chair, if I could.
Uh, I'll be thinking of some
ideas, and I'd like to work with
our district attorney and others
uh to see if there's some ways
to resolve some of these issues
that have already been brought
forward. Thank you very much,
Mr. Chairman.
Perfect. Any other questions?
John, I guess, put that on our
radar and see what the number
looks like and.
I want Mr. Tro takes over, but.
Get them in a pile. What are the
work. All right, thank you.
We are going to the 13th.
In the 2nd and then we're done.
Oh the first, why did I get
this? I already got it.
They're not in order. It's hard
for me now.
See, the first thing that should
be the 2nd, but the 1st and the
13th.
Go ahead. Good afternoon.
Sorry, moving a little slow, I
somehow managed to tweak my
back. I still don't know how you
can go to sleep and wake up in
the morning with a hurt back, I
guess that's age. I'm not sure.
Um.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chair and
committee members for allowing
me to present to you and also
just for taking the time to
consider our budget requests. I
know that you all received the
handout, which outlines um not
only where we spend our money,
but also what we are asking for,
and we're basically asking for
an increase of less than, well,
4% basically, um, a difference
of $356.5,000 and that is
specifically um to help fund our
vacant positions right now, we
have 10 general fund vacant
positions, which is a 12%
vacancy rate.
Um, our agency projects to hire
2 more trial assistants in in
the next fiscal year, which will
bring our vacancy right down,
right down to 8, vacant,
full-time positions.
We, we aren't asking for an
increase in any other state
funds, our contractual services,
other funds were asking um to
remain flat, and the reason that
we are asking for the increase
again is to
Not only fund those two
positions for attorneys, but
also for, we've been talking
about retention recruitment, but
also to give a 5% raise to the
attorneys that we have for the
purpose of retention, um, and
recruit recruitment.
And
I, I know I, I mentioned this
every time, but I guess maybe
because of my military
background being fiscally
responsible has been drilled
into me for a long time, and for
the 3rd year in a row, we have
continued to decrease our
agencies's reversion rate to
this year it's less than 1%, um,
and that's thanks to my, my
chief financial officer, Anna
Cassels, who's sitting to my
left and my chief deputy Jessica
Martinez, who is sitting to my
right.
I just, I would just like to to
answer.
Because the advantage of going
last is you get to hear all the
questions and concerns of
everybody before you get up
here, and obviously, as you all
are, have, have demonstrated
you're well aware of the
recruitment retention issue that
we all face. And I think one of
the things to keep in mind is it
was touched on earlier.
Um, one of the ways I think that
could, could help us in our
retention, especially is to
change our retirement to match
law enforcement.
To 25 years.
And the reason I say that is
because
Our prosecutors in a very, very
real way based a lot of the same
kind of secondary trauma.
Um, that law enforcement
agencies go through.
I, I don't know if my office is
typical or atypical, but in the
last two years, I've had a lead
investigator have a heart
attack. I've had two of my
deputies hospitalized for
various health reasons, um, and
I, I have had to send some of my
attorneys to counseling
following really terrifically
horr horrific crimes, you know,
when you prosecute a rape and
murder of a six year old girl,
it does something to you. And it
has a cumulative effect. And so
that's why
I would, I would, I would ask
that that could be one thing
that could be taken into
consideration, maybe altering
our retirement plan.
Um
And also, it will also just
allow us to remain competitive,
and with all the other state
agencies.
I think I've forgotten anything,
I would have gotten an elbow and
I haven't, so, um, with that,
I'll stand.
forgiveness.
Oh, yeah, and I would also, um,
Advocate for some kind of a loan
forgivement program similar to
what the doctors in rural areas
get, and that's my chief deputy.
She makes sure I don't forget
things, so.
Didn't we offer the DA's an
early um there is a program to
pay for your education, right?
Yes. And then my, my didn't
forget.
A lot of people would not take
that pay raise, cause then they
didn't qualify for the loan
repayment, and we resolved that
issue or not resolve that issue.
You know, Jess, Miss Martinez
actually has personal experience
with that, so I'm gonna let her
answer that question. Yes.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
members of the community. Uh, I
was one of the few beneficials
that did, um, benefit from that
10 year forgiveness, um, but it
is true, I couldn't make, I
couldn't make above a certain
amount of salary in order to get
that. Um, it's a little weird
right now since everything's
still kind of on hold with that.
Um, but I think, um, and another
thing that I didn't qualify for,
I, I did not go to UNM, not the
cause I didn't try. I did. I had
to go out of state, so, um, when
I
did apply for that program. It
was given to UNM students first,
so I didn't even qualify for the
state program. Um, so I think
if, if that could be cause we do
have to recruit from out of
state now, um, and they're not
qualifying for the in-state
programs. It's doesn't really
help. Um, but something similar
to doctors, if they, they give a
commitment for 3 years in rural
areas like Las Vegas, Grant, um,
that's how they have doctors
because of these programs, and
if we have something similar
where they give us that
commitment.
And their loans are forgiven,
um, I think that would help a
lot.
You know, the number the LFC.
I think she has it on speed
dial, that's good. I'm glad
she's got the speed dial, so
reach out to them tomorrow and
see how we can fix that. That
helps alleviate some of the
problem if it works, right? But
I remember clearly, they would
not accept pay raises that
disqualify him from the tuition
payback and, and so now I think.
We're past that since the
pandemic that's a very good
point, um, Mr. Chairman and
I know that you know where I'm
from, but I, I always forget to
introduce myself. I don't know
why, but for those who don't
know me, I am, I represent the
13th, which is um Sandoval
County, Valencia County, and
Cela County. So it's quite a
diverse, um, district with 3
counties with very unique needs.
OK, Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you. So, uh, what is the
retirement now?
It's 30, it's 30 years or you
can, you can retire earlier, but
30 years is, if you get maximum
retirement benefits.
And uh Mr. Chairman uh so has
some something being presented
to the oversight investment
pension Committee? No, I, not
that I'm aware of, but um
someone from one of the other
district attorneys or um
AODA might have done that or
have something in the works, Mr.
Mr. Tedro would be more probably
uh familiar with that, if that's
an upcoming. I know we've talked
about it in the past, um, how
far it's gotten or what stage
it's in, uh, Mr.
Senator, I'm not, I'm not really
sure.
Thank you. OK.
Oh, Mr. Chairman, um, I didn't
see anything go through our
committee but uh this is uh 60
day session to which um.
Uh, you know, something can be
looked at, but um.
I would suggest and um.
And perhaps, you know, and uh if
you want to include me also um.
Maybe we could have a short
meeting with the director
Trujillo from the PRA.
look at the difference because
um they would have to present it
to their board, right? Yes, sir.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator
Chairman.
All right. Thank you.
Thank you. I don't see any other
questions. So we are on to the
first. Thank you. Thank you all
for your time. I appreciate it.
Thank you.
Mm
Good afternoon, Speaker and
Representatives. Uh, my name is
Mary Carmack Altwe, and I'm the
district attorney for the first
judicial district, which is here
in Santa Fe, Rio Ariba in Los
Alamos Counties. I am recovering
from bronchitis, so excuse me if
I have to pause to cough. You've
probably heard me.
Back there all afternoon. Um,
the first judicial district
attorney's office is asking for
a $1.7 million dollar increase,
uh, expansion increase, that is
for 13 new employees. Um, we are
also asking for about a 347,000
increase to base, that is to
cover, uh, the, the increased
insurance premiums and small
raises for our existing staff.
The reason for these 13
new positions. There's, there
are about 3 different
initiatives that we are
pursuing. The first, um was sort
of prodded by the governor
actually, she is wanting
district attorney's offices to
prosecute misdemeanor
shoplifting cases in magistrate
courts, magistrate or metro
courts. Um, at present, we
Most district attorneys' offices
are not funded to do that, and
so we are asking for 3 staff
people, 2 attorneys, and 1,
support staff to prosecute those
in Santa Fe and Rio Reba County.
Um, then we are asking for 9 new
positions because we are, uh,
we've been told by the Supreme
Court that we are getting the
case management order that
Albuquerque operates under and
uh that is a
Very strict set of rules which
when it went live in Albuquerque
when it went live in Las Cruces,
it, it resulted in many
thousands of cases getting
dismissed, and we do not want to
see that happening in Santa Fe.
I've spent the last 4 years
preparing our office for this
inevitability, uh, but we are
seeing a need for increased
staffing, um, it's about 5 new
attorneys and the rest will be
for support staff to handle the
increased burden that is placed
on the beginning of a case. Um,
And finally, we have a grant
that we are asking for a
permanent position to be funded,
was a private grant through the
William T. Grant Foundation, so
it's a grant grant, um, and, uh,
it is for juvenile diversion,
juvenile and young adults that
we are piloting and is going
live.
Kind of right now in Rio Ariba
County to try to um divert
juvenile offenders more out of
the system, but with a wrap
around holistic services and
hopefully start to decrease the,
the juvenile criminal population
in Rio Riva. So that is the
reason for our relatively large
ask, um, and I also want to
point out that we will get, if
we are funded for this, we will
get those people filled. I
actually am at 0%
I'm gonna knock on wood, but we
are at 0% vacancy rate right
now. And that is generally where
my office is. We have periods
where 3 or 4 people will leave
at once, but then within about 3
months, we are back to fully
staffed or nearly fully staffed,
um, and that is a wonderful
place to be, but I have
overburdened attorneys. I have
overburdened support staff, and
we need these extra attorneys,
um, not only to help, uh, our
existing uh our existing load,
but also because we know that
the, the mandates that are
coming down from the Supreme
Court will will increase those
loads on those existing
attorneys. And so to prevent an
impact to public safety, um,
that is, that's why we're
requesting that. I would also
point out, I think I couldn't
see from the back, but a
representative from this side of
the room asked, what can we do
um in the state of New Mexico to
deal with, with the public
safety issue.
Sorry, representative, I didn't,
didn't know which one it was,
but um, as you were saying that,
I googled uh the average
attorney prosecutor pay in the
surrounding states. So in
Colorado, the average pay is
$119,000 a year. In Texas, it's
146,000 in Maricopa County,
Arizona, it's 158,000. Um,
And while that is probably too
high to be sustained in this
state, I would say without being
able to run my numbers, which I
couldn't do from sitting in
here, but our average attorney
makes around 85,000, um, over
the last 4 years, I have raised
our starting salary from the the
DA.
Bottom, which is 72,000 to 80,
just for people to be able to
come to my office and live in my
community. Santa Fe is very
expensive. Rio Riba is very
expensive. And so even paying
85.
They don't really have lives
much, much outside of work. And
so if, if we really wanted to to
tackle the huge vacancy rate in
prosecutors and encourage them
to stay. I do echo what DA Romo
said, changing the way that we
are looked at with regard to
PERA, but also we can't compete,
compete with those kind of
salaries, um, I am fully
staffed, but over the last two
years, I have lost 6 different
attorneys, most of whom have
gone
to Arizona and a couple have
gone to Colorado, and when I
have tried to retain them. They
were looking at $40,000
increases and in my existing
budget, I can never do that. And
these aren't my chief deputies.
These are my
We euphemistically call them our
baby attorneys, our attorneys
with one to about 3 years of
experience. So if they're
leaving me for 80,000 and going
up to Colorado for 120, that I
can't do that. That, that's what
I pay my deputies. Um, so I
would ask you to, to look at
more robustly funding
prosecutors um for salaries. We
are doing that, we have been
doing that for the last few
sessions with police officers.
Now I have police officers in my
district that make more than my
attorneys, and
So we need to, we need to
balance out that system.
And with that, I started to
ramble, excuse me, but with that
I'll stand for questions. Thank
you, Senator Rodriguez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good
afternoon, um, DA or DA and our
deputy, uh Jennifer and Mary. Uh
we just appreciate you so much.
Thanks. I was just reading the,
your statistics here and I guess
I didn't realize, um, I knew you
did a lot, a lot of work, and
you have a lot of cases in Santa
Fe gets an enormous amount here,
but when I saw that you have
40,500 cases that are referred
to this year alone for
prosecution. You only have 26.
5 average number of attorneys.
To deal with all those cases.
That's correct. That is
unconscionable. It really should
be changed. That's too much.
Then you've got an average
caseload, each one of those
attorneys then what you need
some water there? Each one of
those attorneys has to handle
239.21 on an average cases per
year. At 72,000 a year salary,
72 to 85 the most, gross pay.
That is not good.
Um
I can see why you can, you know,
what we're doing here is we're,
we're providing for a training
ground.
for more money.
And even for a single person in
Santa Fe with no children coming
in to work at the DA's office,
you think, well, 72,000 isn't
too bad. Well, it is, because by
the time you deduct insurance,
FICA, everything else, that's
gross pay again. You come out
with a net amount that doesn't
give you enough money to pay
rent in Santa Fe, let alone by a
house.
And so all these factors are
obviously contributing to the uh
To the fact that you need more
employees, and, and we have to
stay now retaining and stay in
and the salary is going to make
such a difference. So thank you
and I'm happy to see that your
vacancy rate, did you say, uh,
Mary, may I call you Mary, that
you're it's 0.
Uh, speaker, Senator Rodriguez,
yes, it is 0 at right now. We do
have a budgeted vacancy rate of
about 2%, um, but we, we are
fully staffed and have been for
a few months now. And I have 4
attorneys that I'd love to hire
today if I had the budget or the
FTEs. I see. OK, thank you. And
I noticed also that you're
moving to a new building. Oh my
gosh, that building was like
ready to fall, so I'm happy that
you're gonna get something soon.
Speaker, uh, Senator Rodriguez,
yes, we have actually been out
of our building for the last
week and a half due to a gas
leak, and we were finally
allowed back in the building
today when we found out that our
heater had broken, I guess,
while the gas was turned off. So
it's a very cold office right
now, and actually while I was
sitting here, I got noticed that
our elevator was also broken, so
we are, uh, we are.
It's one of the worst buildings
uh in the state. It's got to be,
um, but we are slated to move
sometime in the 1st 6 months of
2025.
I sure hope so. I guess one of
the things to um remind
ourselves here, I'm sure you,
you don't have to be reminded
you deal with this every day,
but we do, is that you don't
only have one county here also.
You have 3 busy counties, Santa
Fe, Rio Riva, and then Los
Alamos to deal with. And so you,
you do it very efficiently
considering the limited
resources, but I'm gonna
recommend one small thing, Mr.
Chairman, here is on, on your
request that you had Mary, um,
of 347,300 increase to the base,
that would include um you're
requesting that to the base to
sustain your agency's growth. It
says here, you know, as you
mentioned for liability
insurance and costing supplies
and furniture and so on. It's
also to replace vehicles. Now,
the, the request um for the
vehicles could really should not
be on in the base because it's a
non-recurring, for example, and
maybe that.
could be out of what we call
section 5, that's specials and
so that would decrease the um
the amount from 337 or 3473 by
the amount of the vehicles, um,
just so that we put it in a
different area. OK, uh, of the
budget. So I just wanted to tell
you in case you see it somewhere
else, that's really where it
should be. All right? So, um,
and I think this applies
furniture and all of that,
that's pretty common stuff that
you're requesting very
reasonable budget and um your
position
that you're requesting is due to
the fact that your case
management now you new things
are happening in 2025.
Obviously, that you've been
saddled with here and that is
your reason for requesting those
additional positions and you you
have like the shoplifting and
commercial crimes area in the
magistrate court that you have
to deal with that in the past
you didn't, for example, uh, and
so in your in the young adult
diversion program now also, you
have to work with that. So all
these new things, um, and so the
initiative with the William
T. Grant Foundation initiative
is what you're looking at. But
anyway, so I thank you so much
for your work, for all your
perseverance through the limited
resources that we've given you,
and I appreciate your enormous
um loyalty and commitment to
your work, both you and your
deputy Jennifer and your staff.
Thank you to everyone. We are a
team, aren't we? Without that,
without our staff, we can't get
anything done. So thank you so
much and I'm going to move on in
case somebody else's questions.
Represented Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you presenters, and I
really appreciate you telling me
about Al or uh Colorado and
Arizona.
Because I've, I am starting to
see a pattern here on pay.
And
I know that whenever you get,
and I'm gonna ask you a
question, so say you have a 5
year attorney.
And you have to start over with
one of those baby attorneys.
Do you really feel like they're
hitting the road running like
your five-year person, and then
you have to build that person
up, so everything suffers for
that.
Uh, Speaker representatives,
that's, that's a very good
question. Yes, uh, that's, we
spend about 2 years really
training someone to get
comfortable handling a case,
going into trial, feeling like
we can let go of their hand and
they can do it by themselves.
And then we usually get about 1
to 3 years out of them before
they move on unless they have
decided they're going to be a
career prosecutor, and when you
spend those 2 years training
someone, that's taking time from
the senior attorneys. I go to
trials with them, my, my chiefs
have them do trials with them
and uh we spend an enormous
amount of of time and effort to
get them to a place where we
trust them to, to walk into
court and, and be able to handle
anything that's thrown at them
and, and stuff is thrown at him
every day. And it is a great
training ground and, and, and,
and we recognize that, but it is
very frustrating when we have
someone with with 5 years
experience, 5 years usually
means you can handle a homicide,
you can handle.
uh, the, the worst of the worst
kind of cases, um, and, uh, uh,
brand new attorney, they're in
magistrate court handling
misdemeanor domestic violence,
misdemeanor DWIs and even at
that level, we still have to
hold their hands because those
are still important cases. And
so we often have to put two
attorneys where a five-year
attorney we could send them off
by themselves to handle a DWI
case all day long, um, and so I
always wish people well when
they leave, but it is.
It's heartbreaking because we,
we create, especially here in
the first, we create good trial
attorneys. We go to a lot of
trials, we, and, and we do them
well. We win. And, uh, but when
we lose them, it's just a wealth
of institutional knowledge
that's just out the door and
that's not replaceable.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I, I
appreciate that background
because
That's a very specialized
position.
And with everything that's going
on with crime, it's very
important position.
And, um,
It resonates to me because I
used to run a fire department
and you want your people to be
razor sharp, and whenever I
would lose somebody.
And they would go down the road.
And they're getting a 30.
You know, 30% pay increase.
I couldn't really, you know, I
couldn't hold on to him, so.
We started a an incentive
program, and everybody's talking
about training, so every 200
hours of training that you would
get.
You'd give them a 3% bump, and
you had to cap it at 2000 hours.
So every year,
They would, they would, that was
the incentive for them to go
train, they would get a 3% bump
and they would do it until they
capped out. And I'm just
wondering if there's any kind of
incentive pay that you could
possibly give your people like
that, and or
Possibly reclassify them because
we heard that earlier in the
week that we, you know, they
were gonna go back and
reclassify people. How do we get
those attorneys to help our DAs.
And help retain them to where
you have.
A 1015, and maybe even a 20
year.
Attorney. Well, and I'm gonna
completely steal my chief
deputy's um, she looked
panicked. uh Jennifer Paget was
see is her idea, which is, and I
guess it's kind of uh DA Romo's
idea, which was move us to the
law enforcement, um, uh, PERA
such that it's only 20 years
because as as DA Romo pointed
out, it is, it is traumatic. No,
we're not out on the street, but
we're looking at the same
pictures and dealing with the
same issues and, and then
go one step further though,
require that their last, you
know, 5 years or a total of 12
years of that PERI time has to
be either in a prosecutor's
office or at LOPD, um, and I
think that that gives people an
incentive to either come and
work their whole way through, or
come and spend their their most
experienced times, their, their
last 5 to 12 years, um, in a
prosecutor's office. Those are
the, the people that we really
need. Those are the ones.
that I try to hold on to the
most. I love training. I love
getting getting attorneys out of
UNM. I do it every year. We get,
we get 2 or 3 every single year,
but, and God bless them,
they're, they're not that
helpful as attorneys. I need the
ones that, that can prosecute
the worst of the worst cases
because those are the ones that,
that take the most the knowledge
and experience. And so that
would be one way I think to
increase. I, I love your idea.
Um, it doesn't work.
as much with us for training
because we're just required to
do training, um, but if it's
Come and stay for 3 years and
then you automatically get
A $25,000 retention bonus stay
another 5 years, you get another
25,000 some, some laddered thing
like that. I do think that that
would work on people. We have
tried to give retention bonuses
over the years and um
I have to say it works, my
attorneys or my support I give
them the support staff too.
Everybody likes it, but I don't
know that it necessarily
translates to, well, now I'm
going to stay because last year,
she gave me $5000. Um, but
Colorado is offering me $40,000
more. I, I don't know that that
it necessarily
that that model works. Thank
you, Mr. Chair, and you know,
the only thing, the only reason
I bring that up is I think we
need to think outside the box
and um I'm not trying to open up
a can of worms, Mr. Chair, but
I'm a performance-based pay kind
of person, and if you're
performing and you're in you're
really overperforming in your
job, you should be rewarded for
it.
And we don't want somebody else
to take those people and we want
to reward them, so I was just
thinking about maybe some of the
reclassification, um, if you're
talking about going over to the
law enforcement side and they
can reclassify them over there.
But we ought to be able to at
least take that average and, you
know, especially every time I
come, I love coming to Santa Fe,
but uh whenever I check into
the, the, the hotel.
I get a dose of that bill and I,
I still love Santa Fe. We still
show up, but it does cost a
little bit extra to be here, so
we need to pay those good
employees, good money. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. I mean, sometimes
everybody looks at the pinching
funds to to recruit and retain
and, and enhanced benefits have
a cost to them in a shorter time
frame have a real cost. If you
look at the magistrate plan in,
in the judicial plan that's
underwater that we can't get
above water cause there's not
enough people in it.
And when you create those
classes, it's just a word of
caution. We did the arms race
with
Lu police were crunching,
retention and recruitment, and
now every police department is
in an arms race to who can pay
the most to get the most
officers, right? We did that
with teacher pay, became the
highest in our region.
And they went about us. And so,
We got to figure out what's the
right pay for the right area to
recruit.
In, in some, but I mean, the
cautionary intent, we chased
that.
Money figure in
And the teacher Neil just sticks
out like a sore thumb or not a
rich state.
We are now, but we weren't, and
we brought it to the highest
level and everybody went above
us and now they want us to come
back up to that level, and it's
the same thing with, with police
officers and, and then it's
If
If Gallup's offering 45 and,
and, and Albuquerque's offering
65 $25 an hour makes a big
difference in paying, so.
It, it's a tough.
Thing to fix.
And human nature is no matter
what, if we go up, Colorado will
go up.
And, and they may have the
budget, we may not have the
budget and 40,000 is a big
difference. You can't blame
people leaving for 10.
Right? Life's short, you only
have a, a minimum learning
capacity before you got to
retire and so I don't know, we,
we gotta figure it out, but I
don't know what the.
I don't know what the answer is,
so.
Thank you for your time. Thank
you. Thank you.
Um
You want to come back, Donald,
do you want to come back up?
Not like you're in the back
room, right?
They, they said you wanted to
present the 11th.
The 11th Division 2.
You want to present 11 division
2 or
There was
I'll just pass on the message we
did call Miss uh Martin, uh, and
tell her that the hearings are
going on and she was in court
and she just told me to let you
know that she's got a flat
budget. That was it.
OK, that's the 2nd or 3rd year
in a row she hasn't
unfortunately, I can't.
Answer any question you heard a
bunch of the comments today, so
I'll be reaching out and talking
to your DAs and your association
and figure something out. Yeah,
and I'm happy to help in any way
I can. He may throw Ben Bauer in
there and see if contract
attorney in that pole helps them
to know their opposite sides of
the team, but
we've we've always worked well
with Ben, so, and, and attorneys
and attorney and, and so
creating that pool or something
may benefit both sides of the.
The case. Excellent. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee.
OK, thank you. Anything that?
No, you're good.
I think that's it, we're wrapped
up.
Uh, for today.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
