amazing what we have here. We
started in 2019.
And trying to, uh, new space
Nexus actually started with a
small little grant out of EDD,
um, with, uh, led by, uh,
representative Hoffman v. Hill
to get us started and um we were
able to, the main thing is to
just really show what all we
have here. If you see this
ecosystem, you know, we have,
um, we have all the assets here.
We have a space port that is.
a purpose-built spaceport we
have, um, Space Force
organizations. We have two
Department of Energy
laboratories and, uh, and, uh,
Air Force Research Laboratory.
So what I like to highlight is
that we new space nexus and the
impact we have made would not
