Yeah.
All right, good morning. Good
morning Chairman. Good morning,
everyone. Uh, my name is Brian
Baca. I represent House District
8, Valencia County.
Great to be here and thanks for
being here.
All right, Representative
Garrett, good morning. Good
morning, Mr. Chair. Good
morning, everybody. It's nice to
see some new faces presenting to
us. I'm Joy Garrett, uh, I
represent Northwest Albuquerque,
home of petroglyph National
Monument and wonderful people.
All right, and I'm
representative Andres Romero. I
represent the uh far South
Valley and Bertollio County and
parts southeast to Albuquerque
and the high school teacher.
Um, interim director Sanna, if
you want to introduce yourself
and the staff, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I am
your interim director John
Senna, um, I'll go around the
room here, we've got folks all
over. We're one, we're happy to
be back in Santa Fe after
traveling all summer long with
you all, so it's good to be back
with you all here in Santa Fe,
uh, in the back there, we got
Merritt Andrews, one of our
policy analysts, Connor L.
Hicks, policy analyst, uh,
Natasha Davilos.
Daniella Stupinan.
Jessica Hathaway.
An Armitage, um,
Alonzo Baca on the back and Tim
Bado, and then in a minute
you'll hear from Mark Montoya,
who's another one of our policy
anas. Happy to be here.
All right. Thank you all for
being here. So we'll go ahead
and get started with um
broadband, broadband update. So
Mark, good morning. Good
morning, uh, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee.
Um, before I begin, let me
please introduce some of my
guests here at the panel. I'll
start with Mr. Vio Villorca.
Please introduce yourself if you
don't mind.
Yes, uh, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee. My name is
Ovidi Veika. I'm broadband
manager, uh, formerly with the
public school facilities
Authority since this summer with
the Officer Broadband Axis and
expansion, um, and working on
various broadband for schools
initiatives.
Um, and I'd like to take this
opportunity to introduce uh two
of my, uh, uh, my colleagues
here, David Rodriguez and uh
Paula Pedressy. They are the 22
individuals, 2 team members
working on uh this broadband for
schools in initiative full time.
Thank you.
Good morning, uh, Drew Lovelace,
acting director of the Office
Broadband Access and expansion.
Glad to be here. Uh, Broadband's
a big topic and so I think we'll
primarily defer to to Mark's
presentation and be glad to
answer questions for you. So,
uh, we can get into the
specifics of what you'd like to
talk about.
And my name is John Chadwick. I
am the digital equity
coordinator for public education
department.
And I'm, you know, happy to be
here to present Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee, and I
want to thank our policy team
who helped our
soon to be retiring CIO Public
Education department Mary
Montoya.
All right, thank you, gentlemen.
So I'll start with a brief
overview of the state education
networks, the statewide
education network, along with a
broad landscape and update on
broadband infrastructure and
digital devices.
Um, additionally, Mr. Loveless,
Mr. Varker will provide any
insights that they have on their
organization and the impactful
work that they are doing.
Following their updates, I will
pass it over to Doctor Chadwick.
He'll discuss key issues around
digital equity and device
accessibility. Finally, I'll
conclude with the potential
strategies the legislature and
the state might pursue to ensure
both immediate and long-term
success in these. So, uh, as I
present, I'll be referring to
the brief you have in front of
you, it's also on your.
On your screen.
The legislature has made great
strides to develop the
infrastructure needed for
widespread, reliable and
affordable internet access
throughout New Mexico.
It has invested significant
state resources and leveraged
federal programs such as
educational rate program, known
as ERA.
The American rescue Plan Act,
known as AARPA.
The Broadband equity access and
deployment program, which is
known as BEE, as well as the
digital equity and competitive
grant program.
One key component of the state's
efforts is the creation of the
statewide education network,
which I'll refer to as the san
going throughout this
presentation.
Simply put, the sand integrates
regional connection hubs
throughout the state and
supports the insulation and
maintenance of critical
education technology
infrastructure.
The sand went live in July of
this year.
However, Alisy's staff found.
That there's still a lot of work
needed to reach the potential of
this, the full potential.
There are also challenges that
need to be addressed to achieve
this. Uh, one, there is a need
for additional administrative
support.
There are staffing challenges.
And there are challenges that
are presented with current, the
current governance structure.
Alongside the Seine, the state
has also launched other
initiatives to provide and
improve broadband access and
promote digital equity to
schools, students, and citizens
across the state.
These initiatives are managed by
several entities.
These initiatives can um
Can include very technical.
Complex work.
That um is handled by various
agencies, and sometimes that
work does overlap.
The technical operations
involved deploying fiber
infrastructure, I think video
has.
A props that he'll show it to us
later.
Um, as well as other technical
uh devices and hardware
throughout the state.
Um
Coordinating data, um,
integrating this wireless, uh,
programs and ensuring advanced
network security and maintenance
to provide high speed reliable
internet. Some of the work
that's involved, uh, this work
also includes full-time support
to navigate
and pretty labor intensive.
And the state's efforts to
provide broadband and digital
equity, there are also other
factors at play. One example is
the Martinez Yazi lawsuit.
As you'll see above on your uh
screen, I provided a brief
synopsis of that and the
implications.
As we know, the lawsuit was
originally filed in 2014.
The lawsuit challenged the
advocacy and equity of New
Mexico's public education
system. It was filed on behalf
of at-risk students throughout
the state.
The the suit argued that the
state was failing to meet its
constitutional obligation to
provide sufficient education for
all, in 2018, the court ruled in
favor of the plaintiffs,
concluding that this uh
Mexico's, uh legislature and
state um education funding was
inadequate and inequitable.
Uh, the court did mandate that
the state undertake reforms to
ensure access to quality
education for all students, with
particular focus on addressing
the unique needs of underserved.
Uh, groups in 2020, plaintiffs
filed another motion and sought
further relief from state regard
from the state regarding
perceived failure to provide
essential technology to at-risk
students.
They claim that the state's
attempts to provide internet
access and uh educational
devices during the global
pandemic was quote woefully
insufficient.
In 2021, 1st judicial district
judge court, a judge, Judge
Matthew Wilson, um, approved and
expedited motion for further
relief?
Um, he stated, students who are
lacking access to high-speed
internet and technology for
remote learning.
are not getting much of an
education, if at all.
In 2024, July of this year.
Uh, plaintiffs, uh.
He's attorneys filed a motion
and starting that the state had
yet to fully address the needs
of at-risk students. The motion
did call, as we're aware, for
LFC LESC develop a comprehensive
remedial plan.
Among proposed components of
this plan, the plaintiffs
emphasize the need for
technology systems that ensure
that quote all risk.
All Irish students and their
teachers have access to
broadband services and dedicated
digital devices at school and at
home.
Um, I'll briefly touch on the
importance of digital devices
now, but I will hand it over to
John Chave to dive a little bit
deeper into that, since that's
one of the era that he's
organizations really diving. So
the digital devices, they played
crucial role in providing
broadband access by acting as
access points. We could have the
most robust networks in place
without the devices needed to
actually access and utilize that
technology. It's pretty much all
for naught.
Um, they need to be up to date.
They need to be handle the
resources and the capabilities
that we have planned for them.
Um
So, in talking about broadband
in the statewide education
network devices.
And not be ignored.
Uh, during the pandemic, the
state did provide many students
with devices. However, these
devices are nearing their end of
their useful life, they are
becoming out of date.
They don't have the apps,
programs, specifications needed
to fully utilize um technologies
like the ones that will buy and
OB BDCP are actually put into
place.
Um, PED.
Doctor John Harwick and his
group are one of the state
agencies responsible for
monitoring and managing this
issue.
They have communicated that
there's a pressing need for
funding to tackle this
challenge.
Although we have yet
ED, um, has yet to establish the
actual amount needed and the
number of devices that will need
to be replaced, that is
something that is on the radar.
Oh, I'll dive into some of the
legislation, um, the legislature
has actually been hard at work.
There's quite a number of
legislative items that have been
passed to enable the work that
this group and the broad
initiatives of the state to to
move forward on page.
Let's see here, page 3 of the
brief. I did provide a brief
graphic that outlines some of
these legislative items. Um,
I'll just briefly highlight some
of the key components here, uh,
2014 Senate Bill 159 was passed.
They created the broadband
development and connectivity
program, BDCP. It also created
the expenditure of $10 million
for funding.
But there was a sunset, it was,
uh, scheduled to end in 2019.
However, in 2017, Senate Bill 64
was enacted and that removed
that sunset to allow for ongoing
support of broadband and send
initiatives.
In 2021,093 established the
Office of Broadband Access and
expansion. Oh bye.
Senate Bill 144, also in 2021,
mandated public school
capitality PSCOC.
to develop guidelines for the
statewide infrastructure
network, which now is known as.
Talk about Obai a little bit,
um, as you may acting director
Drew Lovelace. He is supported
by 23 individuals.
Um
Uh, as I mentioned, there were
established by Senate Bill 93.
They oversee several of the
initiatives that I mentioned,
um, in my introduction.
This includes the bead program,
again, broadband equity access
and development. The program
offers $42.5 billion in federal
funding to enhance high-speed
internet access across all
states and territories.
Obai will effectively manage
$675 million of the federal
infrastructure throughout New
Mexico.
They also oversee the digital
equity program.
Mexico has received $8.67
million.
From the NTIA, um,
This is.
Focused on providing support for
the state's digital equity plan,
led by Obai which aims to
improve broadband access,
affordability, affordability and
digital literacy.
There's also the Connect New
Mexico Fund. This was created in
2021 by the Connecting Mexico
Act.
This program owned by awarded
over $40 million in grants in
companies, as well as tribal
entities.
To improve their uh internet
access and support broadband
projects throughout the state.
There's also the grant writing
engineering planning program,
also known as the GWEP, um, what
this does is it provides
financial assistance to tribal
governments and local entities
for grant writing, engineering,
and planning services.
Now I'll briefly talk about
BDCP.
EDCP, also known as the
broadband Development and
connectivity Program is compried
by is comprised of three
permanent staff members. This
includes Mr. Vidoorca.
And what they're doing is
focusing on education for
school, uh, for teachers and
students specifically.
They oversee projects such as
the Sin.
E-rate assistance.
And student connectivity and Wi
Fi on school buses.
The team does also receive
additional support from Obai and
a contractor, um, that
contractor's focus is split
between Sen and BDCP.
Sorry for the alphabet soup,
I'll try not to get too caught
up in it, but the contractor
offers provide assistance to
BDCP but it's also focused on
other initiatives within Obi.
Um, Obai is dedicated to
expanding broadband and digital
access across various
demographic groups. Well, BDCP
specifically targets
connectivity solutions to
support educational needs,
specifically for public schools,
as I mentioned, and charter
schools. I do want to note that
libraries, private schools, and
schools funded by the Federal
Bureau of Indian Education.
are not a part of this focus.
And on page 4, I did provide a
brief synopsis of E-rate program
and how it's utilized in Mexico,
um, for
Uh, time and not to bore you, I
will not go into that, but
that's there for your reference.
So I just want to briefly talk
about the governance structure
that I mentioned, um, as a
challenge, when BDCP
The video's team was created. It
was created under the PSCOC, the
public school Capitol Aley
Council.
So, therefore, P PSFA public
school facility Authority is
administrating body.
Now, since its beginning,
Um, it's
The BDP team in Sana's kind of
been a little bit
Uh, ill-placed for lack of a
better word, um, the focus of
PSFA is really construction and
building schools. Um, so since
the beginning, getting the
support needed to
To allow for the BTCP
initiatives has been a struggle.
Um, the team at PSFA, although
willing and um, you know,
striving to provide assistance,
they do not have the expertise.
They don't have the dedicated
focus and staff to focus on the
the needs that BDCP.
And.
As a natural evolution, um, I
believe, uh, Obai.
Has come into the picture. Um,
there is an active MOU
memorandum of understanding,
which is a fade still overseas
BDCP administratively and
budgetarily, however, Obai.
is more of that technical
oversight, and they also land
technical expertise.
Now, right now, that is a
temporary construct.
SB 45, which was not enacted but
presented in 2024 would have
effectively removed BDCP.
PSA and the PSOC and the act
itself.
And move it under Obai, which is
under do it, and they would also
move the source of funding.
Over to Oba's control.
That correct?
All right.
So
One thing with this move though,
um, we do want to highlight the
need for.
Or staff. Um, and talks with
Drew, uh, talks to the video.
They do have the technical
stuff, um.
Available, but I think it's
important that they do address
the needs of the scent.
Um, not to go too deep into the
specifics with the work that
video and his team is doing is
again, very highly complex.
Very technical and setting up
the sand and maintaining that.
But there are also responsible
for a lot of the administrative
work.
Um, helping with Era.
Filing, um, applications for
federal funding. They're also
having to go out into the field
and assist schools who lack the
technical knowledge or the staff
to handle things like setting up
to send or basically getting um
usable and reliable, effective
Internet.
So they are throughout the
state, these three individuals
trying to help. So they, they,
they need help. They need uh
additional staff, um, according
to the words of Mr. Video.
Also,
Um
Technical staff.
Um
The staff faces increased
strain, um, because in addition
to onboarding,
stuff and dealing with the
E-rate program and Wi Fi for
schools, um, they
How do I put it?
Their key.
If video were to leave today.
If their staff were to, to, uh,
you know, see a departure, it
might take some time, and
additional effort to find
somebody who could actually fill
those roles.
Um, additionally, governance
support, as I mentioned, there's
a temporary construct, where
they are operating under the um
Obai, but they're still
effectively under PSFA.
Um, this is something that does
need uh to
It requires care.
And the permanent uh structure
of this to address the problems
that I've mentioned.
To ensure that they have the
correct support.
Break out to make sure they have
the correct funding and to um.
Maintain the success, wrap it up
in a nice bow. There's a lot
that's been done by the end.
It's in a great place, on the,
the, the cusp of getting it to a
place that can be.
uh utilized, and I'll let a
video talk about the
possibilities a little bit, if
you wouldn't mind.
Of what could be done with the
sand when it's fully
implemented.
But we need to continue that
progress. We do need to talk
about the challenges that are in
the way of them reaching full
capacity.
Um, and then also is
The difference between schools
having broadband and being on
the set.
Right? So all but true skills
have all but 2 schools have
broadband currently.
There, there's work to be those
schools on board. But having
broadband does not mean that
it's secure, doesn't mean it's
reliable, and it doesn't mean
that it's being maintained
properly.
Like
Bringing all schools onto the
Seine, they will receive the
technical support.
They'll receive support that
they don't currently have
because they lack the staff or
knowledge, right? The video's
team who effectively use
broadband, but also to utilize
all the the things that the San
offers.
Um, with that broadly stop or
briefly stop and pass over to a
video and drew to talk a little
about about the things I've
touched on.
All right, Chair, Director, uh,
thanks for having us here. So,
uh, again, mainly we're going
to, you know, be here to answer
questions. We can get very
technical and into the weeds,
and I want to be careful about
not not diving too, too deep
into this, or how this fits
into, you know, broader
conversations of broadband
unless, unless the uh
Uh, LESU would like to to go
there. Uh, you know, that being
said, I just want to highlight a
couple of things for you.
So looking at, at, you know,
what the sin is today, and just
kind of that brief overview
going back to 2014. BDCP team
has primarily worked in the
E-rate space, and that is where,
you know, the 3 individuals who
we have here who on the on the
team, uh, you know, have had
their kind of longer term, uh,
you know, focus, as we've
launched the state education
network that demands that effort
is increasing, and so that's
partially where Obai has been
able to lend the.
Technical expertise, uh, but
that being said, as it continues
to grow as more schools, you
know, decide to join, uh,
The demand is going to be there,
right, to be able to offer that
technical capability. So we see
a future where we're gonna need
additional staff.
Uh, and then traditionally, the,
uh, the team over at PSFA had 5
positions during this last
legislative session, uh, we were
given money to bring the team
across and so now they are, you
know, with, uh, on the executive
side with Obai, right? And um
and have stepped out of PSFA and
there are administering
basically the memorandum of
understanding between PSFA and
Obi.
So those are a couple of key
elements, uh, and just noting
that again, there's down to
positions that did not come
across because they were not
filled at the time, uh, for the
transfer. So, there's a couple
elements there. I want to turn
it over to video just to to make
a couple of quick points, and
then we'll, we'll wait until the
end of uh John's presentation to
stand for some questions.
Yeah. Thank you, Drew. Um, and
thank you, Mark, uh, and LESC
certainly this is a very
important topic. Um, dear to, to
my heart, and I want to, to
emphasize that um I am as a
longtime employee of, uh, the
public school Facilities
Authority. I'm committed to um
to that organization's success.
Uh, they have a great mission
and um they, they have a great
team. They, they do great work
and.
This program, the program that
we've worked for over 10 years,
um, over there, um, has, um has
accomplished tremendous, uh,
tremendous progress.
Every pretty much every single
school in New Mexico has fiber
optic, um, to that premise, uh,
exception being 2, say a guy and
uh and Librook Elementary
School, these two schools have
had projects funded for a number
of years we're working on these
projects, but they are complex.
They, they take a long time uh
for because of all the
intricacies permitting and and
other.
reasons. So we expect the last
2 public schools in New Mexico
who do not have fiber optic will
have fiber optic by um
By June 30th of next year. Uh,
what this means is pretty much
unlimited bandwidth, unlimited
um potential to send and receive
um send and receive zeros and
ones. And the reason that is
important is because without the
ability to send zeros and ones
effectively at high capacity.
Everything else, education,
technology, machine learning.
Even school security, artificial
intelligence, everything that
we're talking about in the arena
of technology will not be
possible.
Yet
You know, it is as simple as
these small devices here, uh,
these are transceivers that
change electric pulses into
light pulses. It is really
possible once the fiber optic is
present to deliver either.
1 gigabit, a billion zeros and
1s every second.
Or 10
Billion 0s in 1 every second
that and the difference is
simply, you know, one or the
other. The difference between
these two in cost is really
insignificant. It's about $100
if that really for the, the, the
non-brand
um element.
So, at the same time, the office
of Broadband has a um big task
and it is an unprecedented ask
in front of them, uh, connect
everybody in the state and
because of the size, the
complexity, the scope, and the
time frame of.
Pretty much expanding $1 billion
worth of infrastructure in the
next.
Or approximately 4.5 years. Uh,
that's a big task and we are
committed, they are committed to
realize that for New Mexico,
it's very important for the
future of technology in the
state. So with that said, um.
Mark asked me to to speak about
the potential and I want to
point you to slides.
before last.
Potential central services.
And
what's this represents.
Um, here is a list and the list
really is, is not um is not
complete. It's not, this is not
a comprehensive list. It can be
much longer because literally, I
want to, to, to say the sky is
the limit.
Um, in terms of what can be
delivered over this high
capacity optical network that
encompasses the entire state.
Regionally to these regional
notes to all this, the schools.
Connected into the, the network
and those could be books, could
be lesson plans, could be online
classes.
Could be health and wellness
online tutoring, professional
development, learning platform.
And again, the list goes on, all
this is the potential that this
network now brings to all the
participating schools, so, um,
there is a lot more work to be
done because once the schools
are connected into this network,
which is today, this becomes a
mission critical 24/7 365
operation.
um
That um that is going to
basically serve uh probably by
our expectation, our target is
2027. We hope that all the
schools will be connected into
this network. So that means 89
school districts, 100 charter
schools, uh, the constitutional
schools and hundreds of
thousands of students and
teachers, uh, that would depend
on this for.
All these services, including
secure services based on
cybersecurity. We, we just
submitted a um an application
November 1st for the pilot
associated with the UA program
for cybersecurity $4.5 million
that
would help us secure the
network, secure everybody
downstream and provide technical
support in an arena that.
Truly, most schools, if not all
the schools do not have um
resources for and probably never
will.
So that is where we are, um, I
think that we've made tremendous
progress. Um, you should be
proud of, of this progress.
There is a lot more work to be
done. We need a team.
That is going to help this
network accomplish its full
potential.
For the next 10 to 20 years and
beyond.
Um, and we'd be happy to, um, to
answer any questions going
through this, um, this visual
aid, um, I'll turn it over to
Mark?
Yes, that would be wonderful.
Thank you.
a short video, and I'll just say
that the QR code on that slide
deck takes you right to this
video if you'd like to watch in
the future.
Why would we connect all 840
schools in New Mexico to one
fiber network.
So any curious student in New
Mexico can travel anywhere in
the world.
So a Native American student in
Albuquerque can connect to their
culture from home.
So a budding chemist in Tularosa
can take AP State Education
Network connects, especially
those in rural areas. The
opportunity to take
state-approved courses they may
otherwise not have access to.
Students will no longer pay the
price for lack of resources.
Teachers on native land can
spread their knowledge of
traditional language and culture
to students anywhere in New
Mexico.
The state education network will
improve upon and model how
unimpeded by distance or
location, accessible to all
P
Yeah.
Thank you for having me here
today, um, Mr. Chair, and
interim director, yeah, I really
appreciate the opportunity, um.
To you. It's a bit loud, but
anyway, my name is John
Chadwick. I'm the digital equity
coordinator, uh, in the
information technology division
at New Mexico Public Education
Department, and yeah, the reason
I ended up with tidal digital
equity coordinators because my
boss got tired of saying er rate
slash text slash slash that, so
you know, so I ended up with
this equity coordinator.
Um
All right, so I'm gonna start
out with um why devices are, you
know, for students are
important.
And research, you know, done by
Coelho Institute of the Michigan
State University.
I found that students who do not
have home internet or are
dependent on a cell phone for
access perform more on a range
of metrics, an examples of this
deficit can be found in student
grades, standardized tests, and
homework completion.
And something that we just saw
last week with the snowstorm
that shut down a big part of the
state, and we ended up with, um,
so, you know, a lot of our
schools are going to remote
learning only. Students do not
have both connectivity at home
and a device.
We're at a disadvantage compared
to the peers.
And I do want to do a quick
shout out to New Mexico Office
of Broadband Access and
expansion, Bye bye and thank you
to Drew. Um, yeah, yeah, they've
launched the New Mexico Student
Connect to provide internet
access to unserved and
underserved students. This came
about because there was a
concern that with the estimated
time frame to get access to
every corner of the state being
2029, our students can't wait
till 2029.
And I'm going to make the
argument, although Drew and I
have had some good discussions
on this, um, connecting
connectivity have the equation.
Students need to have those
reliable devices.
And, you know, one of the things
we found is policies for, you
know, school issued devices,
they vary from, you know, school
district to school district, you
know, some school districts only
require um students in high
school, others middle school and
high school. Some say we just
won't do devices for pre-K.
Or kindergarten students. So
it's, it's, it's very, it's a
variable that really is hard to
get, you know, get some, uh, you
know, expert numbers on, but we
do our best that we can.
Uh, we have some school
districts to ask students to
share devices if they're in the
same household. That could be a
school issue device, but more
often than not, that's a device
that's owned by the family, and
it's not only used by students,
but it's used by family for, um,
you know, telemedicine,
telehealth, you know, and for,
you know, and for a whole wide
range of services that can be
done online.
And yeah, one of the, you know,
things we've found is students
lacking a scholarship device are
more likely to share a device
with others in the in the
household.
Next slide.
We found that about 78% of
students in New Mexico have a
school issued device and we're
about on par with the rest of
the nation, you know, in that in
those numbers, but what's, you
know, really disturbing is that
we still have 2200 students who
rely on a mobile phone. You try
doing a term paper on a mobile
phone, it's just not something
that's, it's not the most
efficient way to do this. And so
we were concerned about that.
We found that 10% of students
use their own computer as a
primary learning device, and
that's oftentimes shared with
others in the household.
And as of the end of 23, 24
school year, more than 17,000
students.
Use their own device.
You know, and like I said, that,
you know, can be used by others
in the household, and what is
really concerning is.
You know, are at risk students,
those who are, you know, the
native students, ELL students,
economic challenge to students
and.
Special ed students are, you
know, less likely to have a
device of any kind, you know,
let alone a school that you
devise. So that is a.
And, you know, we broke down,
you know, by, you know, by
different categories, you know,
what kind of devices are
actually out there that schools
issue.
Or you know, students have
Chromebook is, you know,
Chromebooks are by far and away.
You know, the, you know, make up
the bulk of those devices,
laptops, you know, also, you
know, that could be Windows
device or an Apple device.
Um, you know, and, you know,
could even be a
Um, you know, it could even be a
desktop computer, tablets, both
Apple and Android.
And then there's some other ones
over there, um, desktop, yes,
and you know, but, but, you
know, the number there is
17,000, there's 17,000 students
who don't have access.
You know, at home because they
don't have a device at all.
And here's a breakdown by device
and, you know, you can see once
again, uh the bulk is
Chromebook.
You know, but we have, you know,
the desktop makes up a
proportion, yeah, good size
number, laptops, tablets.
You know, I know that, you know,
some districts, I think, you
know, um Los Lunas is using
Apple tablets, if I'm correct,
so, you know, you know, so
there's, you know, it varies, it
is all based on, you know,
district policies.
Yeah, I'm going to, you know,
Mr. Chairman, if it's all right,
I would like to do a quick shout
out to Representative Baca. Um,
he was instrumental in getting
the digital equity and Education
Act passed in 2023, and that
that requires schools to address
how they will refresh devices
that are end of life.
And you know, I do want to note
that we are the only state in
the country to have something
like that on the books. So thank
you.
And, you know, schools are gonna
need to start replacing those
devices that are going to end of
life.
You know, and, you know.
You know, you know, so many were
recurred during, you know, use,
you know, and they had access to
extra funds, there was also the
emergency connectivity fund. We
know that about, you know,
200,000, you know.
You know, about 200 students did
not have a device and schools
ask for about 200,000 devices
for students.
And there's ways to get around,
you know, get to this, um.
Yeah.
You know, techno, you know,
opportunity, um, it can be like
a local bond election in some
cases or other cases, like, you
know, a school district can go
and just say we're gonna as you,
you know, you know, bonds for
this, um, you know, get funding.
Uh, leasing is an option. It's,
there's something buried in
public finance, you know,
chapter 6, you know, that allows
schools to lease devices, you
know, it was written back in the
day when schools were buying big
servers, but now they can, you
know, at least, you know, at
least devices.
And school district policies and
needs vary, you know, as they
work to ensure digital equity.
Um, you know, so I'm just, you
know, some districts that I've
spoken with, they want
You know, total cost of
ownership covered. I just heard
from Albuquerque Public Schools
yesterday, you know, they think
it's gonna take
5.9 million.
Next school year.
To, you know, to address just
replaced 20% of their devices in
their district. So this is, you
know, there are things, you
know, this is coming down the
pike here.
Um, you know, what we've done,
we've done, you know, public
education department has worked
to address the Yase Martinez
tech order to ensure all
students have access, especially
at-risk students, and public
education department has
provided funding thanks to the
legislature, um, you know, for
scholarships for graduate level,
you know, courses and
educational technology for
teachers and edgy badges, which
is a online virtual training for
teachers, you know, and a lot,
you know, it it covers a lot of
topics, but a lot of
used it to learn more about
using technology in their.
And, you know, of course, now
the next big divide, you know,
future considered as we think
about what's coming down the
line, uh, you heard about, you
know, you've heard this already,
artificial intelligence and
Brookings Institute.
Actually causes the and several
other groups call this the next
digital divide.
And, you know, design of it, you
know, of AI and education, you
know, it has some positives. It
can address learner variability
and a responsive to student
needs, student strengths and
backgrounds, and AI is already
being used and impacting careers
in medicine, agriculture, and
petroleum.
Yeah, but I wanted to, you know,
I want to share something from
the, you know, enclosed, you
know, almost closing from the
Brookings Institute. The first
digital divide was, you know,
some people had technology, some
people did not.
Second device, some people have
the technology and the skills to
use it effectively, while the
poor or, you know, others may,
you know, like, you know, you
know, restaurants, yeah, they,
you know, they have the
technology, but they don't have
the skills to use it.
The 3rd divide is.
You know, people who have both
technology and people to help
them use it and others who just
have the technology and don't
have any support system.
But I envision is something
where we don't have a digital
divide. We're all students have
the support they need from their
teachers, from their families. I
envision, you know, that's, you
know, that's the future that I
would envision.
Is that everybody, you know,
every student has the tools they
need and the access and the
resources. So thank you.
Thank you, Doctor Charlie.
Thank you, Doctor. Um.
So, what I like to do is wrap up
with just some considerations.
Um, to enable the long term
success of these initiatives.
Uh, first, develop a
comprehensive statewide
broadband plan.
The legislature in the state
could consider establishing a
centralized plan which
consolidates digital equity and
broadba initiatives with clear
goals, regular assessments, and
a focus on long term
sustainability.
Oversight of this plan should be
assigned to a dedicated body.
That's made up of Mexico
leadership.
As well as knowledgeable experts
in that field.
Second, to prioritize resource
allocation and administrative
support.
Legislatures shown a commitment
to establishing these
initiatives, they could ensure
ongoing issues have sufficient
funding technical expertise, and
administrative support to
achieve these objectives
effectively and reach their full
potential.
You could invest in a skilled
workforce.
The legislature could address
the shortage of technically
trained workers by enhancing
STEM education and creating
workforce development programs
focused on telecommunications
and broadband installation, I
will shamelessly plug uh my
colleague Connor. I know he'll
be presenting more on the STEM
work next month.
And lastly, uh, we could enhance
digital literacy and community
collaboration.
The legislature and the state
can collaborate with schools,
community organizations and
higher education institutions to
promote STEM education and
digital literacy, enabling full
use of broadband infrastructure
and preparing future workers.
Thank you. With that, we will
stand for any questions or
comments.
All right, first my lips,
Representative Buck.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you for your presentation. Um,
and thank you, Doctor Chadwick,
for your work in the digital
equity plan as well.
I do have a couple of very brief
questions.
With the Ezer funds.
Running out. What is a
district's primary source of
funding for the purchase of new
devices.
There are several options on the
table for districts, but I
think, you know, there's also a,
you know, deed for, you know,
some level of funding from, you
know, the, you know, through the
legislature.
Yeah, and yeah, if you're, you
know, if somebody wants to ask
me about a number, I'm willing
to, you know, give, you know, a
reasonable estimate on that.
We'll come up with that number
because I'm gonna ask you in a
bit. Um,
so I believe that for many
districts the funding for the
purchase of devices through mail
levies, is that correct? Yes,
some districts to utilize the
tech not to raise funds for
those as well as
which, which again is very
costly and for those districts
that are not able to pass on
elections or mill levies.
Then that limits their ability
to purchase devices.
Uh, for their students. Uh, Mr.
Chairman, the next question I'm
gonna ask you, and I did hear
the word uh the request for
expansion and more staff. I'm
gonna refer to the, the chart,
actually mark your on page 5.
Uh, and
What came struck me was that,
you know, we're asking for
increases, but when we look at
the number of projects, and we
look at the number of funds, it
seems to be decreasing. Can you
explain?
That graph as it relates to the
expansion, yet we're doing fewer
projects.
Mr. Chairman, uh, Representative
Baca, um, the, the number of
projects vary, uh, every year,
but, um, all.
Overall, um, I would point to
these numbers in that graph and
say 2024, actually, it is a
partial number. So those are
expected to uh the number is
expected to increase to
something like 60 projects and
the approximate same value of
$10 million. If you look across
um historically, we've
accomplished, we've completed.
probably since the beginning
since 2016, we're on track to
complete 475 projects, uh, worth
approximately 100, close to $140
million and those um those
projects, for example, uh, they
depend heavily on 8 funding, 85%
is paid for by E-rate,
approximately 9% paid for by uh
by the.
by PSUC and um I think
Um, the difference of 6% is paid
for by the local schools. Um,
these projects need to continue
forever. The, the fiber
projects, uh, we are pretty much
done, but the upgrades of
internal networks within all the
schools have to be done every
approximately 5 years on a
cycle, so about 20% of all the
schools in New Mexico need a
refresh.
every year, um, again, the
number is approximately 50 or so
every year, and please keep in
mind that we work.
At any given time on prior year
or prior year's projects, the
current year projects in future
your projects for next year,
since it's the the end of the
E-rate site budget cycle. We
expect double the value of work,
so a close to $20 million worth
of upgrades and approximately 90
projects in our team has to work
and provide uh technical
assistance. Otherwise,
These schools are going to leave
money on the table, uh, from the
year program. So, um, so, so
again, the numbers will vary
over time, but the average is
about the same we're seeing
somewhere between 50 and 60
projects every year at any given
time we work on approximately
100 projects and that does not
include the state education
network that is totally separate
from it.
And then, uh Mr. Chair
Representative Baca, if you
mind, I just wanted to also.
He'll bring your attention to
Appendix A.
I think this is a good
illustration of the visuals.
You'll see phase 1 and phase 2,
as a video mentioned, each of
these schools a good majority.
They need on the ground in
person support, because to get
this going.
So video and his team were
actually traveling through the
state.
And helping these people uh
focus on needing for staff. I'll
pass it to Mr. Lovis.
Chaired representatives also
just to point out that
historically PSFA had 5
positions dedicated to this, and
because there were 3 fields when
they transferred over that we
had.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you many of my colleagues
and I, we sit on the legislative
finance as well.
So those are the types of
questions that they're going to
ask as we, as we have increases
in budgets, OK? So I'm gonna
come back to my question, Mr.
Chairman, to you, uh, Doctor
Chadwick, when you talked about
$5 million for just APS alone.
What are we looking at for just
a rough ballpark figure for
The whole state.
Ballpark, I'm not gonna hold you
to it, but, but I know that, and
I guess the other question is,
will that be included in the PED
recommendations when they come
before the LHC. Mr. Chair, and
yeah.
In director, uh, Sono and, you
know, Representative Baca, thank
you for the question.
Um, you know, a rough ballpark
that we've, you know, talked
about internally at PED. It's
about 32 million, and it would
be an ongoing, ongoing recurring
cost. Yeah, because like I said,
Albuquerque, they're looking at
replacing 20% of their devices,
you know, and, you know, and
that's, you know, Richard's in
line with what we've been, you
know, talking about, as far as
if it's going to be an executive
budget. We don't know. It's, you
know, there are a lot and then
my final question is regarding
the SC.
Uh, and it's actual, the
security levels in that because,
as all schools become connected,
and I definitely see the need
and I do see the potential of
that. We've also seen how a
number of districts have been
victim because of their
firewalls or others. Will that
compromise the whole system.
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Baca, um, it may, it could, and
that is why it is so important
to secure first this
infrastructure we are already
working on it to, uh, we, we put
in place protections of the
infrastructure level, uh, to
protect the network itself, the
core network, uh, the funding,
uh, PSCOC approved funding for
the specific purposes and.
The uh request to the uh er
rate.
Uh, pilot cybersecurity pilot is
going to augment and help us.
Uh, expedite the implementation
of these protections, um, at the
same time,
It is uh security is, is
established in layers. And what
we want to, to make sure is that
we have as many layers as
possible. So, uh, so, so the,
um, the, the incidents really do
not reach the, the end user, so,
uh, the, the network will have
tools and protections in place
and and actually individuals
constantly monitoring what uh
what is.
Uh, is being done, the schools
will continue to operate their
networks, their firewalls and um
the expectation is that all
these um the multitude of layers
that are put in place are going
to reduce or completely
eliminate um the uh the
incidents that are experienced
by our schools, particularly
the, the, the rural schools, the
smaller schools will never have
the resources in the, in the
personnel specialized.
personnel, um, who, uh who can
take care of that. We are
partnering with, uh, with some
other organizations we're
working with the Office of
Cybersecurity. We're working
with the PED uh Chief
Information Security Officer.
Uh, we're working with the
higher ed institutions, uh, to
develop, in fact, a pipeline and
utilize the sin as a tool for
hands-on, uh.
Practice to build the uh the
workforce that is going to be
specialized because New Mexico
has a significant deficit of
expertise, and we have to expose
these kids from K-12 through
higher security uh to, to higher
ed to the industry and make that
connection to make sure that
they realize this is uh a
valuable and and real career
opport opportunity that they can
pursue and
Um, and I, well, I think that
we're going to make progress
utilizing all these resources in
place.
If I may add on to that.
Represented, uh, just quickly, I
want to highlight that you kind
of glossed over that the E-rate
pilot uh cybersecurity, uh,
grant that he's applying for.
This is a specialized grant
that's coming from the FCC and,
you know, basically done all the
work, working with those, those
partners that he listed. This is
gonna be a critical next step
and I think, you know, the
federal government is
recognizing how challenging this
is for schools, uh, in
particular with this program,
and it's one that we're looking
to really maximize and leverage.
federal dollars to go after.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
groups of gear.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
I just want to salute acting
director of Obay Drew Lovelace,
Oduora from who's with opiates
the broadband program manager
and Doctor John Chadwick, who's
the digital equity uh
coordinator because I know you
guys have been tired tirelessly
working always with limited
staffing for years. So just
super thanks and then you end up
presenting to 6
different committees. So it's,
thank you. Um, I have a couple
of questions. Um, first of all,
so Obi, are you still uh
Can you just clarify, you still
operating under an MOU with OB.
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Garrett, um, I, I will say first
thank you for attending the
ribbon cutting ceremony for the
scent, uh, this summer, it was,
it was wonderful to see you
there. Always a big supporter of
our efforts.
I am, um, and so Vieica and
Paulo Pedresy, David Rodriguez,
the 3 individuals working on
BDCP are Office of Broadband
employees. So we are working for
the Office of Broadband, the uh
broadband deficiency development
um and connectivity program
BDCP, the program is funded
still under PSCOC, which is
valuable because that kind of
predictable.
in continuous funding is
extremely important for an
effort like this. So PSFA PSTOC
are still in charge of the
funding and the mission for uh
the Ere projects that will
continue forever, as well as the
stable education network and um
some parts of school bus Wi Fi
and, and student connectivity.
Um, so, the program, the funding
is still there and under an MOU
with the Oso Broadband.
Of the office is managing these
programs with uh basically uh
with our full focus on the
program and some assistance from
the office and still from the
office, uh, from the public
school facilities authority
there, um, their accounting
processes, some, some paperwork
and so on still, uh, still, uh,
is located there.
We like to leverage all these
resources.
poses some challenges as well.
Um, so we just, we're making it
work.
Uh, chair and representative
just to add on a little uh kind
of layer of complexity is that,
you know, as Obai was created,
uh, this program was, you know,
in those early stages and so
many of the early procurements,
the phase one elements, really
housed at PSFA. And as we came
on, and we've brought on a video
and his team over to the Office
of Broadband. We've, you know,
been looking at how to deploy
phase 2 and 3. And so we kind of
see like a tiered structure in
how the MOU is run, is that, you
know, PSFA has a lot of the
phase one element
because they did all the
procurements, you know, to go
along with that. Uh, and then as
we move into phase 2 and 3,
that's where Off Broadband is
going to take more and more of
that over.
Thank you. Um, and Mr. Chair, in
regards to Senate Bill 45, um,
The governor evidently just
wanted two broadband bills in
the special session, and as
somebody who had planned to
support as a sign on sponsored
S345. I felt it was far too, it
puts so much together.
That it was unwieldy and so I
just want to state that I'm
happy to work with you. I think
it's important for this kind of
bill to have both Senate and
House sponsorship and to be
broken up because it was so
complex. It tried to do too much
and too little time, you just
want to go on record with that.
Um, in Mark, you've put policy
considerations, but um on page
8, what I'm concerned is obey
already is developing
comprehensive statewide
broadband plans that have to be
updated and presented to the
legislature on a yearly basis.
Could you update us on what to
expect when what the timeline is
to get the next updated
comprehensive statewide
broadband plan.
Chair representative,
absolutely. So it is in statute
for January 1st and given that
it's a holiday, we've been
delivering that the last couple
of years on January 2nd to the
legislature, as well as the the
governor's office as stated in
the statute. And so our first
one was 2 years ago. Uh, we
didn't update this last year and
we will have another update, uh,
forthcoming this year as well on
January 2nd.
And Mr. Chair, if you can make
sure everybody
Actually, the legislator needs
to get it.
If you can make sure we all get
it, but especially LASC, LFC and
science and tech.
Uh thank you for that. Um,
And also, I will just say that
everybody's working on investing
in the skilled workforce, the
opportunity scholarship focuses
on those things.
Um
Uh
Representative Sarana, who's the
chair of Science and Technology
has had that, so that's
happening a lot of this is, is
actually happening. Um, my
second question is,
I'm concerned about what's
happening with the
administration, uh, the owner of
Starlinks is now going to be in
charge of government efficiency.
I'm really concerned who is in
our state government is
overlooking what happens to
E-rates.
Just very worried about
education office of education,
How are you, how are you
tracking that.
Uh, chair and representative,
uh, at least from the Office of
Broadband perspective, we've
been looking at uh the Fifth
Circuit rulings on the FCC and
monitoring, you know, what AFCC
is doing around some of their
administrative authority and how
they're making some changes, uh,
currently there's no impacts to
the E-rate program, uh, with
that, um, however, you know,
it's something that we are
looking at, you know, very
carefully and if there's, you
know, uh, a point, you know,
where we need to interject, you
know, we will certainly take
that consideration. Uh, so
that's at least with the, the
FCC side.
Uh looking at the other programs
from the Office of Broadband,
you know, many of these things
have been awarded to the state.
There have been approved plans,
you know, that we are working
with NTIA, which is the
administering agency for a lot
of our funding, uh, and when
that, with that funding, right,
we're not really that concerned
at the moment that that that
money would be uh taken away
because there's so much demand,
uh, additionally, how the
allocations came out for the
funding is based on population
and I think, you know, most you
know most folks who live in New
Mexico
would, would certainly
understand the low density, low
population density right in New
Mexico and and large amounts of
territory that we have to cover
and so we just don't have enough
funding, you know, to go there.
Uh, we will have a mixture of
technologies, uh, the office has
taken a stance, you know, from
the very beginning that we're
going to need fiber as far as we
can get. We're gonna need, you
know, uh, fixed wireless, you
know, for some of those other
gaps, and then where we really
cannot get to those very remote
places or too expensive, it's
gonna need to be satellite. And
so we actually had built a
satellite mechanism.
into a lot of our deployment
plans going into the future, so,
uh, at the moment we do not
anticipate any changes to a lot
of the infrastructure
programmatics, uh, but we are,
you know, very much watching,
you know, what's happening and
tracking, you know, as best we
can and and then making
anticipative, uh, you know,
thoughts of what we can plan.
And I'm a member of the, you
know, I'm on the board of
directors for the state
educational tech uh, I'm sorry.
Let me back up. Mr. Chair and
representative, um, you know,
I'm on the board of directors
for the state education to not.
Technology directors association
CETA, and we get weekly updates
from Foresight Law and which
like lahy, who gives us updates
about what's going on, you know,
and at the federal government
level, so, you know, I'm, you
know, we monitor this closely
and when there's something that
comes across, you know, I share
it with our policy team and
with.
Thank you. And my last question
is, and John, I may need your
input on this.
As you know, there's a new, um,
uh
suit about the Martinez Yazi
lawsuit and digital equity as
part of that.
And has the judge, the judge
hasn't ruled yet on it.
Anyway, I just want to thank all
of you because I know that
constantly as you work with
education across our state, all
of you are constantly focused.
On meeting the digital equity,
uh, for all the groups concerned
in the Martinez Yai lawsuit. So
thank you for that focus that
that never leaves what you're
doing. Anyway, thank you very
much for being here today.
Representative Saraella.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for your presentation.
Um, so I'm gonna ask a little
more on cybersecurity. So you
said 4.5 million, you've applied
for. So what if you don't get
it? What will happen?
Mr. Chairman, uh Representative,
the public school capital Alley
Council already approved $1
million for um cybersecurity,
the initial protections, the
basic protections, it's not
going to be sufficient. That's
going to be an ongoing cost. Um,
so additional funding is needed.
Um, we expect
That, um,
All this the sin-related
activities will fit uh within
the existing $10 million budget
but um obviously if we reach
that that cap, um, and we, we
are unable to do everything that
needs to be done additional
funding will need to be um uh
found somewhere somehow,
certainly with the um infusion
of
Eate funding, so about half of
the cost of the sand is expected
to be irre eligible. It is under
threat, but um right now it is
in place and again, um, most
likely even if something is
happening with the.
Program, this, the cost of the
stable education network fits
within the existing PSUOC
budget, which is, which is a
plus because the schools will
not have to scramble to find.
Money to pay for their Internet
if they're connected into this
network, if something happens to
uh to the program. We'll report
back, um, obviously the more
money, the more funding is
available, the more we, we will
be able to accomplish. Um, it
would be helpful for the funding
to be specifically, uh, directly
allocated for this purpose, uh,
but right now the public school
capital LA council is, is
extremely supportive of this
effort.
So again, they funded
previously, um, the, the
cybersecurity just initial
implementation, uh, I am pretty
confident that they will
continue to to to fund that.
that effort because of its
importance.
Chairs representative just to
add on to that, uh, you know, we
have good conversations with uh
with director Samba Dam, uh,
from the Office of
Cybersecurity, and he actually
has, you know, some, some uh
tools that are deployed to
schools as well, uh, and
certainly as we bring more
schools onto the network, we'd
like to see those same tools
being deployed, uh, to, uh,
videos, you know, comment,
right, that the more money there
is, right, the, the more
security you can, you can buy,
you know, there's certainly
elements that we want to really
look at and what are the, the
true risks.
Out there to schools and by the
most important tools to make
sure that the schools stay safe
on the network.
Thank you. I'm Mr. Chairman. So
as far as do it in in
cybersecurity, how closely are
you working with them? Is a lot
of within-house vendor driven,
so I just want to know how close
you were with them because if
the network is infrastrated,
that's huge. So tell me what
you're doing with them.
Uh, so chair and representative,
uh, you know, basically Office
of Cybersecurity has, has really
just gotten started in the last
year, so a lot of where they're
at is in kind of similar to
where we were two years ago, and
they're building capacity and
building programs, uh, and so a
lot of what they've done is is
buy some programmatics off the
shelf, like things like
penetration, uh, testing, uh,
uh, you know, for the, for
different networks. Uh, so as we
move forward into the future, a
lot of this is planning and then
deployment that will be seen
over the next couple of years.
I will add to that, Mr.
Chairman, uh, Representative
that we're meeting weekly with
the team from the Office of
Cybersecurity. We have a working
group, uh, that's composed of um
Office of cybersecurity, the uh
public education department, uh,
higher education institutions
and others, um, and we're
working to develop this specific
uh tools and approaches that
we're going to implement, we're
already implementing tools.
We're not going to wait for the
4.5.
$5 million award um to put in
place what needs to be put in
place, uh, but definitely that
funding is going to um help out
and make more financial
efficiency if the federal
government is paying for the
majority 90 86% of the cost of
the tools that we are already
implementing.
OK, so, Mr. Chair, I guess.
I guess the big thing is you're
working directly with
Uh, the Office of Cybersecurity,
they know what's happening.
They're working with your
vendors or whoever's working on
your side directly, so we will
be assured that
If you get on the network or
when you, when it's complete,
the network is safe for the rest
of the state. So that's, that's
my um difficulty here, but thank
you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I don't have anybody else on the
list, but I had a couple of
questions, um, Mr. Chadwick,
about, um, I'm looking at the
graphic on page 6, the New
Mexico digital equity gap data,
um, does PED issue any guidance
to the districts on.
Hardware or equipment.
Mr. Chair, thank you for the
question. We do not, you know,
we do not issue guidance on, you
know, devices, I think I, you
know, you know, and the types of
devices, I think our districts,
you know, know what they need,
they know their student
population, and I think they've
done, you know, quite honestly,
especially, you know, through
the pandemic, they've done a
very good job of making sure
that, you know, students have
the resources they need, you
know, the concern, of course, is
always, you know, now that Eser
funds are running out and you
know, emergency connectivity.
And, uh, yeah, as, you know, has
expired, you know, how do you
sustain that and looking at
predictable.
sustainable and reliable
funding.
And I, and I appreciate that, I
guess, um,
One of the other questions that
I do have is um with 50 56%, um,
being Chromebooks, um, because
as we're talking about, um, high
speed internet connectivity, the
possibilities with high speed
internet connectivity, and
students would also have to have
like the hardware to match those
capabilities and what we're
talking about, it can be very
intensive, and I'm just
wondering if, if Chromebooks are
appropriate.
for that sort of work when we
talk about, you know, the rise
of artificial intelligence, um.
That our students um educators
are going to be using.
Thank you for the question, Mr.
Chair.
Yeah
You know, Chromebooks, you know,
run things we learned early on
in the pandemic, um, we, yeah, I
worked with Kara Bobov, who is
at PED at the time when the
pandemic hit, and we were able
to procure about 7500
Chromebooks for native students
in the western part of the
state.
The problem at that time was,
you know, the only thing we
could buy.
We, you know, we're the low end
devices.
And what we've learned,
especially with some research
that was done by Doctor Tom Ryan
and Doctor Neil Weaver, is that,
you know, you get a higher in
Chromebooks, and they're
perfectly capable of doing, you
know, you know, some of this
intensive work.
And you know, so that's, you
know, when Albuquerque Public
schools made their estimate
about what it's going to take to
replace 20% of their devices
next school year, they're
really, you know, they are
talking about.
$475 roughly speaking, or
You know, Chromebooks, and at
that price point, you're gonna
get some very good, you know,
devices that are, you know, have
good memory and, you know, and
can handle, you know, what's
coming down the pike, including
AI.
That's super encouraging to
hear. um thank you all very
much. We certainly appreciate
the work that you all are doing,
the continued work, and uh your
expertise on the topic. Thank
you.
Right.
So.
We'll switch topics to
future clinical practice, an
update.
Annie, good morning.
Good morning.
We don't have a signal yet.
Yeah.
Oh,
there won't be anything. As I
just said oh, OK, cool. And,
please, when you're ready. Good
morning. Good morning, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
um, you know this, but my name
is Annie Armitage and I'm your
senior policy analyst covering
the educator workforce. Um, this
morning I'll present our report
on teacher clinical practice.
Uh, it looks like this, and you
can find it behind the 3rd tab
in your binder.
First, I'd like to thank my
colleague Tim Bado, who um was a
great supporter in the data
analysis for this project.
I'd also like to thank our
partners, the educator
preparation programs who very
graciously trusted us with their
data and responded to many of my
questions over the past several
months. And finally, a big
thanks to staff at PED for also
sharing data and for all the
hard work they've been doing on
teacher preparation, um,
particularly over the past few
years.
Now, as we all know, New Mexico
continues to face substantial
teacher shortages. There are
high teacher turnover rates and
large student achievement gaps.
We also all know the importance
of instructional quality in
improving these student
outcomes.
With all of this in mind, the
legislature has made major
investments in the educator
pipeline over the past several
years, including in teacher
residency programs.
Last session, you all
appropriated $60 million to the
growth fund for educator
clinical practice, be expended
from FY 25 to FY 27.
And one of the conditions of
that appropriation was that the
efficacy of those investments be
evaluated.
This report examines early
outcomes of New Mexico's teacher
residency model from school year
23, which was the first year of
full implementation.
Prior to that year, only a few
small programs uh were funded,
and they had different
parameters for implementation.
We want to emphasize that this
report's findings should be
interpreted more as a baseline
for teacher residency programs
in the state to which future
evaluations of teacher
residencies can be uh compared.
So first, I'll briefly describe
the state's four main teacher
preparation pathways, including
the differences between
traditional alternative
licensure as well as the
different clinical practice
options those candidates have.
Next, I'll review initial
teacher residency descriptive
outcomes, and I'll review our
preliminary analysis of teacher
preparation and student growth,
and finally, I'll share some
policy considerations.
Let me get my
Now, on the first page of the
report, table one shows the
state's 4 main preparation
pathways.
While traditional teacher
preparation programs have
typically been designed to
prepare undergraduate students
to become teachers, alternative
programs have primarily targeted
career changers who are
interested in teaching.
Turning to page 2, research is
mixed on whether traditionally
or alternatively prepared
teachers.
Um, are more effective in
improving student outcomes. Um,
though there are several large
studies that suggest
traditionally prepared teachers
are more effective, and some
research suggests that
traditionally prepared teachers
have lower attrition rates than
alternatively prepared teachers.
In table 2, you can see a
comparison of traditional and
alternative elementary teacher
licensure requirements in New
Mexico. You can see that in
traditional programs, students
gain a bachelor's degree in
education and complete at least
616 weeks of student teaching
before they enter the classroom.
In contrast, alternatively
prepared educators already have
a post-secondary degree in an
area other than education.
And to begin teaching, they must
be enrolled in an approved
alternative educator preparation
program and pass any required
licensure exams.
The city does require um these
programs to provide at least 18
semester hours of instruction to
the candidates, but the
candidates can complete that
coursework while they're
teaching.
Now alternatively prepared
special education teachers do
have to complete at least a
15-week internship before they
enter the classroom.
But the sea does not require
alternatively prepared teachers
and other areas to complete any
clinical experience prior to
teaching.
Although we should note that
before receiving a level one
teaching license. This
alternatively licensed teachers
do have to teach on their
alternative license for 2 years
before getting that regular
level one license.
On page 3, table 3 shows that
New Mexico's requirements for
alternative licensure don't meet
recommended best practices and
could be strengthened.
It could be strengthened through
um
Stronger program entry
requirements, um, additional
demonstration of content
knowledge requiring performance
assessments and requiring at
least some amount of clinical
practice before entering a
classroom.
Figure 1 shows which EPP's
educator preparation programs.
Offer which teacher preparation
programs. And within the core
licensure areas of early
childhood, elementary,
secondary, and special
education, there are notably
more alternative programs
available to candidates than
traditional.
Turning to page 4.
This page summarizes the number
of teacher candidates admitted
to and graduated from teacher
preparation programs in the
state over the past few years to
a decade.
And here I'll just note that
over the past several years, the
number of admitted teacher
candidates has increased, with
the exception of a slight dip in
school year 24.
And likewise, the number of
completers is continuing to
increase, but still hasn't quite
risen to to a high last scene in
2010.
Over the past 2 years, we've
seen an increase in the number
of candidates completing
traditional programs, and that's
encouraging.
But candidates from alternative
programs continue to make up the
vast majority of completers in
our state.
Each 5 outlines the account
educator accountability report,
which PED is required to submit
to all of you by November 1st of
each year.
For the last time this report
was submitted was in 2022 with
school year 21 data, and you can
see in table 4 that that report
was incomplete.
The way this report works is
that EPPs submit their data to
PED and PED publishes a report.
In the past, the data from EPPs
has not been validated by PED
and frankly, as I'll discuss
more later in this report, there
have been a lot of reporting
inconsistencies and just
incomplete reported information.
PD is right now working on
improving data reporting
practices and going forward
plans to validate all of that
data.
I went to this end, PED has
decided not to go back and try
to fix the data, um, and publish
a report in 2023, but instead
plans to publish a validated
2024 report in January of next
year.
OK, so we've talked about the
differences between traditional
and alternative programs,
teacher candidates in both of
those programs can decide they
want to complete a year-long
paid residency.
So now I'll give a very, very
brief synopsis of the research
behind teacher residencies, and
I'll talk about uh residency
policies and funding in New
Mexico.
I think most of you already know
this. You've made these
investments in future
residencies, but in a very fast
nutshell, national research
suggests that strong teacher
residency programs produce
teachers who are more diverse
and more effective in the
classroom.
Teachers who complete a
residency, consistently have
greater self-efficacy than other
novice teachers and are more
likely to remain in classrooms
longer.
That is your synopsis in a
nutshell.
Um, I want to really emphasize
that New Mexico is a national
leader in teacher residencies.
While 22 states have supported
residency programs in various
ways. No other state has
invested as much as New Mexico,
um, on a per capita basis, as
New Mexico has.
Um, figure 6 shows the $147
million.
on page 6, right? Page 6 and 6.
Um, so that's the $147 million.
You all have invested in
educator clinical practice over
the past several years.
Included appropriations of 15.5
million and $13 million for
teacher residency programs in FY
23 and FY 24.
And this year you all
appropriated that $60 million of
sustainable funding for educator
clinical practice through FY 27.
A portion of that will fund
teacher residencies.
And that big jump in teacher
residency funding you can see in
school year 23, was accompanied
by a strengthening of state
requirements for residency
programs.
And you can see those
requirements in the bulleted
list on page 7. These changes
really strengthen the Teacher
residency Act and included
things like requiring a
co-teaching approach, increasing
stipends for residents,
requiring state stipends for
mentor teachers and partnering
principals, and we requiring
compensating a residency program
coordinators with at least
50,000. Turning to page 8.
People 5 shows a comparison of
New Mexico's teacher residency
Act to national best practices
for residency programs.
And New Mexico frankly measures
up really well on this. It's
really encouraging, but there is
one glaring gap that pops up in
nearly every focus area of the
table. Um, and that is weak data
systems.
So to effectively design and
manage teacher preparation
programs, including residency
programs, EPPs really need
access to data that allows them
to track their candidates into
public school classrooms.
They need accurate, timely, and
granular educator workforce data
to understand what the workforce
needs are of the state. Where
are their candidates likely to
be hired, and how can they help
those candidates meet the needs
of the school districts, they'll
eventually serve.
And they do not have this. In
fact, some of this information,
PED doesn't have either.
Um, that's a big reason that
these statutorily required um
ears and teacher residency
reports are not being submitted.
And statute does require that
teacher residency report to be
submitted to the legislature by
November 1st of each year.
Um, on page 9, you can see table
6 shows the completeness of the
information reported in the 2022
teacher residency report, and
that's um to our knowledge, the
only teacher resident residency
report that has been submitted
to the legislature.
OK.
So, now I would like to share
some initial teacher resident
residency outcomes with you all.
On page 10, turning the page.
Um, there are 8 EPPs in New
Mexico who have a teacher
residency program on page 10,
um, these figures show annual
numbers of teacher residents by
preparation pathway and
licensure area and a strong
majority of teacher residents in
New Mexico are pursuing
licensure through traditional
pathways.
In school year 24, in fact, 79%
of teacher residents were
enrolled, uh, in alternative
pathways. That should not be
alternative.
In traditional pathways.
79% of teacher residents were
enrolled in traditional
pathways, and this does concern
us just a little bit, um,
because residencies could be
really especially helpful for
alternatively licensed teachers
who are far less prepared
usually than traditional
candidates.
Um, but because alternatively
prepared teachers can receive
their alternative license and
become teachers of record
immediately of passing um
passing examination
requirements. Those candidates
are often faced with a choice
between completing a year-long
residency with the support of
$35,000 stipend or beginning
their teaching career right away
with at least a starting salary
of $50,000 plus benefits, and
those health benefits are a
really big sticking point when
we talk to the field.
For many of these often
mid-career professionals, the
increased pay and benefits, uh,
deters them from completing a
residency.
So figure 8, you can see that
the licensure areas with the
most residents are elementary
education and special education.
We think this is probably a
pretty good thing as so educator
vacancy reports have indicated
those are the two areas that
have the greatest need for
teachers in the state over the
past few years.
Figure 9 shows that teacher
residents are more diverse than
the state's current teacher
workforce, and potentially even
a little bit more diverse than
the current teacher candidates
we have as a whole.
We know it's important for
students to have teachers who
reflect their community, and
research suggests that providing
substantial stipends to
residents can help programs
succeed in recruiting diverse
candidates. So kudos to you. We
think that's helping.
On page 1110 shows a map of
teacher residency placements. We
actually made two maps, one for
school year 23 and one for
school year 24. They were
identical, so that's what they
looked like. You can see that in
both years residents were
concentrated in Albuquerque, Las
Cruces, Rio Rancho, and Gadson.
The remaining residents were
spread widely across the state.
On that same page, figure 11
shows the number of residents,
uh, resident placements funded
each year. The number of
candidates admitted to a
residency, and the number who
completed a residency.
We can see that while the number
of resident completers increased
slightly from 23 to 24.
And residency completion rates
are high. The demand for
residencies has not kept up pace
with funding.
EPPs, uh, when talking about
this information, noted that
they've avoided over recruiting
for residencies in the past,
saying they were unsure of
whether or not and how much
residencies would be funded.
Hopefully going forward, that
will no longer be an issue as
there's now sustained funding
for the next several years.
He also cited several reasons
that candidates choose not to
complete a residency, um, one
being higher pay health benefits
for those alternative candidates
who begin teaching right away.
Traditional students who
graduate in a fall semester and,
uh, that doesn't align with
their program's residency
program.
And an unwillingness to commit
to teaching in New Mexico for 3
years after graduation.
If you'll turn with me to page
12.
I will present the preliminary
analysis of our teacher
preparation and uh student
grant. One of the measures of
success defined in the teacher
residency Act is how the
academic performance of
students, residents, students
compares to the students of
other novice teachers.
To our knowledge, this is the
first report that has analyzed
these measures in New Mexico.
We sought to measure how
teachers' contributions to
student growth and school year
24 varied among the four
preparation pathways.
However, in the end, our
analysis was limited by
incomplete data, inconsistent
data reporting practices and
difficulties matching teachers
to students.
And normally I wouldn't present
very much to all of you about
data collection and cleaning.
But I'm going to tell you a
little bit about it today,
because, frankly, the existence
of substantial data problem
problems relating to the
collection, collecting and
reporting of EPP data is one of
the most important takeaways of
this report.
So bear with me for just a few
minutes while I talk about some
data.
So table 7.
So on page 12, shows the
variables in the analysis and
the data needs associated with
each variable. Here, I really
just want to highlight for you
that this analysis required
collecting and linking quite a
bit of data.
First, we requested data from
PED on recent EPP completers.
And they sent us what they had.
Thank you.
Um, however, they didn't have
clinical practice information
for those candidates. So we
asked EPPs, please give us the
clinical practice information
for these candidates. Did they
complete a residency, etc.
But in that process, we found
that there were a lot of
inconsistencies between the data
PED head and EPP's head.
EPP said, we don't know who some
of these candidates are that PED
says that we had. Also, here's a
few 100 candidates that are not
in PEDs data set that we had.
Also some of these are
miscategorized in the programs
that they took, these sorts of
issues.
Several months of back and forth
with EPPs, um, we
Managed to put together what we
hoped was as accurate of uh a
data set as possible regarding
candidates.
Then we needed to connect those
that data set.
Um, to other PE PED data sets.
And those would be PED class
roster data and 2 years of
student assessment data.
But EPPs and PED track
individuals differently, as you
might imagine.
EPPs track candidates with
university IDs and PED tracks
teachers with license numbers.
Because staff were unable to
match a university IDs to
license numbers for many of the
completers, we had to rely on
knee matching for the remaining
computers, and name matching is
fraught with problems, um,
inconsistent spellings. Some
includes a hyphen in one
database, but not in another.
Someone gets married and their
name changes, a middle name is
on one but not in the other. All
of these can make a match fail.
Also, you can have people with
this exact same first and last
name, and we can't match those
people either. Um.
If you look at table 8 on page
13.
You can see that we wanted to
create groups of recent EPP
completers who fell into those 4
main preparation pathways, who
then went on to teach either
English language arts or math so
we could look at their student
results.
While we expected uh to see over
200 residents because of all of
these data problems are sample
sizes for residents were reduced
to 23 traditionally prepared
residents, and 10 alternatively
prepared residents. Obviously,
these are very small sample
sizes that present major
challenges for analysis.
Figure 12 shows each step of the
data cleaning process and where
EPP completers were lost from
the sample. The biggest loss was
in that name matching stuff, OK.
Taking a break from data. Now,
on page 14, I'll briefly uh talk
about our methodology.
reconstructed a two-level
hierarchical model designed to
estimate each teacher's
contribution to a student's
growth over the course of a
year.
The first level of the model
estimates student scores on the
Spring 24 Namasa test?
Based on the number, a number of
student level factors, including
their prior achievement, grade
level, economically
disadvantaged status, English
learner status, and students
with disability status.
The second level of the model
predicts the aggregate amount of
growth a teacher should be
expected to have facilitated,
given a number of class and
school-level factors, including
grade-level taught, classroom,
and school demographics and the
school's rurality.
On page 15, you can see the
results.
So figure 13 shows the average
teacher contribution.
The student ELA scores by
preparation pathway.
Figure 14 shows the same, but
for math.
The horizontal lines that you
can see, there's one dark one in
each of these figures that
represents the average teacher
contribution to student scores
from the uh kind of existing
workforce that we were comparing
recent EPP completers too, and
you can think of that as sort of
a baseline.
On average, recent EPP
completers displayed slightly
lower growth and other teachers
with additional years of
experience, which we would
expect.
Given teacher effectiveness
tends to improve over the 1st 5
to 7. If we compare preparation
pathways, you can see the
biggest difference is between
alternative candidates who begin
teaching immediately, or teaches
a record, and those who complete
a residency.
candidates who completed a
residency scored notably above
other teachers, while all
candidates who went straight
into the classroom or below
other teachers.
This intuitively makes sense and
is encouraging, but the
difference is not significant.
Overall, these results should be
interpreted with extreme
caution, given data integrity
issues and very small sample
sizes.
Unfortunately, PED and EPPs are
aware of the issues with teacher
candidate data collection and
reporting, and work is already
being done to address some of
these problems.
Pages 15 and 16.
Describe data work that's being
facilitated by prepared to
teach, prepared to teach is a
national nonprofit organization
that's been supporting residency
work in New Mexico.
If you look at figure 15 on page
16.
Shows what prepared to teach is
hoping to accomplish. What I
want to highlight for you in
this figure are the two
directions of linking data that
are presently missing.
So we've mostly talked about the
difficulty connecting data
vertically on this figure
between EPPs and PED.
But one big challenge EPPs face
in reporting complete,
consistent, and timely data is a
disconnect between their program
data and data for those same
candidates that are held in
their institutions databases.
So for example, um, ENMU might
have a residency program and
their department staff has that
clinical practice information,
but potentially some of the
enrollment information and other
data that they need for
reporting this housed in a more
central database for ENMU and
those two databases don't
communicate with each other.
So federal grant money, um,
awarded to PED in 2023, GD is
using that grant money um to
contract with Crocus developers
to actually build a data
collection interface at EPPs can
use to connect that program data
to their institutional data free
of charge, and work on that
interface is presently being
finalized and is scheduled to be
piloted by EPPs in January of
next year.
That's really great news. Um,
another challenge being
addressed is inconsistent data
reporting practices between
EPPs.
Primarily do um to insufficient
clarity and guidance from PED.
Over the past couple of years,
PED prepared to teach and EPPs
have been collaborating to
identify which data indicators
are required for state and
federal reporting, and to
establish standardized
definitions for those
indicators.
PED also plans to provide
training and increased support
for EPP data submission in the
future.
I want a foundational level. We
also have some problems with the
way that statute defines
alternative and traditional
programs.
Um, and those definitions do in
some sense guide which data is
collected and how it's reported.
Now, the statutory definitions
are no longer nuanced enough to
really describe the variety of
preparation programs that EPPs
offer, and this came up a lot in
our discussions about this
analysis. The definition also
doesn't match the new federal
Title II definition for
alternative licensure programs.
PED is presently working with
EPPs to differentiate data that
will track distinctions between
5 pathways rather than 4, and
the legislature may wish to
consider revising statute to
align with these these
distinctions and federal law. So
going back to that vertical data
sharing and that figure 15.
Between EPPs and PED.
How that newly linked EPP and
institutional data at the bottom
is going to be linked to PED has
not yet been established.
Initially, the way this was
happening was EPPs were emailing
spreadsheets to PED with their
data.
That was later replaced by
uploading data to FileZilla,
which is an open source
software, which many EPPs um are
objecting to, uh, due to data
concerns, or sorry, data
security concerns.
PED does plan to submit a
detailed funding request to the
legislature in FY 27 for a new
data interface system between
EPPs. So in conclusion over the
next interim LESE staff planned
to study teacher residency
implementation at each EPP and
partnering school district to
better understand strengths and
opportunities for improvement
and to hopefully answer a lot of
questions that this report
raised.
Um, based on the studies's
preliminary findings, the
following recommendations will
help the state strengthen
teacher residency programs. I'll
go through those now.
So the legislature should
consider strengthening
alternative licensure program
requirements, including
requiring candidates to complete
clinical practice prior to
serving as teacher of record.
Consider refining statutory
definitions of traditional and
alternative pathways to align
with PED's new classifications
and federal reporting
definitions.
Consider requiring more nuanced
data collection and reporting in
the educator Accountability
report and teacher residency
report to ensure the data
necessary for program evaluation
is collected.
Set minimum criteria for mentor
teacher eligibility based on
evidence of instructional
effectiveness, including
evidence of student achievement
growth.
Consider requiring alternatively
licensed teachers to complete a
residency prior to teaching.
Consider ways to improve data
tracking and reporting capacity
at small EPPs.
A lacked the support of
institutional data specialists.
The public education department.
should submit complete educator
accountability and teacher
residency reports to this
legislature by November of each
year.
Support development of a state
longitudinal data system with
unique identifiers that tracks
candidates from teacher
preparation to the classroom,
including hiring, retention, and
student outcomes.
And provide increased guidance,
clarity, and training for EPPs
on collection and reporting of
educator candidate data tracking
and reporting.
educator preparation programs.
Should ensure all candidate
educator candidate data.
Submitted to PED is complete and
accurate and reported in a
timely fashion.
Collaborate with PED and the
legislature to ensure the data
necessary for program evaluation
is collected and reported.
And increased recruitment of
candidates to teacher residency
programs, particularly amongst
alternative candidates.
And finally, school districts
and charter schools?
Consider using local and federal
funds to provide teacher
residents additional stipends or
health benefits.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I'll
stand for questions.
Representative.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Annie. I do have a,
just a couple of quick questions
and um so the focus of this
report is on teacher residence.
What about educator fellows? Is
that something that still is,
uh,
A pathway for non-traditional or
support staff.
To become teachers.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair
Representative representative
Baca, that's a great question in
this report did not look at
educator fellows, but it is
still a funded path you all
appropriated $20 million to the
educator, uh, fellows program
last year. It had been funded
with those expiring federal
pandemic relief funds, um, and
that program continues, and we
will be happy to look into how
those outcomes are going.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Annie. uh, it's gonna
build into I have a method in my
madness here.
Which is scary, right?
Um
Mr. Chairman, and any, I do have
a question, and I agree about
the teacher residency programs,
OK, as far as the effectiveness.
One of the errors that I think
we're not utilizing is our
summer work.
As far as we're talking about
teacher residency programs,
anyone's hired.
On an alternative license.
I think that we need to have two
supports for those teachers.
One, I do think that we have
some kind of
Uh, either curriculum or modules
that they can work on if they're
hired, you know, mid mid.
Mid-semester, midterm, but also
we have um
Summer, where we talk about the
summer reading program and as an
opportunity to
Get those teachers combined with
a, uh, and we pay them their
stipends. Let, let's, we, we've
made an investment here and we
know that those are gonna help
out our, our teachers, you know
they effectiveness in the
classroom.
The other uh question, Mr. uh
Chairman and Annie is really
about, and this is about kind of
a grow your own, which is
leading to this educator fellow,
as we're talking about young
identifying young students in
high school through a career
pathway and then working their
way up through the schools as
far as to identify these guys.
You know, like in our school
district in Launas, we have the
student mentors where we have
students that are combined are
paired with students who may be
on, you know, have needs that uh
can be supported by student
mentors as a way to identify um
Potential and future teachers.
One of the best districts that
I've seen that have done their
own Grow Your Own program is
Denton ISD and uh Texas.
Um
The, uh, Mr. Chairman, the
other, um,
The other question I have as far
as is with the data and I wasn't
quite sure.
Or the disconnect came. I, I'm
looking at Tim and I, I remember
all the work that we've done and
you've done with your databases
and everything like that. So can
you very briefly just tell me
where the disconnect is.
What can be done to rectify it,
and I, and I do appreciate your
uh offer to study the
Um, educator fellows, cause
that's also an important part,
you know, we talked about. I'm
not interested in the teacher's
scores per se as much as I am.
Uh, especially early on, because
as I said before, I was an
alternative licenser teacher. I
love my students, I worked hard
for my students. I don't think
it, well, it's questionable
whether I ever became effective
or not, but, uh, it, it takes
years to develop that craft, and
so,
Um, can you just briefly, and
Tim, if you need to jump in,
tell me again how we had the
disconnect as far as
The unique identifiers, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Chair, um, Representative
Baca.
Yeah, so
We had to connect
New teacher candidate data.
At each of the different 8 EPPs
pass.
Sort of a different fashion at
each of them.
And that data had to be
connected to PED's class roster
data and student assessment
data.
Um, but
uh PED uses a teaching license
number to track individuals, and
EPPs use the university ID.
And EPP did not have a file
linking those two numbers, those
two IDs.
For all the people we were going
to look at.
We had to try to match them
based on their names.
Which is just not very.
accurate.
Uh, in, uh, Tim, I'm sorry if
you want to jump in.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Representative Baca. Uh, 11
thing that I'll mention, and I
don't want to talk too much
about this because we're going
to talk about it tomorrow. Um,
is, is this idea of data
governance, but, um, part of the
reason that some of these data
issues occurred, uh, is that
LESC, you all have an interest
in in studying the effectiveness
of teacher residencies.
Everybody loves teacher
residencies. We want to know if
they're working or not, so that
we want to know how much more
money that we can put into the
program, uh, to get the best
bang for our buck.
Uh, similarly, PED really loves
residencies. I, I would, I would
venture that all of the EPPs
that we talked to, uh, they love
their residency program as well.
We all have an interest in, in
measuring this, but, uh, LESC
developed this research in sort
of a vacuum, right? We, we, we
brought you a work plan with a
research question, uh, that we
worked on internally, uh, and we
got your stamp of approval and
then we went to PED to ask for a
bunch of data. And when PED
didn't have the data that we
quite needed, uh, we went to the
EP.
Ps themselves. Uh, if we had
worked in and, and we'll take
some of the responsibility for
this if we had worked in, in
consultation with PED and EPPs
from the outset and said, this
is our research question. We
need you to get this data to us
and give them sort of a nice
timeline to get us that data. It
could have been a lot cleaner
at, at, at the, uh, on the back
end. So, um, there is sort of
this, this idea that uh we can
work together on the front end
and sort of this governance
fashion, uh, not only for EPP
data.
but for everything that we're
studying that um can streamline
some of these processes, uh,
and, and build sort of a
collaborative culture around
what do we need to collect, when
do we need it, uh, and then how
are we going to analyze it at
the very end, so thank you, Mr.
Chairman, I agree with that and
as we're talking about as far
as, you know, as the
legislator's decision makers and
appropriators it's important
that we kind of see, you know,
where we have, you know, areas
of need and where we need to
invest future dollars because as
I said before, everyone in this
committee here.
is a supporter of public
education.
It would help us to have some of
this data to see if we're
directing our funding to the
right source. And the last
thing, Mr. Chairman and folks,
when we talk about and you
mentioned it briefly about
mentor teachers at school sites,
OK, for, for that many years
ago, we had a requirement for
paying a stipend for mentor
teachers. Many districts do not
offer that anymore, maybe
because they cannot afford that,
maybe because it's not part of
the collective bargaining
agreement.
But there should be in some way
looking at some kind of
compensations or wait for
districts. So if I was a new
teacher to APS and
representative Saignana or
represented Garrett would
receive not only the curriculum
to support the areas of need,
it's more than just
How to take attendance, how to
manage the student information
system.
If there were things same as
part of her mentorship program,
these are the five areas that I
need to hit for effective
teaching, and that she be
compensated accordingly for
taking time out of her day and
going above and beyond to
support a teacher resident or
mentor teacher like myself. So
with that, Mr. Chairman, thank
you.
Representative care.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. My first
question comes from
Representative Natalie Figueroa,
who is with us from Volcano
Vista High School online. Um,
and her question is a challenge
to requiring alternative
licensure program candidates,
uh, to complete a residency. Uh,
they serve districts across the
state, but residency is not
necessarily are available in
every corner of the state. How
can we address the issue, and I
would extend that to I don't
know cooperative.
Education services. I know they
have programs, alternative
licensure where people come
together on weekends. Do we have
existing programs or do any of
the 8 programs have an online
component for alternative
teachers to do a residency when
they're living in more isolated
frontier of rural areas, Mr.
Chair, Representative Garrett
slash figure out that's really
great question. Um, I do not
have a really great answer to
that.
now, but I can look into that.
Um.
I would think that the biggest
challenge would be.
The requirements to have their
university kind of teacher
coach, check in on them at the
residency site, and I don't know
if that's possible, uh,
virtually or not, potentially, I
would think, but I will look
into whether there are any
programs who are offering
something like that presently.
Oh, thank you. And then to build
up what representative Buck
said.
I'm the
A lot of the attention and money
has been poured into the
educational fellows program.
And as we met around the state
over the last couple of
Of years.
It seems like Superintendents
and principals.
Use that those fellows in
different ways cause I'd like to
know how many fellows
Actually, is it was it in some
places I understand in eastern,
uh, New Mexico University.
It's been a very effective
pipeline into certification.
Uh, some of the specialized
programs where you have the
multi-classroom teacher model as
utilized pillows. So,
I think we really need to study
what's happening with that.
Um
Because it's multipoly used some
districts have dozens and
dozens, some don't have that
program at all. And then I'm
concerned that grow your own
teacher program.
Um
Focused on existing
instructional aids or
educational assistances
depending on what the
District called them and
included even people who are bus
drivers, some educational
assistants already have college
degrees. I know from my
experience at a very large
elementary school that when that
law was passed, we had some EAs
who today are certified special
education teacher who took
advantage of that program.
And I'm sorry to see PED not
talk about it. I think the
funding is housed in higher
education. I've bugged her
acting director about it.
Um, I know for a while Gallup
had a program that focused.
On classes for EAs, making them
on Friday afternoons and
weekends.
So I, I feel like that's another
channel because you're getting
people
who already are in the education
system.
Um
And know that that's what they
want, and no, because any EA in
the system knows.
Uh, the strings, the challenges
of teaching. So I, I don't want
that.
pipeline to be overlooked in
what I call extreme excitement
about education fellows.
Just, just a comment.
And then I, I'm just grateful
that um
I finally paid off my student
loan and I credit that to
President Biden actually.
Um, which, because I was a, I'm,
I'm a product of an educational
residency program with APS and
UNM uh unpaid residency, uh, so
my salary was my student loan,
so I'm just so grateful that
we've been able to
Fund these programs increasingly
at a good level.
Uh, thank you.
Other question.
No, OK, um.
I did have a, um, one very broad
question. Um, and I think I
asked this every year to kind of
keep it um on our radar because,
I mean, it's only been a program
for a while, educators rising,
and if we have any information
about educators rising students
that have gone on from high
school into um educator prep
programs, and then thereafter.
Um, Mr. Chair, also a great
question. We did not look into
educators rising in this report,
but that's something that we can
also look into along with Grow
your own An E fellows.
Mr. Chair, um,
I hope it's apparent by now
that, that all the work that
we're doing is is connected to
one another. So we, we often say
that we don't want to steal
thunder from the presentation
we're going to give later on,
but I'll talk a little bit about
one of the examples we'll talk
about in terms of long term
planning is, is exactly that,
that sort of intentional
connections between the
disparate programs that exist
across the state, I think to
Representative Garrett's point
about um grow your own and um
Sometimes these programs are
seen as competing or different
and really what needs to happen
is, is
Some intentional coordination
between them, and I think
educators rising, you know,
which is essentially I think 1
or 2 people, uh, at the higher
ed level who sort of coordinate
the statewide program, um, that
don't necessarily connect
directly with all the EPPs
around the state and um may may
or may not have intentional
goals about how many students
were trying to recruit into
educator, the educator
workforce, those kinds of
things. So we'll talk a little
bit more about the
intentionality. I think that's
required.
Uh, for all of these programs to
talk to one another, and that
the the folks responsible for
implementing those programs or
coordinating them, are also
communicating in an intentional
and regular, uh, regular way.
Cool. Certainly look forward to
that, but with that, Annie,
thank you so much. We appreciate
you. Thank you.
We are way early.
So, this lunchtime, folks. So
lunch is on your own. Um, so
just a note to members who are
here, of course, thank you and
those that I know are coming
along for the um afternoon
portion we'll start
right at one o'clock, so we have
a good amount of time for lunch,
but we will start right clock
right at one o'clock with our um
director interviews, so.
Please be back, uh, by one
o'clock and we'll get started.
Cool. Thank you all. We'll see
you at one.
