uh, that, that'll be for us.
We're so excited and, uh, great
to see the superintendent, um,
and, uh, and also the chair, uh,
we're gonna get started we'll go
first to committee
introductions. We'll start over
here, uh, uh, with, uh, Senator
Padilla and then um we'll go
from there.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman, and, uh, Mr. and all
the chairs and everybody that's
here. I'm Senator Michael
Padilla. I represent Senate
District 14, uh, the Southwest
quadrant, well, really the
southern portion of Bernalillo
County, and a very historic
here. It kind of reminds me
driving through this town of
portions of my district as well,
Mr. Chairman, and I want to just
look at the community here and
say thank you very much for
hosting us. Uh, I've never seen,
uh, I think the town of Mosquero
quadrupled in size this morning.
So we are very, very grateful to
all of you. Thank you very much,
um, I've been uh in the
legislature for 13 years and I
thoroughly enjoyed this, uh,
this getting to see this
beautiful part of New Mexico.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Vice
Chair to the members of the
legislative Finance Committee to
our presenters, to the people
that are here, the staff that
continues to ensure that we do
our work as we move forward.
It's just great to go ahead and
be here. This is part of, uh,
Senate District 8 and to go
ahead and thank the people again
that uh that are here, the
hospitality is always great. Uh,
the community is beautiful and
uh what I did the last couple of
hours before we got started. I
spent my time taking more.
pictures, uh, in the community.
I encourage the members of the
committee to do the same.
And to post these pictures
because there's a lot of people
that know that we're here, but
they haven't been here and I'll
tell you, whenever you're in
Mosquero, it's a beautiful place
to be and again, thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
good morning, everyone. And it
like everyone has said, it is
beautiful and quiet, so quiet
coming up here. I am Debbie
Serignan. I represent the House
District 21 in Bernalillo
County, um, and it's great to be
here. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, good morning,
everyone. Thank you for the
invitation to come out here and,
and see all of this. I do
appreciate you guys greening up
the, the landscape before we got
here.
It's absolutely beautiful, um,
San Juan County, where I'm
residing, it's not this green
yet, but we're working on it.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. Um, it's really
great to be here today. The
drive up here was beautiful. I'm
Linda Trujillo. I'm the Senate
representative for District 24
in beautiful Santa Fe, and, um,
I'm looking forward to being
here, uh, for the day. I wanna
say thank you to the school
district for, uh, hosting us
here and um I'm excited to hear.
I hope we get to hear about the
buildings that are gonna, that
are in process.
have been, uh, built right now.
So thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, can
you hear me? I'm Nicole
Tobiasin. I'm Senate District
21, which is the Northeast
pocket of Albuquerque and I was
talking to the mayor earlier,
and I too loved the drive up
here, but I'm trying to figure
out how I can live here instead
of Albuquerque. Um, if I could
make it work, it's a long
commute, but this is absolutely
gorgeous. I've never been in
this part of the state. So thank
you for your hospitality and the
peach pie, um,
Whoever did that, Amazing. um,
but thank you for having us.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for having a meeting
in my district. I share Harding
County with, with Senator Campos
and, uh, it's a recent addition
to me after redistricting, and I
appreciate it so much. This is
the heart of cow country.
This is where green grass is
turned into green dollars, guys.
This is a place that shows you a
cow can do something no other
animal can do. It can convert a
course foliage.
Into protein that we can digest.
Don't get rid of the couch.
I appreciate the opportunity. I
actually played basketball in
this gym, Jonah, uh, they didn't
have the 3 point line around
here, but we would shoot from
half court anyway. It didn't
matter.
So
Thank you so much, Mr. Chair,
for having us here. I'm Pat
Woods, Senate District 7.
Hm
Uh, good morning, uh, Mr.
Chairman and members, so I'm a
state senator Roberto Bobby J
Gonzalez uh from District 6
representing part of, uh, Santa
Fe Los Alamos, Ria Riba, and
Taos and on a very short note.
Uh, my family and my father's
side, they, this is a 1900, they
lived in Hawaria in Sanofi.
And then at that time they used
to graze their animals right
where the cemetery is, then, uh,
their water rights uh
diminished. They were diverted
elsewhere.
And so half of the family at
that time on my father's side
moved to Taos and half moved
here and to Roy.
And so I do have uh some uh
different uh I have uh relatives
around here in this area, so
very proud, very beautiful, and
it's nice to be here and thank
you again. Good morning.
Uh, good morning, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. I'm
Benny Sendo representing Senate
District 22 from Jama Pueblo and
Jame Mountains, and this out
here, I know it's flat country
but it's just as beautiful as a
beautiful ride and uh John and
Mayor, good to see all of you
again.
Thank you.
Good morning. Representative
Tara Luhan. I represent House
District 48, and
This is just beautiful uh
country out here in uh New
Mexico and I haven't been out
here in a very long time, but
I've traveled out here before.
Um
And I'm just very proud that we
chose to come out here again for
our, our beloved representative
Jack Chatfield, and, um, Senator
Woods, you have a, a lot to be
proud of up here, so thank you
for having us.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
colleagues, Mayor, everyone in
attendance. My name is Rep Art
de la Cruz, Representative
District 12, which is in Berlio
County, and I always like to say
that I am the heart of the South
Valley, so if you're familiar
with, with Albuquerque, Berlio
County, South Valley's pretty
well known for good and bad
sometimes, right, Senator?
Uh, but it's a pleasure to be
here and I like everyone have to
echo the sentiments that.
The whole area is beautiful
driving in from from Vegas to
here was just gorgeous, never
had an opportunity to ever be
here before.
Uh, and if we didn't have
meetings like LFC and towns like
this, we wouldn't know, we
wouldn't know what the needs
are, we wouldn't know what the
road conditions were or anything
else, so I really appreciate
that we're here and we also are
here to support our colleague
Jack. Everybody loves Jack.
Thank you Mr. Chairman.
Ah, good morning, everybody.
I'm, uh, Susan Herrera. I'm from
the northern part of the state.
I'm, uh, Rio Riba tells a little
bit of Sandoval, a little bit of
Santa Fe, so I go all the way to
the north, and it is, uh, God's
country here. It's beautiful.
We're so happy to be here and I
just wanna say how lucky we are
that this community is sent to a
Senator Pat Woods and, and
Representative Jack Chatfield,
uh, I'm just gonna tell you when
they speak in the Senate and the
House, people listen.
And it's because they're both
really good smart men and the
state is lucky to have them and
we're lucky to have them on our
team and I just, I'll tell you
what I told everybody when I was
bringing the strategic water
supply to the floor of the
house. I said, at this age of my
life, I've learned a lot of
things that I know not to do
anymore. I don't spit in the
wind.
I don't step on Superman's cape,
and when I bring a water bill to
the floor of the house, I don't
mess around with Jack.
Good morning everybody. Uh,
Representative Rebecca Dow, and
I was looking at where our
committee members are from and
with the exception of Senator
Lanier and Harlan Vincent here.
I think I drew through every one
of your old counties to get
here. I'm, I have a Donana
Sierra and Socorro County, but I
love coming up here and visiting
with you folks. It's good to see
familiar faces and uh I think
I'd drive back next week for
another fried pie.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, uh,
legislators and community, good
to see everybody. My name is
Harlan Vincent. I represent
District 56, Lincoln and Otero
County. And as I was traveling
up here yesterday.
Boy, y'all must be living good
up here because God's blessed
you with a lot of rain and all
the cows were fat, so
everything's good up here. Thank
you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair,
committee, uh, I'm Joseph
Sanchez. I represent uh District
40, parts of Col Fox, Mora,
Ririba, San Miguel, and Taos,
and uh I also want to thank the
community for hosting us and uh
Rep Chatfield, thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman.
Committee members.
My name is Derek Lente. I
represent the sixty-fifth
district in the House of
Representatives. I represent
parts of Rio Riba County, San
Juan County, and Sandoval
County. And I come from Sandia
Pueblo, New Mexico, 87004 and uh
it's, it's really a pleasure to
be up here and intentionally I
made it up here an hour early to
sit with Mr. Chatfield and, and,
and Mr. Woods to, to get their
sense of, of this community and
what a blessing it is to have,
uh, to be here this this morning
with all of you. So thank you
very much. Thank you.
And we're gonna, uh, briefly,
Representative Herndon and
Representative Duncan.
I, I think there should be a
Good morning, everyone. I'm
Representative Pamela Herndon
from House District 28. It's
really great to be here with you
and I'm extending an invitation
to you to come to my district on
July 26th to the 3rd annual
Heights night, and you'll get to
see lots of music, dance, and
entertainment and just get to
enjoy the Northeast heights at
its best. I look forward to
seeing you.
Good morning. I'm Mark Duncan. I
represent, uh, District 2, San
Juan County and, and, uh, this
is, uh, these are my people,
they're cows. I love it. Thank
you.
Yeah
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Jack
Chatfield, New Mexico House
District 67, Koufax, Curry,
Harding Quay, San Miguel, and
Union County. That sounds like a
lot of counties just go 100
miles north to Ratone, and it's
everything all the way down to
ertalis about halfway down the
state. I, I appreciate you
holding this meeting up here,
uh, we're oftentimes we don't
get anybody to come see how uh
our special needs and stuff up
here. I would
make each of the legislators for
making that long drive, and I
welcome you to my home. I
appreciate all of the community
members for coming, showing your
interest. I appreciate each and
every one of you, stick around.
We're gonna have lunch. We're
gonna have dinner.
I have a guitar picker at
supper. So,
Thank you all. Welcome.
Good morning. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Representative
Chatfield and Senator Woods, uh,
for hosting us and thank you,
uh, to all of you. I look
forward to learning more about
this community and, um, I
represent a district in
southeast Albuquerque and so
this is a nice, uh, change of
view. Thank you.
Hello, everybody.
I want to thank the legislators,
um, for being here. I wanna
thank the staff, uh, for putting
together, uh, this shows that
our staff, you know, wherever we
go in the state puts together an
incredible meeting. I want to
thank the director. My name is
Nathan Small. I'm really excited
to get the chair, uh,
legislative Finance Committee,
very grateful for our vice
chair, uh, George Munoz, um, and
we're gonna dive right in before
that.
I do want to say a big thanks to
Senator Woods, and also to
Representative Chatfield. I, I,
as so many members have said,
Representative Chatfield is
somebody that, um, folks look to
for a lot of wisdom, a lot of
insight, a lot of partnership on
issues of course that affect
this community, but that affect,
uh, areas all over the state.
And when we're working together,
uh, seeing different parts of
the state through one another's
eyes. That's probably when we're
doing some of our best work.
And that really, uh, I think
sort of gets us started this
year and we're so excited to be
here. So, um.
We're a bit behind schedule, uh,
we'll be quiet now on the
legislative side. We'll turn it
over, uh, uh, to Miss, uh, John
Oruun, um, and, uh, Mr. Ray
Vihill from the school board,
uh, take it away and we'll start
through our agenda.
Thank you very much. At this
time we have a special welcome
for you guys, so we're gonna
dive right into that, Miss
Hawks.
So.
Glad.
Right.
Oh
Oh, these are our little cheer,
yeah, well, it's, it's all of
everybody.
OK.
Thank you guys. You guys did a
great job.
So this is all of our kids,
kindergarten through 12th grade.
Uh, real quick, I wanna give a
special shout out to Joseph
Flowers for helping, uh, your IT
guy, uh, Roberto, get everything
set up. So he was a rock star
for him yesterday. So thank you
everybody.
That right there. That's why we
do what we do, right?
I'm always used to standing to
present, so I'm gonna be you
guys are gonna see me struggling
with that a little bit. So I'll,
I'll probably have a little mix,
but um at this time, as far, I
just wanna welcome you all.
I'm, I'm so excited. Everybody's
been asking me like, all right,
well, are you nervous? And I'm
like, no, I'm excited. Like
this, we got everybody here.
We're gonna show them some
stuff. So anyway, we're super
excited that you all were, that
you all um are meeting here and
a special thanks to
Representative Jack Chatfield,
of course, for, um, influencing
that, that happening and, and
the rest of you all, uh,
represent or uh Senator Woods,
uh, Senator Campos for
everything that you do, uh, for
Harding County.
Uh, we just appreciate you guys
and we are super glad that
you're here at this time, we've
got a welcome from the mayor.
Good afternoon good morning, um.
Thanks for coming, Chairman,
senators, representatives who
appreciate it, uh, as some of
you know, because we've spoken,
I also have the luxury of being
the mayor and the school board
president out of necessity, not
out of, uh,
Political gains or choices, so
don't worry about me, I'm not
looking for anybody's job, but
thank you for coming to our
community, uh.
One big thing is kind of
How he became the Pirates
because that's always the
question, how are we the pirates
in the middle of a sea of grass.
Well, way back years ago when we
used to have a railroad track
that ran next to town, the
Pittsburgh Pirates were doing
barnstorming tours. Well, this
was one of their stops. And
after that barnstorming tour.
The school decided in honor of
that stop, because we were so
small and in the middle of
nowhere they would rename them
the pirates, so that's how we
became the Pirates in the sea
grass. So again, thank you for
coming, especially to, uh.
Representative Chatfield.
I'm going on a first name basis,
Jack, thank you.
We're putting this together. And
also helping us navigate and
let's be realistic, the
political aspect of the new
school you see being built and
everything that is being done
around here. He does help us out
immensely, simply by directing
us and telling us, this is who
you need to go speak to. This is
where you need to go talk to.
This is what can help you with
the projects you're doing.
Appreciate it, Jack, absolutely
without question. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, OK, um, I think we
have pardon.
Yes, yes. uh, Mr. Mike Lewis for
the, for the county.
This button.
The one on the right.
I was, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The uh sorry, just to interrupt,
uh, Christian Lewis, well, just
one mic on at a time, perfect.
OK.
I'm a Harding County
commissioner. Been doing this
for quite a few years.
Uh, I've known Jack Chatfield
since, well, he was still riding
the horseback.
Long time ago.
Uh, we've got along well and we
worked together well and I would
appreciate all of you guys.
You're all doing a hell of a
job. I know it's a, a real pain.
I've been at this as a county
commissioner. This is my 23rd
year.
Through time started in '91.
It's a
It's, it's a gratifying, but
it's also can be a real problem
and I know you guys have got a
bigger than, than most of us.
But we, as a Harding County of
We're not, we're not actually
the smallest county. I mean,
population wise, we're next.
and Catrin County, we argue
about it all the time.
back and forth, Elvis County,
Catron County's ahead of us by a
little bit like a year.
Of the eldest bunch of people in
the country, but population
wise, we're very small.
But we do appreciate everything
that you guys can do to help us
because
The tax base is just uh CO2,
which is usually east of here.
Uh, in the county and cattle.
And you probably have noticed
that we don't have a whole lot
of businesses to put gross
receipts tax in the county.
And that that kind of stuff, but
everything that the legislature
can do is greatly appreciated.
But I got one thing that I would
like to say, you've probably
heard this a million times.
On your capital outlay.
Our maybe you've changed it, it
was brought up last year to when
you give out capital outlay,
make sure that there's enough.
Through time to get the project
done instead of starting it and
you get the engineering done,
then there's no more money ever
presented. You can't finish the
thing or you get halfway through
it and then it.
We as a county don't have the
money to put into the most
projects nowadays we used to.
But nowadays it's just.
Everything has gotten so
elevated in cost.
That it's hard to make ends
meet.
So we're out here, we're small.
I think there may be less than
600 people in the whole county
now.
But we're, we're very proud
bunch of people. We like our
cows, we like our kids.
And the families that are here
is
They're pretty tough people,
they make it.
One way or the other we don't,
the people that just don't
leave. The kids, the kids leave
because we have nothing for them
to do, but
They're trying to come back.
So I do appreciate it, our uh
county managers, she should be
here but she's trying to put out
a fire somewhere on the highway,
something on the county road
somewhere.
So she may show up in a little
bit, but I do thank you for
coming. I thank Mr. Chatfield
for bringing you, getting you to
come here. I don't know, it's
probably the first time it ever
happened.
And you can see we don't have
the amenities, so when you come
here, you better bring it with
you.
Yeah, thank you very much.
Excellent thank you very much,
uh, Commissioner Mayor
Superintendent or president and
superintendent, um, are there
any questions from committee
members, uh, that folks have
briefly before we uh dive into
uh sort of a focus on education
and microdistricts.
Uh, OK, I, I don't see any
questions. We're really excited
to be up here. I think this
shows and the really the rapid
progress on the school shows how
seriously and how hard you all
are working, we're excited to
see a lot of the work in a small
community, but in a way that you
guys have really come together,
uh, and are serving the needs of
your population and also being
in such a welcoming host, so
thank you very much and uh
Superintendent, I think we.
ask you to stay up there and uh
we'll jump right into our
education uh in micro districts.
Thank you very much. Um,
Mr. Chairman, it's, it's a
pleasure to get to provide uh
this information that we're
getting ready to share with you
about our school and, and how we
function and to kick that off,
um, our school board president,
Mr. Ray V. Hill, had a few
comments that he wanted to be
sure to contribute to the
presentation and, and so we
thought we would lead off with
with his comments.
Again, thank you all, um.
Some of the things like
Talking about educational
outcomes.
is
simply
Like
The requirements.
That are set to, to
To build a school. Here's a
prime example is
Our, our, our shop area, OK?
When it was being designed and
being built and when we were
asking for space, our whole
school, we were told due to the
amount of kids we had is only
19,000 square feet.
For everything
For Jim, everything included,
OK? By the time we were done,
Arguing, talking to people,
trying to get them to understand
that in a rural school, you
matter. There's still kids that
are being educated. We got it to
49,000 square feet.
OK? And here's a good example.
Our, our, our past shop teacher,
ag teacher, Lynn Ray, some of
you may know her, um.
They only allowed us 600 square
feet for a shot.
OK, which is not much wider than
the way your tables are set up
right now.
But she looked at federal
regulations, what OSHA requires,
OK? For each piece of equipment
that we had.
And laid it out on this gym
floor.
And when it was said and done,
It was the size of this gym
floor.
We weren't even being able to
get the requirements for the
spacing that federal regulations
dictate that OSHA says for
safety for our kids.
The solution was, let's put it
on rollers and roll it around
back and forth.
And basically let our kids play
Tetris if they need a bandsaw
today or they need a planer to
use now, you know, and when
you're asking a small 80 pound
child to push this table saw out
onto a floor so that way they
can use it and also try to be
safe for all the other kids that
are around them.
You know, it's just the formula.
Used to.
Set the size of a school doesn't
fit.
Every school the way it should
be.
You know, a big school formula
works great for them, but it
doesn't work for a small school,
but we still have the same
educational needs.
One of the other things is, um,
like the Ed Fellow program.
The funding to it has been
slightly cut. For us, it's been
immense. Basically, we're
growing our own timber.
Already we've had 3 involved in
it, 2 of them.
Have
Come back to our school and are
working at our school. One has
moved on, but it was, it we're
using it to help educate our
kids. So we're not just asking
for funding and not utilizing it
and putting it back into the
community and into the school.
So, those things.
They're kind of unforeseen and
people kind of take for granted.
We don't hear because we utilize
them to the full extent.
That we can. Um,
The other thing is the use of
suburbans, transportation in a
rural area. Suburbans aren't
allowed, you, you, you, you
can't, well, I can't say you're
not allowed, but you can't use
them for student transportation.
There's a whole bunch of
requirements to and from.
OK.
But
Trying to take a school bus and
we have some kids that are
already traveling.
30, 40 miles to get to school
and as you go to to carry
tonight, but that's where you're
staying, and you go down 39.
When you get off the edge of the
escarpment.
OK. You will see.
Some of the roads that they have
to go through. Well, you won't
see them, you'll definitely feel
them on they're down, way down
the road.
You know, if luckily.
Representative Chatfield has
helped us repair that road to
some extent. So it's not as
rough as it used to be, but
trying to be able to get, and
the other thing is trying to get
uh certified drivers.
People that have a CDL.
You can't find anybody with a
CDL to drive a bus, whereas with
the suburban, you don't have
that requirement and you could
get to kids to and from school,
especially when you don't have a
busload of kids. You're talking
about 56.
Kids that you have to take to
and from school.
OK, cause it's the picture we
have up here.
It doesn't do justice, but when
you go east to here about 5
miles, OK? This is off the
escarpment.
And when you look at that
picture, everything you see to
the horizon.
That is our school district.
That is where we are bringing
kids from.
to here. And when you look at
that picture, you don't see a
whole lot of houses.
You don't see a lot of people
out there, but
It's kind of like the Pied
Piper, the school is.
You have it and they will come.
You know, the school is the
heartbeat of a town. It's the
heartbeat of a community,
especially in a rural area, you
know, without it, you don't have
a town.
Because
We don't have a fitness center,
a planet fitness for them to go
to. We don't have a chemo
theater for them to go to. The
school is the theater. The
school is the fitness center.
When you put, you saw how few
children we have, when you, they
put on a play.
This will be packed wall to wall
with people.
And you wonder where do they
come from?
They come from out there.
Because they want to live this
lifestyle because it is a
lifestyle, and it fits them
cause not everybody wants to
live in the city.
Some of us like to live out here
in nowhere land.
Another,
and I've touched on already
another deal is the formula, you
know.
Like when we started, because we
have so few kids, they only
calculated how many kids we had.
In the formula for the funding.
You know, but again, I go back
to, we still have the same
necessities as a big school. We
still have to educate kids. We
still have.
We still need an auditorium.
Why? Because we still have a
graduation.
You know, cause that was one of
the things we're told, you don't
need an auditorium.
Well, yes, we do, but we don't
need a 20,000.
Set auditorium, we I only need a
2000 seat auditorium. We don't
need all the square footage, but
we still need it. It's still a
requirement.
Special ed. What I've seen cause
I also have the luxury of being
married to the special ed
teacher here.
OK, I say she never goes out of
practice because she's married
to me. So,
Ever since COVID, our special ed
numbers have increased.
So
The spacing for special ed.
When you look at it and you say,
well, you only have so many
kids. So this is all the
requirement.
Spacing you need.
That doesn't fit it because.
You still need more spacing
because of all the services you
have to provide for each and
every kid.
That comes into the school. It
shouldn't be based on how many
kids you have. It's, what is the
requirement that a school needs
to do.
Not, you only have 10 amount of
kids.
Um
The other thing is the last
thing that I'd like to talk
about is like the designing of
the school here. When we went to
build the school here.
The design engineers. We sat in
a room, had a Zoom meeting with
them, talked to them, and we
reiterated about
Uh, drainage here, drainage,
drainage, drainage. That has
been my thing. And told them,
you need to come and see the
area that you're building at.
And they didn't.
You know, they looked at, oh
well, we've looked at it from
Google, Google Earth. We can
tell the gradient, so we know
what's, how much the land falls
off or doesn't fall off, you
know, well, we've done core
samples, we only did 3 ft, and
we're telling them you should
dig 8 ft because as soon as you
dig 8 ft, you're gonna hit the
cliche cap, which we live on.
Well, after the first big major
rainstorm.
We had pictures of over here in
this new building site where the
sort of the water running away,
it's running back into
The center of the foundation of
the building.
Through the drainage, which
required us as a school to go
purchase property across the,
the county road, so that way we
could build another.
Drainage pond to get the water
away.
With all that being said, your
engineers, people who are
involved in building your
school, need to go to the
location, need to physically go
to the school, not work at it
from an office in Santa Fe or
Albuquerque, wherever they may
be, they need to physically go
to mosquito, go to Des Moines,
go to Springer, go to all these
little, they all have their
unique.
Land, they all have and people
there know it, and they're
willing to tell you, well,
That won't work here because of
this, and they need to listen to
them because here, some of our
costs have, have gone up simply
because they had to go
re-engineer them instead of
listening to the people that
talked to him in the beginning
and not coming to the site until
after construction had already
started.
Whereas if they would have came
before construction started.
It would have been a key element
in helping to cut costs and
reduce costs, because it's
already high simply due to
travel.
Majority of your budget is
spent.
On mobilization.
costs. Simply getting to the
site. And it's not like, oh, if
I need a new screw or a new
washer, you go to the hardware
store and pick it up.
So, I thank you for allowing me
to speak to you, and I
appreciate you again for coming.
Thank you.
Thank, thank you very much, uh,
President.
We'll go uh now to Doctor Brin.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
committee members at this point,
um, he didn't leave me too much
to clean up this time.
OK, so again, thank you guys for
coming.
We're gonna do this. Is it, is
it OK if I'm up? Is that fine?
Is that good with everybody?
That's great. Uh yeah. Great.
That makes me much more
comfortable. Raise your hand if
you can here. I, I know it's,
it's a little tough with the
microphone.
OK, um, in doing this, we were
tasked with 4 things on the
agenda to address and so a
little bit of the layout of my
presentation is to um talk
explicitly about those issues,
what they are.
But also to offer some
solutions, and then at the end,
clean up maybe with some kinds
of things that might help you
all in the things that you do.
So we've got a few suggestions
for you when we get down to
that. So it gives you a little
bit about the layout.
Uh many of New Mexico's school
district serves, oh, do
handouts. Did you guys all, you
all, OK, you all. OK, good, uh,
small.
communities, they're essential
to the uh community identity.
We've talked a lot about that. I
loved hearing you guys talk
about how much you loved the
area and, and how blessed we are
and we just truly, truly are,
and, and, and families want to
live out here and you're right,
they do deserve the same
education as as anybody else. So
workforce pipelines, critical
piece. We've got to as as Mr. V.
Hill mentioned, we're growing
our own forest. We're trying
to, to keep kids here, continue
to grow them out and student
success, um without targeted
support microdistricts space
systemic disadvantages that
threaten educational equity.
So these were the key issues
that were on the agenda that
we'll be addressing throughout
and they'll be corresponding
numbers so that you can relate
to them some taglines down in
the bottom as well.
So regarding educational
outcomes.
Microdistrict challenges include
limited instructional choices
for classes.
We don't have multiple different
sections of multiple different
types of math.
We rely heavily on dual credit
for our advanced coursework.
Multi-grade classrooms and pack
instructional depth and pacing,
that happens all the way up from
kindergarten and combined
classrooms all the way up
through high school when we have
multiple grades, sometimes you
might have one or two kids in a
class. You think it's hard to
teach when you have over 20 in a
class, it's equally as hard to
teach just two because you can't
do the things that teachers love
to do as far as grouping
students up, so it has its own
challenges. We also have found
that
If you've got 2, you typically
have one gifted and maybe one
that's on an IEP, um, you, you
still have the full range that
you, that you've got, that
you've got the challenge of
reaching and our teachers here
are doing an amazing job.
Recruitment of highly qualified
educators remains a persistent
barrier. So some of the things
that we can that we can talk
about that are benefits with
microdistricts, of course,
higher graduation rates.
100% and mascara ever since I've
been here many, many years
before we have a 100% graduation
rate. I mean, sometimes we got
kids even in our online school,
and we're dragging them to the
finish line, but by gosh, we
have the ability to provide that
individuality with each kid, and
they all crossed the finish
line, and we are super proud of
that.
Higher customers in
microdistricts. Higher
attendance rates. It's because
the students are engaged, the
teachers are engaged, families
are engaged.
Student engagement, one of the
number one indicators of student
outcomes. Fewer discipline and
practice.
So solutions.
The way that we look at it for
solutions for us here.
Dual credit, early college high
school models create
opportunities.
With local colleges to leverage
human capital and expand
pathways for students, so we can
work with our local community
colleges, for example, Doctor
Moss and I, we've been talking
about sharing a math teacher,
um, out of Mesalands, um.
Things like that where we can
maybe share those resources, and
I think that's one of the things
from a CTE perspective that we
really need to concentrate on
going forward as well.
That ties into my next one with
mobile learning labs.
They could be shared regionally
to bring amazing CTE
opportunities to these rural
districts that are a long way
from anything else.
We can't, we can't club up and
make it to
To schools that are an hour and
a half away and get anything
accomplished within, within the
time frame that we have for a
school day.
So
Remote learning labs, they bring
CTE solutions.
They bring careers such as
healthcare, vet science,
construction, culinary arts, all
of those things can be put in
mobile learning labs.
We could create opportunities
within our semesters where we
have week-long learning
opportunities with that lab,
they come with the instructor,
with the driver. We drill down
into that.
And these kids can end the
semester with a certification.
Remarkable opportunity. It's,
it's one that has been
overlooked for too long.
Teacher incentives to encourage
teachers to move to rural
districts.
That's a huge one for us, pay
differentials, things like that
would make a very big difference
in trying to get qualified
teachers out to this area. Many
of you, how many of you saw the
housing project that we have
going on out here. So we're
gonna hit that in the tour, but
we have of our staff, we have 3
driving from the Springer area,
um, a couple driving from Logan,
uh, some from out at Mills,
others, they, they drive from
all over. My home is in Logan,
um, my principal.
Um,
she lives in Angel Fire.
All over the place and they come
here, they choose to come here.
We are so blessed.
But we have to have housing to
keep these people here. There is
no place for any of them to
live. And so the housing is
critical, critical piece.
Local control.
We've heard a lot about local
control. We can't get away from
this issue. It is so important
here. We talk about the custom
and the culture and how things,
how students are engaged and how
families are engaged. That's
part of our local custom and
culture that's so critical. Our
instructional day right now.
7.75 hours.
They have a travel time of about
about 12 hours a week on
average.
31 hours of instructional time.
If we were to move to the
mandated 5 day a week that has a
day of 5.5 hours.
We would probably start school
Right now, Friday, Saturday, and
Sunday, but we would start our
day later, we would have a 5.5
hour day. Travel time would
increase to 15 hours per week
average, and instructional time
would actually decrease to 27.5
hours per week.
The 4 day week is essential
here. That's what works for us,
critical.
There is no way that this move
would create higher outcomes.
Research has proven time and
time again that teacher quality
is the number one indicator of
student outcomes.
Not days of instruction.
The recent impact of 4 day week
limitations on the calendar
submissions.
It was a little tough to swallow
because it again took away more
local control for us. I don't
know how many of you even know
about this.
But PED gave us a calendar that
said you can submit your school
time from 8 to 4. The calendar
could not be submitted if you
sent anything other than ours
being between 8 and 4 o'clock.
Our students get here at 7:30.
At 7:45 we've got a breakfast
learning time.
But let's see how this creates.
So we also lost the opportunity
to have instruction on any 5th
day of the week for instruction.
So if you've had 4 in that week,
you could not have a single week
that had a 5th day of
instructional time.
And still be considered a 4 day
week. If that occurred,
The only way that you would get
your calendar to submit.
was by submitting it as a 5 day
school week which changed all
the hourly requirements, put it
back to, um, what it was that
the lawsuit.
So, because of it, it actually
Because of the way then that we
had to do our calendar and we
couldn't add any extra Fridays
because once in a while we have
an extra Friday that we want to
add because we have something
spectacular that week occurring
and so we want to add that
Friday. Well, we were required
to take them off in order for
our calendar to be submitted in
budget. So that was a loss of
23.25 instructional hours.
Because of losing those 4
Fridays of instructional time.
Again, because of the calendar
tool only allowing 8 to 4 p.m.
And a maximum of 7.5 hour day.
We lost 36 hours for the year.
That's getting accounted for an
hour per week, 15 minutes. I'm
gonna go into a little bit more
of how we spend that 15 minutes.
It's very valuable instructional
time.
So on our calendar this year, we
had a net loss of 59 hours.
Just because the calendar could
not be submitted the way that we
would typically do our calendar.
So
It's, it's an unfortunate
situation that that we were put
in.
I think I have several other
colleagues here that can attest
to the same issue.
So mascara highlights, moving on
from that, we've got some great
things that we're super excited
about. Um, we've, we've really
worked on interventions and math
and reading. We have some scores
that are increasing. Our scores
are usually always masked
because we have so few kids per
class are in ratio is so small.
A lot of times when the test
scores come out, they're masks,
but we have a significant
increases that we can um
attribute to the professional
development that we've been
doing as well as
The uh intervention time.
Mm
I've got a
Couple of slides here.
I don't know, some of you, I had
already heard about our, our, it
was quoted to me, so we used the
term our magical pre-K program.
We have an amazing pre-K
program. So Amy is going to hit
those couple of slides. So
Doctor Amy Jackson is our pre-K
teacher. She's going to talk
about those slides.
All right, well, I have gotten
to meet some of you before in my
capacity advocating for rural
early childhood education. I
don't magical is cool. We're
definitely a unicorn program,
right? Because we are the only
program in the state that
operates our 540 program as 2
full days as opposed to 4 half
days, and we do this because of
our circumstances, right? We
don't have transportation
capacity to run another route in
the middle of the day, and
frankly, we survey our families
every year and they.
There's not a culture of out of
home childcare here. They want
their children to be with them
as much as possible, and when
they need a break cause we all
need a break, right? And some of
them need to go out and have
additional earning
opportunities. They need a full
day to be able to do that.
Because we are the only game in
town.
Right? In our school district we
are the only early childhood
education provider. If when I
needed somebody to watch my
youngest as I was teaching. I, I
had to beg and plead for
somebody to provide home daycare
for me because that's our
choice, right? So when we get
our kids, we want to maximize
our time with them, so we run 2
full days a week. It provides a
graduated introduction into
formal
come, they're excited to come.
They're not burnt out at the Red
Bull at the age of 5, not
wanting to come to school. So
when they come, we make sure
that they have everything that
they need because our kids are
out here. You've seen what we've
got.
We have no museums, we have no
libraries, we have um.
We have a park,
um base for their future
academics. Um, I run my program
as play-based learning. I try to
do everything hands on that we
can, and this construction
project's been great for us.
We've got 4 sample chair boxes
there. We're building a fort.
Every child got their own box
cause I got 3.
We had a giant box for in my
room for about a week and then I
said, all right guys, we gotta
turn this down. Um, but so we
are even integrating our
district-wide CTE and STEM focus
down into our 3 and 4 year olds
because this is engineering,
y'all. We're doing it with
masking tape and cardboard
tools, but they are learning and
they are developing the
vocabulary and they're
developing the capacity to
understand that I can
contribute, right? I can build,
I can do things. And when
they're not at here, right? I
mean, it sounds like we're
running child.
but we're not. They call them
school days and work days
because on Tuesday, Thursdays
they're with their parents.
They're riding around in a feed
truck feeding cows. They're
tagging along in an office,
right? So we all just call them
school days and workdays in PK.
Oh
Our curriculum is STEM-based
with embedded literacy. It's
kind of an inverted model, but
it provides a lot of flexibility
for us to integrate what we
wanted to, what they're gonna be
seeing as they migrate through
our system.
Um, I am letters EC certified. I
wrote a dissertation about it,
um, but we integrate lots of
structured literacy. I implement
the principles of the science of
reading. Doctor,
Doctor Jackson, sorry, well, um,
if we could ask you to get
closer to the mic to make sure
and maybe we can move that mic
over, yeah, somehow it's close.
No, it's good. I, I'm about to
wrap up here, but I just want to
point out that funding rural
early childhood programs with
With autonomy for districts to
be able to implement them in the
way that meets the needs of
their community is critical. If
we were shoehorned into a
program that matched one in
Bernna Leo.
They wouldn't send the kids.
They wouldn't. And then they'd
be coming into kindergarten
behind because of the
trickle-down nature of
academics, right? They're
expected to go in as early
readers in kindergarten. So I
can do that in 2 full days a
week and they still want love
learning and want to learn
whenever they hit kindergarten.
So you see here, we've got
vocabulary charts in our little
word word wall there, the
bookmobile comes to school once
a month. That is their library,
right? But we go and we come and
we
Have access to provide them
services, right? Speech language
services, occupational therapy,
physical therapy, primarily
delivered in a remote manner,
right? Because we don't have any
ancillary staff on campus are
the SLP comes from Clovis every
other week, one day a week to
service our children and the
rest of it is on Zoom. So
something that is not considered
frequently, I think, with
staffing requirements is that
when we're trying to deliver
ancillary services in a remote
manner, we have to have double
the staff because you need
an adult there to proctor, a 3
year old on a laptop trying to
do speech therapy, right? You
can't just send them with the
with the therapist to, uh, to a
space that doesn't exist, right?
Because the funding formula
doesn't provide adequate square
footage for ancillary services,
um, but despite the challenges
that we face, right, trying to
do physical therapy on Zoom is a
hoot and a half.
Um, we love our children and we
love providing them with unique
learning opportunities. We get
to do things here that are so
special and, and frankly
magical, and I really give a lot
of props to our glorious
administration, you know, they,
I say, I have a project, I have
an idea, and they say, all
right, run with it, right? Do,
do it, um, and it gets them off
to a really, really great start.
So thank you for the opportunity
to show off our program and uh I
hope that you get a chance to
come, come see my room when you.
on the tour later.
Thank you, Doctor Jackson.
As you can see, we're blessed.
We have, we have, I, I could
have any number of our staff,
our team up here, and, and they
could deliver things every bit
as well as she just did, so
we're, we're blessed. So mixage
learning experiences, that's
action learning. That's what it
looks like in, in Mascara. We
foster peer mentoring,
leadership, creative problem
solving and cooperative
engagement.
Barty mentioned that we have
multi-age classroom groupings,
integrated school activities, we
bring in the high school, they
do presentations, include the
elementary school. It's fabulous
mentoring, fabulous projects,
our kids, our kids eat it up.
We've got some of the older
elementary reading to some of
the pre-K, this kind of stuff
happens on a regular basis.
Something else we're doing,
we're going to call it Winning
Wednesdays, so it's a little
hard. Most schools, when they do
their PLCs.
All the 4th grade teachers meet
all the high school teachers
meter, all the science teachers
meter, all the kindergarten
teachers meet.
Well, we do ours with all of our
elementary teachers, and then
all of our high school teachers
and, but when your goals are the
same.
It works out because the goals
are improved student outcomes,
and what can we do for Johnny or
what do we need to do for Susie?
What are you guys seeing? And so
that's the kind of
individualized things that we
can talk about in our PLCs to
help drive outcomes,
achievements, and instructional
success.
Coaching reflections, huge part.
It should have been a great big
bullet all by itself.
Um, our principal is amazing at
instructional coaching,
providing those reflections for
our staff. One of the things
when we interview you, anybody,
it doesn't matter to us how many
years experience we that they
have, how do you feel about
being coached?
Because you're gonna be coached.
There's always something we can
all do better.
And they're
Great, all about it. OK, then
you're for us.
So the career cafe, that was the
thing I wanted to get to
earlier, back on the loss of our
15 minutes a day.
We've got people that we know
that work at NASA. People that
we know that work in the
president's administration.
People like all of you all that
have something to offer or talk
about to our students.
So 15 minutes in the breakfast
at breakfast time.
Zoom in. We talk about your
career.
We talk about what it took for
you to get to what you're doing
in your career.
The students listen intently.
They go back to class, they talk
about what that career looks
like, how it might look like for
them when they leave here. We're
so excited about this. Our
teachers have reached out,
they've all got people that are
gonna come in for this or zoom
in for it. It's a great
opportunity. PED doesn't let us
count that 15 minutes a day. Do
any of you think that's not
valuable learning time?
Very valuable learning time.
Very valuable.
Beyond our walls.
Expanding our vision by stepping
into others.
One of the things that we've got
to do here, it not only applies
to our kids, it applies to our
staff. We get tunnel vision,
right? You, you, you've been in
the same spot, you do things the
same way. It's comfortable, it
feels good. All right, we're
gonna scratch that up a little
bit. We're gonna go see what it
looks like somewhere else.
What other things? What other
ideas can we get? Who else is
doing something that we can
model and maybe improve for our
kids in Mascaro USA.
So we took our entire sack on a
retreat.
And went down, visited some
schools in Texas that are also
smaller schools, bigger than us,
but has have things that we can
replicate in CTE that advanced
learning and educational
outcomes across the curriculum
in all subjects.
We had school board members go.
Other community people.
The staff, the entire,
everybody, AIDS, everybody.
When you do something in a small
school, everybody's got to be on
board. If not, we just have them
walk the plank.
Uh-huh
More action learning in mascara.
What do we do? How do we
contribute back to other areas
and things, um, you know, we go,
we want to learn, we always
wanna, but we always want to
contribute and give back.
Professional development.
That's a huge thing.
Statewide, we've had staff
attend and present at multiple
conferences.
Nationally, the national rural
rural educators Association, uh,
last fall, and most recently,
internationally, um, Miss Sherry
Rae, our uh FFA teacher when
presented in Europe, um, that
was quite an event.
And we were super proud of all
of these things that our staff
do, um, we go, we learn at those
things.
But can we do that on?
on any
Portion of the state allocation
for professional development.
Sorry guys, we cannot, our
little school gets about $1200.
Professional development out of
Title 2.
Can't do much with that.
It's really a challenge.
So we got to find other ways to
fund it, but we do.
We're also big on community
participation, integrating
learning service opportunities.
Uh, in our shop, we've made,
we've got a, a plasma table. We
figured out there were some
unmarked graves, and so out to
the cemetery, they went, they
figured out what, what we needed
and made a bunch of markers for
gravestones out at the cemetery.
The paint the town, that was
done, uh, several years ago now
at this point, but we continue
to keep it up. You guys will
really enjoy, uh, but when you
go down to Chatfields, of
course, uh, the headquarters
restaurant
a beautiful paint job on it as
well, but take a minute, walk
down the street, take a look,
because the painting and
artwork.
It's amazing.
And I should note that it was
done by Mascaro school students.
Pretty incredible.
The other thing that they did
for Valentine's Day, they went
out and they had um a lemon, uh,
let's see, what was it,
strawberry lemon.
pie or something like that that
they delivered to all the
elderly folks.
Planted flowers in the in the
park, just uh a lot of community
engagement.
Educating programming and scale,
that's something that's always a
challenge, right? Because it
costs us to do the same as a lot
of things that it does other
schools.
But we might only have 2 or 3
kids that contribute from the
funding formula to help make
that happen.
So it's always a challenging
causes instability in
programming for things such as
CTE dual credit. Some schools
have AP programs. We lean on
dual credit for that.
Reliance again on mobile apps,
uh, it's, it's an interest
that's growing, but it seems
inconsistent. We need to, we
need to nail that system down
with CTE and really take
advantage of the opportunity
that he has to provide.
And skill makes the per per
student investment appear really
high, but they're just fixed
costs.
Things that we got to do. We got
to run the lights. We gotta run
the power, we gotta have
propane, like kinda like to be
warm, so gotta do those things.
But the benefits, of course, is
a low student-teacher ratios.
We've talked a lot about the
flexibility and the individual,
individualized student
opportunities that we have, we
literally build our schedule
every year around what our
students need.
Opportunities to leverage things
like Ed Fellows.
That's an amazing, amazing
program for us. I just cannot
say enough about it, and, and
kudos to PED on, on that one.
That one's been an amazing
program.
Other highlights that we have?
We have some fun things here.
We've got an arena and events
center at lends itself to some
arena management. We also
published the only county
newspaper. It's not just your
typical school newspaper.
Folks, it is a newspaper.
And, and it is pretty darn good.
And so, um, I would encourage
you all. I'll leave some copies.
We have some copies here by the
chairs. Take a peek at some of
them. You ought to order a
subscription to it.
Um,
We've got a coffee shop over in
our business, uh, student
business center.
We've got the RV park.
Uh, that accompanies the arena,
the RV park lends itself or
events and event management,
uh, car shop had a student was
like, I wanna go into auto
mechanics. What can we do? And
I'm like, man, we don't have any
teachers that can.
Teach auto mechanics. How can we
get you headed in the direction.
And so it's like, well,
We got a tire changing machine,
we could do that. Like, he's
like, yeah, I'll open a tire
shop. I'm like, great, let's
open a tire shop. He's loved it.
It's been great. People bring
tires into town, he changes
tires. It's a great business.
He's, he's done well. I again,
our Joseph, also our IT guy, we
all, even the kids all wear
multiple hats around here.
Uh, graphic design shop, we've
got a laser engraver, plasma
cutter, digital design.
Programming highlights further,
uh, co-curricular,
extracurricular activities, of
course, we're blessed in our co
op with Roy on sports. We've had
some fabulous state
championships and basketball and
football. Um, track is
individual, livestock.
This year one first place at
state. We were super excited
about that.
Um, our kids all just work
really hard and then we got our
rodeo kids and a lot of our
rodeo kids are um on our online
school because that's what works
for them. So we get, we have
kids from all over the state
that participate in rodeo that
are in our online school. Now
back to Ed Fellows.
Back to my, my, my fist pump for
PED.
I feel like it may be one of the
most effective programs that PED
has ever initiated to promote
education as a desirable career.
Remarkable opportunity to get
people back in the school once
they've already gone to college,
come back in, let them see what
it is that we're doing, the
successes that we're having,
come, come sit on this side of
the desk with us, and we can
mentor them, they can take the
college classes, incredible
opportunity. However, we're
hearing the funding might be.
Cut for that, not cut out, but
reduced.
If we have to participate in a
cost share for our 3 Ed fellows.
It's going to be devastating for
us and other microdistricts.
We don't have the funding or we
would already have those
positions staffed.
It's gonna kill the forests that
we're trying to grow. It, it
will be a disaster for us if the
funding for Ed Fellows becomes a
cost share. We will not be able
to maintain it.
Microdistricts operate with
minimal staff and limited
discretionary funds. We do
everything to the penny.
A car share to get through rural
and remote schools from
participating.
Effectively excluding access to
many of the microdistricts or
smaller districts.
Requirement with deepen existing
inequities and access to teacher
training programs. I already
talked about what we get for
professional development, can't
do much with that.
Ed Fellows is the best
professional development program
that we have, by far.
Guarantee allotment might be a
solution.
Maybe.
Maybe it's not fully funded when
you have 20 or 30 or 40 of them.
But maybe microdistricts should
be allowed full funding for 3 of
them.
If we've got
More than that that want to be
interested in it, then maybe we
can find the funding for that.
But maybe at least 3 of them
would be something that could be
a negotiation at the table.
Maybe 6 of them for mid-range
school districts to be fully
funded if they want to fund more
than that.
Then they engage in the cost
share.
And maybe 9 for larger ones.
This helps
Disperse the equity of the issue
and still gives microdistricts,
rural districts, the staff that
we need and the ability to
continue to grow our own forest.
Transportation and access. We've
already hit on transportation,
some, so I'm not gonna take a
ton of time here, except to say
that last year when they changed
the funding formula, I had been
told that if we added a route to
get more kids that were in a
remote area through our school
district door.
That we would get funded for
that route after the fact.
So I had to pay for the
Suburban. I had to pay for all
the labeling. I had to pay for
the driver.
And then we got a $25,000 cut in
transportation for this school
year.
Made it really hard to continue
to get those kids through the
door, but we figured out how to
be dedicated.
We funded it out of operations,
had to fund it out of general
operations wasn't enough money
in transportation.
So it cuts out something
somewhere else, as you guys
know, when we have to do that.
So is transportation fully
funded for microdistricts. I
challenge not one of the things
that we've had to do this year
is we're gonna have to take the
route on ourselves instead of
contracting.
Because that way, at least if I
need to add her out here or add
her out here, I don't have a
contractor that's in the middle
of it that I've got to say, gee,
we're gonna all of a sudden cut
your contract, that might be a
lawsuit or, you know, it gives
us the flexibility in-house.
It's not that we have the time,
energy, money, or personnel to
operate that route.
But we have limited choices.
In order to get kids through the
door because we feel like we got
something going on good here and
we want all the kids through
this door we can get.
Maintaining a 4 day week allows
students and staff the
opportunity for weekday access
to things such as medical needs,
extracurricular activities,
work-based learning.
All of those things happen, as
we already talked about a little
bit on that extra day of the
week. SUVs need to be funded as
a transportation alternative to
route, uh, as route vehicles for
rural districts, so what that
means is
SUVs are not currently funded
through PED only school buses,
but out here as you guys take a
look around and you drive off
the escarpment that you're gonna
look at and you're gonna see
those roads and one thing or
another out there as far as you
can see.
It might make a lot more sense
if we rent an SUV out that way,
because as soon as we get
somebody trained up with a CDL,
guess what happens, happens in
the county too. I know it. So as
you get somebody with a CDL they
get hired by a construction
money or construction company
because they're gonna make way
more money than they do if
they've got a CDL in a rural
district.
The mileage for SUVs is funded
at half the rate. It's a really
good opportunity for us to be
able to run SUVs. It shouldn't
be funded at half the rate when
we already have to buy our own
vehicle in order to do it.
Makes it a real challenge.
Not to mention SUVs are a little
more eco eco-friendly than buses
because out here those electric
buses, we're not gonna trust
them.
We're gonna talk a little bit
about the financial stability.
And sustainability, a small tax
base limits local revenue. We're
gonna talk a little bit about
bonding, a hyper student costs
are tied to operational necess
necessities, not inefficiencies.
We're very efficient.
Reliant on state equalization
without rural specific
adjustments.
Creates shortfalls that that are
very difficult to overcome.
Inflexible or caterpillar
categorical funding.
Typically fails to meet rural
needs.
So, regarding bonding and
community support, we've already
talked about all the things we
do as a community, but I wanna
bring you.
attention to right here. This is
all the school districts in the
state that will.
right there?
That's mascara. We are the 2nd
highest taxed district in the
state. The 2nd highest tax.
Tax at 13 mLs.
We have incredible community
support here for what we're
doing in our, in our school.
Incredible support.
How much do you think that
bonding capacity is if we're
bonded at 13 mLs. How much money
might you think was generated by
being funded at 13 millions.
Arced entire bonding capacity is
$3.7 million.
That's the most that we can, we
can bond. If we're at 100%.
Look around, guys, you guys know
you cannot do much.
For capital benefit for the
schools on $3.7 million.
Cannot happen.
One of the things that would
help is if microdistricts were
funded like we had 100 kids,
even if we don't.
That would allow us to make the
programming adjustments that we
need to deliver all the
educational requirements that
this state has for our kids, to
our kids with less than that, we
can't do it.
That it equates into about 400
units, 420 units, depending on
how the unit value is broke down
at any given time within the
funding formula. We have to have
400 units on our 910B5.
To be able to properly fund
education at a basic rate
without being on emergency
supplemental. And if any of you
guys want help on how we could
get that accomplished, I would
be happy to volunteer to help
any time that I can contribute
to get there.
One of the things that we did is
we created our online school.
That was the only way we could
get there.
So we created the online school,
made us look really good because
we happen to start it in 2019,
little event like COVID happened
right after that, so we were
ready to go. We already had
everything we needed, um, kids
were ready to go with the online
school. We just kicked it right
over. We didn't miss a beat. We
kept right trucking right on
through it.
But it's really the only pathway
that we have to be innovative in
teaching and learning for all of
our students is by also
incorporating the number totals
from those online kids. The
unfortunate piece of it is,
while we're, we're taking those
online kids as hard and as far.
As we can all the time, it's a
struggle on graduation rates,
it's a struggle on test scores.
The best is always to have kids
through the door. That's always
the best.
But there are certain ways.
That this accommodates kids in a
way that maybe they would drop
out. So we have a very high
at-risk population.
In our online school that we
work really hard to deliver all
the tools, including CTE
delivery.
It's the only way that we can
cover the administrative
reporting burden that we have. I
don't know what happened to the
10% paper reduction, but that
was been way gone, right?
Dennis?
The only way that we can afford
a principal and an instructional
coach.
All the pieces that are really
lending to the things that we're
doing great here in Mascaro.
We're doing because we had to be
innovative about how we're gonna
get kids in our school.
Capital outlay
PSCOC boy, that was been a fun
experience. Um, there's a few
others that I get a hurrah on
that one.
it's, it's been entertaining, to
say the least, but I think the
state for looking at mascara,
for looking what the needs were
for our kids and funding a
school for the small number of
students that we have here
because they do deserve it
regardless of their zip code.
So
The administrative expertise
that microdistricts need.
are not on site.
So when I encourage any of you
that have influence on the
process with PSCOC.
That every microdistrict from
the get-go.
Have
A funding a funding expert and
owners' representative that can
help them through the process,
whether it be from the design
phase, from the day that it's
funded.
We need an owner's rep. You guys
will get that money back.
Multifold, I guarantee you,
unless change orders.
And less delays in construction
by hiring somebody to be that
owner's representative. It is a
critical, critical, critical
piece. Maybe the most critical
piece.
In funding districts for, for in
my end, particularly small
schools for building capital
projects.
These are some of the pictures
that, that we were talking
about, we had a a unique
opportunity and, and one of
these water catchment areas is,
is quite deep back behind our
bus barn and we had
A really good opportunity
because the design folks, they
were really gracious. They came
out, we were looking at things,
they just kind of wanted to see
how things were going on the
project and they're out every
week. They send somebody out
every week, but we had gone and
we were concerned.
As Mr. V Hill well alluded to
about the drainage.
But these engineered pawns,
we're gonna handle it.
They were there the day before,
got to see them empty, and the
next day I got to send them
these pictures with it
overflowing.
Again, we just have to make sure
that ties back to the owner's
representative on these capital
outlay projects and how critical
it is as we move forward in
these projects and all of them
that are coming behind us and
coming from Des Moines.
Adequacy standards are not
equitable.
They just are not.
Federal law under IDEA
requires schools to provide
ancillary services for students
with disabilities.
Spaces for services.
are not provided for.
And the adequacy standards.
So where are we supposed to have
them.
Bring them all into the gym. I,
I, I mean, it's, that is a major
issue that needs to be
addressed. Special ed classrooms
should be allocated the same or
more storage and features as
other classrooms, not less.
Special ed classrooms, service
students, pre-K through 12, they
have curriculum needs for all
the grades. They have space they
need allocated to house things,
to provide services for students
for all the grades, not 12, or
maybe 3.
All of them, they need a lot
more space.
Not allotted for in, in
In the adequacy standards.
Some schools receive athletic
facilities while others were
told they weren't allowable.
We're not getting a new gym.
It's wasn't, it wasn't allowable
under the adequacy standards
with what we were doing.
Boy, we sure could use a new
track. I think somebody else
might be getting a track that
might be out of some of their
bonded money, but I already told
you what our bonding capacity
is. We're already taxed at 13
mLs. How are we going to fund a
new track?
Some of those things, they've
been critical in dealing with
the PSCOC and they've heard our
arguments. They have.
And we appreciate PSFA and all
the things that they have done.
They have worked hard for us
also. We've had things that
stretched outside of the
adequacy standards. We talked
about the space for our, for our
shop and the great things that
we're doing, those were
stretched out of the adequacy
standards, but then we're gonna
bend the rules here on this
piece, but not on this piece.
Where does it make sense and
from a superintendent who's
trying to plan a school, how do
you plan if you don't know what
rules are to be followed and
what rules aren't within the
adequacy planning guide.
Very challenging.
Let's talk about the last one.
Security systems are not funded.
In the adequacy planning guide.
Why is that the case?
Why on earth are we building a
brand new school that has
Not the full capability of
security that we have at our
fingertips.
Some major issues. So we've had
to go back, our district is
having to individually pay.
For some of the security system
that we need to get our school
when we get it done.
Up, up to full scale.
Just one that doesn't make much
sense to me.
Contractor availability is
limited in remote areas, raising
costs, causing delays. If any of
you have any questions on that,
we've got Bradbury Stam here.
We've also got our, our decker
our design professional hair,
um, everybody is, the whole team
is here and on, on point ready
to answer any questions that any
of you may have.
House Bill 2 had some changes
that may significantly impact
microdistrict's ability to
participate. One of the things
that I learned the two months
that I was the school business
official here in 2018 was I
found that place in statute that
said, you could qualify for a
waiver if you meet these
criteria.
And so when I became
superintendent in January, I
said, hey,
I found this in statute. What do
you guys think about trying to
get a new school. And they
looked at me kind of googly eyed
like I was crazy and I'm like, I
don't know, we already meet all
the hardest criteria. We're
already bonded at over 10% or at
over 10 males. We're already,
we're already, uh,
Meet many of the criteria that
we needed to meet in order to
qualify and they said, well, do
you think we can? And I'm like,
well, all we can do is get told
no.
We're building a school. It's
looking pretty good.
So we managed to get there, but
Now the rules are changing.
Those rules were established for
small and rural districts, but
the rules are changing. They're
lowering the milk rate from 10
to 7 to qualify for a waiver.
And the enrollment size at
school from 800 up to 1500 to
qualify for a waiver.
That's gonna make it really
challenging for microdistricts
to continue to have a place in
line when they don't have the
bonding capacity that some of
the other larger schools do.
As long as we got all the money
in the world, it's not a
problem.
But I think we keep getting told
that that's not going to sustain
forever, and so we need to
consider that.
I know we'll have a number of
questions. I need a hurry a
little bit, but you're good.
I have so much. I told you guys
I was so excited. We're excited
for the tour as well. So we're
very, yeah.
One of the things that we're
doing here, we're gonna leverage
CTE.
Uh, 25, 26 are gos K-12 will be
required to complete an
age-appropriate research
project. A lot of that gets back
to the language and terminology
that we are going to be teaching
our kids so that as they come up
through they know what it's
gonna look like when they go to
college, they know what a
research project looks like,
sounds like. I'll just talk
faster. Is that working?
Um, and 25, 26, all eighth grade
students will choose their
associate's degree pathway and a
completer pathway. Yeah, they
might change their mind, but
we're gonna give them that
guidance because we understand
that one of the critical things
that hits LFC folks and, and in
those research studies is that
students do not adequately, um,
pursue a particular pathway
toward that associate's degree,
so we're gonna, we're gonna put
the sides boards on that and
we're gonna make sure that
they're not taking classes all
over the charts, but that they
are well.
aligned with where they are
going to go.
Qualified completers, it's gonna
be a requirement by 2027 and in
2028, they will have an
individual pathway for
completing.
All the above.
Pretty good plan. I think we've
already got it in action. It's
gonna work. 35% of New Mexico
jobs will require education
beyond a bachelor's beyond high
school, but less than a
bachelor's degree by 2031. CTE
is the key for getting us where
we need to go to meet that
requirement within the state.
Aerospace film, sustainability
in agriculture and energy.
More CTE based outcomes into
Mexico. These are things we need
to be really proud of as a state
because kids that are
participating in CTE, they're
getting it done. They're
graduating at a rate of 98% if
they're involved in CTE.
45% receive post program
placement at 52% um.
Post-secondary college
credentials.
The educational impact of CTE
equals academic equity across
the board.
Here we are. Here's the thing,
in 2018, Judge Singer agreed
that all New Mexico still isn't
school students have a right to
be college and career ready and
that the state is failing to
meet that obligation.
Yasi Martinez created a
conversation. They sharpened the
focus on equity and education,
particularly low income, ELL
Native American and students
with disability.
The key that we're missing
though is that it's rooted in
personal satisfaction. We have
to be able to provide
variability in CTE across the
board. We can't put them all in
the same packages. Kids aren't
interested in the same things.
Back to those learning gras.
Mobile. Equity is education and
education is started by tending
to the social aspects that
inspire students leading with
choices in college and career
opportunities.
Student engagement is a pivotal
lever. How do we get student
engagement?
Engaging teaching.
Not more days, not more hours.
High quality engagement.
Students can find their identity
and skilled trades at the
barriers that stand in the way
of equalizing education are
removed.
A culture of innovation. I've
been talking about that all
morning. All the things that
we're doing here in Mascaro to
be innovative.
But that leaves us into a
framework that we have for CTE
that could be done statewide
through a program like has to
offer from collegiate education.
Students that are involved in
programs in CTE through
collegiate education have pretty
remarkable outcomes. Their
vision is to end generational
poverty. The mission is to
empower rural school districts
and communities to support
education through
post-secondary, leading to
meaningful careers and lifetime
success. That's what we want for
all of our kids.
We have many goals in our CE and
partnership. Data informed
decision making.
Student-directed research
projects. We talked very briefly
about that. That's going to
happen K through 12 research
projects. It's gonna be great.
We're so excited.
Avid and academic rigor.
Provide social emotional
support, those kind of things
needed for students as they
progress through their
educational career.
School operated businesses,
we've got some amazing ones
we've talked about that enhanced
community and higher education
partnerships absolutely critical
and in the success of CTE.
Lerner sited models, work-based
learning, CTE program alignment.
Focus on remote career training,
things that they can do here
remotely, come back, do it from
here, stay in this county, stay
in this community, have their
kids raised here, have their
kids go to this awesome school.
Good stuff.
More goals, the integrated
pathway, uh, peak tech.
Pathways and technology, the P20
model as pre-K through year 20.
Finding these things is
absolutely critical. As you
reach World teacher development.
We talked about the challenges
and, and teacher development.
This is one of the models that
helps provide those things in
rural districts to schools that
are affiliated with this
network.
So here we are. Here's our
policy recommendations. This is
all what we've all been waiting
for all this time.
Uh, create CTEdit educational
pathway diplomas.
There's a lot of kids that that
diploma that is a CTE pathway
diploma is more valuable to them
than maybe our other diploma of
Excellence. I think that's
something that we need to look
at. And hence, rural workforce
pipelines.
Support regional delivery
models. Again, there's that
mobile labs, virtual
instructional hubs, sharing
staffing. There's a lot of
things that we're willing to do
if you get the group of some of
us superintendents that are
here, we can help give you ideas
of how we can make CTE happen,
but somehow a lot of times we
get left out of the
conversation, but we can help
you. I know it's probably
because we talk too much, OK,
um.
Uh, flexible transportation
funding.
Rural equity. We've talked about
that quite a bit. That needs to
be funded. We got to figure out
how to fund all of these
districts, at least like they
had 400 units under the existing
current value. I streamlining
capital processes.
Technical support, policy
flexibility for small districts.
Regional collaboration.
Regional CTE centers may work
better in some areas than others
depending on how far they are
away from it, but it's a great
idea. Transportation funding and
accessibility.
Industry partnership incentives.
OK, a lot of times workforce,
they point the finger. Our
schools aren't giving us people
that are ready.
Come to the plate, come to our
school, provide the training
that you need in our school, and
guess what? We'll make sure that
they get the training that you
need.
Shared governance and
accountability.
Regarding Ptech P20 as a model
and a framework.
It works. It's working in Texas.
It's something that we can do.
We have how many rural
superintendents that are here in
support of, of this right now.
So several of us along the east
side, we're already working on
this. We have alliances. We're
already working on it. Let us
work with the legislature to
figure out how we can deliver
this to rural districts. We got
some good ideas, we really do.
High school structure.
Um, high school support
structure.
Uh, policy to allow students to
retain at a high school level
for support services. What's
that, what's that talking about
is you're 19 and 20, so allow a
space within your school for
kids who don't want to leave
home but still want to go to
school, they've got a place they
can come into that's
comfortable, they know it,
they're familiar with it, they
can finish their bachelor's
degree. This is working. It's
working in other places. We can
make it work here too.
Program designation and
application process.
A transparent structured
application process.
Ran through the public education
department for schools to
officially be designated as
6-year early college PTech.
Or P20 institutions. It will
work.
Funding adjustments.
We talked about the funding
formula, and there is the
fabulous view again as you drive
off the escarpment that you will
see that tells you all the area
that we service, and I thank you
guys so very much, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for the, for the
latitude.
uh thank you very much,
Superintendent. We're gonna go
to uh uh superintendent Flumen,
uh, thank you for being here.
Uh, good, good morning,
everyone. Uh thank you for
coming to Harding County cattle
country. This is the beautiful
part of the, uh, New Mexico and
uh I've enjoyed living here. I
will got raised on a ranch and a
farm northeast of Roy, um,
graduated from Roy in 1981, um,
When you do go back to your
districts, I know you all going
down to To and Carry today, but
if you come back, come to Roy
and look at our campus. We have
a beautiful campus. It's 44
years old, PSFA last year came
into our school and ranked us at
number 19 and uh actually had a
virtual meeting and said that
they would build us a new
school. We don't need a new
school. It'll be there another
50 years. Um, it does need
improvements, uh, we're, I'm
looking at putting in a, a new
vocational education.
building and uh focusing on CTE
programs and working with our
local um colleges in the area.
Um, and once again we have the
same issues that Mascaro has.
Kudos to Doctor Bruun for the
presentation she did, um, those
same issues we have and it's
just transportation is an issue,
getting our graduates to come
back to our communities is an
issue because
There's no industry here, so we
need to figure out what we can
do in these small rural
counties.
Um
One of the ideas that I'm doing
is I uh push forward for um
vocational education building
that I want to put in. I'm
looking at putting in pods and
in those pods, I would put in um
Plumbing, uh, plumbing pod, uh,
electric, electricity plod,
excuse me, um, construction and
then have my
Teacher be there, but have a
screen where the professor is
teaching from that college and
we would be able to work that
out and certify, um students.
We, uh, one of the things about
Royal Municipal schools, we do
have a 100% graduation rate. Our
reading proficiency is at 78,
which that is big in the state
of New Mexico. Most of our
graduates that uh graduate from
Roy, go on to a four-year
college and then get careers
high paying careers, um, and I
just wanna tell you thank you
for being here and I hope you
enjoy the tour of Mascaras
schools.
Thank you.
Great, thank you very much,
Superintendent. Um, we're gonna
go to uh committee members. Uh,
we have a, a list thanks to the
vice chair. We're gonna start
with Representative Linte.
Uh, and then to Representative
Saana and go from there.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, uh, Superintendents for
your presentation this morning,
uh, sitting here, uh, I have to
first ask the question, is
anybody from the PED in in our
attendance today.
And, and if they're not, I hope
they're watching online because
what you shared with us this
morning is invaluable in terms
of, of, of how you represent
your community and how you
represent, especially your
students of your communities and
not just, not just Mascaro, not
just Roy, not just the local
area, but, but all the students
in our state, right, cause when
we, when I sat here and I and I
thought about things, I've been
a part of this legislature for
for 9 years now, and I thought I
was the only squeaky wheel when
it came to education equity when
it comes to
Listening to your presentation,
it sounded like I was listening
to somebody that lived at a
chapter house in the Navajo
Nation or on the reservation,
right? Cause we share a lot of
the same issues when it comes to
education in rural communities,
uh, and I think that's a lot why
uh represented Chatfield back in
the day said, you know what
you're saying? He told me this
one time, he said, you know, you
Indians are saying the same
things as cowboys are saying.
And I didn't take any, any, any.
Harm against that. I, I didn't
feel like it, it was, it was in
any way offensive, but what it
meant to to him was saying, you
guys are the same the same
things that your issues are
almost very similar in terms of
how important education is to
your youngest and most
vulnerable, especially in small
communities and that what our
issues are, and there's not a
one size fits all when it comes
to education for all of our
students in New Mexico, right?
Whether that's the 4 day school
week, whether that's making sure
you're teaching your students
what you want to.
teach them in Moscaro or
whatever small community you
come from. And when I think
about things today, um, you
talked about little to no tax
base, but you talked a lot about
local control, uh, or or local
autonomy to be able to teach
your children what you feel is
important, right? And, and we've
talked about the same things
over and over and over and over
again, but we understand it, I
think at this point around this
table and in the legislature,
right? But the people that
implement these programs are the
PED and a lot
the pushback that we get in, in
many cases are from the PED and
it's may sound like I'm critical
and oftentimes I am constructive
criticism, I think is really
important. So please don't take
this again personal if you're
watching from the PED, but we
have to do some things
differently, right? When we talk
about local control or local
autonomy to be able to teach our
children what, what I think is
important for communities like
Moscaro, right? If what is
important to this community is,
is, uh, farming and ranching.
right? The same thing is, is
being said by those uh Pueblos
tribes and nations when we talk
about making sure that what
we're teaching our, our children
in terms of a culture, in terms
of a practice all rooted in, in,
in a native language, for, for
instance, is extremely just as
important, right? So when we
talk about things and you give
you your policy recommendations
and, and we're sitting here
flipping through 3 pages of
those recommendations. I take
zero offense to it. I think it's
a great and invaluable practice
that you put into place here
that you can think about these
things effectively.
And be intentional about how you
write these, and I think that we
need to share these with the PED
because these shouldn't be a
liability, but this should be an
eye opener in terms of how we
need to look at things
differently for rural education.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you very much,
Representative Lite. Uh, next,
we're gonna go to Representative
Sareana, then Representative
Herrera. Thank you, Mr. Chairman
and thank you for your
presentation. Um, I'm former,
uh, just retired as a high
school math teacher, middle and
high school math teacher, so I'm
gonna just delve into some of
the things, um, particular, just
we have so many people, um, math
scores, what was your math, um,
or your math scores for last
year or 24. Off the top of my
head, I right now do not know.
We got new mass boards in new
proficiency. We can look them
up, but we'll look them up and
get back to you, OK, because we
have from LFC we have um in
2024, your math proficiency was
about 15% accurate,
so what concerns me is, um, your
graduation rate. What is your
graduation? 100%, 100%. So if
you have a 15% math proficiency,
how does that work? So one of
the things that I
Do you know what grade you were
looking at explicitly for math
scores? Was it?
So sometimes those scores, if
you were then to look at the
next year, so 15% that year
might have possibly been a
student who has a learning
disability.
And it literally could be one
student in that.
In that cohort.
The next year, the math score
for that grade.
Might be.
In the overachieving, and we
have to test for gifted.
So the amount of flexibility
that or the amount of
variability that we have in our
scores from year to year does
not lend itself well to looking
at individual years. You have to
look at 10 trend lines of
collective cohorts.
To capture really where we are.
OK. Um, at the uh just real
quick, representative, I think
we're gonna get the um the
specific data that's cited in
the LFC brief. This is on the
ont Ta B. That's what I was
reading. Yeah, we'll, we'll get
you that number and we'll
announce it as soon as we get
that from our analyst. OK, so,
um,
It, it had years previous and
they were lower. So, so my
concern is, OK, walk me through
uh your a day of average day of
a student. What classes do they
go to? What do you cover? So all
of our core classes are in the
morning, so we start with what
time? Uh, at 7.
Well, 8 classes, classes start
at 8. We leave the cafeteria at,
at 5 to 8. Classes start at 8,
so they have math for an hour,
English for an hour, social
studies for an hour, science for
an hour. So those are, you know,
in a nutshell, maybe it's 52
minutes, but in essence, that
captures the morning of the
junior high and high school.
And then in the afternoon we go
into uh our elective
programming. So that's gonna be
shock. We have blocked periods
for shop. We discussed the
possibility of doing a block
period for math.
Because of the concern for math,
um, again, scheduling makes that
a real challenge in a small
district.
But to address
Then at 3 o'clock they leave,
they have, they have PE is at 3
o'clock starts, starts the PE
period, which is also in
practice starts so then they go
to practice.
And after practice gets over at
5:30, 6 o'clock. They drive an
hour and a half hours home,
depending on how far away they
live. So it's a long day.
It's a very long day. Um, a lot
of time wrapped up in travel,
but
To address a little bit further
the issue of the concern for
mass scores.
Um
We agree with that. We
acknowledge that.
We're working on math
interventions. We're working on
things to elevate that. We are
We can look at various different
things because we do, we have
some students who are very much
on the gifted side for math, and
then all the way to the other
end, students who
We are at a 3rd, 4th grade math
level on IEPs, those kind of
things, and maybe they're in 9th
grade. So we still cover the
full basis. It's just we don't
have all the students in the
middle to average it out.
Mr. Chairman, uh, so when would
you fit that into your day, your
schedule for
for any type of remediation or,
yeah, so, so we have two
opportunities for them. So we
have a 23 minute period in the
morning that we do interventions
where they get on, they do
intensive interventions for math
with an online program, and it's
just they, they just get on and
hammer math skills. Somebody
else can probably speak to it
better than I can, to be honest.
The other thing that we do is
We have a block and during block
period in the afternoon, we have
a math teacher who is available
every single day for tutoring as
students need for math. So we've
taken a much better advantage of
that, um, this year with
students going in who need
assistance with math, getting
that help in order to try to
increase those things. So it's
that that one on one time with
them.
OK. Um, just to, to, I'm from
Albuquerque, teach at Mazzano
High School, um, you were so
lucky to have small class sizes.
I averaged 30 to 36 every day of
my math classes and um as far as
grade levels, you know, you have
different kids at different ages
in grade levels, I could have 36
kids tested that first week,
they range from 2nd grade to 8th
grade skill level. So we, we
have the same problems, I think
they're just look a little
different, but um, I, I, I'm,
I'm hoping you, you do work on.
We see this all over the state
that graduation rates are high,
but the math scores are very
low, and that's what we have to
work at because the skills we
need for cybersecurity, for in
all the sciences is math and
it's very important and when
kids are going to college, they
have to take those remedial
classes, we want to try to avoid
that, if at all possible, but
thank you for your presentation,
Mr. Chairman, Representative,
thank you. I think you're going
to see those change. Uh, thank
you Representative Sanana. What
we're hearing back from staff is
that that was in that year, that
was sort of a composite of.
through 8th grade, uh, is the
scores that we're seeing there.
Uh, OK, next we're gonna go to
Rosam Herrera, Rent Vincent, and
then Senator Tobias.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, thank
you for your presentation. When
you talk about 400 years funding
all micro.
Districts at 400 units. Are you
talking about 100 students, is
that what you mean it's, it's
not the same, so, so the way the
funding formula works is that
units are generated based on the
number of kids you have that
qualify for particular programs.
So for example, ancillary
services, depending on what you
have that meet those criteria,
you might generate more dollars
for ancillary services. If you
have more students who are at
risk, it might generate more
units to cover the, the, to
address the
needs for the students that are
at risk. So depending on what
the demographic of your school
is, is how many units those
students create. So
As an, as an average for us, I
cannot speak to other districts.
I haven't looked at other
districts 9105s, but about 90
kids equates to about 410 units
for that value and then you're
funded for 400 units in order to
pay the bills because we still
have to have all the same
qualified instructors that
larger school does that have
thousands of kids, right? We
have to have somebody certified
in math, English, etc. They're
not, they can't all be the same
person. We, we try.
once in a while, but, um, so
does that answer your question?
Uh, yeah, a little bit. Do you,
do you, um, what would the cost
for the state be if we actually
did that? I would have to do
some numbers on that. I could
work on it though. OK, well, we
have people that can work on
that, we'll find out for you,
but I, I'm just curious with
that, with that number will be,
that's all I have our budget it
would mean a school budget of
about $2.7 million and what is
it right now? That that's what
it is because of our online
school. So you're saying you're
funded at this level with our
online school, but we start
talking about test scores. So if
we had test scores of just the
students that were on site, they
looked significantly different
than the test scores of the
students that are online.
So we have to mix that bag, and
so it doesn't represent as well
as what's happening.
In the classroom every day as it
does with our online kids
comment on school days and work
days. Thank you for teaching
kids how to work, because the
workforce these days, I mean,
it, it's just not there. You
can't find it. Nobody wants to
participate. And, you know, if
we teach them at a young age,
which I know in in Mascaro.
I say Ms. Gero, but in Mascaro,
um, you know,
You're right. Kids might be on a
feed wagon or or doing whatever
they need to do Friday,
Saturday, and Sunday, and what
a, what a good um way to be
brought up where you have some
good common sense work ethics
that.
Take you on throughout your
life. Uh, just a few questions I
had, uh, because I am a local
control guy is when you box,
everybody in the same box, it
just don't work. It won't work,
and I now that I've seen or
heard you talk about your, your
routes to get kids to school and
then I've seen the routes in
Magdalena over in that, you
know, kids having to ride the
bus for a long time.
What I was wondering is on your
um suburbans.
You can't have kids in them.
So,
so you can, you can, you can
carry 6 students in an SUV for a
to and from round. You have to
apply to NMPED for the route.
The vehicle has to be, um, has
to have the blinky lights and
all the logos and has to be
tailored to that, but PED
doesn't fund any of that.
So you have to come up with a
vehicle on your own, pay to get
it marked correctly, um.
All of those kind of things, but
what it allows you to do then is
all those students, you have,
um, somebody who's maybe not
required to have a CDL. And so
it opens an opportunity for us
to have other people be able to
to transport those kids to
school, whereas otherwise, some
of the places that we would send
SUVs, those, they, they
homeschool, they're not gonna
make the trek to meet a bus
somewhere, but we could go get
them.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Doctor
Brown.
Have you asked the question why
they won't, um, why they will
not fund suburbans. Is there a
reason why they won't find, I
have not been
given a reason as to why I do
get told that statistically
buses are safer.
And I understand that, but we
send kids in SUVs for all kinds
of things. Why not to and from?
Well, we do transport our
families in suburbans every day,
so I don't know how safety, and
you know, it's just the common
sense thinking of stuff. I'm
gonna be asking the PED that
question because it makes sense.
And if you, if you take the
price of a bus versus the price
of a SUV and it works for
mascara, then we shouldn't box
you in.
And hopefully they are listening
because it's just food for
thought, let's think outside
just for a minute. Um, pay
differentials on the teachers
coming in.
Are you funded for any kind of
pay differentiation. No, sir.
OK, so that might be another
thing that we could think
outside of the box on is some
pay differentials if people have
to move, if there's no place to
live.
In Mascaro, and you're having to
travel, it only makes sense to
have some some pay
differentials, um, the other
thing is, I was kind of bothered
by your ed fellow.
Your professional development.
Did you, did you say $1200.
I thought I heard you say
something about, that's what we
no, so I want to clarify, that's
separate. So we get about $1200
that is supposed to be used for
professional development for our
staff. Are you talking about
$1200 per person or
Mr. Chair.
And Doctor Brown.
You have professional
development for all of your
school teachers for $1200 a
month. No, we do not $1200 a
year. But that's what we're
allocated, yes, and, and the
other unique thing, uh, Mr.
Chairman, uh, Representative for
Mascaro is we do not receive any
Title One funds because we're so
small. So many of the other
districts, um, backfill these
inequities with Title I funds,
we get 0 Title I funds, even
through COVID, we had
a request special funds through
PED because we had all those
requirements and we did not have
any Title One funds and all the
funding formulas for that, and
many other things are based on
Title One funds and we do not
get or qualify for any Title I
funds. So we get very, very
little federal funding at all.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Doctor
Brown, uh, uh, the last question
that I had was on your rodeo
kids that are taking online
courses.
You said that maybe there
whenever they're say their math,
they're mixed, it's a mixed bag,
and they're doing their math. Do
you think they're just not, is
the on is the online schools, I
know they're probably not, I
know they're not as good as a, a
child coming to school, but are
they getting it?
Are they tested? Do they
understand that they're required
to all the state mandated tests.
They, on average, do not perform
as well. We have, we did put
and, and we accepted to set our
online school out as a separate
school for next school year, so
those test scores and everything
will be independent of what's
happening with our on-site kids,
so, so that's part of the reason
you're gonna see some of the
changes in the test scores,
there's still going to be a
struggle with the online school,
but we still need to address
those needs that those kids.
cats, and we have ways that we
could do that. And one of the
things that we've done is we've
started offering that block
period, they can call in and get
tutoring, um, anytime they need
tutoring during that block
period, every single day of the
week. So it's, it's been a good
program. A lot of kids really
use it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
doctor.
Thank you. Uh, we're gonna go to
Senator Tobiasin, Senator
Trujillo, and then we still have
a long list from there.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
Doctor, I want to start off with
commending you because I think
that you have shown so much
passion and innovation. Is this
echoing?
Oh, OK. You've shown a lot of,
um, innovation and passion and
one of the things that I do for
organizations around the state
as I help them map out and build
a culture that matches their
vision and mission, and I think
you've done that. Um, what I
didn't hear you say, but what I
got from your presentation is
your school district is about a
culture of engagement. And the
representative hinted to that,
spoke to that, that you're
teaching school days and work
days, I think are um urly OK.
County can take a, a few lessons
from that. We have a whole
generation of students who
aren't getting the daily lessons
that you all are teaching here,
um, the innovation and the
resourcefulness that it takes to
describe and and do what you all
are doing is unbelievable. So
thank you for that, really. Um,
you're growing a generation of
future leaders. Um, how many
teachers do you have in the
school district? Uh, certified
staff.
Right now we have 10.
10. OK, that's not a lot of
teachers, so I'm, I'm making
kind of an assumption in my
head, and correct me if I'm
wrong, do you, I'm sorry, 1111
teachers you have to apply for
waivers for your teachers to
work outside of their endorsed
areas of, they're all endorsed
in the proper areas. They are,
OK, so that's not a challenge
for you. Oh, it's a challenge,
but you get it done,
resourcefulness again, it goes
to your culture. Um, so what is
the biggest challenge as far as
that education for
your teachers and the $1200 you
know, you were talking about
that, but are there key areas
that you're looking at for your
teachers development that you
know they need that they're not
getting.
Absolutely, there's always more
professional development, and
there's always things that could
be done that help students
capture the, the essence of, of
engaging teaching and, and our
staff is really good. They're
willing to, to go. They're
willing to go to some of those
national conferences they're
willing to go to other places,
even in the state when they have
them, but we can't fund that, so
we have to pick and choose who's
going to go and, and it would be
amazing if we could
our, you know, one year we did,
um, 2 years ago, we sent our
elementary staff to get your
teach on down in Dallas. Uh,
there's, there's other trainings
that happen all the time in
Colorado, places like that that
we could get them to if we
could, if we had more funding
and if the funding did not have
so many strings attached.
That you can't buy their meal
when they go.
So that's the other issue is
that it's
That it's flexible to be able to
accommodate all the needs they
have or to bring people in. We
typically, uh, we can, because
of our low numbers, we can send
people to training in other
places, often cheaper than we
can bring somebody in, depending
on the cost of what that looks
like, but I think there's a
remarkable opportunity with
collegiate education and the
things that they provide and the
and the support that they
provide and the professional
development they provide, that
is a model that that we need to
look at in a
greater capacity even than than
just our districts on the
eastern side, but, but we need
to all get on that train.
Thank you. And Mr. Chair, it
sounds like we need a more
common sense approach to some of
this fine subtleties here in
districts like yours. So could
you speak to the structured
literacy. I think it was your
pre-K teacher that um spoke
about that, that's something I'm
passionate about for our state
is literacy, um, from, you know,
pre-K all the way to adulthood.
It's such a challenge in our
state. So how long have you been
teaching structured literacy and
do you credit that to
Your leaps in literacy and and
um grade levels. I am going to
let her speak to that, because
that's their profession, that's
their expertise, and so, um.
Ms. Fox, thank you.
OK
Good morning, or maybe it's
afternoon by now. Nope, just by
a little bit. Um, so we, we
really started the structured
literacy approach whenever our
state got behind um letters
instruction. It started with our
pre-K, um, letters EC early
childhood. She was, I think, our
very first one, and then the,
the uh PED rolled out letters
for Kinder through, I think now
it's up to 6th grade or at least
our teachers are.
up to 6th grade. Um, it's a,
it's a very intensive program. I
don't know how much you all know
about it, but it, it takes about
84 additional hours um of
professional development.
To go through the entire
program.
Uh, it's a mixture of um Zoom
trainings that they attend.
There's an online, um,
instruction portion that they
work through kind of at their
own pace, and then there's an
embedded uh classroom portion
that they, um, it's like the,
the in practice portion that
they choose particular students
to work with and to try out some
of the different strategies. So
we've been working on that for,
I think this this coming year
will be 5 years.
Thank you. And, and so, Mr.
Chair, um, ma'am, do you credit
that to your growth cause I
can't remember. I, I want to say
it was 75% proficiency or 78%
proficiency. It, do you think
that that's critical. I think
it's absolutely critical, yes.
Um, I mean, the, the most
effective way to get your
students to be proficient is to
have an effective teacher,
right? Um, teacher efficacy is
is one of the biggest
determiners of student success.
and, and improved outcomes. So
if we can provide teachers in
the classroom with the
professional development the the
professional development that
they need.
I think that's that's, that's
what we need to do, right? It's
fabulous. And Mr. Chair, one
more question, when a student is
struggling. I heard you talk
about math tutoring. It's
something that Senator Linnier
and I worked on actually this
last session. Do you have those
same tutors for literacy for the
structured reading, um, it's not
necessarily structured literacy
at that level because it's at
the high school level, but we do
have the same um tutoring
sessions available for our
online.
students in both reading and in
math.
Thank you so much. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Uh, next we have
Senator Trujillo.
Thank you. Um, thank you, Mr.
Chairman and thank you both of
you, all of you for your
presentation, um, uh, you know,
as I was driving up here this
morning, the thought in my mind
was that I'm going to learn some
things that confirm to me that
one size fits all is not
appropriate for schools or for
school districts, and you've
really kind of given me some
reasons for that. So I just want
to say thank you for that. It,
you know, it's a confirmation
that
We can't just have one solution
for all of our students. Um, I,
I also appreciate that you came
with solutions. I think some of
your solutions were really, um,
worth looking at and worth
exploring. I think one of the
challenges that we have as
legislators is funding.
Those kinds of solutions.
And I was on the school board in
Santa Fe, so I'm just gonna leap
out there and say it that larger
districts find ways to get some
of that funding by artificially
making small schools and we did
that when I was on the school
board. I believe that practice
has been curtailed, um, but
those are some of the challenges
that we as legislators have to
look at is, yes, we recognize
some districts are incredibly
small and need to have other
resources available because
you're right.
The classroom's a classroom. The
electricity, all of those
services still have to be paid
regardless of how many students
are in it. I used to say a bus
is a bus.
Whether it carries one student
or it carries 30 students, the
bus still costs the cost of a
bus. Um, I do, I, I, I think all
of my other questions have been
asked and answered, but I'm
wondering, um, do your two
districts belong to an REC. Are
you members of an REC.
Yes, we are. OK, and Mr.
Chairman,
I will just say that Texas does
a really good job of regional
education groups, and we haven't
done such a good job here. I
will note that we raised the,
the, um,
You know, the revenue, the, the,
the amount of money that RECs
would get.
Very small.
But that is really the solution
in my mind for how you have
mobile learning labs for how you
have CTE programs for how you
have shared resources for how
you, you know, uh, I just,
there's a whole list of things.
I just kept writing see um
mascara solutions. Um, I really
see those RECs as a way to do
that, and I think we just
haven't funded them sufficient
enough to make that a reality.
So thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you. Uh, we have
Representative Lu Han and then
Representative Doo, uh, and then
Senator Lanier, and then we'll
keep.
Thank, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you for the presentation.
Again, so thorough but really
confirmed. I'm gonna echo what
uh Senator Trujillo said, echo
um represented some of the
challenges, some of the
questions I've been asking in
LESD over the years and really
getting into, um, you know,
where those those disadvantages
are, but I would, I would say
that the reason why we have the
out of school, you know, the,
the extended time and those,
those were our policies.
Those are the things we passed
as a legis legislature, and
then, um, put upon all of you
to um have to uh perform and
change your schedules and
calendars in Santa Fe School
District though, we, um,
where they're going to go now,
we're going to have new
leadership, but the previous
superintendent and the
leadership of our board really
was, I just like to say an echo
there on the same um place you
were, even though there were a
bigger city and whatnot, but
they believed in the innovation
and really, um, not mandating
those additional school hours,
so I've I've talked to them a
lot. I think we really need to,
Mr. Chair, really look at that
and I'd just like to say, as I'm
looking at our proposed um work
plan in this committee.
Um, there are many things if you
see these highlighted things,
um, are all discussed today
during this presentation, so you
are studying kind of a tone, if
you will, a very strong tone of
where we are going with um
Our education policy, so thank
you for that. But I'd like to
say, um, we're gonna be looking
at the public school capital
outlay, we're going to be
looking at early childhood
accountability, and I just like
to say, Mr. Chair, I've recently
talked with uh one of the
programs in Bernalillo County
regarding early uh pre pre-K
program, and I think you alluded
to this and the overly
structured um model that they
have and I wanna just commend
you and, and, and how you
presented your model.
Uh, with the doctor, she's not,
I don't see her here now, but
that is really important. I'd
like us to take a closer look at
that, Mr. Chair, at those
different models that we have
for the pre-K programs, um, some
of them are federally funded and
so they have to jump through so
many hoops, uh, and I understand
that, but the one word that
stood out for me today was
burnout for our children and our
students, and we want to avoid
that. We want to really look at
that and those challenges if
they are there and how we are
going to um account for that as
the legislature.
Um
And so that's on our program
progress report pre-kindergarten
quality and educational
outcomes. That's going to be
next month, Mr. Chair. So I, I
would just like to dive into
that a little bit more and thank
you for giving us that
information. Also, I want to
commend you on, I tore out some
of your choice things that that
stood out to me, your CTE in New
Mexico program when you're going
to be focusing on aerospace film
and television sustainable and
green energy, sustainable and
value added agriculture. I just
want to say you are following a
very
um, uh, I guess educated uh plan
because as I'm looking at our
tax credit report here are, are
uh list of all the tax credits,
you'll see all the things I've
highlighted here that are all
part of the CTE, uh.
Focused, um, uh, education
programs you're looking at and I
just want to commend you, very
highly commend you in all the
work that you do here because
this is no strong feet, and I, I
do support local control as
well because the individualized,
um,
The more individualized we are
with our with our students and
even with our, with our
educators and giving that
flexibility. We've been asked
that over and over again, and
you talked about Yazi Martinez
and the lawsuit there. We are
told to, to really uh follow
that and we've had some, uh, a
hearing, I think 2 weeks ago
now, or maybe just a week ago
with some of that so I know
we're gonna be updated on that.
I didn't see it on our.
On our list here, Mr. Chair, but
I'm sure we're going to be
adding that, so kind of diving
into that again, you set the
tone. You're very thorough, um,
the ADA portion of your
presentation and us that that is
really near and dear to my heart
when we're looking at all
aspects of our state and how we
are, uh, but particularly to our
students and our kids and our
families, how we are
accommodating, um, in our
schools and and needing that
extra space and all these
things, speak slows to me and to
all of us. I wanna, I wanna say
you touched on
Everything. So, um, thank you
very much. I can't go much
longer because many others need
to talk, but I'm sure I will
catch up to you. The only thing
I would say, Mr. Chair, I think
we try to address, and I think
to the credit of Chairman Munoz
was talking about the
transportation and looking at
smaller vehicles with the SUVs
and getting out to our rural
community, so I hope we, we dive
into that a little bit more and
um.
In the future. Thank you again.
Great. Thank you. Uh, we, uh,
next is represent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for the presentation. Um, we
had asked earlier if anybody was
here from PED, um, I'm curious
how many folks that are
administrators or representing
school districts made the trip
to be here today. If you're with
a school district.
Or a school board member.
Well, thank you guys for being
here and I, I hope you know, I,
I feel like there's a lot about
a lot of bipartisan support
around local control and it's
growing on a regular basis. So,
um,
Happy to vote on the veto
override, uh, so that we could
have, uh, not had you deal with
this situation with the
calendars and I'm, I'm really
sad to hear about it, not just
because local control matters,
your school boards are elected
local officials, not just
because parents are their
child's best expert.
Not just because we're supposed
to trust the educators.
But because we're sitting in a
county with 510 people and
50,000 head of cattle. I was
just doing some math, and if, if
the average household in New
Mexico consumes half a head of
beef. You're taking care of
100,000 households. This
county's feeding 100,000
households annually. It's, it
matters.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, but it matters. Your
voice matters.
And I would come back for fried
pies, but I do want to hear what
you're saying cause the
headquarters is a great
restaurant, but I, I wanted to
make sure that I understood what
you were saying.
I, I, I was watching the the the
slide shows, but it sounds like
Are you telling me that RECs, I
thought the purpose of RECs was
to combine your resources and to
share services, you're not able
to combine numbers for title
funding? OK.
But you do for other title
programs.
No. Other federal grants?
No. OK. All right. Um, so then
it seems like the fix, aside
from letting you guys self
govern, uh, the easiest thing
would be the micro, the, the
you, you suggested the 400
points for the base. What gap
would that leave if we did that?
What funding gap would that
leave? I'm thinking English
language learners, a very high
Um, a, a child with, with high
demands in, uh, with
accommodations and special bed,
what gaps would that leave for
you if we were able to do that?
Yeah, I'm glad that you bring
that up because.
You know, that's for an average
year. And any single thing can
happen in a particular year that
makes it very much not an
average year. And so if we have
a student that comes in that is,
that is DD or a student that
comes in and has some other kind
of special needs, um, the, the
that funding does not cover what
it's gonna take to cover that
kid. So for example, next year,
we've got a student that we're
gonna have to have a designated
one on one for. Someone's gonna
have to ride the bus with that
kid. That's not covered.
Someone's going to
You have to be with that student
all day long, even, even in a
classroom where there might only
be 2 other kids, we have to have
a one on one for that, for that
particular child. That is not
covered. So none of those things
would be covered in this 400 per
unit proposal that that I'm
sharing with you. Um, that's to
handle an average year. So we
have another student that's
going to be coming to us that,
that has a lot of health and
And issues and one thing or
another and we don't have any of
the things to cover that either.
So there is the Puente de los
Ninos grant that you can apply
for, um, to, to help fill the
gap.
But I, I'm not real sure exactly
how much of it all they will
fund they, anytime I've had to
use that fund in the past, it's
always discounted, so it still
doesn't cover what the needs
are.
Thank you. Yeah.
Yes, that's excellent point. So
even if we apply for that grant
for this coming school year with
this student that has all these
special needs, we're gonna have
to still fund that out of
pocket. That funding comes in
the next year. So that first
initial year, we get, we, the,
that grant does not fill the gap
at all.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and,
and thank you for that. Is it,
is it possible for us to know
what the price tag would be or
for us to figure out the price
tag for that. And then I also,
um,
It sounds like your 4 day school
week is cost savings for you.
Did you do the math on what
it's, what it's going to cost to
accommodate that new calendar.
What's that gonna, I mean, not
only are you gonna have less
instructional time. What is that
impact on your budget?
I would want to hone, sharpen my
pencil a little bit. Are, are
you referring to the adjusted
calendar that we got this year
that still allows for 4 day or
if we had to go to the mandated
5 day. Um, that's thank you Mr.
Chair. That's a good point. I
was thinking about the 5 day
school week, but you, so you
should, you don't have
additional costs with the 4 day,
um, no, we would not have
additional costs the way that we
were able to be creative with
our calendar this year under the
cir circumstances.
All right. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you guys so much
for being here and thank you
everybody who traveled.
Thank you very much,
Representative Dao. Uh, next we
have Senator Lanier.
Uh, and then we'll go from
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you for, Mr. Chair, thank
you for getting everybody out
here.
To begin with, um, I'm a proud
Aztec tiger, and, but I will say
that the cats are afraid of
water, so we'd be afraid of
pirates, I guess, um, I am a
former teacher and uh in a small
area, and I think it's so
important.
The drive out here.
Makes people that aren't in
rural areas understand.
Not only the transportation, but
let's talk about your personnel,
so.
We have a base salary for
teachers, is it difficult to get
administrators to take jobs out
here, kind of, kind of throw
this, the housing part aside. Is
it, is it just hard to get
administrators out here. Yeah,
of course it is. It's, it's hard
to get administrators that want
to stay anywhere. A lot of
times, I think we're best in
blessed in both of these
districts right now. We've got
people who want to be here. So
while I do live in Logan,
mascara's where my heart is.
Um, so I think, I think it
typically is a challenge because
they look at schools like this
as stepping stones. So they're
coming in to newministrative um
responsibilities and they look
at the small schools and so
that, you know, because there is
a struggle getting people that
want to be in that area, they
have a more of a challenge than
perhaps some of the others do.
And
Is it hard to get them with the
pay.
Do you have to pay your
administrators more than, say,
Um, a school with 800.
Yes, sir. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, Senator, I believe
that that probably the trade-off
for that is that they are
introduct administrators
oftentimes. So they're willing
to step in for a lesser salary
because they're wanting the
experience so that they can step
up to a higher salary. So the
problem creates two things. You
get people in who are
inexperienced and then
retention. They are not going to
stay because they can go get
money somewhere else.
Right. Did you have something to
add?
Are you sure? OK, uh.
Yes, sir.
Um
along that lines, if you want a
quality school, you're gonna pay
for quality educator and you're
gonna pay for quality
administration, because if you
don't, you're not gonna get any
quality at all.
Because that's where it really
starts.
To get your kids a good
foundation is your
administration and your
teachers. So you need to pay
them accordingly and just like
John had said, you know, we're
in competition with any other
big schools. So we have to look
at what they're being paid to
get a quality educator and to
get equality administrator.
Thank you.
Thank you. And Mr. Chair, my
last question just kind of
closing cause everybody's asked
great questions, so they, they
took all of mine.
But
One of the problems I had when I
was teaching, I taught at the
high school level, and if I got
a student at as a freshman, for
example, sometimes I had that
student every single year.
Now, obviously, I think I had no
shortfalls.
My wife tells me different.
I'm curious if you had the same
problems because the, the
shortfalls that I would have, I
might pass on to that student.
So for example, I hate to use
this cause it's everybody's if
if I wasn't very good at
fractions by the time that
student graduated, maybe I
didn't do him justice in
fractions.
Or if I'm a history teacher and
I don't like the Civil War, I
kind of might pass over that and
so then that student might not
get.
You know, the real basis of
that. I wonder if you have that
problem with, with 11 in your
staff from K through 12, do you
have issues, um,
diversifying.
The instructors towards that,
towards all students, really.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, I, I love
that question because absolutely
and that plays to the heart of
the importance.
Of good instructional coaching.
And these microdistricts, we, we
can't afford principles.
We don't have the funding for
principals.
But that, that's the person that
your instructional coach. That's
why I asked the question when
we're interviewing people,
regardless of their years of
experience, how do you feel
about being coached, because
we're gonna dive into the data.
We've not, we've not done that
historically here. This leads
back to your question,
Representative, is that, is that
we haven't had the staff or the
ability to dive in at that micro
level to figure out what those
test scores are really telling
us and where our shortfalls are.
So when you have somebody who,
who is accidentally crippling
our kids in a particular area.
If you don't dive into that data
and really figure out where they
are, they don't know that that's
the part of the test that's
causing that problem.
We don't have the staff to take
the time to do that.
Because we can't afford to hire
a principal or an instructional
coach that provides that
service. Now we have it.
That's why I'm telling you, and
I grinned when you said it,
because we're gonna see some
changes because we can dive into
that data. We're going to figure
out where our shortcomings are,
and despite the fact that we get
$1200 for professional
development. We're gonna fix it.
We're going to fix it.
Well, thank you, Mr. Chair, I, I
just want to close if I say, you
know, uh, I think a lot of large
schools could learn a lot by
coming out here and spending a
day with you. You know, we talk
about this collaborations with.
All the different groups, math
teachers, English, whatever, um,
you know, maybe we had to send
some administrators around the
state and let them see.
What goes on at other schools.
Let's send you to a large
school, can you, can you imagine
you going to La Cueva and
walking in their gym and, and
seeing, you know, the issues
that they have too. But, but it
might be a real good idea, um,
for you guys to collaborate and,
and I think the appreciation for
small schools.
Would
We completely changed and I, and
I so appreciate you all of you,
the whole community for
welcoming us in um to your
community center, your theater,
your everything, cause I, I know
how that goes, so thank you very
much, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank, thank you very much, uh,
Senator Lanier. Uh, next we have
uh Senator Gonzalez and then
Vice Chair Munoz.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman and
thank you to both to the entire
panel. Um, I just have a couple
of things, so, uh, very
interesting to see and to hear
your remarks, but, um, first of
all I just wanted to uh
acknowledge you that I was
looking at the pictures on that
wall right here behind the of
all the graduating classes and
uh out of curiosity behind this
wall.
I um uh when did the school
start? When was the first
official just uh
Setting for a school in
Mosquito.
I went back and found the
original minutes from when it
began, and, and 1928 was when
the first school board met in
the basement of the courthouse.
That's a lot of history.
And as it was mentioned, I mean,
I think we can learn a lot from
very small districts and also
from medium sized districts and
large districts, but the whole
thing is it's still part of the
state and, and it's part of the
education that is owed to all
the students in the state. Uh, a
couple of things that I was
going to ask you, you mentioned
a while ago that you can go up
to 1313 meals.
Correct. We're, we're currently
bonded at 13 mils. I think it
just was reduced actually. I
think right now in the last
little bit, it might be down to
11, but 13 is where it's been
for a significant amount of
time.
And you also have some bond
issues.
Yes
So and that is that also at the
capacity level?
Yes, we, we are currently bonded
at that capacity with existing
bonds.
OK, I guess um in, in just a you
you know you're setting is um.
For your meals and also on the
bonding.
That probably leaves very little
room to change the yield control
on property tax for the owners.
And uh what I'm looking at here
is um uh this is a very similar
um you know, maybe in a little
bit different parallel way to
like the Zuni lawsuit because uh
based on your needs versus on
what you can generate from your
capacity, you know, that would
be uh the, the difference should
be a challenge, you know, to
that uh
We should come up with a
difference, you know, to serve,
you know, the needs that are
based there to based on what you
can generate, that's just
something I just wanted to to
share with you. The other part
is, so I hope that from our
meeting here.
That we can come out as how can
we help you?
Or how can we all work together,
you know, within this area for
Roy and Moscato in this district
and one of the ones that you
mentioned is Sana.
On the transportation,
uh, possibly, you know, some of
the restrictions is because of
the insurance.
or maybe a different setting for
equipment and uh
Uh, you know, I would like to
help you with that, you know,
whatever we can work with. Now,
at this time, do you have any
bridges that have been tagged as
not sufficient for to and from
school buses to crossover.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, uh, not that I
am aware of.
Uh because uh Mr. Chairman, if
you are, then, you know, that
could also lead to a wayburn.
You know, that we shouldn't be
having a school buses going over
bridges that are not uh uh
satisfied to the safety
standard. That's another part
that, uh, you know, we might
work with a Department of
Transportation, and we can
have them check their inventory
and see, you know, what, um, you
know, the status of uh if
there's any bridges that are
flagged in this, in this area
that
Were well.
So, uh, uh, also on the
On
On the transportation, uh,
At the present time, do you have
feeder ros?
Yes, sir.
OK.
So,
and besides that, you, you're
also with uh suburbans.
With uh SUVs, sir, that is
correct. Sometimes a feeder
route.
It's again uh individual
situation, whether a feeder
route fulfills the purpose, or
if, for example, we could drive
down to the headquarters of Bell
Ranch and pick up.
6 kids that otherwise would
maybe come here. OK. Well, I
just want to live with the part
that uh, you know, I'd like to
help you, especially on the
transportation part.
The other one is, uh, we might
be able to look a little bit
closer on the tax revenue from
property tax.
And then the last part that I
want to mention it really um.
I guess the word would be
bothered me about the school
calendar.
That here you're trying to do
more.
To which that's what.
We all do. We want to have more,
and you're being restricted to
have less, you know, and I, I
think that definitely deserves
some, you know, some uh
discussion and see what we can
work with that. With that, uh,
thank you again for your
For your invitation of being
here and also, you know, for the
discussion we have had. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you very much, Senator.
Uh, next, Vice Chair Munoz.
Thank you. Good to see you,
John. I haven't seen you in a
while. First time not at a
rodeo, so.
Good to see it. Let me, let me
clarify some stuff. So on page
two of that chart, uh,
representative Sariana. Those
are 2 are 200 students out of
all the microgrids. It's not
just this kid, this school
district that had 13% math
proviciency even though that's a
low number, it needs to go up
across the board, right?
And, and we pay teachers more
and more and more, and we're not
getting a proficiencies, and
that's a problem is we, we pay
more, uh, it was refreshing to
hear the superintendent of Roy
say, you know, we don't really
need a school. It's nice to have
nice things, right? And maybe we
should fix the things we have,
but what happens is you're gonna
run into this, you're getting
new school for $50 million and
for five years, you probably
won't have any maintenance
costs, but after that, you're
gonna start paying through the
roof cause it's gonna be a
a higher cost to maintain that
and I don't know how we maintain
that, but you know, we can't
build micro schools everywhere
and keep doing the waiver and
expect costs to come down and,
and performance not go up. Uh,
that's a problem. microdistricts
are just, they're so independent
and so different, you have to
handle them almost one on one,
the way you fund them from Roy
to to look at Vaughn, if you
look at the chart on Vaughn, Von
should probably not even really
exist as a school district
anymore, less than 80 students.
or 60 students, but I don't know
where you take those kids,
right?
Um, the other thing is, could
you tell me how you got to your
cash balances, where the cash or
the money came to get your cash
balances to about 2.7 million.
Where did that funding come
from?
0, 600,000 cash, that's the er
the operating budget was 2.7,
but you're 600,000. How did, how
did you build that pile of cash?
Where did that cash balance
money come from? So we, we've
worked real hard over the last 5
years to maintain a 20 to 25%
cash balance, knowing that this
construction project was coming
in, um, knowing that we would
have some things that we had
been told would not be covered.
So a way to try to, to maintain
that. So, so the additional
students.
That we have in our online
school is what helps fund the
day to day operations of our
school. So that cash balance we
can take a look at what the
state wants. The state wants 30%
in their, in their cash covet,
um, for a microdistrict to try
to carry over 22 to 25%, um,
that is a, a very small
percentage given the, the tight
box that we have to work it in.
So I feel like it's good
to make sure that we have that
much carryover in the event that
we have something go wrong with
some other funding aspect. One
thing can go wrong in a
microdistrict. I don't have any
other revenue pots coming in. So
our SB 9 has funded that the
largest portion of what you will
see is where I have tried to
reserve our SB 9 funds as we
come out of this construction
for things that we may need.
me.
So most of that came from your
local mill levy, correct, right?
And then the rest came from
online students. Yes. OK.
Uh, we're just trying to figure
out because we have a large cash
balances across the state that
came, that have been coming up
and on the rise, right? I think
they toppled over a billion
dollars now in cash balances,
and we don't know if that state
money that's been
set aside and built up a cash
balances, yours is, is tax
revenue and then, and then
revenue off of online students,
so I, I just want to get a grasp
on that. Thank you guys. I
appreciate your time. Thank you
very much, Richard. Uh, thank
you all, uh, members. Thanks for
great questions. This
really highlights, um, obviously
the need, uh, and the
opportunity for us to work
closely with you all as a
microdistrict and get, you know,
as members of that sort of
brought up, it drives home
particularly for myself and
others who don't represent, you
know, represent much larger
districts, how we collectively
push the strongest standards and
substantial improvement that's
needed statewide, really sort of
wherever you go, um, while it
the same time, one, pushing that
substantial improvement, which
is preparing our kids for a
challenging world, which is what
we all want to do, uh, to
acknowledging and supporting uh
local control and the, the, the
remit for local uh uh.
uh, education
boards and 3 in a system that is
very, very, very heavily state
funded and thankfully, right, we
wouldn't be able, many areas
around the state would not be
able to afford the investments
in our public schools if our
state wasn't sort of pretty
unique in how we find things,
given our state revenue system.
So all three, you know,
different things to balance, but
this is so helpful for us, uh,
in
really reinforces the need for
us to work closely and to find
the ways to collaborate and
acknowledging that is a
microdistrict, it's just
fundamentally different. I'll
have a few questions,
Superintendent offline, so um
just understanding the number of
English language learners. Um,
really interested to hear your,
the sort of the observations
around online school. It sounds
like maybe um you, you know from
some of these families that
have.
There's different transportation
options online might transition
into in person, so it'd be
curious to dig more into that,
um, but thank you, uh, members,
we're quick, please make sure
that you're uh lunch requests
have been communicated, um, to
our LFC staff, we're gonna go,
we're a little bit behind, we
started a bit behind. We're
gonna go to our tour now, uh,
superintendent, uh, and I know
there'll be a lot more chance to
interact there, and then we'll
go straight.
to lunch after that and then
we'll reconvene here, um, we
should probably do that about
1:30.
Yeah, we'll, we'll reconvene
here between 1:30 and 2 for, for
the next presentation.
Superintendent, if you can take
us on a tour. We'll, we'll bring
you lunch here. uh, and we'll,
we'll get back here at one,
about one or so because uh the
chat fields are bringing lunch
here.
