these tech areas because we've
gotten, we've made an impact so
far, but this, uh, this state,
uh, funding is gonna just really
help us launch to that next
level, and I really wanna thank
you for that.
Um, as far as the challenges for
some of the space companies, um,
one of the things that new Space
has done all along is we start
off with, you know, discovery
and strategy, then we bring do
the uniting and then the
igniting and as we did the
initial discovery, we, you know,
we work at the company level,
but we also
Host a national level state of
the space industrial-based
conference which the very first
year 2020 is where we were able
to use those New Mexico, um, EDD
funds to help us get started,
but what we do is we put
ourselves, we're trying to grow
this space industry, so we put
ourselves in the place of those
companies and what are their
gaps and challenges and issues
and so all of our programming,
um, you know, we have this in
your slide.
We talk about the various
programs that we work on are all
about, um, addressing those gaps
and challenges for the companies
and we've been able to with our
Ignier company and just within 2
years helping.
This return on investment to
help these companies get to.
59 million in investments and in
government contracts and so it
really helps them, you know, a
key part of, of helping the
industry grows, helping those
innovators, whether they're
small startups or they're early
stage companies, medium stage,
you know, get them to the
funding sources and in in what
newspa Nexus in the middle is
navigate some to those resources
they need so that they could get
their concept.
To a product all the way to the
money and that's how we get them
through the valley of death if
you've ever heard that term. Um,
the only other thing I wanna
tell you is, uh, that news one
of the resources that we have
found over you're gonna, we're
gonna tour the launch pad and
you'll be able to see this is a
great place where they could get
to some of the high cost
equipment that the smaller
companies can't get to to be
able to demonstrate their tech
and um another big uh gap that
companies
talk to us about is um.
Having secure facilities, a lot
of our, our, um,
Military partners have a lot of
opportunities for funding for
these companies, but they can't,
they have to be able to see it,
get access to it, and so we're
really excited about the
opportunity enterprise revolving
fund.
Uh, awarding 12.5 million to
build a new space center of
which it will have a 10,000
square foot rentable secure
facility that these small
companies can come in.
be able to get access to all
those opportunities and it'll
also have the incubator, the
continued operation of the
incubator within that and
there'll also be a little bit of
space to rent to those
companies, so that's what
Newpace Nexus is about, like I
said, you'll hear a little bit
more about the launch pad when
we give you the tour and I just
welcome you again. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Uh, Ms. Newman.
Hi, I'm Maggie Newman. I'm
representing Road Runner Venture
Studios. I wanna thank you for
inviting me and thank Casey for
hosting, um, Roadrunner Venture
Studios is an NMSIC backed
venture fund.
Um, we are a traditional venture
fund, but we
into these companies. We also
offer a huge amount of support.
So we work with our founders
every day on providing talent,
uh, product.
Operations and fundraising. So
