Good morning everyone
I think
as much as we're enjoying
smoothing and catching up with
each other it's time to get on
to work and uh first item this
morning is
the president of the western new
exile university doctor shepherd
so thank you for joining us
today and thank you for
incredible hospitality that you
show this committee and every
time the committee meets here we
always love to come to silver
city.
Yeah.
Brothers line this is there's a
icon on your mike
I like I like governor others
line representative block said
are you chancer are you
president just call me joe until
you get to know me and I I think
that for so no fis new mexico
the type of people we have and
in leadership positions that
were pretty down earth people I
know we have our differences at
times and so forth but I think
one thing that we don't have a
difference on is the desire for
excellent health care and I
think that's what this this
committee does yesterday you
hear from a number of wonderful
people that including our our
nursing area and some of the
things we're doing at western
new mexico university and I
apologize that I wasn't here
yesterday I have to tell you my
my wife valeries stole me away
and kidnapped me I had no idea
where I was going for my
sixtieth birthday to to let you
know it it involved nappa but he
was it I had no idea that that's
what she was taking me but it
was it was delightful so we just
got back late last night
health care real quickly and
then i'll i'll let you move on
mister chair to to your
regularly scheduled program
health care is critical
whether it's the universal
health correct care that was
formally or informative called
obama care that has moved
through our system and now
benefits millions of americans
or whether it's here locally
nevertheless I feel that it is
under crisis if you take a look
at nursing programs in
particular and representative
jones was telling me I guess
you're the only nurse in in the
legislature so you know this
better than anybody else
we're seeing we're seeing some
difficult times ahead in terms
of the supply chain of nurses
yet the demand is is
astronomical as baby bloomers
are now hitting
uh their sixties like my staff
and seventies and so forth and I
can tell you this as that person
who needs more and more access
to health care it's an important
part of.
My decision making in terms of
what I do where I go where I
work etc that being said when
you take a look at a small
community like silver city or
damning or any of our particular
areas that have rural hospitals
they're particularly vulnerable
yes albert kirky and your your
metropolony metropolitan areas
also have a crisis but ge- but
giving people to come to rural
areas is is difficult
not only in the health care area
but also in the legal
professions as well
as the two are related after
times the intersect but to still
suffice it to say that let's
take here you're going to hear
today from some some wonderful
people here some of our doctors
here locally and I think one of
the worries that I have is we
have whether they like it or not
we have an aging population in
terms of art our doctors and
nurses are our practitioners are
are health professionals and
when it comes to rural health
care attracting people to come
here to silver city or places
like us is as great of a
challenge as getting the
qualified individuals that any
any places looking for now
there's some strategies for that
in one of the hopes is that you
can support institutions like
ours like eastern like like a
northern light like highlands
because those are the
institutions and I I mentioned
the comprehensive as opposed to
the research institutions those
are the institutions as well as
the community colleges around
our great state the have those
rule communities and when we get
a nurse practitioner when we get
AAA a a nursing assistant when
we get an r n
there is probably about eighty
percent of them will stay right
here.
So if you think about that for a
moment in an investment here is
more than just simply saying
let's get another nurse or let's
get another nurse practitioner
it's about saying we're
committed to a rule areas in in
in new mexico and getting them
the access to qualified
professionals.
So that's part one part two is
as we move along right now you
could be a hundred plus miles
above above our earth in the
international space station.
And if something happens to you
you better have somebody on
board who can help you out and
there's not too many people on
board the space as you know why
do I say that and moving into
the world of telemedicine and in
telemedicine of course again uh
mister chair you and I were just
talking about dicks and a
beautiful place for those of you
who don't know dickson go up how
how we sixty eight up towards
house in about november first
hit their long art festival and
you're going to find a lot about
this wonderful town but that
town represents so much of new
mexico in the sense of towns
like it where you might have a
population and you may not have
access immediate access to
health care or you might have an
urgent facility and you need
telemedicine to to applicate
whatever it is that person is
doing so that you can get the
immediate treasure before you
can get shipped off in that
particular case to santa fe
perhaps and here was your new
mexico university as you know we
are embarking on those projects
on that educational uh
curriculum to provide the
necessary skills for
telemedicine because at the end
of the day so much is going
toward the urban areas that that
I think for a large state fifth
largest in the nation
geographically
in particularly a large state
that sport sports pipeline like
that's like some of the other
more larger states
that.
Is in my mind probably the only
thing that will save us in terms
of the crisis that we think is
approaching so for this
committee I ask you just a
couple of asks one support
telemetrics and support those
programs there are embarking
upon that I think that will pay
dividends to our future number
two support programs that will
track the necessary health
professionals into the rural
areas uh to to augment whatever
is happening in those particular
areas in three of course support
all of our universities as you
know i'm the the president of
the council of university of
president's support our unims
who are in our new mexico states
who are churning out doctors and
nurses and so forth they're
doing an excellent job i'd put
him up against anybody mister
chair I don't want to take up
too much time but the but I want
to conclude by saying thank you
for coming to our wonderful city
and if there's anything that I
or my staff can offer you please
do that hesitate to to to let us
know and if you have a medical
emergency you have a nurse right
here
thank you
well thank you doctor and it's
always great to come to a
western the campuses gorgeous
the hospitality is ferocious and
the food is excellent so I wish
we could extend our state but
tomorrow at noon will be rapid
it up and thank you again for
for welcoming us thank you and I
hope I hope you come back do any
members of the committee have
any questions for doctor
shepherd
doctor representative jones did
you want to ask anything about
the nursing program
mr chair i'm sure there are a
lot of things i'd like to ask
about the nursing program we
could probably talk all day
about that i'm a particularly
interested in how I can help the
debit in a new campus move
forward and anything I can do to
support them and we did discuss
that yesterday so i'm looking
forward to that
thank you thank you mister
chiran representative of jones
root quickly as you know we just
open up a a brand new health
profession's learning center uh
down indemning and we have I
think a couple of cohorts are
really going through that.
Um we need to expand that but
equally as important sometimes
we focus so much on the nurses
and the and the doctors but we
also need to expand our work
force on the nurse on the
nursing assistance and some of
the things that we can
immediately get into the high
schools and so forth and so I
look forward to future
conversations representative
jones has just been a leader in
terms of banking sure that her
community in her area is is is
moving forward and make and
providing that health care she
often times challenges me in
others to make sure we provide
the necessary instruction down
there that's applicable to our
community so thank you for your
leadership
thank you so much and I
appreciate you as well thank you
mister
thank you representative
representative of chase you had
a question taken mister chair
and and thank you president I
appreciate remarks I just when
you said max discuss the fifth
largest state geographically i'm
always saying that back when we
were trying to get public
education for three and four
year olds with disabilities
what we would see to people is.
You know what when a family is
seeking specialized services for
their young child who have some
developmental challenge they
were having to drive the
distance between washington dc
and philadelphia to do that and
so sometimes connecting those
diets helps people understand
how specially populated and huge
we are but I think it's a smart
thing to do and and everybody
should be too
we're trying to convey the need
and the urgency thank you very
much happy to be here
representative chase in mister
chair just a real quick note on
that not only are are you
traveling the distance between
washington DC in philadelphia in
that geographic area are
probably at least a hundred if
not two hundred hospitals that
you have access to where is here
in between that area you have a
lot of land but you don't have
that you don't have the medical
care.
When other quick note i'd like
to add to the conversation the
social work program here
actually has more graduate.
Students in enrolled than any of
the others in the state because
it does it exclusively at no
exclusively but largely online
and people from all over the the
the country are taking graduate
program in social work here at
western through their.
Teller education program and
mister chair just a brag it's
it's ranked in the top ten
online programs in the united
states
representative thompson thank
you mister chair when you talk
about that I have a cousin in
oregon who did the social work
program here but wonderful
well the reason I brought it up
because my daughter in law is
currently enrolled as an
undergraduate bsw level program
student in the western program
excellent will thank you so much
for tell your daughter thank you
for supporting our our
university and we appreciate any
inheritance that uh she might
get from you to accomplish
you obviously don't know
our family situation but that's
a that's really a very very nice
thought
anybody else will thank you so
much doctor shepherd and and we
look forward to uh if not as
legislator to other
opportunities to visit here in
the future thank you mister
chair thank you members of the
committee it's a diet but like
to be here and thank you again
for being part of our wonderful
grant county all the best.
So members of
we have AAA nice busy schedule
ahead of a solicitor started
right away with the first panel
this morning which is from the
silver city health care
providers and once again mister
rotero was here down the
terrible from the deliberate
medical services terresa ari
saga doctor only saga is a
psychiatrist
she's with she's a chief
behavioral health officer the go
mick mcmillan the chief
operations officer it southwest
bone and join institute and I
think he was here yesterday made
a comment during public comment.
And again robert would occur the
CEO and our host last night at a
very nice dinner at the healer
regional medical center and was
there a fifth person that was
going to join us
yes mister chairman and
committee if we could have a
doctor down steiner join us up
here
and thank you for the
flexibility and adding on and I
understand doctor standards of
private practitioner in town yes
our doctors dinner is the
private practitioner in town and
also a physician at all medical
service okay well we turn it
over to you then
good morning mister chairman
madame vice chair and committee
members thank you for the
opportunity to speak with you
again it was really a pleasure
yesterday to talk about gme
educate gme and rented the
program from the state yesterday
before we before we jump right
in I do want to acknowledge a
couple of people I want to think
w m u again for hosting this the
session and specifically duly
more alice for courting eighteen
or the food and all the other
good stuff that western provided
I also want to acknowledge
actually ogilvy she is our
behavioral health program
manager at a local medical
services she's joined us today
as well
um put a lot of work into
coordinating not only the event
in the event tonight but also
some of the other elements of
our discussion
of course I always want to say
thank you to the gmipa and the
members the g my I p a that are
here
and rob whittaker from here the
regional medical center who's
joining us and I don't want to
forget the prospectors who are
also here and coast pantry this
week's event so thank you for
that I did put a folder in front
of you at each of your seats and
inside that folder has the
presentation on the left side
on on the right side it has the
services that we offer that all
the medical services and lastly
as your invite you to nice
reception is in iraq with the
instructions to get to the
facility tour and reception.
So thank you for that so i'll
jump right in
again dental terrible on the c o
h dollar medical services i've
been here since twenty sixteen
if it's okay i'd like to do the
heavy to our member to a quick
introduction then i'll come back
to the presentation hi my name
is that sad saga and the cheap
behavioral health office thirty
dough medical services then have
been there for over four years
and before that
for a fifteen years was the
chance of her health unit
director at her regional.
Good morning mike mcmillan
here today on behalf of the
gmipa and southwest bone and
joint.
Robert would occur see of heal
of regional medical center
I am down on stainer physician
and board certified pulmonary
critical care sleep and internal
medicine a practice here for
approximately twenty five years
and i've moonled and practice in
other cities seven in all in new
mexico.
Thank you
mister chairman committee
members
now going to start walking
through our presentation and the
slides in the hand out I first
just wanted to do a brief
introduction about hidogo
medical services we were
incorporated in nineteen ninety
five in large bright new mexico
at a time when health care the
health care system
basically went away the only
services available for many
years down there was an
ambulance service another large
county in the state of her dog
will county
the community came together with
local representatives and
established at the federally
qualified health center in
nineteen ninety five will be
celebrating thirty years or
thirty year anniversary next
year
so we've been serving the region
now for those twenty nine years
primarily in her dog or and
grant county as we expand it and
ruin to grant county however we
do serve
the entire region we we even
have patience coming to us from
donate county
catherine county of course luna
county sierra county but the
majority of our clients come
from granted his doggle county
we are as a federally qualified
health center we are a division
underneath health and human
services at the federal level
or fhc's around the state in the
nation are managed by the health
resource service administration
we are active members of triple
a c which is our crediting body
to ensure that we are a patient
center of medical home at all
our sites patient there medical
home are critical for high
quality safe delivery of care
we're also an active member of
the new mexico primarily care
association and also joining us
today in case you want to speak
to her the event ramidas
american the ceo of the primary
care association
who you all know very well and
we really appreciate appreciate
the fact that she's been
traveling around the state to
support all the community health
centers.
Um
so so with that that's the
introduction I think you all
know there's approximately
twelve hundred and fifty health
centers across the nation
serving with one and ten
americans and that's reflective
in the state new mexico as well
and that's a little over twenty
thousand delivery sites so to
put that in context if you look
at the next slide that we have
on slide three this is a an
example of one federally
qualified health center that has
thirteen clinical care delivery
sites in the region
i've tried to represent this in
a way that shows that we provide
primary care medical care
behavior comprehensive behavior
health services dental services
and we have the honor and
privilege of working with our
municipalities to run five
senior centers around the two
counties so you can see that
any of our residents in head all
going grate county can get to a
primary care site within about
thirty minutes so when we talk
about healthcare access you know
we really appreciate your
continue support federally
qualified health centers and
other private practices around
the state public and private
practices to ensure
you know to continue to improve
our health care delivery system
in new mexico.
On slight forum to switch over
and show you a little bit of
are.
Access statistics so the first
one here is the graph that shows
their distribution of
unduplicated patients by service
delivery you can see the numbers
that it relates to unduplicated
patients in our medical services
our behavior house services
dental services and family
support i'm sorry our greatest
volumes occur in the medical
division and the primary care
side and we deliver the little
services with approximately
fifteen medical providers.
But one of the other things I
want to point out when we talk
about family support at each ms
the term that we use in the
industry of the neighboring
services so these are the
individuals that we employed to
make sure that we're addressing
social determinance of health
while they're accessing health
care services another major
responsibility of our family
support team in community health
workers is enrollment making
sure that our patience get
enrolled in the appropriate
health insurance that they
qualify for the also work to
qualify qualify our patience for
slighting fee because we offer
sliding fee one of the key
important tenants of health
centers right as you all know is
that we do not turn anybody away
from her in ability to pay
so we are always available as
long as we're open we're going
to we're going to see you
at had all the medical services
and other health centers across
the state when I want to point
out on that first graph is you
know the number shows fourteen
thousand twenty six we were at
sixteen thousand three hundred
and fifteen prepandemic so it it
began the question why did we
drop so much on the number of
unduplicated patients and is
directly correlated to the
number of providers we have.
So that you obviously access to
providers are going to decrease
the number of patients that can
be seen at any given time across
our system on the right hand
graph shows the number of visits
and this is the last fiscal year
fifty year twenty four and if
that sixty five thousand nine
hundred and eighty four visits
that's down from approximately
eighty thousand visits at our
high point prepandemic
if I wanted to share those
numbers with you
the next graph on
flight five is a representation
of the work for specifically
license independent
practitioners work force changes
that we've experienced so you
can see the numbers going all
the way back to twenty twenty in
the heart of the pandemic the
blue graph the blue bar excuse
me is representative of our
primary care providers the red
is our behavioral health
providers and the green is our
dental staff and of course the
the purple bars total you can
see that those numbers have
dropped specifically in primary
care we talked yesterday we had
to close our residency program
so that was the biggest impact
in the decrease in our primary
care providers uhm dr artisagan
her team have done a wonderful
job recording behavioral house
providers she's going to share
more information on that shortly
and we've stabilized in our oral
health care or on our dentist
providers to support the
community but we cannot find
hijanis it's been two and a half
years for us to build a recruit
hijanis so that's been a really
tough um impact of the oral
health care delivery system for
us
now the next line at eight i've
shared a little bit of our
financial data to to demonstrate
where it hopefully be able to
connect the work force dynamics
were facing with the financial
impact that we started talking
about will be yesterday our
payroll has remain relatively
flat but when you look at that
number on that first line there.
Do you know that we have less
providers so that's it that
immediately tells you if are
salary costs for remaining flat
and we have less providers the
increase costs that we talked
about a little bit yesterday to
recruit and retain providers and
other health care professionals
has changed the dynamic has
changed
also our french benefits have
have relatively remained flat
but look at the contractor cost
when we're having trouble
recruiting
professionals in order to
maintain access in all of our
thirteen clinical sites we
sometimes have to go out and get
contract providers and you can
see the the increase there was
two hundred and fifty percent.
Uhm specifically to contractor
cost recruitment fees at a
hundred and eighty five percent
increase again not not a
significantly large number but I
touched on this yesterday
it costs to recruit
professionals as going up
year to year and in the last one
there's a four hundred percent
increase on relocation fees to
get providers into the area and
again this is specific to her
dog or medical services.
The last graph that I have on
page six here is.
The that next connection which
is we're experiencing in health
care decreasing margins and it's
just getting tighter and tighter
in.
Again I I acknowledged yesterday
and I want to say again we
really appreciate them thank you
all for the increases in
medicaid rate medicaid rates
that you've made for all the
health care system we appreciate
the increases that you've
approved
for our pps rates for f q c's in
anything that you can do to
continue to assist that year the
year is going to help us stay
viable in able to maintain
access at all these locations
that we do uhm plus lots of lots
of challenges ahead of us but
what's the great opportunities
and it's it was it's always
inspiring for me to hear the
dialogues and the the passion in
the support from our legislators
to continue to improve the the
health care delivery system so
with that I am done with my set
presentation of course happy to
answer any questions an hour at
the end but if it's okay mister
chairman by chairman committee
members I will end it often
after.
Thank you mister chairman and
the committee for having this
here and allowing us to speak to
you about the service as we
offer it mean dog medical
services i'm your specifically
to talk about being either a
house so
and the first slide of the
behavior house say they have a
list of the different types of
providers we have we have a
providers ranging from the
society attracts
say getting his practitioners.
One of whom we just hired who
also is going to be doing
primary care within our division
we have their replacement a
health therapists substance
misuse counselors we have pure
support workers care
coordinators community support
workers cycle social rehability
coordinators and we also have a
medication assisted treatment
coordinator so we have a number
of providers within our
department twenty three
specifically therapists and
psychiatric providers but as a
whole including all the support
providers as well we have thirty
six within our division
the next slide shows the
different types of divisions we
have with in our entire
behavioral health apartment so
we have our psychiatric services
which are provides like yaduate
consultation to our premium her
providers within our practice
but also just within the
community and also other
counties we see people who have
difficulty accessing the
payatory from other counties who
come
to seek our services we provide
a psychology services which
includes psychological and your
psychological testing which in
the past and our area was a very
difficult to obtain some people
were waiting a year sometimes
three years just to see
a psychologist or
neurosicologist for testing
would often have to travel
either to last crucials and
usually the alba coordinate so
being able to
recruit to a neural psychologist
and psychologist was really has
impacted how we able to deliver
those services to people within
this division we also have our
new mexico psychology internship
consortium program which is an
internship for
people who are becoming
psychologists in the state so it
includes he dockland medical
services.
The program in shiprock and then
also the new mexico be ever
health institute and last
figures then which people from
all over the country i'm apply
for these positions to do their
final year in working towards
earning their phd in psychology
and the hopes of this program is
also to recruit psychologists to
were on your mexico
we have our community behavior a
health service line which makes
up most of our mental health
therapists and various locations
addiction medicine services
which includes are two classes
location which we've invited you
to see this evening and also our
medication assistant treatment
assisted treatment program
including
therapists are substance used
counselors psychiatric providers
and primary care providers.
We have are behavioral health
specialties program including
our comprehensive community
support services where we have
our community support workers
who go out into the field to see
patient some to help with
whatever they may need help with
they may need help learning the
bus system they might need
support and seeing their primary
care providers or their
psychiatric providers
just one on one services to help
with a lot of case management we
also have are a second social
reabilitation within this
division which does the same
thing but in a group setting
located at one of our are
locations here in silver city
and then we have a care
condition program which we have
a care link
your mexico program there
there's several I think twenty
six now throughout new mexico
that provides integrated care
coordination for people who have
both a site ah mental health or
substance use disorder and then
also a physical health
condition.
Um the next slide show indicates
of visits and twenty twenty
three at each mass specific to
mental health and substance use
so looking at the total number
of visits for the year twenty
twenty three we had just over
fifteen thousand visits with
just over twenty five hundred
unique patients.
Including a substance miss you
services which were just over
fifty five hundred and almost
two thousand unique patients for
those services.
We also provide crisis
intervention on a small scale so
we provide cases intervention
which means we'll see somebody
for who walks in any cipic scene
right then and there will see
that the same day or if someone
is in their appointment with
their dentist or their primary
care provider and is having some
sort of behavioral health cases
if it's something that that
provider can't address for
whatever reason than
they'll call us up and ask you
know do we have someone
available to see somebody and so
often will either go to the
location where the patient is at
or are the peace or sometimes
over time department if it's if
it's where they need to be we
provide services in person most
of the time but also through
teller health so we do provide
behavior how services in eight
of our locations in person but
also through telehouse so we
have several telehealth
providers both psychiatric and
mental health therapists
if if if we don't typically
provide even to a health in one
of these locations we can create
a tower health visit with if
someone works into the animals
location and we don't typically
do teller out there we can
help with them providing the
service if somebody need is a
need
looking at dinosaurs so I wanted
this slide in the next place to
be there because it just
demonstrates that we do trees
the spectrum of sakyatra again
behebra behavior health in
general psychiatric and
substance use disorders from
alcohol related disorders other
substances including op disorder
stimulant use depression other
disorders would include bipolar
disorder anxiety disorders
include postrating stress
disorder and other panic
disorders
disorders that we may often see
and children but sometimes it
does attention deficit and and
other disrupted behavioral
disorders and.
Included in the other meantime
disorders includes things such
as gets a friend yeah or artism
spectrum disorder.
Things of that sort
looking at the next slide I
already described what we do a
little bit with crisis
intervention in here describing
where you do a lot of it in
person and through telehealth
and also very often through warm
hand dops we have a really good
communication between our
primary car providers and are
behavior health providers.
Most of the time our behavior
help providers can
can manage the crisis and help
resolve it but sometimes they
can't and someone needs a higher
level of care so at this point.
Depending on where the patient
is located sometimes we often
use ems or sometimes we have to
involve a law enforcement
depending on the situation to
have the patient taken to our
local emergency room where
they'll see a telesake provider
that's located somewhere else
um
may not even be a new mexico but
a teller psych provider who will
then evaluate them and determine
if they need impatient
hospitalization.
Yeah sometimes
people waiting for these
services are waiting for hours
because at the lack of telesake
providers out there.
Sometimes when sits determined
that somebody needs and patient
treatment uh specifically
impatient security treatment
sometimes people are waiting
for days sometimes especially if
there are children just waiting
for a bed to open or for the
availability of mass to take
someone to where they need to be
and if someone needs these
services they're leaving their
home their community this region
this part of new mexico just to
receive these services when I
was working when we had an
impatient ever healthy in it at
the hospital and I was working
there.
We had a impatient but all we
had was in patient or outpatient
those were the only two choices
and often people need something
in between there and and we
don't we couldn't offer that so
a lot of times and now without
our out or impatient unit we
find that people are trying to
manage to crisis as an
outpatience and the best they
can with their opportunity
providers and and sometimes they
may not meet criteria for a cute
impatient care and so people
either end up managing the cases
or decompensating and end up
needing eventually to go to an
acute impatient career sometimes
end up in the detention center
you know depending on what what
the situation is and and may not
get the the the treatment that
they need from that perspective
we we also educate our patience
and our families on the use of
nine eighty eight and we often
get referrals from nine eighty
eight sometimes
you know their appropriate
reforms sometimes it's hit and
mess where we may get a referral
to yaka larger hasn't been an
existence for a number of years
here or we might get referrals
from people in the about critic
area to to class where you know
it's clear that they're not
going to drive for hours to get
here and so are the people that
answer our those referrals will
work with the person and try to
find the services that they need
an in the specific part of the
state and so we were card to do
that
in the next couple of the next
couple of slides is just going
over some of their substance
misuse statistics in our region
of the state so it works at our
local emergency department
emergency department and learn a
county and then sierra county
and the types of things that
they are seen and so just
looking at a couple of months
ban with alcohol related ed
visits we thought those ed saw
about four hundred patients that
were identified.
And I think that a lot of times
this might be under reported or
not identified appropriately
this two month span we also
within these emergency
departments are
twenty five op overdoses
related to that substance use
also looking at the span of a
year related to stimulant to use
the eds are around a hundred and
thirty visits and then over the
course of a year ed saw around
twenty twenty one overdose
related visits related to bensa
daza pings there's I think is
really under identified just
because a lot of times people
will over does some penzos and
wake up from it and then we hear
about it a couple weeks later
and
maybe they don't go to the
emergence from at that time
maybe they do but it's maybe
identified as to a satellite
easier longer and overdosed I
think those may be under
identified there.
So moving on to the next
languages talking about the
future of behavior how that each
ms specifically and then
regionally
so right now we have the six
divisions I talked about with in
each mass serving different
types of behavior health needs
and we are working hard at.
Opening up another division
related to christmas services
recognizing that how important
the treatment of the fourth
spectrum of crisis services is
needed and
city and our community in our
county in our region this part
of the state so right now we're
working hard at the reopening
our crisis trish center which is
up to twenty three hours of of
treatment services for any
behavior health cases whether
it's related to a substance use
or misuse or mental health cases
we
for one of the we were open a
couple of years ago and had to
close after just a couple of
months a service because has
we we couldn't sustain the cost
we list just about seventy
thousand dollars each month
those two months that we were
open and just decided we had to
close and come up with with
another way and so we are doing
our part in trying to look at
how can we work with improving
our reimbursement rate in one of
those ways it's becoming a ccbh
a certified community behavior a
health clanic we recognize this
over a year ago and worked
really hard at um becoming a cc
because hms does it as you can
see a offer an array of being
brown services and william we
really are close to meeting that
creek total criteria for
becoming a cbh however we run
and reran into some road blocks
there with some language at the
federal level of seating why we
didn't one of our major sites
are took us a site didn't
qualify
in becoming a ccb c because we
offered too many of the services
there and it was built after
twenty fourteen and so after
about a year now we have been in
discussions with some nick
bookers and his team and they've
really been.
Quite helpful and working with
us to come up with some
alternatives and other ways of
working around that to see what
how can we move forward and
become a ccb so we're doing all
that we can on our part to do
that so that we can negotiate
a better reimbursement rate
because back in twenty twenty
when we got a reimbursement rate
back then it wasn't enough to
cover the cars and now
everything has increased as that
that a reference to the the
increase in whether it's
employing providers or the
increase in supplies or just
anything related to providing
these services it's going to
cost more than that
reimbursement rate we were given
back then so that's what we're
trying to do as well as is do
our partner working towards that
we also recognize that part of
crisis services involves mobile
crisis response so throughout
this region of the state we have
a spattering of places that
offer out patient services each
message one of those what we do
you know whether it's a line of
county or and i'm
he dougle county catching county
county we there's people that
offer out patient of our
services you don't go county has
also in the last couple years
been able to offer some mobile
crisis response through a grant
that's how they are getting
funded and i'm not sure how much
longer they have on that grant
but they were working together
with
lawn forcement to provide some
of those services and it all
goes county but nowhere else in
this region is there something
that set up and functional right
now for mobile cases and
definitely not in grant county
we recognize that that's an
important part of cases response
and cases treatment
also as stated before nowhere in
our region do we have shant to
behavior a health all the and
patient behavior health units
whether it's related to
substance used or mental health
acute psychiatric it's really
mainly located in alba cricket
area and last cruces area.
And of course we have our
impeaching unit and last vegas
and a few throughout new mexico
but those are really where
things are located so when
someone needs a cude impatient
sake of treatment we need them
we need to get them to the
emergency room or call up at the
hospital in a range for some
sort of
transport to these facilities
that are outside of a community
and a lot of times just being
outside of our community as such
a hardship for people and then
on top of that the
transportation a lot of times
they've had patience who haven't
been able to come back or get
back or get back part of the way
because they don't have the
resources whether their family
doesn't have the resources or
their home you know house let us
home let's don't don't know how
to get back and somehow find
their way back because this is
where they live and so there are
a number of areas that we have
to overcome and still have a
difficult time overcoming just
trying to get people that
treatment that they need
unrelated to the spectrum of
cases care.
So.
What if we have this regional
behavioral health care system
located here that can serve this
region of the states.
You know that for part of it
includes the crisis charge
center part of it includes
mobile for a part of that region
mobile crisis response.
For all of that region of
fourteen day crisis
stabilization unit because
something that we learned and
that I learned to in the
hospital is that a cases is not
always resolved in less than
twenty three hours a lot of
times we need more time to help
determine what this person needs
with this individual needs to
become stable.
And i'll sell an impatience
thank you trick unit so the
concept of this regional people
health care system was derived
through discussions with
lieutenant governor how in what
I live in talking about the need
for a comprehensive behavior of
health approach or a
comprehensive approach to
treating the spectrum of
behavior health and then also in
some cases talking about public
safety you know in some cases
and also just looking at you
know the the number of people
that end up don't not getting
these services and end up either
on the streets or a detention
centers
I can save a confidence that I
know that it's his belief and
it's our belief at hms that this
comprehensive approach really to
address all these needs
absolutely need support for
cases services where they were
talking about prices triage you
know that is reimbursement rates
were talking about cases are
mobile response the the crisis
stablization but also support
for housing support for
transportation in our very rural
and frontier part of our state
and then the support for
inpatient services whether it's
for details or substance use
treatment or acute psychiatric
care and then just support for
access to all of these
behavioral services.
If we can do that
I believe this can be we believe
that this can be replicated the
other parts of the state there's
sort of regional behavior health
care approach
and so
the things that you know that
there were just thinking about
to just some bad up is what if
we can be that pillars for this
regional behavior of health care
system delivery approach at
comprehensive approach to
delivering the so much needed
behavior or health care at all
different levels.
And
and the the last light of mine
you know looking at this um just
wanted to show you just have a
graphic there of what this could
look like so ray in the middle
you'll see crisis trash center
you know one little person's
label crisis charge center and
outpatient and fourteen day
crisis stabilization that
building right now exists that's
where we have to class that
through we provide our
outpatient services we
provide psychiatric services
there we provide medication
assisted treatment there we do
individual treatment group
treatments all of those things
are cases charge center
we're looking at currently how
we need to renovate it so that
we can accept involuntary
patients which with you know
with the help of that bill a
couple years ago senate bill
three time that was passed to
allow crisis charge centers to
accept involuntary patients from
different places including law
enforcements
that this building rate there is
labeled as that exists and so
what doesn't exist yet but we're
working towards the mobile
crisis response team in on how
that all works in conjunction
with our emergency room
and then
a future of fourteen day crisis
stabilization units and perhaps
even a future impatient unit
treating children at a lessons
adults both for substance misuse
and acute psychiatric care.
And then keep over the last year
plan
they could actually add mr
chairman and committee members
if it's okay i'd like to ask
mister robert would occur to say
a few words and time the
experience that he has well
running the hospital and of
course specific to behave.
Yeah thank you dan mister chair
and committee members
I I think what's been shared as
is really important and uh
within our emergency room we do
see uh a good number of patient
to come in for
behavior health needs that don't
have other medical needs that we
might be able to treat and and
take care of it in that way and
eh dr zaga mentioned about
transfers and with healer
regional we we on the county
mass as well and we operate that
and it takes trucks and cruise
and an empties out of our county
and out of our community to to
transfer those patients.
Um
it's a it's a complex to complex
problem and I I think i'm very
supportive of uh doctorators
arguing doctor that altered with
the idea of creating this uh
regional comprehensive type of
deal
that the the staff the
provider staff that you need and
and care staff and
infrastructure and there's a lot
to goes into it and and there's
a lot of support and need for it
and and i'm very supportive of
it the
one of the things that uh uh
i've been asked is about
what we do as an acute care
hospital in and that's what we
are and we're licensed as an
acute care hospital and and
there are things that that we we
do that no one else can and and
it's important that we focus on
those and and make sure we do
those to the best of our ability
right and we think of emergency
room right surgeries delivering
babies right and those things
and those are very important and
and the things that can be done
with the partnership with others
is is important to me and I have
expressed this worth massive and
their leadership team is i'm
very supportive of helping them
and
on this path and on this road to
improving behavior health or
brain health services in our
community and in our region
really and it's it's critical
and it's important.
Uhm.
So I have thank you mister
chair.
The technician would go mister
chairman and committee members
we have a one last light if it's
okay all summer rise these are
the legislative support items
that I wanted to list out I
think yeah one of think that are
disagree for doing the next of
standing job of lane out that
regional be held a house
behavioral health model in the
importance of being that model
across the state in rural and
front here new mexico
I I don't want to overdramatize
it but I think we all know the
urgency is real and we do need
to access because you know it's
a lot of life
a lot of individuals needing our
help across the state so the
first item on slight eighteen is
the re- regional behavior house
system funding we're working on
what those projections would
look like for a short and long
term strategy to develop the
continual of care that was
discussed all the way from
mobile crisis immigration with
our ed with two karfa or or
crisis center current crisis
center fourteen day and the
impatient unit
hmf will be coming forward to
request funding to renovate a
nineteen sixty primary care
behavioral health facility is
one of the first facilities in
silver city and grant county
it's a very old facility the
complete renovation it serves
almost four thousand unique
patients every year with over
fifteen thousand visit so this
is the center that gets used
very heavily it provides
behavioral health primary care
entire practice services in that
facility so
what will be coming forward for
that uh additionally
as you all know and we talked a
little bit about this yesterday
about the community had an
active shooter um and that some
of the elements around that we
know that our our partners in
the community is the silver
school systems and they've
invested in some technology
security system technology to be
able to identify individuals
entering our facilities that may
be carrying weapons and we
really need some help on th.
We have so many locations with
the crisis that we deal with
want to make sure that we keep
our employees say violence
against health care workers has
increased substantially over the
last several years both pandemic
and it's always a challenge for
us to look for ways to keep our
employees safe
we also have two very aged extra
machines we
in large birth we have an extra
machine at the only actually
access in hedogo county and it's
approximately eight years old
and then we have another one to
silver city that we use for
outpatient
and so we're going to hopefully
be able to get some support from
you all to get those two
machines replaced because they
are at the end of life
we also talked a little bit
about transportation
one of the excellent solutions
to access to care is having
mobile health units and we're
looking at getting quotes to see
if we can get some port for a
dental mobile unit and a primary
care mobile unit our vision is
too for example to take those
units out to areas like had
cheater new mexico and animals
in burden and different parts
may be sapio so that we can
schedule patience for a full day
using those mobile health units
that will also minimize the
transportation concerns that we
face we do home visit that hms
but it's a very difficult to to
keep up with that demand for
home visits
the other big one is just how do
we build a comprehensive
transportation system in wrong
in mexico
we've we've come up with a
strategy to develop
transportation system that's
tied to the mobile crisis
response unit until we're we're
working out those details and
just trying to figure out the
best funding mechanism and
operational approach to you for
that transportation need.
That the next one on number
seven is uh increased funding
for senior centers now is that
directly health care related yes
absolutely one of the contracted
services that we have with the
trip a is transportation of our
singers to their medical visits
the cost of food in the cost of
staffing the centers has because
increased of course like
everything else currently in the
budget for all five senior
centers h m s is about two
hundred and fifty thousand
dollars short for FY twenty five
to be able to continue services
through the whole fiscal year we
do thank you for the support and
increases the funding for senior
services last year it's been
very helpful to make up some of
that gap but they're still
additional need the last three
items again
just continue looking at our
reimbursement rates for medical
services across the health care
system a specifically for us
it's our pps rates for medicaid
and then number two you'll be
hearing more about the
rural primary health care act
that has been in outstanding law
that has supported our rule
health clinics across the state
and it's been around for a long
time any any support for that
continuing and or increasing
would be greatly appreciated and
then lastly I believe you've all
heard about the what's going on
nationally with three forty b
drug program it's an increased
jeopardy not only for our
community health centers but
also for our local hospitals
that are providing discounted
medications for almost
vulnerable patients so in
collaboration with a medical
primary car association will be
coming forward to talk about
state legislation to to protect
the three forty b program in new
mexico so more to come on that
but I just wanted to put that on
your later so that's all we have
on the hms I mister chairman of
committee members in I will go
to mister might technology
thank you.
The.
Mr chairman members chair
members of the committee.
Thank you for this opportunity
to present to you first going to
present a little bit of
information
from the healen multi specialty
independent physician
association or what we call the
ipa
i'm recently appointed board
member administrative board
member to this board and the apa
members which compose and grant
county composer twenty four
physicians and allied.
Healthcare professionals from
nine medical practices.
And include primary care
maternal and child health care
and behavior health care
providers as well as specialists
I apologize I don't
I don't have an electronic
version but I provided this
resolution to you.
And it hard copy.
The apa met with our local
legislators and our listening
governor earlier this year and
met about the challenges around
providing health care in
southwest new mexico and from
that this resolution was created
since doctor stiner is able to
join us this morning i'm gonna
let him expand on that a little
bit
later on
and i'm gonna move on to uh some
specifics about southwest bonnet
join institute.
Many of many of the challenges
that the I p a identified we see
it southwest born and joined
institute and to give you a
little bit of background
southwest born and join
institute a celebrating twenty
five years in practice this
month.
Doctor brian robinson founded
south responding joint in
nineteen ninety nine with three
employees and are five thousand
square foot building
since then southwest boring
joint institute has expanded to
include advanced imagine open
air m r I physical and
occupational therapy.
And durable medical equipment.
We now have twenty nine
employees and a facility that's
twenty thousand square feet and
includes
lease space for the veterans
administration search we serve a
four county region southwest in
mexico
last year a medical providers
are a physicians and pa
completed seven thousand seven
hundred medical appointments or
pt's and oc
completed six thousand four
hundred thirty visits.
And
we performed four hundred
seventy two more I scans.
Also are surgeon performed a
four hundred forty one surgeries
that he would regional medical
center.
As a side note to many view here
may not realize that doctor
robinson and germc were
the first surgeon in hospital to
complete a com- uh computer
navigated total ne joint
replacement back in twenty
twenty
two thousand one
the need is here
doctor robinson is booked out
for total joint surgeries to
february twelfth twenty twenty
five
he performs two
total joint surgeries on mondays
and two total joint surgeries on
wednesdays.
The service these services are
greatly improved the health of
our patience in our communities
over the years but is a doctor
or terror it mentioned the
business of health care is
becoming increasingly difficult.
I will present some of those
challenges to you and hopefully
some solutions that will help
our practice and the other
practices in our area
wherever an aging population and
a high we treat a high medicare
and medicaid uh patient
populations and these two payers
are lowest reimbursing pers.
As compared to commercial payers
but we do not limit the number
of medicare or medicaid patients
that we serve and we accept all
commercial plans.
The first challenge I want to
make you aware of is at the
federal level was cms and since
two thousand one
twenty twenty four medicare
physician payment has decreased
twenty nine percent when
adjusted for inflation
it's simply an unsustainable
path with our growing medicare
population and I urge everybody
here to to reach out to our
congressional delegates and urge
them to fix the medicare
physician reimbursement
next I want to speak to medicaid
reimbursement and we are
thankful for the recent
increasing system a medicate
reimbursement over the last two
years but I will point out those
increases the higher increase is
targeted towards a specific
providers and primary care
behavioral health and maternal
care.
The floor is at a hundred
percent of
medicare right now so medicaid
cannot pay any less than that to
other providers uhm and but we
do receive
some higher reimbursement for in
m codes which is at a hurd and
twenty percent currently next
year that will go
to a hundred and fifty percent
and it's greatly appreciated but
again I would like to point out
that
if you're not in that those
three groups you are receiving
for the majority of our cousin
receiving the hundred percent
which is the floor rate and so I
would urge you as a body to also
when you increase.
The medicare rates that you
increased the floor rate and I
would suggest that maybe we re
increase that floor rate to a
hundred and twenty percent
this next session the other
piece that was
included in the budget bill with
medicaid reimbursement last year
was there was a six percent.
Uh can bonus increase for
federally qualified health
centers
doctor or terrible runs and
that's that's great for him but
I would urge the body to
consider a six percent increase
for all rule healthcare
providers.
And
I believe it's important that we
we don't have winners and losers
with medicaid
reimbursement and increasing the
floor and providing a bump
of whether it's six percent or
another percent to all rule
health care providers is gonna
be vital for us to continue to
provide services
next to speak a little bit about
medical malpractice.
Over the last four years are
medical malpractice increased
protection forty four percent.
This is last session there was
some money what there was called
the subsidy that came out
of some funds from the
legislature in the governor
which would just this last month
we received
some money back from our medical
mail practice courier.
And I believe uh art our group
it was sixty percent of our our
premium now the premium is just
one piece of that the state
assessment is another peace it
did not apply to the state
assessment just to uh the
individual premium.
That two is greatly appreciated
um especially if we can't
fix medicare to make it more
affordable for private providers
but this was this too was just a
one time fixed for twenty the
premiums paid in twenty twenty
three.
The
officer the superintendent of
insurance just came out with a
bolt in last night I think for
again they have a car about four
o
providers they went ahead and
there are providing a subsidy of
a hundred percent so that's
again it gives great for those
providers I believe behavior
health and primary care were at
eighty percent other premium
other specialists like or the
predicts where it's sixty
percent so medical mail practice
is is an issue to huge issue
with
a private practice of physicians
again our cost over the last
four years.
I've done it forty four percent
and so it's it's a a critical
issue if it can't be fixed I
would suggest that we continue
these subsidy programs
another challenge
for us as the health care
delivery fund last year there
was eighty million and that fund
this year there's forty six
million we had
some of the challenges I find
with that
front is in order to qualify for
the fund you have to have either
a new service or an expanded
current service.
For our practice that's very
difficult we we pretty much of
are providing comprehensive or
stupidity services outside of
building of a free standing
service center there's there's
nothing else we can expand on.
But we did have an opportunity
this last year
a physical therapy practice was
closing our community and they
wanted to continue working we
brought them on board so I
thought this was a great
opportunity to.
To apply for this phone
but unfortunately from that
application and second
application that I submitted for
an expanded m r I services.
We receive zero dollars it was
very frustrating a lot of work
into those applications and from
the from what I saw on the award
e list I didn't see
any arm small private practice
medical clinics that received a
word
so I will probably apply again
this year for the forty six
million but I i'm just not as
optimistic as I was in the past
when that first came out so I
would I would urge the body to
look at.
Maybe another way to help rule
health care providers whether
it's we're if there is losses
that are in train financially
or just other mechanisms to help
rule health care providers
besides creating a new service
or expanding a service.
And with that.
Yeah.
Although one of their piece of
when I add about a medicaid
reimbursement as we currently
pay g r t on those are mco's
however don't to reimburse is
there for uh grt
summer at four percent summary
six percent however great here
is I believe eight point one two
percent I tried negotiating with
mcos to reimburse us the full
eight percent g r t that we pay
and they refuse to and I know
the language is in is in the
budget bill that uh
uh you know if you're not in the
card up providers that you can
and negotiate with himself on
a higher rate than the floor
rate but the misuse refuse to
negotiate i've tried and they
will not uh negotiate and and
they say is due to the all the
changes and increases and rates
that have been happening over
the last two years.
Uhm I spoke a little bit about
the surgery plus program and how
there's just another hardship
our specifically right now and
or the period practices around
new mexico.
And and and I don't know what
the fixes with that that's a
legislative uh created body in
nipsier I don't know how we can
encourage them not to uh
contract with specific providers
and albert turkey were outside
this date and try and
bring in network providers at a
thirty percent discount so
those are some of the challenges
and I think the opportunities
that we see as a practice here
in in southwest new mexico and I
will be around it at lunch and
dinner if there is any
additional questions or or one
on one
and I thank you for your time.
Thank you mike mr chairman can
many members don't done who get
him.
The.
My statements are coming from a
group of people I was asked by
the I p a two bring their
thoughts here and i've talked to
doctors throughout the state I
have been in private practice
for twenty five years and.
It's interesting because I was
at a conference a few years ago
and I got from
uh
third world country stated that
he had to drive a taxi in order
to practice medicine and I
thought well that's that's
something and now
i'm still in private practice
but I find I have to work for
one of the organizations in
order to continue private
practice and I love I love
medicine i'll keep doing it
I actually hope I die on a
handball court but second.
My wife's arms and maybe third
seeing patients
the some of these things I
wanted to mention.
Are other people's ideas but I
agree with all of them and we
they mention my mention that the
two thousand eight reimbursement
rate for
medicare was our medicaid was.
Thirty eight dollars per r u v
and now it's thirty two so
that's a decrease from sixteen
years ago so my the
consideration I think is on one
bundle medicaid from medicare
and increase the.
Medicare.
I had medicaid reimbursement.
The state as you all know is
very short of providers and
shortness of providers means
that fewer people are there to
help with difficult cases this
means that more practitioners
are practicing and the fringe of
their companies see due to
necessity.
This causes providerings the
anxiety in what is being labeled
as more moral dilemma it also
means specialists they're
spending their time hearing
problems that should be dealt
with by a primary provider.
When I ask a patient
who's his primary provider they
often mentioned don steiner and
that's me and I say i'm not a
primary i'm out there
subspecialists not just
specialist and they say what I
see you more than anybody else
the wait for a specialty
consultant six months to one
year and over kirky and santa fe
and i've been last month last
year working part time and
sounded fee
so the considerations that might
be considered are to bring more
providers to the safe to the
state the same say sense out of
the private practices as
corporate providers the state
does out thirty million to
corporate entities.
Thirty million should go to the
private.
People.
Corporate medicine is
problematic providers are
dissatisfied with working for
corporations.
If new mexico could become the
state that encourage private
practice people will relocate
here to escape corporate
medicine people hated the
physicians aided that much.
The.
Yeah i've had my experience with
that the people i've worked have
always been very nice to meet
gracious and i'm very thankful
to them but when I have to spend
at a half an hour with a patient
because he's has some serious
problem that I can't deal with
quickly.
I'm very late I can't say it's
ten minutes i've read in
journals now that it's
acceptable to say your ten
minutes are almost up that's the
new school the old school is
always late so my attitude is of
your doctors always in time.
He's not my type of doctor.
Because you can't rush with
patience and when you do your
just going to make mistakes so I
tell my office if i'm behind be
sure not to tell me to hurry up
because i'll go slower and so
that's the kind of medicine we
will not have in a few years.
It'll be gone because people
like me will retire and I won't
retire right now because the
state is so short a doctors I
move around the state.
At least in my practice my
practice is based here.
So corporate medicines is
problematic because it destroys
I think the person that has to
rush and see patience.
Providers feel patients come
secondary to profits outside
providers have paid fifteen to
forty percent less for the same
procedures as corporate entities
and as some of these facts are
very hard to come by of asked
various sources to could try to
be more accurate so that you
don't think i'm a presidential
candidate and
it's a extremely difficult to
obtain exact numbers.
Providers are not paid facility
fees by the insurance and that
is a biggie and i've and i've
had in my own experience been
charged extra money to have.
Court or extend in such an at
that is a solution but I don't
think it's a solution that the
patient should have to pay for I
think it's a solution that the
insurance company should be
paying for me
I stated I was going to santa fe
and working for a group and i've
kept some of the patient time
because I knew they weren't
going to be able to get a doctor
and i'm making house calls on
because that law is my overhead
and I also realize doing these
house calls or not doing the
house calls in here and having
the expensive and office and
staff and clean up in parking
lot in the whole shot that i'm
having an expense that i'm not
being reimbursed for in any way
and that if I worked for the for
the corporate system they're
expenses are paid for if a
corporation sets up a uh in
office out in timbook to the
state or probably pay a good
portion of that and if I do it
i'll pay the entire portion so
facility fees would be nice.
The.
The uh.
So my considerations on this
that new mexico should supply
the same incentives to private
practitioners it does to
corporate providers there is a
belief that corporate providers
are getting more reimbursement
from the state without providing
a better product new mexico
could set up a system for
helping providers set up a
private practice.
The state can market that it
will get the practice going and
help keep it going because I
don't think anybody in this room
realizes it's like I do the
amount of distrust and.
Burnout the doctors are
experienced because of corporate
medicine and I think it's an
opportunity for the state to
switch gears a little bit and
have a whole department of
private practice and couragement
where where the state would
actually help private doctors
and i'm not saying that the that
these people here don't need to
help but i'm saying that people
like me do need to help.
The gross receipt tax was
already mentioned there that
that should just be seized
ceased stopped malpractice new
mexico ahead a reputation for a
good place to practice in the
past because of the cap on the
malpractice payouts and the burn
I am sorry and the board the
board was a group you could go
before and discuss your
situation and most of the time
they'd say it was nonsense and
sometimes it's a was new max a
couple will be lucky to get with
a recent legislation being there
raised cap new mexico will be
lucky to get any new providers
it's not when doctors are
searching out they look at what
the malpractice situation was
here what map brought me here
twenty five years ago michigan
had a bad malpractice situation
new mexico had it good
malpractice system.
People were thinking providers
for participating during the
pandemic and shortly after the
afterwards words the state
raised the malpractice awards
capt
and that was a terrible shock
and it's a terrible way to say
thanks.
Earth gives me doctors diner
method of mine apologize for the
rupting mister chairman
committee how we doing on time I
know there's a cuanet.
Yeah we usually like to leave
time for a committee to ask
questions but there won't be any
time today if we if we don't
repent up okay thank you mister
chairman okay so i'll cut it a
little shorter
so my mysolution to the
malpractice problem is limited
amount the laws could take from
mel practice cases if you put a
cap on the the malpractice
lawyers earnings
like
there there wouldn't be a mouth
practice problem here that would
leave there would allow the
patient whose experience the air
to
get his fair share which that I
think what was tried to be
attempted from the legislature
but all it's caused is the fact
that there is great going to be
great difficulty getting doctors
here.
And I think the final thing I
want to mention is that change
in the environment of the state
would be extremely beneficial
what needs to occur is the state
needs to realize that the
medical community is an asset
something to be proud of rather
than something else to build
safeguards such an office of
medical retainment that deals
with all providers and
especially those who are about
to leave the state the office
would work with physicians as to
spell aloneness and moral
deliver and keep the provider
here I have found that the new
mexico doctors are not here for
the money as they think they
would do better and almost any
other state in the us they are
here because they love medicine
the land culture and the people
if the state would provide a
reasonable alternative to
corporate corporate medicine and
solve the malpractice dilemma
there would be no doctor
shortage in new mexico.
And I thank you for a listening
to this but thank you thanks for
the presentation you certainly
played out a number of issues uh
members we will take we'll just
move a half hour we have a half
hour for questions so if if you
have a question
my chest one question each and
then
if you don't have a question
just move right person and when
we start with you representative
vincent and move right around
thank you mister chair and
thanks for that presentation and
I think mom I had plenty of
questions but i'm gonna choose
one so it's going to go to
mister wienerger and.
On your transporting on the
mental health issue that you
have when you're having to use
your locally ms to do transports
is it
is it turning into a problem
where it's hard to staff trucks
to do transfers and are you
running in the red or in the
black doing your transports
thank you mr chair committee
members I appreciate the
question so yet we do we do
running to challenge there was a
day and our emergency room we
had a seven behavioral transfers
waiting in our emergency room to
be transported and it was just a
took it took almost eighteen
hours to get that accomplished
and it is a challenge for our
our staff and ram tears and in
having an ambulance leave our
community in those no staff
members and we do have our ems
director does a great job of of
working to make sure we still
maintain proper coverage here
and and I don't know if we can
say necessarily we we run in the
black because
we need to make sure that we
have proper coverage as well as
make sure we have these
transfers in and we do what it
takes to to make sure patient
carriers
proper
thank you mister german
i'm going to give i'm have two
minutes and one but it's one
question so we need to be quick
and I will I will be very tough
about the two minutes when
you're two minutes are up you're
done so thank you a voice
chairman is real bulldog about
this
representative block your turn
all right thank you mister
chairman how quick can I talk so
so I think this is for doctor
arizage I apologize if I masked
your name so my question is
about telesake providers.
You talked about some mister
chairman i'm wondering I know
that they have to be registered
in the city new mexico and I
know that's probably a barrier
do you have any issues with that
with providers who want to come
to new mexico but is it is it
too strict and stringent
mrperiod so to get a providers
license to new mexico does take
a while and specifically we've
had problems with the medical
bord I know not just in our
division but in the primary care
division so that and there was
even one that we were recruiting
a physician to come here and
then that recruitment start
because it was just taking too
long or gonna take or be too
much of a process to be come
licensed in new mexico so it has
been a barrier
thank you mister chair I don't
know how many seconds I have
left but I definitely think
that's a good thing to talk
about I don't know legislatively
what we have oversight with the
medical board but I think if we
can make it easier for providers
to if they want to be from a
distance help tele medicine wise
that would be really good
especially for rural new mexico
thank you mister chair
representative johns
moving right along that was a
great presentation so much good
information that i'm happy to
have
john got my question and wanted
my top question second i'd like
to speak with you doctor what's
your last name steiner okay I
didn't have that on my my
paperwork here but doctor
steiner do appreciate uh the
care you give to your patience I
understand that moral injury and
wanting to provide good care and
not being able to because of a
system it's it's a hardship it
really is and thank you for
continuing your practice we keep
hearing from individuals from
from providers that meant now is
a big issue and it's what's
causing physicians to leave the
state and preventing them from
coming to new mexico but here
from individuals but there is a
a strong voice that says
road back out to that no that's
not true so.
I don't know how we can say that
I guess we have statistics
somewhere that have that argue
with what the providers are
actually
telling us but is there a way
that you can collaborate with
fellow physicians to be a strong
single voice to show that what
you're saying is actually true
it is actually a physician
opinion that this is why
physicians are leaving I know
i've heard it from my own
possession it depends on which
physicians you're talking to
because you have to remember if
you're in private practice the
all points point to you when
you're in a in a in a a group
practice say h m s they cover
your mail practice if you're in
with the university you don't
pay it and you may get in
trouble if you get suit but
there is a different focus if
you're the primary person who's
getting sued versus the whole
institution and
I think it also depends on your
your you know being named in a
lot suit is not a good thing but
it's not as bad it's a kid and
if you put it in perspective you
you you get sued and then you
move on or you get sued and you
move out of the profession and a
good percentage of the people
move out
and it you know I I don't think
these fat they're very hard to
find
new mexico does not i'm sorry
time is up to
talk later thank you
yes we'll talk later about that
thank you so much presentative.
Thank you mister chair and my my
question is this with their
conjumpted so one of the things
is you indicated that you needed
a x missing in this area could
you please elaborate on what
type of expert machine is that
in our eye or not and you also
indicated that if people need
behavioral health care that
sometimes they have to go into a
detention center are they
getting the service is better in
a detention proceeding uh center
than they are in in a private
area okay they took me a
chairman committee members and
representative turned on i'll
take the first question the
trade machines that we
have in our facilities are
standard for flat films they're
not any of the specialty attract
machines we just do basic films
in the outpatient setting if if
it's okay mister chairman i'd
like to have a parties out and
for the second question on
detectors here so what I what I
was meaning there is that a lot
of times when people aren't able
to get the behavioral services
they need they may be
compensated become either more
psychotic relapse on substances
and then for whatever reason end
up in the detention center and
and unfortunately it is had you
know well a detention center
isn't really the place to
receive behavior all the
treatment where fortune enough
that are detention center
does the best that they can and
is really trying hard to get
them the treatment that they
need but most of the time people
don't get what they need in a
detention center and so they may
end up in a place for they
shouldn't be or that could have
been prevented if they had the
proper treatment
thank you mister chair
then to rodriguez thank you
mister chairman I will be quick
because representative earned in
here ask a question on the
marine machine that was going to
ask but let me ask you little
further when you mention that
you you only have limited
equipment do you have an its
called open mri or or just an in
general for people who have you
know behave your health problem
sir.
Other phobia problems do you
have that
mr chairman committee members in
senator rhetoric is we we don't
would have emerged at all we're
just doing basic attracts and
usually not directly related to
the behavior health care
services so in just a quick
point in hedogo county is the
only actually machines that we
have available to that community
and population of about four
thousand people on my goodness
now that's even worse than what
I thought thank you thank you so
much for that
represent representative to
russia's this would be a good
opportunity for you to use your
capital outlay for your
constituents
thank you mister chair
we have supported our our
medical facilities here he'll
regional and uh hms and so forth
but
it's not enough my friends there
are apologies to give you don't
have enough time that we run out
of time but
dan i'm not calling the riser
doctor so my robert inducts all
yours I know you will and are
all of you guys did a wonderful
job and expressing the needs of
our area and art my colleagues
here that are sitting here
understand how far it is to
drive here when you come here
once and then if you drive to
animals or a cheater you'll
really get to know what how hard
it is to to be in rule new
mexico and so I I know that the
you know there's so much going
on here I can't I can ask enough
questions but i'll see that we
need to support you more all of
this is the compression that
you're that you are struggling
uh due to inflation and the lack
of able to your lack of being
able to provide
a billion oh a way to bill
because you don't have enough
providers I would it kind of
getting that sense.
And then the reimbursement rates
obviously aren't enough your
your
miss people are going all over
the state because i've talked to
some of the drivers doctor
standard i've been in in the
mortgage business here for a
long time and you just look
around from when we are kids
that are so your dad's one of
the last doctors that had their
own private practice you see it
changing and so we absolutely
have to answer a lot of the
things that are going on
but we appreciate you expressing
everything that you're your your
challenges
got bless you at you know that
i'm in full support of of you
guys and we do have to address a
lot of things that you have
already been stated thank you
very much but thank you very
much for your time
thank you representative
representative chase thank you
mr chairman
I was just wondering if any of
you now
whether on insurance companies
have
edit I I know it's true of our
mcos there is a guideline on how
much they can raise their
premiums but what about them the
insurance market in general is
there any control at all under
premiums
thank mister chairman committee
members and representative chase
you thank you for the question
it depends on the insurance type
of course for our governmental
payers those rates are set as
discussed earlier by the state
for our commercial payers or
private payers
they traditionally want
negotiate with the providers
themselves to specifically get
those rights and online and I
believe that's the question that
you're asking as far as how much
control we have on that and
hopefully I answer that question
yes you do
I guess it just want to say I
I used to work for
a colleague whose husband was an
obynic you I am and they live in
chicago now and it has nothing
to do with any dynamics here in
the state of new mexi.
Co but he was one of the few
doctors that I knew who wasn't
who really felt like he had the
insurance companies number and
felt there's a lot of the
intention here between
physicians and and those areas
was really do to the insurance
company profit and without
manager of mister chair excuse
me madam chairs the time keeper
held like i'm really answering
to her
I will I will conclude but this
was twenty years ago and and I
do think that
perhaps there's a market for a
socially responsible insurance
company.
Thank you representative of
chasing up but representative
pathetia robot cover will go to
you next
thank you mister chair and thank
you very much all the panelists
are I think it's very important
to hear the lived experiences
detailed in the how you detail
them are because you are the
voices and our patients are
patients your representing our
patience and it's important to
hear and so I thank you for that
especially dr steiner who went
into a great deal of detail I
have
personal stories obviously and
related to insurance companies
as a representative of chasing
mentioned and their party payers
pay as that was a call payers
who actually contribute to
corporate medical care and
continue to enhance it at the
risk of the patience and so I
definitely
understand especially in the
area borth of pedic surgery that
i'm my personal
self has been dealing with
insurance companies and the
failure a lack of having or is
the pedic surgeons in the state
so I appreciate I wanted to see
that I appreciate the time we
took up in particular I have a
question there is a direct
correlation as we all know
between dental care and overall
medical care their direct and on
the chart on page of five it it
is very telling because the
receipt considerable drop in
dental care and so my question
to you mister is you mentioned
the lack of gentle hyjennis so
what do you think we need to do
suggestions
where we could be helpful to
support the dental cleaning
usually leads to.
X rays leads to other problems
and that's really important so
can you address that please
thank you mister chairman and
committee members recognize the
I have a quick answer by me
we we have two dental assistance
that are very interested in
become general hijanist and h m
s is going to sponsor them to go
to school at donate already on a
break
in the sister from the state
would be assistance to the
provider to support them
financially that's going to be
the only way we're going to get
out of that dental hygiene
crisis new mexico thank you
thank you very much
up senators so the olympics
thank you mister chair it's so
hard this mail practice thing is
so hard to entangle we can have
data from the of c that shows us
the mail practice rates have
stayed the same while hospital
profits have gone up and so
yeah for it were little as I say
in it's for hospitals are there
problems with individual doctors
and what can be done about that
individual practitioners I
understand that it's a dying
breed
mr
member
senator
it is a problem for a private
practices we initially after the
change we saw over a thirty
percent
increase in and premiums and and
I don't know what the fixes
to the issue itself but
until there is a fix I can just
recommend keep the subsidies
coming like we were provided
first twenty twenty three
provides some financial
subsidies to those providers and
the that will certainly help but
to the larger issue
that's above my my pay greater
apologies.
Think you don't think I so have
a second in weekend to talk
about this offline I just want
to mention this frequent users
that really show up when you
talk when you identify the
unique patience and I am
fascinated about how we can
reduce the frequent users and
resolve the issues
you know went and from thank you
mr chairman committee members in
senator office in the primary
care out patient city we we
don't necessarily see that
similar we don't see a frequent
users the way you might think
about it in the cut care in the
sense that we want our patience
to return on a regular basis the
more primary
the more care they get in a
patient center medical home the
less likely to be end up and and
emergency room in appropriately
and or in an impatience day.
Representative charges
thank you mister chair I I don't
have really any questions about
you want to make some comments
and so first off and get there
so much here rate
and so first if I want to see
that yes I agree we do need to
address the issues that are
facing fcs
I think that they are crucial
critical to
primary care
in the entire state of mexico
I wanted to say also that
the new mexico finance authority
I have understand they have a
money available to help with the
kind of building that you're
talking about and I don't know
if you've had the opportunity to
to check with them to see what
that looks like
in terms of the real health care
delivery act my understanding is
that it was intended for
nonprofit and not necessarily
private groups
and so i'm not sure you know how
we fix that and if we do you
know what is I mean it's sort of
opens the door in terms of you
know giving money
to
to ever I think what we need to
do really is really fixed the
healthcare system and I think
the the point that doctor
started made in terms of
corporate medicine is really
right on I think that we have
gotten into a situation where
corporate medicine is really
driving health care and were not
focusing on what people really
need in terms of health care and
that's really what's driving
doctors and you know
independent providers al of
practice because that is so
frustrating the corporate
practice the corporation of
medicine and the the four profit
healthcare industry is what's
easier to live thank you mister
chair.
Good if you say some others
three second are you saying that
nonprofits can get the money but
you could look at you could lump
all people in private practice
at least internal matters and
family practice is not profit
because they're not making
profits thank you mister chair
representative ferrari thank you
mister chair I
really appreciate everything
that doctor ariza you're you're
doing for behavioral health in
your community and I look
forward to seeing that you're
able to reopen
you know the crisis stabilising
unit and because they are very
funding intensive to keep open
we had problems with thousand
last cruises also but I was
also wanting to mention that our
alcohol harms alleviation fund
that we're trying to create by
raising the liquor excise tax
could help with a lot of the
programs especially in our rural
communities that are so
desperately needed and also I
was wondering are you able to
use
now track sonner have it
prescribed for alcohol use
disorder
yes we often use that for
alcohol use to sort of use the
daily dossen and then the
monthly injection
on form of it as well okay great
in also
mrtero when you were talking
about the regional transaction
transit system
in last cruises we have david
army ho who runs a south central
trd and he has great experience
on how to get federal funding as
well as you know expanding for
state funding
he's run you know in san
francisco san francisco.
Area as well as sound of bay in
the now for loss cruces and I be
glad to ask him to you know lend
any support he can because I
know that's important for you
know people to get to their
medical appointments as well as
to school in to behavioral
health appointments also if
they're able to do it in person
so thank you thank you.
Representative thompson thank
you mister chair let me start by
timer.
So I I just somethings were said
that um are a little concerning
and so in terms of the
malpractice insurance for a
private practice the cap was
raised to seven hundred and
fifty thousand from six hundred
thousand that we set forty years
ago so it's it.
And and as someone else said on
that this chart we got from lfc
yesterday malpractice appears
not to have increased up this is
the data that we have this is
what we have to go with so
uh it's
I encouraging people to get the
details before they listen to me
everybody has a complaint and
people frequently imbellish
their complaint but what our
data shows us is that
malpractice rates have not
increased and if they have it's
because of insurer uhm just
making more profit so we are
looking at a way if we can to
count the percentage that
malpractice insurers can make a
profit because it I mean when we
change the la i'm sure they side
as a chance to
kind of you know run away with
numbers and I I think it's time
that we stop up putting out
falsehoods and i'm not saying
anybody is doing that
intentionally I know that people
have been given information that
does that does not have data we
hear you know insurance
companies want that insurers and
we have asked for rejection
notices we have not received a
one so something is is in a
disconnect and i'm asking for
folks to work to take a deep
dive and talk to people who
really we we understand mail
practices and issue but we also
understand that
the caps are not the cause of it
thank you mr chair.
Thank you representative
i've got I want to pursue
something that that i've been
curious about when we were here
I guess it's been must be about
seven or eight years ago we were
here
doctor neal bolan was still it
is all going and he took us to
the new facility that it just
opened I thought it was an
impatient facility and r t c or
something of the sort it wasn't
thank you mister chairman can
any members are no sir it was
designed and license I think
crisis tree yard center with the
twenty three hour stay and we
now continue to operate that
facility as an outpatient
facility and two months we
opened that after his other
reference was in I believe
october november november
december twenty twenty you tried
to run it as a twenty four and
the reimbursement this you
couldn't you couldn't
financially do it it was in
feasible yesterday that is
correct
so does he would not have a
psych
mr chair we do not did you used
to have a sake yes for no is
that is is that if similar thing
that the reimbursement for a
psych unit just doesn't make it
financially feasible or or what
happened that's correct.
So I mean here here's here's our
here's heard dilemma and on the
eastern plains there for
counties are getting together
and they're trying to build
their own psychiatric hospital
I think it's current
better which otherwise of their
roosevelt I think it's part of
that anyhow
we have this incredible need in
the state for impatient
psychiatric care
we have a state hospital that
has an empty that has empty
wings but they won't take a lot
of people that need to go there
cause they don't have the
staffing
we we've got this incredible
disproportionate relationship
between need which is enormous
and our
resources to meet that need III
really do think that we need to
revisit the philosophy that said
we don't need in patient
facilities anymore because all
of this can be dealt with in the
community level we just need to
have more outpatient thing we
need to stop thinking that way
it's clear that that's not doing
the trick.
We have an albert you don't I I
haven't seen it here but in a
court we have mentally ill
homeless people living on the
sidewalks because there is no
place for them to get any kind
of comprehensive treatment and
you doctor I decide I mentioned
the need to find something in
between in patient and
counseling out which is
basically what up visit your
doctor get your media reaffirmed
and and and and get some
cancelling and that doesn't get
doesn't cut it for a lot of
people either and if you don't
have in patient then that's all
you got so I I really do think
you're on the right track trying
to find an impatient facility
somehow and I would hope that
the legislature in its
inevitable wisdom would would
figure out away to finance the
creation of regional psychiatric
facilities because having one in
las vegas may have worked in
nineteen seventeen
it doesn't work today
and and the stories we've heard
of deputy sheriff's
driving all the way up to las
vegas for somebody that the
court ordered into treatment and
getting there only to have the
psychologically son this but say
i'm sorry he really isn't
doesn't meet our threshold and
sending them all the way back
that's nuts with we really do
have to have a different way of
thinking about what the needs of
people in new mexicor and I know
that the old asylums were horror
shows we don't want that but in
between that and what we've got
now there's a huge area that we
could fill in and thank you for
the work you're doing mister
chairman if we could respond
quickly and committee members
thank you so much for saying all
that when you look at the social
support system in a community
and the resources that are
available to go through that
continue of care that a patient
needs is crucial once we start
for any transport and around the
state it breaks down and and I
would love it if government is
ugly responsible as well but we
do believe that this model is
crucial to the success of.
The health care behavioral
health care delivery system in
new mexico yeah and I was just
gonna say what you described was
the need for the spectrum of
services and and that's you're
exactly right thank you.
Well thank you
you've brought issues before us
that are
you know extremely important uh
I wish you had given us a few
solutions
but that's our job I guess
mister chairman I have one
i'd like to solution I I have a
solution we can make our capital
out there like twenty five to
forty million dollars in my
growth maybe about five and I
think I can pack some of the
stuff up they can shoot and all
that would take would be to
reduce our reserves from thirty
five to twenty five percent and
you could do it
better chairman one last fifteen
second comment please sir on
behalf of this panel in in all
the work that's been going on we
want to thank you again for the
opportunity to prevent you all
the remiss we'd be remained if
we didn't think there's a group
of individuals in the community
that are putting this regional
behavior health system plan
together of course i've heard
his argument lieutenant governor
how more alice doctor stays the
stacy **** from phi there that's
what the s are zaga mister james
marshall assistant city manager
so city charliene web county
manager asked the older week and
back to the room we mentioned
earlier
one of our greatest patient
advocates in our region is susie
to heal commissioner alicia
edwards and lily urban by tay so
we just want to acknowledge them
for the great work they're doing
to help us build a better health
care system thank you mister
chairman committee
thank you very much uh uh dan in
and and everybody for your
presentations doctor design are
good to see you again
all right we'll go now to the
next item on our very busy
agenda
supported care givers and direct
support workers megan lorino the
executive director of the
association for home and
hospitals care and adrian smith
president CEO of the caregivers
coalition
good morning megan in adrian.
Who are you going to go first
make it or okay.
No you have to push the icon
with the person on it.
Great thank you
mr chair members of the
committee thank you so much for
having us here this morning I
thought was a really interesting
panel and we're gonna be
conbuilding a pin that this rate
discussion that I think you get
to hear about a lot in your
positions and i'm really
thrilled to be sitting here
shoulder to shoulder with adrian
smith from the direct caregiver
coalition
um we're gonna be heading on a
lot of the same points in any
place that we're not on the same
points is really going to be a
a reflection of my diverse
membership so really quickly I
want to divend it who I
represent through the new mexico
association for home and
hospitals care just as our name
implies we represent home health
agencies which what that means
there's a providers who provide
skilled care directly in the
home that yes
i'm sorry could you take your
conversations out into the
hallway please you're you're
getting picked up on the my can
your intermit conversations are
now known stateway
thank you sir
it's our home health providers
they provide care that is
directed through a a physician
or non physician provider like a
nurse practitioner or a
physician's assistant and they
provide that skilled care in the
home to a home bound patient so
that could be skilled no seen or
physical or occupational therapy
and new mexico most recent
counts we had about eighteen
thousand medicare beneficiaries
received that benefit in a year
and we had seventy two licensed
home health agencies another
group that I represent is our
hospital's agencies our hospices
really addressed the physical
and emotional needs of in
spiritual needs of people at
their end of life and focus on
carry not curing during that end
of life care.
In that care is again typically
provided in the home wherever
somebody calls at home we have
we provided again most recent
counts over eleven thousand new
mexico beneficiaries in a year
received hospitals care or
received medicare hospitals
benefit and we had forty two
medicare certified hospitals
agencies but I came to almost
frequently representing a really
critical group of providers is
our personal care service
providers those are are medicaid
member providers who provide non
skilled care to medicaid members
who receive their um yeah the
community benefit who have a
nursing facility level of care
that means with our arch are
care they would be eligible to
be receiving care in a much more
expensive skilled nursing
facility on average skill
nursing care as about seventy
five thousand dollars a year on
average personal care services
about twenty five thousand
dollars a year so we really are
that more most cost effective
care
and a believe that we have over
thirty two thousand medicaid
personal care service members
receiving those services and my
association we represent ninety
members who provide services at
almost a hundred and fifty
locations and our industry that
I represent provides hands on
cared over sixty one thousand
new mexicans each year.
I am here I am passionate about
care in the home because it is
both patient preferred and also
a very safe care setting and a
low cost safe care setting so
you've heard the statistic I am
sure a air p tells us that
ninety percent of people sixty
five in older prefer to stay on
their homes as long as possible
we also know that are medicare
beneficiaries would prefer to
receive post hospital short term
health care at home unfilled
home health referrals are
associated with more hospital
readmission and a higher
mortality read and a lack of
appropriate services can lead to
more frequent rehospitalization
within thirty days and hopefully
you know after serving on this
committee for so many years that
rehospitalization means higher
costs and patience and socially
disadvantaged communities are at
greater risk of not receiving
these services and often sir
suffer worse physical and mental
health as a after
hospitalization
so I typically don't spend that
much time I tell you about home
health and then I tell you about
hospitals and then I spend all
of my time talking about our
medicaid personal care service
members but I am at a talk that
about our home health providers
today because they really are at
an across this point as a result
of a some national legislation
that was just recently and par-
put into
implemented here a new mexico so
the twenty first century curious
act was passed by congress and
signed until ar in december of
twenty sixteen so almost ten
years ago and it is bride
legislation that whose aim is to
enhance healthcare delivery and
accelerate medical innovation
and address critical health
issues
the curse act was supposed to
promote the interoperability of
help information technology.
And aim to reduce regulatory
burdens on providers
and what we what we mean when I
say i'm the cures act and then
talk about
electronic visit verification
that is essentially hopefully
what it sounds like are
providers are going into a home
they're not like clocking and at
a hospital where they have a
supervisor that can see them so
this just creates that
accountability and it geo
locates them and knows that they
went and they provided that care
speak sense twenty sixteen when
this was passed every single emr
system in the country that that
serves our home health providers
saw the writing on the wall
they're pretty good at business
so they decided to make all of
their emr systems are there
electronic medical record
systems to be even curious
compliant so that they could do
exactly what the federal
government mandated
and the federal government gave
states the option they could
have a closed model they could
dictate to providers why white
system that they use right now
five states and were one of the
lucky five no unlucky five who
are on this closed model and one
of the there was five is
tennessee and they are going to
the open model january one of
twenty five so then will be a
lonely for all the other states
are on what's called and open
model and all that really means
is that there is an aggregator
that talks to the provide the
provider has a choice about
their emr solution and that
solution talks to an aggregator
that reports to the manage care
organizations into the state all
the information that's required
through the cures act
our state however took the path
of least resistance we had any
bigger system I have came and
talked he all about the v system
and our personal care service
world um it is pretty
administratively cumbersome.
But for personal care services
for non medical care and we
implemented this way back in
twenty seventeen so it was
actually the for year we were
ahead of the curb and
implementing cures acting in our
home and community based
services
so even though it was cumbersome
even though there was lots of
problems with it from many
agencies this is their only
solution that that only provide
pcs that only provide that
medicaid personal care services
they've built all their systems
around it home health has been
using emr for decades because of
the complexity of the way that
they have to report their care
so the state just said this
thing that works in this non
medical lean skate that we
already know is not great but it
it is what it is we're going to
use that and for our home health
and we try to talk to yall about
this we try to talk to the state
about this but it is where we
are today and when everything
goes right with a with a vvb and
we use this for our medicaid
home help patience only so if
there are medicare patient that
the the agency can use their
regular emr system but if it's a
medicaid patient than their
clinicians have to use two
separate systems and to make
matters worse there are two
different medicaid home health
patience they can either be on
community benefit or they can be
on another waiver and then there
are a two separate logins for
our clinicians all it does is
tell you if they showed up or
not we already know that from
the mr systems that they've
invested in.
And when everything goes right
from the moment
care is ordered by that clint by
that clinician by non physician
provider the physician to when
the first claim is paid if
everything went right it takes
double the amount of time as a
as a medicare claim and things
don't go right basically every
single claim has to be here
individually submitted and it
has to be touched multiple times
and retached multiple times it's
a huge problem and all of this
enhanced time all of their
having to hire additional staff
so all of this enhanced time all
of everything that's been added
into the system has resulted in
zero quality outcomes for the
patient and it delays get a
makes medicate home health
either delay the start of care
or it's denied cause it's not
worth it to providers to invest
all of that time and effort for
a claim that basically pays half
or less than half of a
traditional claim and you'll
heard me talk about the benefits
of home health is that it helps
reduce those hospital
readmissions it helps in hence
the men on physical well being
of those that are relying on it
so we're we're not seeing any of
those benefits a specifically
for a medicaid patience
you've got this up to us last
year
you brought up to medicaid in
the meat why hasn't it changed
what didn't we do that we should
have done I mean to be very fair
I think that the now health care
authority was going through a
lot of and big transitions in
the last year because they are
now the health care authority
and we now do have turkey's care
so I think that the owned to be
fair to them I think their
bandwidth was pretty fall
but we have been talking to the
stay about this for years as we
saw this train coming down the
track and we don't get much
response so I can't i'm not
going to try to guess as to why
not things happened.
Can we put this on our list for
something to to bring
healthcare authority at least
the medicaid director have you
talked to the new medicaid
director a dana florida planner
yes we I have met with her yet
yeah i'm sorry
we have talked to at
medicare director flannery and
mostly about our personal care
service rates which will be my
next point of contacts but also
about this and then also I have
spoke to all of the deputy
bureau chiefs that are
responsible for a long term
support services and home health
about this a frequently see i'm
still naive enough to believe
that when people bring these
problems and we'll say boy
that's a big problem and we
agree that it's stupid to do
what we're doing
that it will have changed by the
next year but it didn't change
so
no but mr chair you have a
really good track record of
getting foot's attention on
behalf of our association so we
were to really appreciate any
support okay we will will try to
to to get something going on
this and if necessary i'm sure
the ones that are going to be
around in january we'll bring
legislation forward to make the
change this year we will not let
it go on addressed thank you
good thank you mister chair
thank you members of the
committee
okay well with that point
hopefully very well made we're
gonna now talk about our
personal car service issues and
adrian and I are going to
hopefully be singing and court
or anything gonna be singing a
lot in chorus
you I have some grass that
you've seen hopefully time and
time again but you can look at
the history of the reimbursement
rates for the those personal
care services there's non
medical adl services for end it
for medicaid members with their
nursing facility level of care
in nineteen ninety nine the
reimbursement rate for this
program was eighteen dollars an
hour
out since that time in the last
twenty five years we've seen a
number of decreases.
To the system
and I did turn around in twenty
twenty as we saw the minimum
wage and start to get raised
across the state we did start to
see increases to the
reimbursement rate but those
that increases were only and
direct
relation to the minimum wage
increases not even in direct
proportion so a great example is
when you the cost of something
goes up proportionately so does
grt proportionately so it is
fight gur social security all
workers comp all those other
taxes as well as just the cost
to do business the additional
costs to do business
so you will see that based on
and this graph that I present to
you all the time what it is
based on is when colts were on
the fee schedule we could add
that long term support services
was on a fee schedule before we
went into managed care it was
public so that's part of it and
then after that this state would
make letters of direction
directing the managed care
organizations to increase the
reimbursement rates and so we
have tracked each one of those
letters of direction according
to many of my member or most of
my members when I you know we
have to be very careful we
cannot be colluding but this to
them represents the rates that
they are familiar with when they
are negotiating a rate with the
manage care organization and so
today and twenty twenty four
that rate to the best of our
knowledge because it is a
negotiated rate and not a
publicised rate in any way it's
eighteen seventy four so in
twenty five years the rate is
now seventy four cents higher
you all have a a little bit of a
complicated graph
provided in your slides with
blue green and rad bars the blue
bars represent minimum wage
over the years from twenty
eighteen to twenty twenty four.
And for the purpose of this we
just focused on the new mexico
total
minimum wage and cast as opposed
to looking at how those are a
different between santa fe
albuquerque and last cruces
cause that's very confusing then
were the green graph represents
the provider reimbursement rates
and then the red is the provider
costs and I want to be really
clear with that cost includes um
we've done our own internal rate
study this is the association
conducted a worked with our
members closely and we basically
looked at what were the very
baseline bare bones costs to
operate this program so the the
bear the bear minimum you need
to pay is minimum wage not a
higher rate but you actually do
need to pay a higher rate to
recruit and retain qualified
staff and the minimum is how
much it costs to do exactly the
tv test their background track
that the your proportion at grt
is looking at the very specific
cars that go enter offering this
program without any bells and
whistles
so you will see that we went
into a pretty problematic error
starting and twenty twenty to
twenty twenty one where the cost
exceeded the reimbursement rate
we were thankfully you know how
do you operate a business with
when your costs are more than
your rates thankfully there were
recovery dollars that held our
providers for that period but
those dollars are gone
and we are still operating where
it is more expensive to provide
the car than the reimbursement
allows and so that's really am
concerning
i've also provided a comparison
of how new mexico looks at our
neighbouring states when it
comes to reimbursement rates for
these services
so we see that.
And are our neighbors in arizona
they're reimbursement rate and
at the hourly rate is thirty
four dollars and eighty cents an
hour for personal care services
almost double what it is in our
state
though maybe they're just
generous so we'll look at
colorado and colorado and denver
for a non relative the
reimbursement rate is thirty
dollars and ninety two cents
outside of denver for a non
relative it's twenty eight
thirty six
in oklahoma the
minimum wage and oklahoma I
think it's worth noting is the
federal minimum wage of seven
twenty five yet they're
reimbursement rate is still
higher than ours at twenty one
and then a utah or so at that
federal minimum wage of seven
twenty five and their hourly
reimbursement rate is twenty
four seventy six so we're not
looking great compared to our
neighboring states though maybe
if I put my home state of taxes
then there that would make this
look better but let's not do
that.
So my recommendations and hobes
from today's conversation are
three one
yob already indicated you are
interested in supporting is to
help support us to put pressure
on the health care authority to
move toward a and open an open
electronic visit verification
model
the next is to increase help us
increase that personal care
service reimbursement rate and
mr chair you've already asked me
if i've talked to medicaid about
our recommendations of course
with this is ban a real big
focus of our conversations and
it's it's clear to me that that
they're not there is going to be
a an increase or I believe that
there might there may be an
increase for a personal care
services
but that it'll be very modest
and so the executive budget I
think will not have a
reimbursement rate increase of
the type that we want for not
just our agencies it's really
about our caregivers or
caregivers being able for our
agencies build a recruit and
retain qualified care giving
staff for a caregivers to have
quality of life that is
appropriate and you know if
we're not getting that support
from the executive I don't
believe it's going to be an
lsd's recommendation I would
just say that this barty rate
here has has the power to help
support ads and that that is
what we're looking for and then
finally I just my last comment
is that when the legislature is
looking to increase and enhance
worker benefits where things
like paid sickly or
paid family medical leave as you
are doing that moving forward I
would love for yalled to be
thinking about medicaid
providers to me a pretty simple
solution and if you wanted to.
Home down into medicaid home
case or home and community based
providers that would also be
fine but these are providers who
when you increase the cost
provide care we have no ability
to increase our rates we
especially in medicaid we don't
have other payers we are really
on our own and the state is
always behind the ball so even
if u say we see this for the
increase costs by two percent
three percent so we'll give them
a two or three percent increase
first of all to already state
dollars second of all we already
needed that two or three percent
long time ago for other costs
that have been imposed on us so
I would love free auto consider
exempting medicaid home and
community based providers from
employer assessments for those
types of worker benefits because
we're not an eight dollars the
state is either going to pay as
the dollars are they are going
to examples from the assessment
of those dollars and to me that
the cleanest way to do that is
to exempt us so that is my final
plea
and with that i'm in a turn it
over to my colleague adrian
smith from the new mexico direct
caregiver coalition
thank you megan
mister chair members of the
committee my name is adrian
smith them in the president and
see of the new mexico care
givers coalition i've been in
front of you many years and I
thank you a couple of things
we have a fees one in a fees two
report here every single one of
you have been helpful in passing
the legislation contained in
these we this body passed senate
joint memorial six the task
force fees one report was
largely about federal they
fairly branded act these two was
twenty two other recommendations
contained in that we're well
along the way of the ten years
worth of work and I want to
thank you personally for that
i'm gonna send around my own
copies and ask everyone of you
to sign it if you don't mind
i'll tell you a little bit first
i'll tell you with what my last
site is going to be and then
i'll come back and just give you
some intelligence.
My last flight is going to ask
you for what make and requested
and that is that we want to do
for personal care workers what
house bill through ninety five
did for direct support
professionals it passed this
body unanimously it passed the
house in the senate unanimously
in fact each be three ninety
five so we're gonna come back to
you with the bill that we're
gonna ask the committee to
endorse our bill writers are
here those are jet jim jackson
and ellen pins are with us today
and then the second thing we're
going to request is a twenty six
million dollars appropriation
which was not in the age be
three ninety five and which
megan did refer to we have not
got it gotten a good reception
from the administration or the
health care authority so we're
gonna put some pressure on it
different levels of government
see if what we can do to you
know demonstrate the need for
the reimbursement read increase
what are organization cares
about are the workers the
personal care services workers
the people who work at minimum
wage or a very low wages in our
state we know there are better
ways for these workers to work
then how they're working they
are largely making minimum wage
and what we're seeing in the
field right now is that direct
support provider agencies are
actually having to go to
personal care services agencies
and get those workers to come
and work for them there's so
much turn in the system in a in
a turnover with the turnover
rate of up to fifty percent in
the director work force
my presentation to you is um i'm
just got a kind of go through a
couple of important side here
slides here in my presentation
which is the orange one are
organization or perspective is
that of work force development
we don't have medical people on
our staff we have work force
development specialists on our
staff it's this one here
and i'm on page two
and slide three.
Our organizational lenses that
abort force development
so as I said we know that there
are better ways that caregivers
can work what we worry about are
things like wages benefits for
these workers things like
misclassification under fair
labor standards act when
caregivers are classified as
independent contractors and they
shouldn't be and i'll talk about
that toward the end of this
presentation we're a very small
organization so we can kind of
test some things and see if they
work and then fall down or in
our face and see all we probably
shouldn't do that will go in a
different direction but we've
tested a lot of things over the
years a bar history
on page three
slide number five these are the
kinds of things that we do we
develop training that recognize
the personal and professional
contributions of care givers and
then we deliver those trainings
they might be an infection
prevention but they also are in
safe transfer lifting moving
clients so that the caregiver
doesn't get hurt
we also do things like
communication skills ethical and
legal responsibilities of
caregivers
opeoed overdose and reversal are
all kinds of things that
recognize the value of the
worker
we've also a partnered with the
federal reserve bank of kansas
city which is our it district
for half of the state of new
mexico and the federal reserve
bank has developed a public
assistance portal for the state
of new mexico by county it's
very specific to show what
happens if a worker decides to
stay in that low wage job but
then also go on and get
education to get a better job
how will how long will she lose
her public assistance benefits
before she makes up enough money
to be able to
go off benefits completely it's
a really great tool and that's
on our website but it's
available for anybody to use and
everything that we deliver is
available to care givers at no
cost and I must.
I can't even think of the last
time we have and cop charged an
agency for our services.
In page four side seven we've
also developed with the help of
a national arch national network
a respect care portal any single
person can go on there for seven
hours online self peace training
and earner certificate of
completion
for being a respect care worker
in the state and then order
certificate of completion and
once they have that certificate
of completion we develop from
general operating money a
registry so that that person can
then put the profile up and be
found and i'll i'll say that
it's we don't have tons of
people on that registry right
now maybe about thirty but it is
very much statewide you could
see people on that registry
today I think from I know from
gret county and I know from
different places i'm not sure
from silver city though our
legislative principles are that
we want to recognize in advance
caregivers which we've tried to
do every year that we've come
before this body with each be
three ninety five we
specifically assisted direct
support professionals those are
the workers in the development
or disabilities waiver program
the reason we've been working so
closely with megan lorino's
organization and her board
members and members is that we
want to do for her though the
caregivers of those systems what
HB three ninety five did for
direct support professionals.
And on page five what we've
realized over these many years
is the the places we have the
greatest impact are on the
medicaid funded workers of
medicaid funded systems so those
that are publicly funded so in
our conversations those are two
different sets are workers those
are the direct support
professionals in the ddwaver
system and the personal care
services workers in the
in what's called the community
benefit program you might also
know it is too scare
so if you remember on slide top
ten just a couple of things
three important bullet points
pointed out from hb three ninety
five and those were it requires
the healthcare authority to
collect work for statute on the
direct support professional work
force and I think this since
your last meeting or maybe
during your last meeting you got
that report from jennifer
rodriguez on on that data these
were data about the direct
support professionals in that
work force
it very much tracks with what we
know about them predominantly
women predominantly hispanic low
wage workers and I can pass that
around I see a couple puzzled
looks
but I think that came to you at
your last meeting
the bill eight three ninety five
also requires direct development
on disability supports division
to report that data publicly
this being the only way that
data becomes transparent and
that we know anything about this
work force
and then the third thing that hb
three ninety five required was
that ddsd would have to conduct
rate studies
and when they conduct the rate
studies the direct support
professionals should be valued
at a hundred fifty percent of
minimum wage right so that they
were going to be paid if the
minimum wage was twelve dollars
which it was at the time age be
through ninety five came around.
When when ddsd comes running
does it by any all rate studies
that direct support professional
will be valued at eighteen
dollars an hour does that make
sense
so
that bill passed you have your
first report already from hb
three ninety five and thank you
again for it originated that
bill originated in this body
with this body
I am now on page six slide
number eleven these are the
rates that make a lorino just
showed you in her presentation
just instructive to see that in
real terms of we just have gone
rates rates for pcs agencies
have gone down actually if
because these are actual wall
numbers not a real wages
rates i'm sorry.
Dade okay
and slide number twelve just a
little bit of information about
the community benefit to choice
care program
where you go and age in this
stops at at nineteen as a
continued down or is it going up
again
chair members of the committee I
I think that to get the full
picture you can refer back to my
presentation
and that goes
sorry and that is on a believe
page seven for you is where it
picks back up for a twenty
twenty three twenty twenty four
and so the data
from nineteen ninety nine I
believe until twenty fifteen
actually many of you on this
committee with no better than me
it reflects the cults fee first
feature service schedule and
then after that it reflects the
building upon that what the
letters of direction to the
state provided so it's titled
pcs reimbursement rate twenty
twenty to twenty twenty four
hours where it picks back up so
just to remind your we really
should have only one mike on it
a time or will get feedback we
haven't been but just remember
to turn off your mike's
thank you so but for this seems
to shop with it
it's starting to go back up
thank you mister chair I don't
have the answer for that I just
have the data that's in this
slide that's right it would in
twenty was fourteen ten and
twenty one it was fourteen
thirty two
in twenty two still fourteen
thirty two and twenty three went
up to sixteen oh three and now
it's up to sixteen seventy eight
so starting to cover but it's
still notice I was in nineteen
ninety nine it's a they think
it's a couple sets at seventy
cents or so higher but mister
chair members of the committee.
The biggest jumps and their
reimbursement increases are are
really directly related to the
minimum wage increase and again
about time just one every I want
you to know this for the rest of
your lives if the when the
minimum wage went up by a dollar
fifty that was the exact amount
that the reimbursement rates
went up so it did not capture
all the other increased costs
that would go up when you're
when you're personal costco at
thank you slide at twelve i'll
just point out that the latest
data that we have for the number
of members in the community
benefit program or turkoise care
there were twenty three thousand
nine hundred twenty seven
those are numbers of people
enrolled in agency directed
community benefit program
vs self directed community
benefit program just over two
thousand so that's a good you
know number of people on
medicaid in the community
benefit program turkois care.
A page seven
i'm just gonna spend a little
bit of time talking about some
of the initiatives that have
been going on at the federal
state and even at a legal
from a legal perspective
slide thirteen the community
benefit benchmarking study the
health care authority
we've been told for the last two
years has been concerned about
this issue of period direct
support professional
professionals making more than
personal care services workers
they're starting to understand
that these systems they sat in
different places they were
funded differently and now
there's a little bit of an
imbalance between the direct
support professional pay and the
personal care services workers
pay I don't know how to compare
those two apples to oranges but
until there's a us department of
labor standard occupational
classification that's different
these are these same workers
direct support professionals and
personal care services workers
are the same workers they're the
people with the same skill the
same educational level they're
just they sit they sat in
different agencies until just
this year now they're in the
same agency there in their under
the same per view of the health
care authority and ddst sits in
healthcare authority
the healthcare authority has
been conducting a bench marking
study different from the rate
study that d d st has been doing
the bench marking study compares
rates for pcs workers across
states
not within states across
providers of megans but across
states
if that makes sense the health
current thirty says that it will
establish a fee schedule I
understand this will be for the
very first time for pcs services
workers we haven't seen that yet
it is supposed to come out in fy
twenty five I don't know when
that's supposed to come out erm
but that would just be something
you know for you to know and
listen for.
I think
page a slow number fourteen you
might remember hearing in april
about a federal access rule the
federal access rule and the
reason we're not bringing you a
bill this year
that's we would otherwise call a
wage passed through in other
words asking for a certain
appropriation with say eighty
percent of the funding going
directly to the workers which we
have asked you about before and
you have supported the reason
we're not asking you for that
now is because the federal
government has already done it
in april they said eighty
percent of the rates that are
now going to be passed on to
providers have to go to the
workers we think that's a
fantastic thing there's probably
gonna be some push back from
that from providers in their
state I I don't doubt that there
will be we think that's a good
thing
all states will happen till
twenty twenty sixth to make this
a reality.
At the executive level making
the reno and I have gone hand in
hand just to give you some
background we've gone to the
governor's office and we've had
several meetings with the health
care authority
asking for
a true rate study instead of a
bench marking study
we don't really have an
indication of what they may do
we've also gone to the health
care authority to say our best
calculations are that you need
twenty six million dollars to
bring the personal care services
system up to parity with the
direct support professional work
for system
and we were met with I think
some surprise a good deal of
surprise rate and both the
healthcare authority and
governor's office said there
will be a modest increase we are
planning for a modest increase
but a very modest increase but
we're still going to go back and
ask for a twenty six million
that's our that's our plan today
slides sixteen i'll just point
out to you because I did mention
a misclassification earlier in
our conversation just recently a
lawsuit was settled up there
were some plaintives direct
support professionals that claim
violation under federal fair
labor standards act
because dd direct support
professionals were not paid over
time in fact they were
classified is independent
contractors but should have been
classified is employees so the
claimants one that lawsuit the
claimants will be paid one
hundred eighteen percent of what
they were to have been paid we
think that's a victory our
organization thinks that's a
victory and that's just
something to pay attention to
because we put in our
s you're study that you all
help us lead and pass that
department to work for solutions
needed to be a lot more involved
than they had been in terms of
providing direction and guidance
two state agencies.
What they had been doing is
saying we don't care how you
classify workers but direct
department work for solutions
needs to care how workers are
classified that's the
enforcement body
so
the I don't have anything more
to say about that well I think
what it happened in twenty
twenty four session was
the legislature
doubled the office of the
enforcement people for the labor
enforcement people so that's a
good thing so they're being more
proactive right now in dws.
And i'll go right to slide
eighteen
which is how I started my
presentation we're going to
renew a bill ask for your
endorsement and
also separate from that as for a
twenty six million dollars for
the pcs program thank you so
much.
Quick question before we go to
the committee the the
the settlement go back to the
settlement slowed sixteen
the last it was settled the the
agencies that had missed
classified the employees as
contractors had to pay
a one point fifteen million
dollars
into the settlement fund where
did they get that money
mr chairman I don't know the
answer to that did the state I
mean which has allowed them to
do this so along did the state
add some money to the potter mr
chair I don't think the the
state was named in this lawsuit
at all
so I don't know the answer to
the okay we'll will jim will
probably tell the story to come
in or something okay
members of the committee let's
start over here with you
representative robot cover you
know any questions
thank you mr chair just i'm
sorry interrupt two minutes
I understand that
I just wanted to make a a little
clarification to for miss lorino
and think you would fell off msw
social worker so I it's
important to note that in the
pay family medical leave would
listen to very closely to all of
the comments and
I want it to be clear that
employers are in the twenty
twenty four version which
continues to be improved
indicate it that they would be
paying zero point zero four
percent and workers would be
paying zero point zero six nine
two to three percent and that's
important to make sure that
we're clear on that
and also in addition
because there is a significant
lower amount
coming out of the employees per
year which is.
Two hundred and fifty depending
on
a lot of different
specifications per employee
issue of exemption has to be
treated very carefully because
already that's a very low annual
medium deduction so I just want
to make those clarifications and
not asking you many questions or
anything at that I just wanted
to make sure that we were clear
on the twenty twenty four
version of pay family medically
because I don't want our
providers to no feel that there
being overburdened but in fact
it is a a correction of the
record certainly just wanted to
make sure that that was correct
and that we were listening thank
you mister chair representative
rail robert i'm so sorry
coming
I appreciate that clarification
I did not intend to use the two
to three percent as a fact of
what it cost I was being
illustrative of a variety of
costs and what they could look
like so my a a appreciate that
the cost is much lower than I
think that illustrative comment
made me unclear but the point
they do want to be clear is that
they're already behind and it's
also already state dollars
whether we're increasing the ad
the reimbursement or a
or big the state is pain either
either way because this is a
medicaid program thank you
thank you mister chair
representatives
centers to the oldest
thank you mr chair
congratulations on the unwinning
that lawsuit that's really
important I see that throughout
new mexico so many so many
employees miss class of five has
independent contractors when
they're not if you're
controlling the time place and
manner and providing the tools
that's that's not an independent
contractor so i'd like to learn
a little bit more about that.
It when did it settle who who
brought it with a lead planters
who with it I I think that this
is a good illustration in a
cautionary deal for other
employers and who are the
defendants so just a little bit
more thank you very much I don't
know that I have a lot of
information I do know that the
lead attorney is chris benwa
chris ben walk for milaso texas
here's also license to practice
in the seat of new mexico I
believe there were five
agencies employers that were
involved with the lawsuit and if
there is a gym jackson or an
illinois who has more
information than that
that might be a better person to
talk to I do have the source
note from the document that
chris benwas sent to me at my
request I believe he said that
the judge makes the final
determination on october tenth
and I said well should I be
sharing this information with
the committee he said it's
basically done go ahead and show
the shared this information but
the document that I have is at
that source note
thank you so the judge has not
yet approved this settlement but
this is a tentative settlement
of mr
senator I believe that's correct
and he told me it was safe
enough to to share it today
excellent well I I think that
this is a really good cautionary
note because it happens a lot in
this state and particularly with
these this group of employees
that's just so unfair so thank
you so much and congratulations
representative charges
thank you mister chair I just
wanted to comment on exemption
the caregivers from future state
tax extensions like up family
medical leave and any other
benefits
I I would have some problems
with that because.
Definitely this is a group of
people that really need that
kind of a benefit.
My question is are there care
givers who are still that you
know who are still being
misclassified or classified as
independent contractors in the
state
mr chair representative shovers
thank you for both of those
questions
so I do want to clarify that I
my
recommendation is that the
employers are exempted from the
assessment not that the
employees who receive the
benefit and can carry that or
can have that benefit no matter
you know wherever they work in
this state that they I I am not
in any way suggesting that they
be exempted from the benefit and
then two year second question ah
I believe that the class of
workers that were talking about
are are not part of the
association that I represent I
represent personal care service
agencies that am that are
received that are served
medicaid members and per or
state me anymore those personal
care service workers have to be
employees and as to the best of
my knowledge they are employees
of the agencies so if they work
over time they are they earn
over time pay they also receive
all of that benefits that are
legally required as this year
for by the state and the federal
government so were a little bit
that this conversations a little
bit getting mixed up because
while at point they look similar
as far as they're providing non
these are workers that are
providing non medical care
through two benefit sharies of
medicaid they're not they don't
have the same laws and rules
around them
mr cheer representative
travelers our information has
been the same as megalorino just
talked about in fact we've spent
three or four big conference
calls with a few of the members
who don't know of any situations
for.
Where pcs agencies are
misclassifying their employees
thank you mister chair.
Representative ferrari
thank you mister chair I
appreciate the questions that
have already been asked and
just like two point two an
article in the candle and the
headline is the priorities of
state legislator and the
governor are very clear but
that the gut that we value film
workers more than workers who
care for disabled new mexicans
it's an interesting read so but
thank you for your presentations
and look forward to supporting
the changes that are still
needed thanks
representative thompson thank
you mr chair thank you for your
presentation and so I don't
really have a question but as we
work through the paid family
medical leave last year on the
floor of the house there was an
amendment to fix things for
these types of providers and you
have my word that I will do
everything I can to make sure
that if if and when we do this
that there is something written
into the the la that says that
the state must reimburse the age
because you have no other way to
make more money I mean you could
have been sales I guess but you
know that doesn't go very far so
just it's my word that if when
we do paid family medical leave
that we won't forget that you
all have no way to raise that
extra money that you need to put
in so thank you.
Representative vincent you don't
have a question so represent the
book he does not question
representative jones
they're hungry
representative earned and will
have a question I am confident
yes I do have a question thank
you mr chair and out present is
the the big question is with
respect to those individuals who
are family members who are
taking care of their own family
members at home and a lot of the
people that have spoken we are
not getting paid and they can
get paid so i'm wondering why do
you all help with those in those
individuals situations and
second if they are deciding to
put there person into a a home
or a facility they want to be
exempt from
from gross receipts texts
because it's already costing
them so much money and I don't
know if you are aware of that so
i'm making you aware of that and
then the the second the final
and last thing is that there has
been a request and I don't know
if you are out engaged in
helping individuals who are
asking for
assisted live assistance in
dying
because that the question is
that you have to be on some kind
of help for six months and they
said some of the people are
saying look I I can take this
any longer and I can't be on
there I can't wait for six
months so I just
mr chair my personal
representative heard and get to
ceo I go backwards so with with
regard to medical aid and dying
definitely a lot of my hospitals
members participate with medical
aid and dying meaning that they
take on patience who are seeking
to you to use at medication in
order to.
A alleviate the final sufferings
of their last days they do have
to be qualified for hospitals
because the whole and so
hospitals qualifications means
that you have six months or left
to live you do not have to be
enrolled in hospitals there is
no time commitment for how long
you need to be
have been diagnosed as being
terminally l but medical aid and
dying is there to support that
end of life but it does not
cause the end of life the end of
life is caused by the disease so
that there has to be a diagnosis
so based on my education and
limited education on that matter
I hope that answers your
question I can i'll just say
frankly for your other two
questions I I can talk to you
offline but it's just say that
my association doesn't directly
involved it with either of those
matters but I can talk to you a
little bit about ways that we
are involved offline hopefully
that's helpful thank you thank
you mister chairman mr chair
representative here we do deal
with those calls every single
day half of the cars that come
into our office or people who
are too wealthy to qualify for
medicaid but not wealthy enough
to pay the agencies and I can
talk to you about that the other
set of calls that we get our
people looking for caregivers as
independent contractors because
of the difficulty probably
perhaps in reimbursement rates
but there are also people who
were already and crisis so we
will do a warm hand off to aging
into somebody resource center or
the family caregiver center to
help them sign up
for medicaid i'm gonna again ask
folks to be briefer we are
already behind schedule and
there's people waiting to do
public comment so
send it to rodriguez your turn
thank you miss a madame chairman
mister chairman and thank you
both for your presentation in
your work just quickly
and I don't know how this can be
astroned in two minutes but I
know that's all we have and I
respect it but h.
I heard and I did go to our vice
chair earlier and confirmed this
that when you get services
through hospitals or nursing
homes or whatever services you
get from the state with this
trade expense some form amount
of money that when that person
dies person whose hospitals are
terminally whatever that the
state goes back and tries to
naturalize class back files to
claw back all the assessors the
patient has or the dead person
had or at least as much as it
takes to replace the funding
that the state has spend on that
client or that person quickly
can you disaster and know if you
can't cause my two minutes or up
and then we can follow up
because that's terrible if
that's happening mr chair
representative at quickly I
don't know the answer to your
question but will follow up with
you offline thank you because
madame chairman I do hear that
there are people who don't want
to get services further loved
once because they know that
their home is going to go after
that
in other assets and so just
wanted to bring better thank
you.
In senator rodriguez under it it
has nothing to I mean
essentially the status clowing
back medicaid money so it's not
whether you're in a nursing home
it's whether you've been
provided medicaid services
thank you madame chairman for
that but it would impact
hospitals though in other year
and that's real concerning
because sometimes people are at
their end times terminal and to
know that that's going to happen
is like crazy
okay thank you madame chairman
yep that's something we we
really need to ask about to I I
did not realize we did that and
if so it's
peculiar I mean i.
This is this is because the
state is so poor that we can
afford to so III don't
understand that i'm chairman can
I have like thirty seconds just
to respond to this
but I did get a bill passed one
of these recent years that able
accounts are stable accounts
there achieving a better life
experience that we put in the
law that that money can not be
but that's a small subset thank
you madame chairman and I do
appreciate that very much uh
that was only for the dd waiver
I should say only it's big for
the dd waiver because I carry
that bill in the senate for you
thank you for that but this is
for people in january who needs
services and I know it's quickly
and i'm not going to ask because
of time but there is a family
his mother died have a little
modest home the late died
elderly getting services and the
straight immediately jumped in
to try and claw back all the
funds that apparently they had
spent on this per woman left a
family with nothing including a
daughter who has very severely
big disabilities and they don't
have a place to live it was a
terrible situation and that's
exactly the situation i'm
talking about is happening here
so we need to get to the bottom
of that thank you
yes thank you senator for
bringing it up we really do need
to find out if that's accurate
and if so why and can't we
change it since we have a lot of
money now
representative chase you turn.
Ah mr chairman I have no
questions thank you thank you
very much for your work
I I can't thank you enough for
for the work you're all doing
and and for these presentations
uh little by little were edging
toward AAA more just society
here and and
when you bring these data to us
it's still staggers that were
paying reimbursing less than we
did in the nineteen ninety nine
is.
I mean there's it's a scandal
there's absolutely no reason why
why this should happen and and
you keep us with the sense of
urgency about these things and
that's a terrific function thank
you for doing that also they I
want to thank you for having
some real simple clear asks that
we ought to be able to follow up
on so we're going to ask our
staff to make sure that we
include them in our list of all
possible life changing
legislation that we introduce
this year
thank you so much
and with that we will go now to
public comment and we have
public comment from janet wallet
or teas
yes please come up.
Then you have to hit that I kind
of journal
the person.
A little head of a man or a
woman is that work yes I can
hear myself sorry to prolong
your lunch but good morning it's
still morning mister charing
committee members thank you for
all the good that you do and
thank you for the opportunity to
offer public comment my name is
janet wallet or tease and I have
been a resident of county for
forty years in the last decade
or so we in green county have
been nervously watching our
hospital treat teetering on the
brink of being sold to a private
company or even closed and also
enduring a revolving line of
ceos each promising to get our
hospital finances back on track
at one point the county
commissioner is actually became
our hospital board and hired a
management firm which is still
in charge of our local hospital
at another point we were paying
two ceo salaries due to the
golden parasheet contract given
to one ceo who resigned and was
rewarded with the three force of
a million dollars remaining in
her contract at another point
there were rumours of an offer
to buy healer regional from a
private firm and while the board
ultimately refused the offer the
very next day in the press it
was reported that the same firm
that made the offer to buy or
hospital had been purchased by
another company
thirty eight percent of
hospitals in new mexico or
already owned by private equity
firms a twenty twenty three
study out of harvard reported
that patients are more likely to
fall get new infections or
experience other forms of harm
during their stays in a hospital
after it is acquired by a
private equity firm
and march twenty four article in
the santa fe new mexican states
that private equity hospitals
experience a complete drop and
or reduction and services and a
drop in patient care why
because health care is a
commodity naturally puts profit
over patience.
Representative suspense gay and
senator do hag get it new
mexicans not only need o s I to
meticulously examine every
proposed transaction merger or
acquisition to make sure that
decisions regarding the critical
health care of all new mexicans
are made for patience first with
ongoing and for ever oversight
of this crucial goal we also
need new mexico hospitals to be
put on a guaranteed annual
global budget so the cfos are at
least assured of a certain
amount of money that will be
coming to their institutions
this will ultimately stabilise
hospitals so they will not be so
vulnerable to take overs from
private firms there are federal
funds available via grants to
help new mexico create global
budgets maryland has been a
success has been successful in
this endeavor and because new
mexicans need the state to
really dig deep into the cost
drivers of health care and
produce conclusive data we need
to submit a guarantee of
resources needed to continue
this study by putting required
funding for this purpose in HB
two and that rely on happened
funding mexicans need continued
study at hard reliable data and
continued and ongoing for ever
oversight of the tenuous
healthcare situation in the
state new mexicans are depending
on you thank you
mr chair
miser cheese to send a copy of
republic comments to me
please
or to all of us
may I ask mrperiod teased to
send it as a copy of her public
comments was a very powerful
very detailed and i'd like to
see him no problem
okay and so how do I have the
address to send you give to me
okay thank you thank you very
much and I guess we have a
couple more public comment but I
just want to mention here the
two copies that were supposed to
s.
Sign where are we signing the
sick on that
it's just because she she wanted
us to sign it as a kind of a
victory statement I think you
know that we got something done
it's a rare that we get anything
done
don't don't quibble just sign
the down
but I don't know where you're
supposed to sign it
on that page there's no other
name nobody else's signed it
first
it's okay
okay jim jackson
public comment
thank you mister chair members
of the committee jim jackson
lobbyists for a disability
rights new mexico and also cheer
of the disability coalition just
a few quick points on issues
that were raised uh this morning
just totally fyo over not
looking for any activity at this
point from the committee but you
heard about problems with even
how much of an administered
burden this is it's come to
attention recently that there is
an option for exempting people
who are living and many of our
attendance are family members
who live with the person who's
receiving the services my
understanding is that the feds
allow the stay to exempt those
people from the even
requirements so we're going to
be visiting with the healthcare
authority about that possibility
it doesn't solve all the
problems with the but it's one
important peace the coalition's
position on family paid family
medical leave
this is an important benefit for
a workers we are totally
understanding the concern of the
providers that if they don't get
paid to do that and yet they
have the new requirement it's a
burden on them so I would
encourage.
Um representative thompson happy
to hear about your commitment if
the states required to cover to
pay the contractors the cost of
enrolling in uh uh family
medical lead as as an employer
as well as the employee we think
that's really the best solution
because a lot of people would
benefit from that
i'll just note that of course an
m and the coalition are strongly
supportive of better rates for
our providers and for the for
the for the workers for the
people who are actually
providing that service on the
with respect to the issue of
contractors versus employees and
the specifics of that
will defer to to uh jim cotton
if you choose to do that on the
cause he represents the dd uh
providers and
I think mispines might be
covering this issue around a
state recovery but it's it's
it's it's a federal issue
thanks jim ellen you want to
talk who is about to
cloning back
precious resources of poor
families to help balance the
federal budget i'm as we say in
the edition it's a shandom
mister chair ellen pines I am a
health policy **** and the
registered lobbyists for the
disability coalition and I
appreciate senator rodriguez
bringing up the estate recovery
issue um that's what it's called
submedicate a state recovery
program and unfortunately matter
of it is mandatory under federal
lot of the state doesn't have
any control over it for older
individuals who receive receive
long term services whether that
is in a nursing facility or
through home and community based
services there's a federal
requirement that the state
after death after the person's
death that the state recover to
the extent possible.
The cost of those provisions and
I think that's
a pretty nasty provision of
medicaid law the purpose of
having insurance and medicaid is
in fact insurance of the purpose
of having insurance is that it
protects your assets and the
fact that they are are taking
your home or whatever smaller
state because if you're on
medicaid you probably won't have
a very large state um that that
cannot be passed on to your airs
I think raises significant
equity issues in medicaid but
unfortunately as I said that
it's a a federal requirement
beyond that for other programs
for other services beyond long
term services nursing facility
and home and community pace long
term care it's optional for the
state to do that and new mexico
does not do a state recovery in
those circumstances some states
do and that's the case in
california for example and there
are people who choose not to go
on medicaid because they don't
want their home taken away they
port card to get it and they
want to pass it on to their kits
but new mexico does not do that
what new mexico does is the
federal requirement there are
exceptions if you have a
surviving spouse or a child who
is either under twenty one or
has a disability they will not
go after a state recovery but
outside of those of and there is
a requirement for wavers in the
case of hardship and I know I
was from fault back in the days
when I was practicing law
representing a child who had
been
I think was the result of my
practice I don't remember but
there was a large recovery to
the the trial um and they wanted
to recover from that money and
we negotiated a settlement of
that so there are provisions and
states are required to have
hardship waiver at some process
in place for hardship wavers.
But to the extent they're going
after older recipients who have
received long term care that
it's federally mandated and you
can't do anything about it
we could write a stupid strongly
worried letter legacy and i'm
sure congress would be thrilled
to hear from you
thank you so it is just nursing
home car nursing home and home
and community based services or
it is home and committee is home
and community based I just
double check to make sure I was
remembering that correctly mr
chair record I make a motion
that we write as strong include
better to our delegation
I I think it had much more
impacted each of us wrote our
own letter so they get fifteen
sternly letters rather than one
mr chair when from the committee
and then one from
the senator drink just briefly
because I know time but you know
one of the problems is that in
defining the word hardship okay
who has the definition and are
we defining it differently than
the fad zero do we use their
feds definition and what is that
definition if some people are
example because of hardship
situations who makes that
decision that it's a hardship or
not those are all the questions
that I think there's loopholes
in there and in this very
concerning thank you and if I
may respond very quickly mister
as I understand the federal
requirement each state has to
have a policy so it's individual
to the state I do not know to
what extent there is federal
guidance and formulating those
policies but the policies are
state by state thank you and I
think that's one thing we need
to check on to see what kind of
policy the state has on there
thank you mister chairman
set representative chasing did
you want to ask a question
no mister chairman but i'm
actually quite shocked about
this because I know when one
goes on to medicaid one has to
be deemed eligible.
And I never thought actually I
don't I always thought homes
were exampled so that you didn't
have to
uproad the family but
I can't believe
it's it's like getting blood out
of a turn in and it's just offer
and it's in human
okay
I think we have somebody online
do we have somebody
just net cheese the only one.
Net where we're we're
uh
eagerly awaiting your comment
now.
Thank you mister chair members
of the committee made a vice
chair members of the public
merc the medicare estate.
We're waiting for your public.
Can you hear me
I have admitted can you hear me.
Was there anybody else here who
thought they were going to be on
public
here
okay you just hadn't checked it
up but I I should have asked
yours now in the net will get
you after calling
hi.
Are you guys are dealing with
extremely complex issues I don't
know how you do it.
Good nurse my background is.
I used to teach and nursing
schools and I have run a private
practice for forty years I pay
the bills I do the payroll I put
people in rooms I do all aspects
of patient care and i'm pretty
good at getting authorizations
for patience to have procedures
and to get their medicines which
is um very difficult nowadays
but when you take an item from a
store and you don't pay for it
it's called shaplifting.
But when you take services
professional services from a
physician and it doesn't get
paid for I call it doctor
lifting and we have a lot of
doctor lifting going on in the
state it is in a large part due
to the insurance companies
the big problem my billing
service said is that the state
runs and I check this the runner
website where you can check if
someone's medicaid is current
and you put in their name and
their date of birth then it
tells you she said it's it's not
up to dated or say yes they have
it we send the bill and then we
get to night they didn't have
coverage so that's one problem
problem two is they will say
we can't the insurance company
blue crusters should of new
mexico it's probably the worst
we will call them
we're told no authorization is
required to do this certain
thing we do the certain thing
with sending the bill we get it
back we didn't get a
authorization they will not give
it to us in rating that no
authorization is required so I
wish that the legislator let
legislature could make a rule
that they have to have a
printable thing on their website
with the date that says
authorization yes or no for this
code of treatment
and also I would like it limited
two days a year that they can
change it like january first in
june first so they can't just
change it every week my
receptionist has to call every
single time even though we know
last week they didn't require an
authorization because they might
have changed this week.
And then the other problem is
are these different companies
that do the medicates you don't
deal with just one thing you
dealt with prayers you deal with
blue crash you deal with in a
western sky and they're all
different so it's of enormous
pain in the but
the insurance commissioner is
not much help I wrote to him a
oh whoever it is about a problem
with a medicare advantage that
was administered by united
health care I figured that's
private insurance doing the
medicare I wrote to them and
they set
right to medicare I wrote to
medicare and they set right to
your insurance commissioner so
you have an enormous amount of
unpaid services provided by
doctors and the only other thing
I would say is please quit
discriminating against
subspecialists because your
family dot practice doctor can
not do your heart surgery your
family practice doctor cannot
diagnose your rare long disease
we see patience of the time that
the primary care thinks they
have asthma no they've got
commoner if they brought us
they've got cack sitting on my
courses they've got all kinds of
disorders so don't discriminate
against your subspecialists your
family practice doctors need
them and you're paid the
patience need them thank you
very much
thank you thank you for bringing
up
a few more complicated issues
for us to consider
an admit if you can hear us we
can't hear you so we're going to
keep working on fixing this and
will take you up at four o'clock
when we finish our regular
agenda will go to one last
public comment from unit if
you're still there
will recess for four lunch thank
you representative and it's it's
today's lynches in the the
museum which is across the
street over here somewhere.
Just road across the street not
in the same place as yesterday
so will reconvene from research
of a five or ten minutes after
