Right, so we'll go ahead and get
started. Good morning, folks.
Good to see you all this
morning. Hope you're feeling
well. Um, we're gonna start off
with the director's report. So
please, Director Prego Ornament.
Good morning. Good morning, Mr.
Chairman and members of the
Legislative Education Study
Committee. Um, I have a very
short director's report this
morning.
I'm just gonna go over the
newsletter and then have a quick
announcement about next, um, the
next meeting. So behind tab 10,
you'll find this month's, uh,
newsletter.
A couple of the, um, um,
Articles in the newsletter
reference the presentation on
the longitudinal data system
that we had, uh, just yesterday,
and the restraint and seclusion
working group presentation that
you heard on Wednesday. So, uh,
I'll point out a few items, the
letter from the chair, uh, as
always, is, uh, in the
newsletter, um, specifically,
um, I'd like to point out that
the chairman has, um, called out
the high school graduation.
Requirements and their um uh
potential impact on the state,
uh, in the article on the
longitudinal data system, as
staff, we wanted to really
highlight this is a great
benefit for the state. Um, it's
very exciting, I think what
we're seeing in terms of this of
the LDS Rise New Mexico, um,
there's a lot of potential with
the um ability for ECECD, the
public education department,
HED, DVR, and, uh, department
for for.
For solutions to be able to
seamlessly, um, have a
warehouse, um, and system by
which not only is data, um,
collected, but actually analysis
comes out of it. Um, and those
are two different things.
Data systems that actually
collect and manage and organize
successfully data, but then also
the analysis that comes from it.
And that analysis is what allows
you, as many of you, um, sort of
said yesterday and asked about,
uh, for great um movement
forward as a state. So we're all
excited about RS New Mexico, the
article, um, talks a little bit
about your investments over time
to get us to this point.
On the back page of the
newsletter. Um, we also wanted
to highlight the restraint and
seclusion working group. Um, we
felt that that was a very
successful endeavor, uh, on the
part of the developmental
disabilities Council, um, and
all of the members that took
part in that work, uh, you saw
the working group report and we
will work together as your staff
with, uh, that working group and
members of the developmental
disabilities Council to move
forward in terms of potential
legislation.
Uh, you'll see the map there
from uh Miss Hathaway. She did
some wonderful, um, analysis
work with mapping to look at CT
concentrators in New Mexico
school districts also heard
about the success, um, and our
first review as we move forward
through the interim of career
technical education and
concentrators are located and
how the money is being spent.
Uh, with that, Mr. Chairman,
I'll just note that our next
meeting is not, um, the next
month, not in August. We will be
meeting in September, um,
traditionally the legislative
Education Study Committee
reserves August is the month
that school starts and honors
that for um many educators in
schools since we meet in school
districts across the state, um,
in September, uh, the committee
will be meeting in Albuquerque,
um, in the
School of the chairman at at
Trisco Heritage High School,
which will be exciting. And, um,
on Friday the 20th, so the
meeting will be September 18th,
19th, and 20th, Friday the 20th
will be a joint hearing with the
legislative Finance Committee,
so.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I'll
stand for questions.
Oh
Suzanne Garrett syndicated she
has questions
questions. This may involve PET
Suzanne Garrett syndicated she
has questions
questions. This may involve
PETED also, uh, deputy
secretary, um, on rise.
as it expands, so NMSU has been
producing statistics about
vacancies in teaching and EAs,
um, does that come from PED? Who
collects the data that they're
using. Sure, Mr. Chairman,
Representative Garrett, they
collect that data actually, and
one of the criticisms of the
report, although it's wonderful
and we all rely on it as a
state, is that it's what we call
snapshot data. It's one snap.
Shot, uh, that they collect by
reaching out to each of the
school districts about the
actual vacancies at that point
in time. Um, so in order to
really understand better the
movement of, um, both supply and
demand, you'd want to track that
almost on a monthly basis, to
get it the true vacancy rate.
Thank you, because I'm concerned
about when we say those figures,
when was the snapshot taken? And
my second question, Mr. Chair,
is uh Representative Lauda had
done bills to look at
counselors, uh, can he just
clarify, did that ever pass?
Can you just repeat what it
looked at?
Mr. Chair, can he do that?
Really quick, um, representative
was just the one for, um, the,
the pay scales?
No, this was the one for
counselors.
All the social emotional that.
That not the teachers, not the
EAs, but everybody else. Yes, on
the get him on the three-tier
space, yeah. So there's been
talk, uh, Mr. Chair, um,
Uh, Director Warman is, um,
there was, there was some talk
and coordination between myself,
uh, Matt Paul.
And Representative Thompson
regarding uh placing these, uh,
positions on the three-tier
scale just like the teachers.
Because uh we feel that uh that.
You know, the school districts
have to compete with, uh, with
private industry. And so, um,
So that was discussed. It was,
it was very preliminary, um.
We did encounter some obstacles.
But nothing that, you know,
nothing that couldn't be
overcome, but it really has,
it's really stalled out, uh, but
I would be more than willing to
to to bring that back and and
work with anybody who would want
to work with me to do that
because I think that's really
important because
My main reason for this was
number one, to provide that
service to the students, but
number 2 is to allow the
teachers to teach.
And not then have it to triage
in in the classroom. And so that
way they can just refer out to
the professional at the school
site and that can be taken care
of.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Uh, thank you for clarifying
that and, and Mr. Chair, and,
uh,
Director ornament, I just, um, I
know I keep referring to my
visit to Chicago. Sorry about
that. But they had county by
county district by district, um,
the categories of everything and
then another thing, and I, I
know we've heard two-thirds of
the superintendents change over,
but we were talking this morning
about um have we ever looked at
the fact that some of the most
successful districts have also
had superintendents there for
longer than 2 years. I think,
uh,
Um
Superintendent guy is in her 4th
year here and there's been a lot
of stability here. It's not just
social economics, but it's the
stability, um,
Of somebody being there long
enough to actually implement
oversee and be accountable. So I
just feel like
That data should be part of this
rise system and that would go
for CYFD, uh, all those 5
departments, uh, the stability
of employees and everything, so
just wanted to share that. Thank
you.
Any questions, comments.
Doesn't look like it.
Thank you so much. We appreciate
it.
So we're a little bit ahead of
schedule, Daniel, would you be
ready?
All right, cool.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Sorry.
OK
Right. Daniel, good morning.
Whenever you're ready, please.
Family income index.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee. Uh, my
name is Daniel and I cover
public school finance for the
LESC.
Thank you all for sticking it
out until Friday morning for my
presentation. Uh, I appreciate
all of you, and I'm gonna try
and make it worth your while,
but unfortunately, I'm still
recovering from some respiratory
thing from earlier this week. So
if I cough or my voice devolves
a little bit.
Bear with me and we'll get
through it together.
Um, so we are now on tab 11.
With the brief titled Review of
the Family Income Index.
So before I start, I want to
acknowledge Tim for his data
work in the brief. So thank you,
Tim.
Uh, the FII is now in its 4th
year of implementation with the
intention of accomplishing two
goals.
Uh, the first creating an
innovative approach to
identifying poverty at the
school level.
And allocating additional
funding directly to schools, the
highest concentrations of
poverty.
And this Mister Chairman, is
important to note because never
before had you all said let's
use our own state's income data
to identify poverty in every
individual school, and then
let's give uh extra money to
schools with the highest
concentrations of poverty
without them having to apply for
it and then let's give
principals and teachers uh some
discretion in how they spend the
money.
Um, so that whatever they choose
to do is responsive to the needs
of their specific students.
This was a pretty bold move on
your part to really start to get
a very distinct but
individualized impacts that
poverty has on student learning
as as you all can see in figure
one, where assessment results
among low-income students
consistently trail those of
non-low income students.
Uh, so far you all have
appropriated $55 million to the
FII, which again has been a bold
and visionary investment on your
part in addressing the findings
of the Martinez Yazi lawsuit,
and we're here now to show you
all what impact your investment
had on student outcomes.
If you turn to page 2.
We summarize your all's original
intention in creating the FYI.
Uh, currently we rely on the at
risk index in the SCG to
identify poverty in each
community.
But with the way it's currently
designed, the SCG is only
responsive to poverty at the
district level, and it does not
consider the differences in
poverty between schools in the
same district.
And at the same time, charter
schools are assigned the poverty
indicator of the district that
they're located in. And so
that's also a challenge in the
SCG.
Uh, because of the limitations
of the SCG, you all took a
different path with the FII and
said, yes, we need the SCG to
address the effects of poverty
where they exist, but we also
need to provide even more
support to schools.
Uh, where students who go to
those schools, most of those
students, um, live in poverty
because we know that as a
concentration of poverty
increases in a school, the
greater the impact it will have
not just on low income students,
uh, but on the entire student
population within that school.
So in your original bill, you
are required that schools spend
their FYI money in a very
specific way.
With table one showing that
schools receiving more than
$40,000.
Uh, from the FII had to spend at
least 1/3 on literacy, at least
1/3 on math.
And no more than 1/3 on student
supports.
And we have examples of those on
the right hand column.
In 2023, you all amended statute
to remove those spending
requirements and you all did
that because of the strong
community feedback that you all
received.
Uh, that the requirements were
too rigid and didn't allow a
school to sustain locally
responsive uh initiatives such
such as a school that received
$90,000 from the FBI, not being
able to hire a behavioral
support specialist because they
could only spend $30,000 on
student supports.
And on top of that, the spending
requirements were also an
administrative burden on PED who
had to verify that each
expenditure was aligned with
statute.
So as you all consider how to
move forward on FII.
It's important to note the
outcomes of the program revolve
around two separate themes
listed on the bottom of page 2.
Including one is the FII an
adequate model in identifying
concentrations of poverty at the
school level, and 2, is their
capacity at the school level to
adequately support the intention
of the FII in centering the
characteristics of a school with
the ultimate goal of improving
student aca academic
achievement. So essentially we
have the methodology of how we
calculate poverty of the FII as
one distinct conversation.
And the actual programmatic
piece of the program as a
separate conversation. So two
separate but interrelated
themes.
If you all turn to page 3.
We have a section on the
methodology of the FYI.
So to identify poverty in each
school, the FII relies on income
data from 3 sources, uh, TRD,
the Healthcare Authority, and
the census.
And you can see a breakdown of
where student income data was
sourced from in table 3.
And uh I want to acknowledge the
staff at TRD and the Healthcare
Authority for their great work
on FII because in FY 25, only 9
students were not identified in
the income matching process
across the state out of over
300,000 in New Mexico.
So the FII is very much a big
implementation success story. So
well done, TRD HCO and PED.
Uh, once we have each student's
household income identified,
they are categorized into 5
buckets, which are listed along
with the poverty thresholds in
table 2.
In figure 2,
You all have a statewide
breakdown of students' household
income, with 40% being above
average income, 8% being
moderate income, 15% being low
income, 17% being very low
income and 20% being extremely
low income.
And based on this data, each
school in the state is assigned
an FII and that number is the
percentage of students who are
below 130% of the federal
poverty line, which is everyone
in level one and 2 in table 2 or
everyone who is ranked as uh
categorized as extremely low
income or very low income.
And once we have the FII for
every school, we then rank every
school in the state by that
number, and the schools with the
highest concentrations of
poverty in the state are then
allocated funding from your
appropriation to the program.
Moving on to page 4.
Uh, traditionally, we've relied
on assessment results,
attendance, and discipline to
serve as indicators of student
need, but those indicators often
measure the effects of systemic
socioeconomic challenges that
shape the conditions for
learning in schools rather than
measuring the socioeconomic
challenges themselves. In this
case, poverty.
So in figure 3.
We use the raw data from the FYI
to create district level
indices, and it shows us where
the largest concentrations of
poverty are in our state with
Gadsden, Hatch, and Deming
having the highest
concentrations of poverty in the
South.
And Zuni, Dulce, and Raton
having the highest
concentrations of poverty in the
north, and we have broadly
speaking, lower concentrations
of poverty throughout the
Southeast where oil and gas are
a strong source of uh activity.
In figure 4, we also included
the schools that have the the
that have had the largest swings
in poverty between FY 21 and
FY25 with Columbus Elementary in
Deming, having an increase of
38% points and Pinasco
Elementary in Artesia having a
47% percentage point decrease.
And this information is also
interesting because it reminds
us that the conditions that
schools exist in can change very
dramatically, very quickly, and
we need systems in place that
help schools address the effects
of those changes in external
conditions.
On page 5.
We have a breakdown of the
expenditures from FYI and FY 23.
In table 4, you all can see that
of your $15 million
appropriation to the program
that year, 3.9 million was spent
on supplies and materials.
$3.5 million on compensation,
$1.7 million on professional
development.
1.1 million on benefits and
364,000 on contracts.
And overall schools spend $10.8
million of your appropriation
and did not spend $4.2 million.
In table 5, we have a breakdown
of the compensation
expenditures.
$2.4 million was spent on
teachers. $428,000 on the
instructional assistance,
194,000 on summer and after
school.
169 on councilors and $120,000
on school and student supports.
last in table 6.
We have a breakdown of the
professional development
expenditures with $1.1 million
being spent on general education
466 on at risk, 220,000 on
special programs, 18 on
bilingual, and $2000 on fine
arts.
And so this is helpful
information because it shows us
where the need is across the
state, but it also raises
questions about how responsive
the SCG is in providing these
supports through the formula.
Because
yes, we know that additional
personnel are often needed to
serve low-income students, but
if the money to pay for those
personnel is coming from the
FII. Does that signal to us as
staff and to you all as members
of a of a potential inadequacy
in your appropriation to the SCG
or an inadequacy in how the
money flows through the SCG or a
potential.
Uh, dynamic where LEAs are just
not prioritizing spending
at-risk money on at-risk
students.
So we're we're gonna be focusing
on those questions throughout
the interim, and they'll come up
in our SCG revision proposal in
September.
Moving on to page 6.
As I mentioned before, you all
created the FYI to identify
poverty in each school.
And then allocate additional
money to schools with the most
low income students.
So in this section of the brief,
we evaluated whether your
investment in the FII had an
impact in reducing the
achievement gap among low-income
students.
But before we go into that into
what we found, we first want to
introduce you.
To the LESE's new framework for
measuring student growth.
Uh, you all haven't seen our
framework before, so we're going
to briefly describe it and
explain why we're using it in
this brief.
Uh,
as you all have increased
funding for public schools, you
all have rightfully asked us
what is the impact of your of
your investments in bringing
students closer to proficiency.
And our goal now at the LESC is
to establish a clear and
consistent measure of student
growth that we can use in all of
our evaluations and analyses and
so that we can measure the
academic progress of individual
students, evaluate the long-term
effectiveness of your
investments and programs and to
track the outcomes of the
specific student demographics
cited in the lawsuit.
And so to support you all in
evaluating the impact of your
investments, the LESE framework
for measuring student growth is
designed to identify the
individualized pathways that
students need to be on to reach
proficiency in 3 years.
And to do that, we take each
student's prior year assessment
score?
And we plot out a growth target
for each student that they
either meet or do not meet each
year?
We aggregate that to the school
level by finding the percentage
of students who met their growth
targets each year.
So for the purpose of the FYI,
we're evaluating whether the
inflow of FII money into a
school helped that school get
more students to reach their
growth targets compared to a
school with the same
demographics and the same
characteristics that did not
receive an inflow from the FYI.
And we did this for low income
students, English learners, and
those with disabilities.
And before we turn to the
results, I want to acknowledge
Tim for his role in designing
the framework, and he's gonna be
working on strengthening it in
the coming months as we start to
integrate into more of our work
at the LESC. So thank you, Tim.
Uh, on page 7.
You'll see the results of our
analysis where the blue bars and
figures 5 and 6 represent the
percentage of students in
non-FII schools who reach their
growth targets in each subject,
and the red bars are the
percentage of students in FII
schools who met their growth
targets in each subject.
So overall, as you can see in
the graphics, we found the FYI
did not have a statistically
significant impact and
increasing the percentage of
students who reach their growth
targets, and you can see that
for each student demographic in
both English and math with the
exception of students with
disabilities in math.
So overall,
Students were similarly or less
likely to meet their growth
targets in an FII school than
those in a similar non-FYI
school and so the FII itself.
Did not improve student growth
in FY 23 under the conditions,
the program existed existed in
at the time.
And so, as you all digest that.
You may be thinking maybe the
relationship between funding and
outcomes isn't as strong as I
initially thought, but we want
you all to reflect with us and
questioning whether the lack of
impact of the program was a
matter of just money, or was it
a matter of a lack of local
capacity and the lack of
strategic planning.
Uh
So if you turn to page 8.
We have a section on the
importance of local capacity to
the success of the FII.
Uh, you all may know from your
personal experiences in public
schools that school leadership
and teachers usually have a
limited role in budgeting and
spending state money, but the
FII challenged that historical
dynamic when you all allocated
the money directly to individual
schools.
Uh, so moving forward, there is
a critical need to build local
capacity so that there is
collaboration between teachers,
school leaders, and district
leaders in identifying areas and
formulating identifying areas of
need and formulating strategies
for moving toward specific and
locally responsive student
outcomes.
Uh, you are already working
toward building that capacity
through your $60 million in
multi-year investments through
Grow and educator clinical
practice, which includes teacher
and principal residencies, and
moving forward, uh, we are also
exploring the concept of
innovative staffing models, as
you all heard about in Chama
from Annie, as those models
encourage a greater
collaboration in schools.
A few challenges we saw
throughout the state aside from
from the capacity and colored
schools that either weren't
notified they got money from the
FYI or they were notified late
in the school year, and so that
was one reason there was $4.2
million that reverted from the
FYI and FY 23.
By PD staff has been working on
that piece by engaging directly
with schools and we really want
to highlight that good work at
PED's Martinez Yazi response
team.
If you turn to page 9.
We have a section on adequacy
and SCG funding.
Uh, since FY 19, you all have
increased your appropriation to
the SCG by 62% or $1.6 billion
and a lot of that money has gone
to compensation, uh, benefits
and adjustments to the formula.
Uh, now a key assumption of the
FII is that your appropriation
to the SCG is adequately
supporting the programming
required in each school and that
the FII funding is simply
supplemental to that adequate
programming.
But as we saw on table 4.
Uh, a lot of the money in the
FII was used for compensation,
uh, PD and supplies, which
signals to us that there's more
work to do in providing the
resources needed for low-income
students in the SCG.
And if we were if we were to
work toward adequacy in the SCG,
uh, we can simultaneously create
a condition needed for the FI to
be successful because the
program can then be truly
supplemental.
And down below on page 9.
Uh, you all have heard about the
challenges with PED's
reimbursement process where
there is a delay in LEAs
receiving reimbursements for
below the line programs and as a
below the line program, the FYI,
the FII had the same issues
you've all heard about, and that
is partially a symptom of the
administrative burden, uh,
placed on PED by the recent
creation of so many so many
below the line programs. So
moving forward, uh, we believe
there may be, may be an
opportunity to minimize
Or consolidate some of those
appropriations and focus instead
on appropriating flexible
funding to the SCG and using
multi-year budgeting so that PED
can adjust its long-term
staffing and uh LEAs have
consistent funding to sustain
programming.
And to wrap up on page 10, we
have our policy and budget
considerations for FYI.
Uh, even though we did not find
an impact of the FYI on Syria
achievement between FY 22 and FY
23. We want to caution you all
that those results should not be
interpreted as an indicator that
supplemental funding is not an
effective component of a broader
and more comprehensive strategy
for supporting low income
students.
And as we just talked about for
supplemental funding to be truly
effective. It needs to be paired
with strong school leadership
that prioritizes collaboration
between themselves, teachers,
and district leadership.
And that capacity component is
already a priority of you all,
uh, especially when it comes to
your investments in principal
residency programs.
And moving forward, we should
all acknowledge that the chronic
effects of poverty on student
achievement.
Are the compounding effects of
decades of chronic
underinvestment in public
schools, and those effects are
not going to be adequately
addressed by a few years of
relatively small and
non-recurring appropriations to
particular schools.
And so what does need to happen
uh to create comprehensive
supports for low income students
are comprehensive investments in
the educator ecosystem providing
accurate, adequate, and
consistent funding in the SCG
and targeted below the line
supports, each of which needs to
have a theory of change as you
all heard about yesterday, uh,
that expresses the intended
outcome of a program and centers
the needs of students.
So overall, we're not gonna
recommend that you all either
continue or discontinue the
program in this brief because we
think there's a bit more work to
do in evaluating the impact of
the program, but we do want you
all to consider several
considerations as part of a
comprehensive and systematic
approach to supporting low
income students that is also
aligned with the LESE roadmap.
The first of which is assessing
whether the at risk index and
the SCG is an adequate measure
of poverty, and that is a
consideration we'll bring to you
all and to LFC in September.
Number 2 is evaluating whether
your appropriation to the SCG is
adequate in meeting the
comprehensive needs of low
income students.
The third consideration is
continuing to leverage
multi-year budgeting in
supporting local capacity, as
you all are already doing
through Grow for Educator
clinical practice.
And last, uh, carefully
considering uh below the line
initiatives that place an
administrative burden on PED and
LEAs and potentially consider
focusing instead on flexible
increases to the SCG that
promote adequacy in formula
funding.
And you all will see each of
those considerations come up
continuously throughout the
Inche and in the coming years,
starting with the preliminary
SCG revision proposal in
September.
And I did not cough and my voice
did not give out at all. So
that's it for me, and you also
have an appendix that shows um
every allocation to every school
in the 4 years of the program.
So you can refer to your own
districts and see what schools
got money in your communities.
Thank you. All right. Thank you,
Daniel. Uh, Representative Baca.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Daniel.
Just real quick, I'm going to
start off and as I've been told
to ask just simple.
Questions and not group a bunch
together, so for those that are
out there, and maybe for those
on this committee that don't
understand, tell me the
difference between below the
line spending and above the line
spending and how that impacts as
far as school budgets and where,
uh, money is directed, please.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, uh, every district
and every charter school in the
state receives SEG funding. That
funding is very much student
based where the characters of
each student generates program
units in the formula that then
flow out to districts and can be
used in a very flexible way to
meet whatever programming and
whatever services that that that
district chooses to provide. Uh
there's broad guidelines and
guardrails for how they should
spend the money, but overall
it's very much based on local
discretion for below the line
programs, below
The line programs have very
specific uh goals and
intentions, they tend to flow
out to specific LEAs that could
apply for the programming and
it's very much based on a
reimbursement process, but
overall, the intentions of below
the line programs are very, are
very much tighter than they are
for formula funding.
And thank you just for
clarification because I was
having a conversation and so
when we're talking about below
the line spending, OK, as you're
saying, can you give me an
example of what might be
considered below the line
spending? What kind of activity,
what kind of program, just one
example so that we understand
that.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, the family income
index is uh is is an example of
a below the line program.
Mr. Chairman, I was hoping you'd
say something like bilingual
education or special education,
something very, but, um, OK, so
I guess just so we understand as
far as with the school budget
that there's a lot of complexity
with that and there's some that
have more restrictions and some
that have more opportunity for
local, um.
Basically decision making.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, my, my
question, um, and it's more of a
statement and, um.
is we're talking about
assessment a lot.
And you know, 11 of the things
that I think, Mr. Chairman, and
uh Daniel, and I know you're not
the assessment guy. I know it's
Tim and I know it's Greg.
But have we had a lot of changes
in the way in the assessment
that we're using to
Both identify and both um base
student assessment or
achievement on.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I'm gonna defer to
Tim really quick, but just on
your previous question, another
example of a below the line
program is your CTE funding.
Yes, the district can choose to
use their formula funding for
CTE programs that are very much
locally responsive, but they can
also choose to apply for CTE
funding from the state from your
$40 million appropriation and
the guardrails for that program
are very much tighter.
Tim,
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Baca, the, uh, the assessment
that we use to measure student
achievement and proficiency
right now is the New Mexico
measures of student success and
achievement or MASA, um, that
has been the assessment for now
this is the 3rd year FY 24 will
be the 3rd year. Uh, we haven't
seen those results yet, but the
results that you're looking at
here is 2 years of the MASA
assessment. It's the same
assessment for those years and
so, uh, going into the future,
we're hoping that we stick with
that assessment so that we can
continue to do these sort of
time.
analysis. And thank you, Mr.
Chairman, and I didn't get to
ask this question yesterday when
we talked about assessment, but
we talked about longitudinal
assessment. So as a as a a a
data person or as a
statistician.
How many years do we have before
we actually have longitudinal
data?
Uh, Mr. Chair and Representative
Baca, the, the rule of thumb
that I like to use is 3 years
that we, we don't really see the
impact of a program until 3
years of sustained
implementation of that program.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
that goes to the question that
we've talked about with
assessment because we've had
many changes in assessment, not
only in the grades 3 through 8,
which I asked before, but also
from our pre-K through 2 and our
high schools with oursat
preschool. So I'll move on, um,
Mr. Chairman, and Daniel, when
we talk about the lack or maybe
that we did not see impact of
it. I think one of the elephants
in the room is we have
attendance issue of 40% of our
students, so I, I think that it
would be helpful to me to see,
is there a correlation between
those students that may be
identified through whatever
measure as being in poverty and
higher or, you know, as far as
where their attendance would be
because when we talk about, and
I'm gonna say this.
We talk about engagement and
giving students, you know, first
of all, get them to go to an
interest in going to school and
let them be successful at
something, you know, for me, my,
my big successor line was lunch
and recess, right? That's what I
was good at. So, um, but it kept
me coming back, right?
So I, I would really be
interested to see the
correlation between.
The attendants, because if we
don't, if we can't get them
there, hey, we're funding it,
but if that kid's gone, almost
50% of the time, no program, no.
strategy, pedagogy is going to
make a difference, um, so I know
you may not have the answer to
that, but Tim, you're kind of
nodding. Tim, would you like to
respond to that? Mr. Chair
Representative Baca, thanks for
the opportunity to answer that.
So we, we presented some data
for you, uh, last month that
there, there is a correlation
between uh student poverty and
their attendance rates. Um, from
the models that we've run, we've
we've seen that poverty alone
accounts for about 20% of the
variation in in student
attendance.
There are other factors going on
that uh determine what, you
know, it's different for every
student that determines what
that student needs uh to get to
school more often, but poverty
is certainly one piece of the
story.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for the, I guess the
other question about it, and I,
I asked this in Secorro, um.
But when we talk about.
You know, along with the impact
of our um.
As far as the funds we're
talking about.
I'm really interested in the
Pre-K or our early childhood,
the EC because as we know,
We have that window of time.
And if we have not.
Had a student to, you know, um,
provide or reach a achieve or
proficiency by 3rd grade.
Or if we have identified and we
have not intervened, it makes it
more difficult.
So I think one of the data or
one of the data points we need
to look at is our
Basically kindergarten ready or
1st and 2nd grade.
Because as we say before, we're
playing, you know, I believe
really that in her early
identification, early
intervention, and I'm also going
to say early, you know,
differentiation for our teachers
to be able to meet the needs of
our students.
We want to get those done
because when K through 2,
they're learning to read. After
that, they're reading to learn.
So if we have a reading problem,
we don't, you know, we don't
make that hit that mark by 3rd
grade. They're reading
trajectory or they're learning
trajectory from here on on will
be impacted. So I really do
think that as this committee we
take a close look at.
What is the impact of the huge
investment we've made to the
early childhood programs as
well.
And so I, I do appreciate this.
I do think as we this committee,
Along with this, we can't just,
you know, we talk about
quantitative and qualitative
data, right? The quantitative is
the numbers.
The qualitative is the story
behind the numbers and the fact
about it is we've got to talk
about student engagement.
We've got to talk about making
families welcome in our schools.
We talked about takes a
community to raise, you know,
with a child. It is a
partnership between the school.
The family and the community.
And many of our parents are
saying they don't feel welcome
in school, so I think that we
need to change that and we need
to really work for the benefit.
Of our students. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Ribs and block
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and uh
Tim, you might want to sit down
again. I'm sorry.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you Daniel and and Tim. So,
I, I was looking at the data at
the back about different school
districts, and from what I saw,
some districts, they got a lot
of, a lot of money in FYA like
22, for example, that was
reducing in FY 23 and then it
increased again and I played 24.
So, Mr. Chairman and Daniel and
Tim, I'm just wondering if
Because we look on page 7 and we
say there's not really a direct
correlation between those
dollars, but since they've
fluctuated from year to year.
Does that make any impact on
The results that we see in
reading and math, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Block, that's an excellent
question, and that's, that's one
of the things that we wanted to
dig into a little bit more. Um,
part of the reason that we think
that we're not seeing an impact
in the numbers that we have is
because we're not sort of
tracking the value of the
sustained investments and you
know if a school district or a
school gets a family income
index award for multiple years
in a row, you know, it stands to
reason that next year they'll
know a little bit better what
they need to do with that money
in the next year and then the
next year and it becomes part of
their sort of
Coordinated spending strategy,
right? So, um, that that's an
excellent piece that we'd like
to start to work on and we're
hoping that we can do that when
we get uh more uh recent
assessment results from PED.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Tim. So I believe you said
earlier about 3 years is what it
takes to to track. So I know
some of these districts, they
didn't get an award for 3 years,
uh, some of them got an award
one year and then not another
year. So I'm just, I would love
to see what that looks like in 3
years from now. And then Mr.
Chairman, and I don't, I don't
know if either one of you want
to answer this one. I know in
2023, we changed the FII with SB
3, and I'm wondering what, what
did that do?
Uh, structurally to the program,
Mr. Chairman.
So Mr. Chan,
Chairman Representative Block
just to provide context for you
all over how a school can be an
FYI school or non-FYI school.
Once we rank every school in the
state by their FII every school
above the 50th percentile is
considered to be eligible for
FII.
Uh, each district is limited to
10% of their schools who can
receive the FYI. And so that is
why sometimes you have schools
that get FII one year and that
don't get the FAI the next year
and the amount that they receive
is based on the school's, uh.
The school's low income students
eligible students and that
school's share of all students
throughout the state.
And so that is why.
The awards can vary also in the
actual size, year over year. So
to your second question, uh, for
the statute that amended.
The statue. Um, it's simply
removed the requirement that
schools spend at least 13 on
literacy, at least 1/3 on the
math, and no more than 1/3 on
student supports. They're still
required to spend the money on
those 3 broad buckets. They're
just not required to spend it uh
in that specific uh proportion.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Daniel. So that clears it
up a little for me. Did we have
a problem previously with the
spending of that money because
it was in these silos, and is
that why we changed it. And then
since we've changed it, I know
it's just last year. So I guess
it would take 3 years from then
to see those.
Those results, I would assume,
Mr. Chair Daniel. Yeah,
so one of members of the
committee, uh, the primary
reason that you all amended
statute was because of the very
much rigid nature of those
requirements. I had an example
where if a school received
$90,000 in funding from the FYI,
they couldn't afford to actually
hire an FTE for behavioral
health supports because they can
only spend 1/3 of that money on
student supports. So that's the
primary reason that you all
remove the requirements and they
can
much do that now. I'm not sure
if Tim has.
Anything to follow up to on the
3 year.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Block, certainly we, we, we'll
continue to look at the data as
we get it. Um, the, the 3 year
thing is sort of a.
You know, guideline rule of
thumb, we, we, we'll keep
looking at the impact, um, the
longer that a program goes on,
the more certain that you, you
can be about the impacts that
you're seeing and attribute
those impacts to the program
itself.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for those, those answers
that kind of clears it up for me
because I know we've made
changes and it's hard to to get
correlations when we make a
change last year and we, some
people got $100,000 this year,
they got $900 last year, they
get.
20 next year, how, how much does
that impact the student
achievement and then I would
just love to see all that data.
I know you're the data guy, Tim,
so thank you for that and I
appreciate the time today, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you so much.
Senator Souls.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, it's
very interesting because it's
not what we sort of expected. We
expected the money to have an
impact and it doesn't, uh, I
very much appreciate the, the
matched pairs design because it
allows you to do more than just
look at, um, it takes out a
number of the factors that might
be confounding the data. I'm
curious if you looked at were
there any of the FII schools
that showed great success and if
so,
what was different about them.
I'm kind of looking at you, Tim.
I know Daniel, it's your, your
show, but I suspect the
questions are more two
questions. Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair,
uh, there, that is an excellent
question that we didn't do a
whole lot of digging into if we
see some sort of uh trends
around what schools are
consistently doing well of those
FII schools that are doing well.
Um, certainly would be worth
looking at and happy to do that
for you if you'd like. Thank
you, um, and again, I don't have
to say, Mr. Char
So, Mr. Chair,
It might be interesting to look
at, for instance, the top
quintile and see if there are
any characteristics of those as
far as their achievement
compared to the bottom quintile
or something of that sort to to
see, you know, what they did
different. Did they put all of
it into personnel? Did they
focus in one bucket instead of
all three buckets. I'm, I, I'm
making it up, but you know, just
see what kinds of things might
have had an impact.
Um
So much of what affects student
achievement we know is rooted in
community disparities, not just
in school disparities. We put
money into the schools thinking
it's going to make an impact
when that may not be where the,
the negative problems are coming
from and so just want to keep
remembering that schools don't
function in isolation from the
communities in which they, they
reside. Uh, the children don't
function differently at school
from the communities in which
they reside.
Um,
As I look through on these, one
of the other things that kind of
jumped out is the FII schools.
In every single case
underperformed their matched
pair.
It's a nonparametric statistical
measure, but that's concerning
that almost is indicating, you
know, fairly small sample, but
all of them are in the wrong
direction, where it's almost
like the money is
disadvantageous.
How come? I mean, if, if it kind
of jumped around, that'd be
different. But is that because
the match pairs are not good
matched pairs, or is there some
disadvantage for having the
money that's causing the
problem.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Sol's,
uh, always happy to dig into
methodologies with you, um, the
what, what you've said is
exactly correct, uh, when, when
we're talking about FII schools
that received an FII awards, uh,
we are talking about the highest
poverty schools in every school
district, the 10% highest
poverty schools just by design
of the program, uh, and so you
are comparing someone at the,
you know, in those highest
poverty schools with somebody
who's just outside of those high
poverty schools, I think that's
what you're seeing when you see
uh slightly lower performance
from those FII schools. It's
just that the money that was
provided isn't doing enough to
bridge that gap.
OK. And that makes some sense
that, Mr. Chair, that the match
pairs aren't really matched
pairs, there's, you know,
they're the ones that didn't
quite get there. And so, you
know, you would expect.
Some of that potentially, but
then again also points to the
influence of affluence within
the communities where the
schools reside that, you know,
that, that is one of the main
factors, and we're trying to fix
it in education when the problem
is a community problem, not a
school problem.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative Garret.
Thanks Mr. Chair. Couple
questions. Uh, the Masa test,
which we've now had 3 years. Is
it a time test?
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
I'm gonna say yes and then I'm
gonna look at PED, is that
correct?
OK
OK. It is not. OK. OK, so unlike
the part Madam Sharon,
uh chair Mr. Chair and Madam
Director, I'm Mike Park, it is
not timed.
That's correct. Um, so, Mr.
Chair and Representative
Garrett, the massa was designed
so that it was shorter in a time
span, um, didn't go as long as
the park assessment.
But that students could actually
have a um longer time to finish
their actual section, so.
Thank you. Um, I was a test
coordinator forever and some of
these questions are important in
looking at results.
So on the masa, are there
writing portions in math and
writing portions in the literacy
sections.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Garrett, I'm gonna say yes and
I'm gonna look at quit. Yeah,
um, the, the, uh, what Gwen is
talking about when, when the uh
In the design of the test, so
all of the tests moved from,
from a, uh, you know, you're
writing on a book and and using
that. So I think everything is
done on a computer now, uh, and
the assessments are called
computer adaptive assessments so
that they um are they're trying
to pinpoint where a student is
on the test by offering them
some questions and if they're
doing well, then they're going
to scale up the difficulty of
the questions a little bit, uh,
and, and that, that allows it to
be shorter and allows it to um
use more sort of formats of
questions.
to your, to your point where um
you're
having writing in a math section
of the test.
Thank you. And my next question
is really important because at
the schools, I don't know what
the standard is now, but our
beginning of the year, middle of
the year, and end of the year
tests in math and in reading,
never had writing portions. I
read it was simply multiple
choice. Is that true of those
tests now?
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
my, my gut says that there's
going to be a variety of
questions on these uh computer
adaptive assessments, not only
um multiple choice, but short
answer where you're asked to put
in, you know, a number, a
numeric answer or something like
that or a sentence and answer or
uh things like that that are
sort of doing multiple measures
to to get to, um, you know, what
is, is a student, you know, on
grade level.
OK, and I'm Mr. Chair and, and I
don't know if the directors
looked into this because the IR
test, I station tests, uh, in
grades 3 to 8 had no writing on
the preparatory tests, which I
think is significant because
Then either the teachers are
instructed to give their kids
writing tests during the year,
but when they actually get in
the end of the year tests, it's
quite different than the
measurements that took place
throughout the year.
And
John,
It's magic, uh, uh, Mr. Chair,
Representative Garrett, you're
right, and, and not because I
have personal experience, um, my
wife is a 3rd grade teacher.
It's one of her one of her
concerns with with formative
assessments is that they don't
match that format and so
obviously teachers are then.
Well, in order to prepare them
for those summative tests that
do that do include writing
teachers are doing that, but
they're, but students are not
exposed to that in the testing
during the during the more short
cycle formative testing.
Thank you, and I bring this
point up, Mr. Chair, because
when we're looking at the
mechanisms that we're
determining growth topics.
There's a disconnect, which, um,
and I'm glad to hear they're not
timed. I used to have gifted
students crying because they
couldn't do their best because
they couldn't finish their test.
Um, so I think we have to look
at that.
Now when we decide the growth
targets, uh, I was thinking of
the weight of Gwen and me. I am
50 pounds overweight.
Are you.
No.
She's not. Maybe she's a pound
overweight. So if we look at our
growth targets over the next 3
years, I have to do a lot more
than she does. And maybe I can't
do that in 3 years. Maybe it
takes 4 years, so we're
expecting the kids who are
lowest performing to grow more
than a year. I mean, most
teachers are if my student grows
a full year, that's something.
But when, and some students can
grow 2 years even during COVID.
I kids do 2 years of reading
just because of who they were.
So as we do these growth targets
and decide if they meet them or
not, um, it's questionable.
Because when I look at figure 5
and figure 6.
I'm thinking and I think um
Senator Sols referred to it,
actually, that's not bad. It's
not a terrible thing, those
statistics that I'm seeing,
especially when he talks about
the affluence of the greater
community. So that that's just
something that I'm thinking
about as we look at this. And
then my other point is just, um,
oh, this is a question I don't
know if anybody can answer it in
New Mexico, all kids take.
The end of the year test if they
have severe disabilities.
There's an alternative test. At
my school where I think about
800 out of the 1100 kids we're
testing in grade 3 to 5.
One child qualified for that
test. So all the all the kids
with IEPs with the individual
education plan took the same
test. I'm wondering in other
states, is that true? Do all the
kids with IEPs take the same end
of the year tests. Do we have an
answer to that?
Uh, Mr. Chair and Representative
Garrett I'll, I'll take a stab
at it and then I'll pass it over
to Gwen to to give you a little
bit more context. So the, the
federal government does require
that all students participate in
standardized assessments, uh,
the, the goal that the feds have
put for states is 95% of your
students must be tested, and all
students are required to take
the same test, uh, that being
said, if an IEP determines that
a student is eligible for a
separate assessment, then
have to do what the IEP says,
so, um.
Gwen, I don't know if if that
hits it, but Mr. Chairman and
Representative Garrett I'll add
one thing to Tim's, um, great
description and that is uh
federal government does watch or
the Department of Education does
watch that the percentage of
students, um, who are very high
needs and require an alternate
assessment is under 1%. It's
called the 1% benchmark. So
every state has this 1%
benchmark.
And we were slightly over
actually, and it was flagged for
the Department of Education.
Thanks very much, because when
we look at international things,
many countries look really good,
but they don't include any of
those test results. So thank you
for that. And then just my
final, um,
Let's see, my final thing is,
um,
The early childhood observation
tool, the ECOT.
When I was at elementary school,
kindergarten teachers complained
because they didn't get those
results. When you're a teacher,
a good system means you can look
at your individual students'
test scores and reading scores
from the time they entered the
system.
But, but the ECO didn't
transfer. It was a separate
system. Has that been fixed?
Because kindergarten teachers
wanted to know, well, what
happened now that we have
universal pre-K, what happened?
And they didn't know. Has that
been fixed?
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Garrett, I, I think I might
actually defer to PED on this
one, it's my knowledge. I, I am
familiar with the issues that
you're talking about. Uh, we
also have had very difficult
time analyzing ECO results, and
sometimes even obtaining ECO
results from uh from PED just
given that it is a separate
system from all of the other
assessments. Um, so I'm not sure
if PED would like to comment on
the status of of the eco and
whether it's being streamlined
to.
Uh
Mirror other requirements. OK,
uh, well, uh, Mr. Chair
Representative Garrett we'll,
we'll work with PD and we'll
follow up and get you a good
answer.
OK, thank you. Um, my final
thing is, um, when we looked at
The goals and the curriculum for
kindergarten. If we go back to
2012 in the Common Core state
standards. It went from the top
down and so many early childhood
educators.
Felt the expectations for our
youngest learners were not
reasonable. And, um, I just
think it's important of what
we're expecting, you know,
kindergartners to read. I don't
know about anybody here, but we
didn't learn to read in my
kindergarten. learned how to
draw geometric shapes for math
by drawing witches, which I
still remember because it was a
powerful experience in math. But
I think we can't.
We have to look at the efficacy
of what our youngest learners
need.
Because as you know, in Finland,
they don't start school until
they're 7, and in our country
and in our state, if a kid's not
reading at 7, it's a flag, and
I'm not dismissing the
importance of identifying
issues, but I think sometimes in
our goal for all these
statistics, we're losing sight
of the whole child. Thank you.
Other questions from committee
members.
Representative Figueroa, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for the presentation. This
is good stuff. I think that FII
is a tremendous step forward in
identifying where our students
in poverty really are so that we
can allocate funding that
direction. But like Senator
Souls mentioned, it's really
disappointing to see no impact,
so my broad question.
is if we, if we can't.
U
The charts on page 7.
Or student achievement or change
or growth.
What are the indicators that we
can use as legislators to
Justify this funding because we
all know the need is there.
That poverty is directly
correlates to achievement of our
students.
So, but, but we also say we are
data driven. We are
evidence-based. We do policy
based on evidence. So what are
the indicators we should be
looking at? And when will we
have them?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Figueroa, um, I'll, I'll say a
few things. I think Danny wants
to say a few things and then it
looks like represented uh sorry,
uh, director Prea War that wants
to say a few things as well. Um,
The first thing that I'll say is
that uh we can use these charts,
uh, and we can use this model to
evaluate the effectiveness of
programs and uh to return a
little bit to a question or a
concern that Representative
Garrett had about um bias within
in the growth model. I'm, I'm
also like deeply concerned about
the the biases that are present
in this model, uh, and in
proficiency rates in general,
um, and, and I, you know, you
have my commitment that, that
I'm working to refine this model
to make sure that it is uh.
As close as we can get using
assessment scores that we have,
uh, to measuring whether a
student is uh on pace to get to
that level of proficiency that
we want every student to get to.
Um, that, that, that being said,
I think when we see uh data like
this or when we see data in
general, it doesn't necessarily
tell us yes or no. It tells us,
hm, why, right? And it, it gives
us a, it gives us a point to
jump off and to start asking
questions.
To Senator Sol's points about
what might be working and what
might not be working. And so,
um, I, I think that the last
section of of this brief does a
pretty good job of, of what we
think might not be working, uh,
and I'll let Daniel talk a
little bit more about the
capacity issues that he's
identified. Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, that's why we
were very specifically included
a section on local capacity. I
think it was the local capacity
piece that very much somewhat
undermine the success of the
program. So moving forward, I
think, really invest.
continuing to invest in building
the capacity of individual
school leaders is going to be
essential and actually building
the conditions that are needed
for the program to actually
succeed. And that's why I asked
you all to reflect with me was
the lack of success of the
program, a matter of money
itself, or was it an issue of
various conditions that just
needed to exist for the program
to actually be successful and
you all are already doing that,
you're investing through Grow
and Educate our clinical
practice.
you're moving toward adequacy,
adequacy is a very ambiguous
term. It's a, it's very much a
legal term, but it's also very
much an aspirational term,
adequacy very much varies by
student, depending on the
characteristics of the student.
There is no defined.
Definition, I think, for
adequacy. So we're all you are
doing all the things as John
likes to say, uh, that are
needed to build conditions for
these types of programs to
actually be successful on their
own.
I'm not sure if Gwen has any
other context.
Mr. Chair and uh Representative
Firoa, I do feel that the data
was important uh for to bring to
you and I'm very proud of uh
Daniel and Tim. I think you have
two very strong senior analysts,
both the money and the data
coming together in this report
that I was just,
um, the point of privilege is
the director to shine on, um, my
team and your team to be able to
do something like this. But I
feel like it's inconclusive, and
I think that's a really
important point that we bring to
you sometimes inconclusive data.
Um, the point of, uh,
Representative Garrett, that
this is 2 years' worth of data
is not sufficient. It is
important to still look at it.
To my point yesterday during the
Martinez and Yazi lawsuit
presentation, we have to
continue to look at benchmarks
every year, look for output or
outcomes and then impact. And so
if the outputs in this instance
are that funding is going out,
we're looking at implementation
at the public.
Education department, how those
RFRs are actually being
processed, um, we're looking at
actual local capacity, all of
those steps in between to then
finally get it um impact, but if
we have a model that allows us
to actually think deeply about
this in a, in a, in a way that
brings for you all data alive, I
think is the best possible
thing.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you all. You are bringing out
exactly the points that I think
are essential and also
highlighting a difference
between the research that you do
and the decisions we have to
make because they, as
legislators, the decisions are
yes or no when it comes down to
it, we have to vote.
Um, but this time in interim
when we do the research, we,
when you do the research and
bring it to us, it is really
important for us to see and I
appreciate the fact that the
next step is why? Where did it
break down? And the issues
you've highlighted, the
timeliness of notification?
The issues of, um, training and
knowledge at the site level for
principals when they're informed
it's available, what options?
Are there, what can they do with
it? What are the effectiveness
of those different options in
their community, then is there
any time to deal with
stakeholders.
These are all the points where
the process
Breaks down.
And the impact is impeded. The
impact that we all want to see.
Um, doesn't necessarily happen.
So now we have to dig into those
and figure out how we can change
those. But those become our
indicators of success. The
timeliness and flow of money,
the application of the money,
the involvement of the
stakeholders. Those are the
things that we have to look at
to make sure those are
happening.
To get the end impact.
Um.
So going to page 10.
The suggestions there?
Can you elaborate on those
you've talked about 3, quite a
bit. The multi-year budgeting is
really gonna help, involve
stakeholders, allow principals
to incite leaders to look at
their options and to do
something long enough to
possibly see impact. So we
talked about the value of
multi-year budgeting and the
value of training.
For leadership that we have
heavily invested in.
But 12, and 4.
Can you talk a little bit more
about those?
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, uh, for the first
consideration, assessing whether
the at risk index is an adequate
measure of poverty. Uh, we are
now in year 2 of our review of
the SCG. Last year was a review,
this year is a revision. Uh, one
of the primary considerations
that came out of the uh out of
the review of the SCG was
questions around whether the
at-risk index is an adequate
measure of poverty. There are
questions over how accurate
Title One data is, uh, and
actually.
Quantifying poverty uh in each
district. There are questions
over whether charter schools
should have their own poverty
indicator and not the poverty
indicator of their district.
There's questions over whether
we should have access to our own
state's data so that so that our
staff and executive staff can
actually audit the data for
accuracy. There are a lot of
things going into that, even the
poverty threshold itself, should
it be higher or should it be
lower than what Title One uses.
So there are a lot of questions
going
In that and we're going to bring
to you all a potential
consideration for embedding the
methodology of the FYI into the
SEG so that we finally have um
in state data that we use as to
build a poverty indicator in the
SCG. And so we'll bring that
consideration to you all in
September to the joint LESC LFC
uh presentation. So that's
context on number one.
Uh, number one just focuses on
the actual way that that the
money flows through the formula.
2, focuses on the actual amount
of money that flows through the
formula. We haven't done much
work on actually defining
adequacy. We very much know that
the court said that we're not
providing a sufficient public
education, but it very much left
it up to you all to define
what's efficiency actually
means. I don't think we've made
much stride and actually
defining what that means per
student much.
less statewide and so we're
still digging into that, we're
still entering into a special
education five-year plan
overview. Uh, we're going to do
a lot of work on that and
defining what adequacy means uh
for each student and what it
means as a top line
appropriation to the SCG. So
that's very much an area that we
need to focus more on in the
coming years. And number 4.
Um, you all just had a crash
course in the extent of work
involved in administering one
below the line program. I want
you to all reflect on the amount
of work that it takes to for PED
to implement uh 2030, 40 below
the line programs, each of which
have their own language and
House Bill 2 and which have
guidance that PED issues. So
moving forward, I think there's
a consideration that you all
somewhat
Start to consider moving away
from creating you below the line
programs and instead focus on
appropriating flexible funding
to the SCG that automatically
flows out to districts rather
than districts having to apply
for money from PED, wait for the
award letters, use their cash
balances to front the money and
then get reimbursed the whole
cycle. And the number 4 very
much focuses on what you all
already did in this.
session, which was appropriate
$30 million in flexible funding
to the SCG for uh literacy, for
math, for CTE programs, for
community schools, uh,
potentially considering
continuing those investments
rather than creating specific
below the line programs in the
future.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for that explanation. I
would posit that it's not
adequate.
We are not meeting an adequacy
standard and
All of the below the line
funding then or it's it's being
used to keep the lights on. It's
being used for basic education.
It's not.
There's a disconnect between our
intentions as, as a legislature
and what is happening in the
schools because they need to run
their programs and and
Most of us have been teachers or
administrators that we know that
the school site, you bend over
backwards to do what you need to
do for your students and to make
it work. Regardless of what you
have to finagle.
With the paperwork. Um, and
We need to make it cleaner and
more focused, but it starts with
2, making sure it's enough. None
of the extra supplemental things
that we want to do for the kids
who have particular needs at
risk, special ed.
Supporting a math program,
supporting the CTE program. None
of those supports are going to
go where they're intended to go
if the base isn't adequate.
Um,
So we have to move on #2. I'm
glad we're moving on number one.
I think we're going to come to
consensus that FII is long
overdue,
uh, method to target our kids in
poverty. So I'm not worried
about that, but 4 is contingent
on 2, and we need to make
headway on determining the
adequacy of adequacy of our SEG.
And you don't have anybody else
on my list, but I did have a few
questions. Um, thank you all for
the presentation, um.
Uh
So I'm gonna ask a broad
question, if you could help me
out, um, and maybe some folks
even on the panel could help
out.
In the local portion of your
brief, you talk about school
districts perhaps not knowing or
once they were spoken to about,
well you get family income index
funding, not necessarily
knowing. So like the local
level, when that money comes in,
what is school administration
looking at in terms of their
number and how does.
This allocation fit into the
number they're looking at.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, don't have too much
context
for, oh, John, John's here.
Once, once again, the glasses
are healthy. All right.
I put them on right before I get
here, Mr. Chair. Uh, so Mr.
Chair, there is,
I don't know that much more than
anybody else. I have, I have
some personal knowledge about
FII because for better or worse,
I was responsible for, for
helping to administer the
program the first year at while
at PED.
And so I can give you a little
bit of anecdotal information at
least. Um, again, as Daniel
said, school districts receive
FII through the award letter
process. This does not flow
through their SEG base
allocation, right? So districts
get an award letter, actually
they get a pre-award letter in,
in the case of most things and
tell a planning award letter
that says you're gonna get.
This much money that usually
happens before the beginning of
the next, the fiscal year in
which they receive the funding,
so you know, May or June,
they'll get a letter that says
you're gonna get some money.
So that you can start to plan.
Usually that award letter goes
to either the superintendent or
the superintendent and the
school business official in that
district, or maybe just the
school business official in that
district, right?
Then PED works through creating
new funds, all the internal
processes, and eventually we'll
issue an award, an actual award
letter to that district for for
whether it's FII or CTE,
whatever that might be. At that
point, it's most school business
school business officials that
I've spoken to and
superintendents will not spend
any money.
On this particular initiative
until they receive the actual
award letter.
Right, even though they've been
told they're gonna get money.
They will not spend any money
until they get the actual award
letter and that's what Daniel
was referring to and some of the
timing of this depends on the
capacity of the department and
the internal processes there.
You've heard in the past and,
and I'll, I'll be, I'll take
responsibility in my role at PED
because it was a new program
because I wasn't as familiar
with our internal budgeting
processes. The first year that
FII was implemented, the actual
award letter probably didn't go
out until September or October.
So even though districts were
going to receive hundreds of
thousands of dollars for one
school, for instance.
They didn't start spending on
that program until September,
October, November.
Right. But again, the, the, to
your, to your more specifically
to your question about what
happens.
School business officials get
that letter.
And then they start to make
decisions about where to budget
it.
What was interesting about FII
and and probably some other
awards as well as these are
supposed to be school-based
awards.
And sometimes what happens for
whatever reason, I don't, I
don't want to cast any blame
here. The principal who is
responsible for implementing the
program may not even know that
their school got that award.
And a school business official
then says to them, we bought you
some stuff.
Because you got this money with
this award, right? And everybody
shaking, a lot of you are
nodding your heads because
you've you've experienced this,
this in your district. And it's
not just an FII issue. This is
the way that schools operate and
and part of this the budgeting
and communication systems with
within those districts. And so
it does get to a little bit of.
Local capacity not just in a in
an individual's ability to make
decisions about the money, but
just in the systems that exist
that sort of dictate who makes
decisions about how to spend
that money, right? So I spoke
with a lot of principals in my
role as administering this
program who said, I didn't even
know we had that money. Or yeah,
they told me I got something,
but I'm not exactly sure what
that is.
Or I talk to school business
officials who said, well, what
is this? What am I supposed to
do with it?
And of course, it was a new
program and so we, we walked
them through again, you know,
this was.
This was in the year, 3 years
ago, 3.5 years ago, something
like that. So I don't know if
that that's helpful in in and
again, that's probably very
slightly from district to
district, from school to school,
some districts.
Probably communicate that
differently to their principles
in a large district versus a
very small district and so I'm
sure it varies.
In
And I'm hearing that that
process may have improved since
your time at the department.
Yes, well, obviously I'm not
doing it anymore, Mr. Chair, so
that's probably a good thing,
um, we, we know from talking to
PED staff that their systems for
distributing that money have
become much more efficient. They
have provided much more
technical assistance and
guidance to school districts and
school principals about what to
do with that money, um, again,
this was a new thing at the time
and we were trying to help
people understand that.
They now have family income
index guides at risk, in
addition to how do you spend
just your at-risk money in
general to support students who
need it most, so I think the
department has done a much
better job of that, um, and I
think school districts also now
know, oh, that's what it is. And
and they know to expect it to a
certain extent, uh, although to
Representative Block's point
earlier, some schools got it and
then didn't get it because of
the way that the that the data
plays out, but I think in the
last two years especially,
school.
Districts have become more
accustomed to receiving it.
Schools are accustomed to
receiving it and have a better
idea of how to spend it.
And, and I guess it brings up an
interesting question, I guess
for the department is.
Do we have a way to track when
that money is getting spent by
the districts. So if John saying
in the initial years of the
implementation, it was getting
spent September, October,
November, um, do we have better
idea of how it's being spent now
or when it's being spent. So Mr.
Chair and I'll let the
department come up if they want
to speak to this too, um.
All of these transactions are
are tracked, if you will, right?
So a district spends money.
On the front end for something,
let's say you want to buy
instructional materials, which
you could do in the first year,
especially a lot of money was
spent on instructional materials
or things having to do with
structured literacy training,
that kind of thing, because
that's where those, those
guardrails were those 30, 30,
30, right? Or 1/3, 1/3, 1/3.
But a school district spends the
money and then submits.
The request for reimbursement,
the RFRs that you hear about all
the time. The department
receives those RFRs, evaluates
whether or not that money was
spent on appropriate things and
then reimburses the district for
their expenditure. All of those
transactions are, are trapped
within the OBMS operating budget
management system, yeah, got it.
And so we can def we definitely
know when and what they spent
money on.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, I actually happen to
have the expenditure sheet that
was sent to us sometime maybe
late April early May.
As of May, around 58.3% of your
$15 million appropriation for FY
24 had been spent.
So that's still pretty low
percentage they still had about
a month, a month and a half to
submit their reimbursement
request. There were some schools
that had fully depleted their
expenditure, which is great. And
there are some that had yet to
even begin to spend the money
and those are some of the
smaller schools that we see on
the list.
A pretty wide range. Yeah, no, I
appreciate that. Um.
I guess coming back to to
Daniel, your report, um,
On page 3, it says this process.
Um,
For the family income index was
successful in identifying
students, household income, 24,
only 9%. So we have a model
that's successful at um.
Looking at household.
Income
And that was one of the stated
goals of this program was to get
a better idea about household
income of our students. So it
seems like we're good there. The
departments are overburdened by
the work. It hasn't become an
excessive workload. It seems
pretty easy, seamless to get
that information. Does that
sound about right?
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, uh, I talked with
TRD. I've talked with the
Healthcare Authority. They say
they now have mechanisms in
place to make the process pretty
well streamlined. Um, I think
there are some maybe some
concerns about the workload at
PED maybe if you want to talk
about it, that'd be great. If
not, also great, um, but overall
the process after 4 years has
been very much streamlined and I
think we're pretty confident in
the actual data that's being
produced and again, only 9
students
throughout the state weren't
found out of over 300,000, so
big success.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
thank you, um, Daniel, and, and,
uh, the committee for being
concerned about the
administrative burden placed on
the the department. Uh, we have
definitely seen as, as we
mentioned the other day, we have
greatly decreased the vacancy
rate within the agency and we
have turned around the um the.
RFR process, uh, such that the
we have greatly shortened the
amount of time it takes to
process a request for
reimbursement. And um though it
the the data does appear to show
that the spending happens later
in the year. I do want to want
to mention that often that that
what we're really looking at is
when is it being requested for
reimbursement. We're not really
looking at when the expenditures
happen, uh, and expenditures can
happen earlier in the year,
though they don't request for
reimbursement until.
Later and so it does make it
look like, um, the expenses are
happening later in the year.
I appreciate that nuance, um.
So, have a process.
Of identifying these students
and where the money can go to,
so I'd want to turn to page 5
and and represent Figueroa
started going into this about um
some of the uses, um.
Compensation, or sorry, uh,
professional development for
structured literacy, something
that we have heard as an issue
of letters training and all that
goes into it and the time it
takes for, for educators to do
that. Um, but also very
necessary that we're, we're,
we're very hopeful of the, the
end result from, uh, for our
students, uh, compensation for
literacy coaches we've heard
that at a lot of the, the school
districts that we've been at
that
hired using extra funding or
other sorts of funding for
literacy coaches, uh, same thing
with social emotional
supplemental materials, um,
Career technical education
program, something we've spent
some time on here today, um, and
then on page 6, I mean, I think
that's probably the most glaring
thing and that something that we
as the interim committee or
standing committee has known for
a while, um, is that
These
What this money is being spent
on are things that our school
districts have asked us as just
a basic support for their
students in general, um, and I
think that speaks volumes to
where we as a legislature, have
not been fully funding our
Schools through the SCG to
perform work like this to where
school districts.
Whether they're in the know in
the particular school site is in
the know about what this money
is for our spending it toward
things that they know.
They need help in to help their
students, um.
And I really think like
Representative Figueroa is that
we really need to get a handle
on our SCG so that like is being
suggested um by you, Daniel,
like, is this truly supplemental
funding as it should be because
I see some of the other things
like field trips, like field
trips would be awesome to be
able to have the money to have a
bus and take students on field
trips to different museums to
places of higher education as
supplement.
Men or to our education, but.
A lot of us at schools, we don't
have time, uh, we don't have the
funds to do it. They're being
used for X Y Z.
But
That's where I see the hope for
something like the family income
index if we can really get more
comfortable with the amount of
money we're putting into the SEG
so that school districts are
comfortable being able to
provide these basic supports
that we hear all over the state
schools.
Having done or wanting to do,
um, they just don't have the
funds for and that's something
that that we really, we as a
legislature really need to get a
hold of and actively do, um,
otherwise we're going to be
sitting here going back and
forth on, um, below the line
funding and what it's used for
and delving into the weeds into
this, that and the other trying
a project, pulling that money,
putting it somewhere else, um.
Which is, which is.
Unsettling to everybody
involved. Um, but I think
through the, through the SCG is
where we need to start tackling
these problems to get to like.
Represent Figueroa said.
Getting to what supplemental
funding could
mean and what it would mean for
our students, um.
So I think that's that's a great
suggestion and something that
hopefully we can through the SCG
workgroup, um, Daniel, that
you're spearheading, um, can
really get a, a handle on um
what components need changing
and, and, and what the desired
effects of those changes might
be um so we can move forward in
this and certainly I appreciate
all the work that's gone into
this and looking at the family
income index, um.
Look forward to to this next
year's number in further
evaluating it and then again the
work group of the SCG, um, work
group, so with that, thank you
all very much. I certainly
appreciate it.
Um.
All right, so I believe we have
PED rules.
With John, we give him a moment
to.
Adjust his glasses um for this
one.
Mr. Chair, uh, we're in contact
to the next meeting just, just
so that, you know, I don't
promise to do as good a job.
Well, we'll lower our
expectations.
Um, so, Mr. Chair, uh, thank
you, uh, members of the
committee, uh, good morning. I'm
John Senna, your deputy
director. I have with me today
Elania Arellano, who is the
deputy director of policy at
PED,
um,
clearly I'm not good at
logistics, otherwise we'd have a
name tag for her as well, um,
for next meeting, I promise, I
shouldn't have said that, um.
She's gonna she's, she's here
today because oftentimes what
happens in these rural reviews
is clearly as staff we do our
best to analyze the technical
aspects of rule changes. Um, we
try to to get that intent to the
extent that we know as staff,
uh, but it just makes sense that
we go straight to the source for
PED and they can describe for us
some intent and some background
for some of these rules. And so
I'm going to talk a little bit
about these are all behind tab
12, uh, you saved the last for
last, and um.
Um
I'm going to talk about the
technical changes here a little
bit about what the rule actually
does, and then Siano's gonna
talk a little bit about why PEDs
decided to, to propose these
rules and what they might mean
in a more practical, uh, for
more practical effects. So the
first one we're going to talk
about today is, uh, NM 6.101.2,
fair hearings and alternative
dispute resolutions related to
vocational rehabilitation.
And so you'll notice that the
that the first couple of a few
paragraphs here really talk
about the same thing for two
different processes that exist
for applicants of or recipients
of uh rehabilitation services
from DVR from the Department
division of vocational
rehabilitation. And so this rule
is a repeal and replace, and
really what it does is it
Um,
Expands on the specificity of
the processes if someone who is
receiving services from DVR and
they're not happy with the.
Determination that DVR staff has
made, there are processes that
they can essentially appeal
those decisions. The first is a
mediation process. Um, someone
has to request that mediation
process in writing within 45
calendar days of the time in
which they've made that
determination. So DVR makes a
determination about the kinds of
services that someone's going to
get. They're not happy about
those services. They have 45
days to request mediation.
Uh, that mediation has to be
conducted by a uh an appointed
mediator that's selected on a
random basis, and that mediator
cannot be an employee of DVR.
Right.
The next paragraph, fair
hearing, is actually a very
similar process. There are some
distinctions between the two,
but the first again, is that the
an applicant for a recipient of
services has 45 days from that
determination to request a fair
hearing. The fair hearing must
be held within 60 calendar days
of the the request of the
review, right, so they have 30
days and then once they make
that review, the fair hearing
has to take place within those
60 calendar days.
After that request.
Again, the the fair hearing is
done by a hearing officer that
is selected from a qualified
pool of individuals that hearing
officer cannot be an employee of
DVR.
And the last paragraph, and, and
just so for your reference we
have included the rule itself
behind the brief.
Happy to speak to and I think
Ms. Ariano is also happy to
speak to specifics of the rule
and want to go through the
entire rule itself, but it's
there for your reference and
happy to answer questions.
The impact here obviously is,
Based compared to the the the
current rule that is that is
being proposed, uh, to be
repealed was a very small rule,
didn't add a lot of specificity
to these processes. So the
impact here is that all parties
involved in these processes have
a better understanding of what
goes into them, the requirements
for those, those processes, who
should be involved, um, I didn't
talk any talk about
the payment and the cost of
these processes, but the rule
talks about who's responsible
for the.
Costs of these processes and so
this clarifies all of that for
both applicants and for staff of
the DVR to to ensure that those
processes are followed
appropriately. And I'll turn it
over to Ms. Ariano, or unless
you want to go through both
rules at once, Mr. Chair.
OK, great. The second rule.
is a straight repeal.
Of N max 6.65.4, teacher leader
development framework, and I'm
not sure how many of you are
familiar with PEDs teacher
leader development framework.
This is a
A program that was created
during the last administration.
And again, the rule is behind
the brief for for some more
detail, the the short of it is
PED has said that they don't
really need a rule to do this.
They're already doing teacher
leader network as as the
overview states, um, even though
the last administration
conducted this program for
multiple years, they didn't
actually adopt this rule till
the last month of of their their
administration and so it was
sort of a way of codifying a
practice.
Um, that they, they really liked
and PED is continuing and but
the rule, there's no statutory.
Reason for having this rule sort
of codified a practice that the
previous administration was
doing, um, the practical impact
here is almost none because PED
is continuing the program though
it may have changed a little
bit, and I'll let Ms. Ariano
speak to that as well.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee, um, is
John Noden. I'm the deputy
director of policy, but I also
was an LESC analyst for 5 years.
I left in 2012, so it's a
pleasure to be back in front of
the committee 12 years later.
Um, and to to have work it can
experience on both sides of the
street, um, as, as many of us
do.
Um, so, and as the deputy, I do
coordinate of the rulemaking
efforts of the department. We
have a team of 4 analysts who
work with program divisions or
Office of General Counsel and
our leadership to bring forward
proposed rule changes and we
work with the administrative law
division of the state, um,
Center for Records and Archives.
So
on, I, I will reiterate that
John summarized everything
perfectly. Um, as you know on
the DVR role, DVR is a very
independent division.
of the public education
department. Um, but one of our
analysts still worked with them
carefully side by side and our
Office of General Counsel to
help them revise their fair
hearing and mediation processes
because they had had some events
where, um, they were told that
they needed to codify the
mediation and the fair hearings
processes. And so we're happy to
be able to promulgate that role
on their behalf, um, and the
teacher-leader rule, as John
mentioned,
It was promulgated at the end of
the last administration. It's
still very popular program. Um,
that rule as it is describes the
secretaries, teacher advisory,
which is now called the um
a long name.
Um, I know it off the top of my
head, but I want to make sure I
get it right. It is the
Teacher-leader, network and
advisory committee in practice
today and it's a very popular
program. It is coordinated by
PED's teacher liaison, as is the
school liaisons program. Those
programs are discussed in this
rule, but you can tell even the
name of the committee has
changed since that role was
promulgated. Um, as we worked
with program to amend this and
seeing the
No state statutory need for it.
We like to clean up rule when we
can. We've been looking at Title
6, looking at what sections
could be repealed because it is
a time-intensive process, and
it's a legal process to
promulgate rule, just to make a
change in a program that you
want to evolve. Um, this program
is very much alive and well,
repealing it won't make it go
away. Our teacher liaison
position recently moved to the
educator quality division and
the division would like to be
able to use.
have more flexibility to use
Title II funds, for example, to
provide professional development
and stipends to the teachers
participating in these programs.
And it's on, um, the guidance is
on the public education
department's website about how
to participate in this program.
And with that, I'll be happy to
answer any questions.
Represent Garrett.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. Who is the
current teacher liaison. The
last one I knew was Mandy
Torres, who I think has been
long gone.
Um, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Garrett, it is
Doctor Angel Montoya.
Or in vodka.
Thank you Mr. Chair and thank
you for the presentation. I, I
don't have a question about
these roles, um.
What I do, Mr. Chair, and is I
do want to understand as far as
The authority for PE making
rules, uh, what, what guides
that under what circumstances or
situations or role may be done.
Especially when it appears to
be, um.
Canada with the legislative, uh,
Intent was. So I, I, I don't
know, John, if you want to take
a stab at that now, but.
You have your glasses on, I'm
sure it's gonna be good. Your,
your colleague doesn't have a
name tag, so you know, but so
she gets out of it. It's now or
never, Mr. Chair. Um, when have
you ever known me not to want to
say something about something.
Um, so statute, and I'm gonna, I
don't have it in front of me. I
can pull it up very quickly, but
the, the general powers and
authority of the of the
secretary and the department as
a whole, give them rulemaking
authority.
There are like other agencies
across the state, they're not
the only ones.
Who have rulemaking authority.
Um, I don't have the specific
language in front of me, but it
essentially says that they have
general rulemaking authority as
long as those rules are not
contradictory to statute, right?
And so, um, obviously you have a
very good example recently of
what could happen with any rule,
to be honest,
uh, the, the, and you'll see in
the rules themselves, uh, if you
want to take the DVR rule, for
example, um, your
There's a section 6.101.2.3 and
it says statutory authority, and
this is included in every
rulemaking in every rule that
outlines the statutes that give
the the department the authority
to promulgate that particular
rule. And so you'll see that,
uh, for instance, this is a lot
of DVR authority, but 222221 is,
is the is the department's
rulemaking authority.
So oftentimes when you don't
have a rule that has explicit
statute that says you all will
pass a law and then say PED, the
department shall promulgate rule
to implement this law.
If there is nothing like that,
the department may use its own
statutory authority for
rulemaking to promulgate a rule,
right? And that was the case for
the teacher leader network, for
instance.
Despite all of that.
If someone says, I don't, I
don't agree.
That PED has the authority to
promulgate that rule. You have a
legal process, right, where
someone can then essentially sue
the department to say, I don't
think that's right. I don't
think you do have the authority
to do that, whether because it's
contradictory to statute because
statute isn't clear about your
authority to do that, whatever
the case might be, and then, of
course, uh, the courts decide.
Thank you, sir. I have no other
question.
Another comments questions from
folks. Represent Figueroa, I
think that's, that's what that
meant, OK.
Um, I just wondered if you had a
little information on what the
current process is for the DVR
as in
Our, our requests now accepted
in other forms rather than
writing, is this reducing the
way requests can be made and
what's the timeline now? Are we
shortening it? Are we
lengthening it, or are we just
codifying what's happening?
Mr. Chairman and Representative,
that's a great question. Um, it
was not specific enough in the
rule before. I'd have to look
back at their guidance and maybe
send a request to them and see
what they were doing in
practice, um, but I do know that
it was an issue that it wasn't
codified.
Thanks, Mr. Chair.
No questions, comments? All
right. Thank you all so much. We
appreciate it.
All right.
So,
That concludes our meeting here
in Los Alamos. Thank you to Los
Alamos for hosting us. It was
really awesome. Thank you. We
certainly appreciate it. Um,
like was mentioned, we have
August off for meetings at
school goes back, so, um, hope
everybody has a great, welcome
back to school in August. I'll
be there on Thursday, yay,
students, the next Wednesday and
then our September meeting,
September 18th through the 20th
at ariscoll Heritage
Academy high school, high school
I teach at, the community I was
born and raised in, still live
in, raised my family. Super
excited to have all of us there,
um, and certainly the LFC folks
that will join us on Friday as
well, but as always, thank you
to our awesome staff here at the
LESC for setting up the meeting
and for all your wonderful
information and reports for us.
And thank you all committee
