Not that you haven't been doing
that for months, but, uh, so
you'll take, you'll take uh
office September 1 or however we
call it.
Were you leaving earlier, Mr.
Percy we'll look at.
The pay periods and see when it
makes the most sense. OK.
Probably need to confer with
you.
You may need to control with
the.
Oh
OK.
Sounds good. All right, well,
you, you can stay here for the
rest of the meeting.
I'll let Raul take back.
Thank you.
Mhm
All right. So, um, moving on,
uh, now we'll approve the
minutes. Now, I mean, the uh
Yes, I'll, I will look for a
motion to approve the minutes.
I'm sure I moved.
Approval of the minutes from the
June 24th Legislative Council
meeting. Thank you.
Uh, any opposition to that
motion seeing none, we have
approved the minutes and let us
now go to our next item,
business, which is our
classification and compensation
plan that we have been working
on for months, and again, we've,
uh, we have this great team of 6
chief of staff from the uh
minority leaders and
majority leaders and the speaker
and myself who have been working
on this, who keep coming back
and asking us more questions and
so I think we now have a final,
do we not, Mr. Biaga?
Madam Chair and members, good
morning again.
Um,
What you have in front of you
and you have it in your file
folder. There's a lot of red ink
on it because a lot of this is
new, um.
Additional information,
additional, uh, amendments if
you will, to the existing.
Uh, policy. There is an existing
policy number 20 which talks
about the classification and
compensation plan and what you
see in black is existing
language.
Uh, after a number of
discussions with the chiefs of
staff, with the two chief clerks
and with the directors of the uh
LFC and the LSC and myself.
Um, we have, uh, amended the
policy that you have before you,
and I'm gonna go through each
subsection briefly.
Um,
The uh subsection B
has taken out the part about
automatically adjusting the
compensation ranges, any cost of
living, uh, compensation
increase. What was happening
before, and this is part of the
reason that the compensation
plan got out of whack, is we
could only do that, we could
only adjust the compensation
after the legislature provided.
That
1 or 3 or 5% increase across the
board for all uh uh public
employees, state employees.
Um,
So instead, the classification
and compensation plan will have
a committee. This is already
actually been approved, but now
it's in writing.
The committee will be comprised
of the statutory.
Statutory legislative agency
directors, LCS LFC LESC.
Both chief clerks and the chiefs
of staff, the 6 of them.
Uh, and the committee can make
may make recommendations to the
council on any revisions to the
plan or, or the policy for that
matter.
Now, in terms of how to keep the
plan updated, uh, subsection D.
Indicates that the fiscal policy
research analyst of council
service that's that is Clinton
uh Turner, and the chief
economist of LFC uh Izzy.
Um,
will provide to the plan
committee a recommendation on
increases to the compensation
ranges.
Based on inflation, cost of
living, cost of labor, and any
across the board increases.
To ensure that the plan remains
competitive for recruitment and
retention.
Again, that is subject to
approval by the council.
The idea is to look at all
factors and not just depend on
the across the board increases.
Um, subsection E is about a
candidate who has been selected
to be offered a position.
The hiring manager should work
with HR and look at the salary
ranges and make sure it's
commensurate with their
experience education and skills,
and to ensure equity with
existing employees.
Along those lines, new employees
would be hired at no more than
75% of the compensation maximum,
which as you may recall, was the
uh compensation max that we put
into the that you adopted in the
policy for district uh staff.
Now, an exception could be made
to that 75% cap if the hiring
supervisor um gets approval, and
if it meets at least one of the
following prior legislative
experience, second prior
relevant experience in a
setting.
Um, it could be city council,
county commission, etc.
qualifications that
substantially exceed uh other
staff, um, in similar positions
or significant other significant
considerations, level of
education, professional
credentials, and the like.
Subsection G.
Indicates that salary increases
for agency directors, chief
clerks, and chiefs of staff will
be subject to approval by the
leader of the respective chamber
or leadership office.
For the committee chairs of the
respective statutory agencies.
So in this case, for example,
the speaker in the pro tem as
co-chairs of the council would
approve the director's salary or
increases to it.
Subsection H is about ensuring
pay equity.
Um,
So if
If there's an effort to increase
somebody's um
Uh, salary, and uh the
supervisor would consult with
HR.
Look at education experience,
skills, etc.
And that in any year um of
employment, it should not be
more than 3%, provided, however,
that that 3% does not apply.
It does not include a subsection
4. That's the longevity. That
doesn't happen until somebody's
been here 10 years.
Or across the board increases
provided by the legislature.
Or a promotion to a higher
classification.
So
Assuming that nothing else is
happening.
The employee would be maxed at
3% for an increase.
But
That person
Um, might get a 3% increase, say
in the spring of the year, and
then in the summer or the fall,
that person is is um promoted to
a higher level.
They could still do that. That
would not be limited by the 3%.
Um,
And then the salary employee
who's being promoted.
Uh, is determined using the same
policies as new hires.
Um,
And then an employee that that
has completed 10 years of
service. This is the longevity
piece.
Um, there have been situations
where somebody has reached the
maximum of the compensation
range.
And it's stuck there, and that
has in the past.
Required the approval of the
council for anybody to go over
that.
Although that hasn't always been
done, but, but this is to put it
in writing.
In those cases, somebody who's
at the max.
would get an increase of up to
5% in the 11th year.
And then a 5% every 5th year
thereafter, excluding across the
board increases or promotions
and provided that there's budget
satisfactory performance and
authorization from the
respective leaders or chairs.
Lastly, uh, some of this has
been done but not consistently
across all agencies, and that is
to provide tuition
reimbursement.
And the council encourages
employees to counsel this body
to enhance their job skills and
career growth, and to do that.
Um, the employee may uh be
reimbursed for tuition, um, and,
um, the, the mem the employee
would have to pay that tuition
and then uh if
If they've been here at least
one year. Again, it's subject to
availability of funding and um
um should consult with the
agency director, supervisor, CFO
to make sure that, that there's
money available, uh, and then
there's some guidelines here,
tuition should be at a New
Mexico institution unless it can
be demonstrated that attending
an out of state institution
through virtual attendance might
be uh more uh feasible, more
appropriate.
Um, they can, the agency may
reimburse up to 100% of the cost
of tuition, including fees.
Textbooks, lab
Minus any grants, scholarships
or other financial assistance.
Uh, they are required to
complete a course and have a
grade of C or better, and if
they don't, then reimbursement
cannot be made, um, and they
Yeah, they just, we can't make
reimbursement if they if they
get below a C.
Um,
And uh they will have to sign a
form that that they agreed to
this provision, and then if the
legis if the employee leaves
within a year after completing
the coursework and gets
reimbursed.
They may be required to
reimburse the agency for up to
100%.
Uh, the costs that are already
paid.
Um,
And if need be, that, that
amount could be taken from any
uh last payroll or accrued leave
or the like.
And then, uh, just a final
subsection that basically says
that the salaries and the
increases are limited.
To this plan.
And this policy as a approved by
the council.
In addition to this policy, you
have the new, uh, it's actually
the one you approved on March
25th.
The only thing I will point out
is that we have added some
positions.
To allow for more of a step
ladder approach, uh, that we
didn't have before. Some
positions had a 12 or 3 that
allowed um upward mobility. Some
did not, so we added them to
ensure that that happens, but we
did not.
With the exception of something
that happened, um,
In a in a different committee,
um,
We didn't move any positions to
Higher one,
And
With that
Madam Chair, I stand for
questions.
Uh, so, um,
A row, let me ask the first one,
the on the salary ranges,
midpoint.
That's not 75%.
So 75% is somewhere between
midpoint and maximum, and can
you give an idea
What where that is.
Madam, Madam Chair and members,
uh, 75% of the maximum is
actually slightly below the
midpoint.
And initially we had recommended
70%, but when we did the
numbers.
The, the, the maximum at which
you could hire 70% was much
closer to the minimum we thought
hiring supervisors needed a
little bit more flexibility to
bring in staff, right? I want to
remind the council that this
particular plan had increases,
especially at the middle levels
of anywhere between 20 and 28%.
So this has gone up
significantly.
Uh, since the one that was in
place last year, 2023.
All right. Thank you and thanks
to, I, I forgot we had the both
chief clerks and the director of
of uh LASC and LFC and you along
with our six chiefs of staff, so
this has been Yeoman's work, so
questions from the committee.
Yes. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, um, Mr. Briciaga. My
question was just, um,
Is C and D is there.
A minimum frequency that that
would occur. I um
That's specified in here or that
you
See that would apply, would that
have to be repeated every year,
for example,
the compensation plan review.
I, I, I apologize. I'm not sure
I understood your question.
C and D, how often is this being
done? Yes.
Um,
So first of all, on the
committee, I think the committee
can meet at any time to review
things and then bring them back
to
His body for approval. For
example, there's been some
discussion about taking certain
positions and moving them up to
a higher level, but that would
require council approval. So the
committee could meet basically
at any time, and I would, I
would recommend at this point
that they ought to meet at least
once a year, um.
To do that.
Secondly, on the.
Uh, we did not put that in here
because I don't know that we had
agreement or consensus about
whether the uh
Their names, Clinton and Izzy
should do this on an annual or
biennial basis.
I'm happy to amend it, but at
this point, I would say it
shouldn't.
Should at least happen once
every 2 years.
Thank you, Mr. Perciaga, Madam
Chair, I would just um
Make a suggestion that we do
include at least an
At minimum, annually or
biannually, maybe annually for
item C and
Uh
At least every 2 years in I D.
Um, simply because I know we are
all incredibly busy and often
compensation and staffing.
And it falls to the bottom of
the priority list because we're
dealing with so many other
urgent matters and I just want
to ensure that we have an
opportunity to make sure that
compensation remains competitive
and certainly for the private
sector, this is often done
annually, annually, often you're
doing.
Compensation and benefits
reviews and I think it would be
great for us to be in sync with
that so that we can stay abreast
of
The challenges. So, Madam Chair,
I would, I would just make that.
Suggestion
As part of the discussion, uh,
so I'll, I'll call on people to
chat about that first, but uh it
would just be adding uh yearly
somewhere in the.
Right? I mean, this is a
Simple change that we would say
that.
The committee a recommendation
on increases anyway, we can
wordsmith that but let's chat
about it. Rips and Montoya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
that this is on the on the
amendment. Thank you, um, so
Madam Chair, uh, uh, and Mr.
Garciaga.
With these employees not get the
increase that all state
employees would receive.
Um, when increases were
uh uh
Go forward by this body with
that with those increases still
Play
Madam Chair and Representative
Montoya.
Yes, they would, um.
Like a bill. It's, it may not be
real obvious, but what it says
in there is that they're limited
to a 3% raise, but that.
Doesn't include across the board
raises. So if somebody got a 3%
raise right after recession.
They did a great job during
session.
Uh, and then
The legislature decided to
approve a 4% increase across the
board. You would get the 3% in
the spring, they'd get 4% in
July.
And they could get promoted.
In November because they did
such a great job and get a raise
for that as well. That 3% is
just
Provide some incentive to keep
you around if they're doing a
good job, that's the max, but it
doesn't include the across the
board or promotions.
So thank you, Madam Chair. I, I
think this might be a little
premature, this discussion then
because we haven't even hired
our first person yet.
And we're already trying to put
something in place for
evaluations.
Um,
We have, uh, I would imagine
we're going to be passing a
budget this next year that would
cover this because uh the plan
that has been put in front of us
goes beyond the $6 million
that's been appropriated.
Uh, in last year's budget, so I
think this discussion is gonna
happen anyway. I don't know that
this amendment is necessary at
this point since further
discussions.
are gonna have to take place
this next year if we're gonna
have an increase to cover the
expansion of of this that's
already kind of baked into what
we're doing.
Um, and we, we've done that.
At this point, without ever
having a debate.
About it. So I, I think, uh, I
think this may be premature to
even consider this amendment at
this time.
and rips onto I just remind you
that this is for all staff.
I mean, this started uh with way
before we, we agreed to district
legislative staff, so it's
really for the legislative staff
that's year round. Thank you,
Madam Chair, but I think that's
exactly why we need to have this
debate.
And conversation.
Uh, during a regular session.
Um, not just among a few of us
here.
I understand.
Other questions or comments
represent the leader chasing.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, on
the amendment. Um, I, I think
maybe someone, whether it's one
of us who
And the finance chairs who met
regarding the compensation much
earlier this year.
How long it had been?
Had it been before since we last
did this. It was a long time as
I recall.
Madam Chair and Leader Chasey.
Plan went into existence around
2000. It has been updated, but
it's only been updated by across
the board increases. So after
the recession.
When we had a number of years
where there were no across the
board increases. This didn't get
updated. It lost out to
inflation.
And, and as a result,
Uh, it, it got way out of whack.
And so we had Clinton Turner.
Bring it up to date, and that's
what was adopted, but
So, while it had been updated,
An actual inflation adjusted
plan had not been in place,
probably since 2024 years ago.
So, um, madam, Madam Chair, and
Mr. Speaker, Representative
Montoya.
This had never been updated.
In 20 years.
And so what is being proposed is
that we simply put in
That it be reviewed annually or
biannually.
So
It doesn't mean that it has to
change and it's just reviewed
and it was really shocking what
Clinton Turner had to take us
from
Something 2 years ago to the
present, and uh so it's just a
policy matter of
It, it needs to be reviewed, so
I don't, I don't think the
amendment's premature. Thank
you, madam.
OK, other comments on the
amendment.
Sarino.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, I don't.
I 4 on the employee.
Um,
Taking courses and it says May,
can you talk a little bit about
why it's May and
If somebody leaves within a year
after taking courses.
Madam Chair and senator, are you
talking about number 4 on the
second page. OK, so.
What that is is that
And we've had staff who've been
here a long time have maxed out
and haven't gotten raises.
And those times that the
Compensation plan didn't go up
because nobody got across the
board raises. A person was
stuck. They didn't get that.
Um,
So the idea here is that if
you're at at least 10 years.
And you're at the max of a
particular range.
Then
Based on performance or whatever
the supervisor feels
appropriate, that person may
receive an increase of up to 5%
in the 11th year.
And then every 5th year
thereafter.
Um, and this doesn't include
across the board increases or
promotions, so.
If
If they still are at the max,
even after a promotion or even
after we get across the board
increases, it can still be
increased above and beyond that.
And part of that is, um, that
request was, was proposed by a
couple of leaders because um it
was difficult sometimes to hold
on to that that are maxed out
and we, we couldn't give them
more.
Thank you. And then the other
question is the uh
Uh, I believe the tuition, uh,
benefit.
And a number 4 is, is that if an
employee leaves within a year
since they made.
It
100%. Can you talk a little bit
about who or who.
Doesn't have to pay or who who
makes that.
Arbitrary, I guess, decision.
Madam Chair and senator, that
would be up to the respective
chief clerks, directors, chiefs
of staff.
I think when we were discussing
this, we
We're looking at requiring that
that person pay back that money.
But there are situations that
I think may have to be handled
on a case by case basis. I think
one of the examples that was
provided was that that person
wanted to stay with a particular
agency, but his or her spouse
was leaving and had no choice,
but
To go and, and I think they may
have only asked for part of the
reimbursement back. I think for
those reasons, we put it in as
permissive because there are
situations that that have to be
taken into account. OK. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you.
So we're still on the amendment.
The amendment is to uh on D on
the first page have this.
Analysis done yearly, uh, is the
amendment. Any other comments or
questions about the amendment.
OK, uh seeing Nan, uh.
And move adoption.
All right.
So we're on an amendment just to
make the deed, the fiscal and
policy research that happen
yearly. Any opposition to that?
Seeing, OK, uh, note that we
have one in opposition, um, and
the rest, all right. So that
amendment passes, we're back on
a discussion of the discussion
draft, and I think who had a
question representative Rob
Caballero. Thank you, madam.
I have
Just one question
In relationship to um
Did
You compare any of this.
With um other comparables.
Uh, of human resources, um,
confer with.
Uh, NCSL or any other bodies
that are similar or or even in
our state.
Uh, was there any comparables
done? I noticed some are very
similar to what I'm used to
seeing at the university or
community college, so that's why
I'm asking. Uh, just to make
sure that usually when we
propose things like this,
there's some sort of comparable
data that we use.
Madam Chair, and
Representative
Um, there was some, uh,
comparison. We looked at some of
the positions in the executive,
uh, a number of the, the chiefs
of staff, I think, uh, looked at
that and how it, how it compared
with something comparable.
I would also add that NCSL
actually did a market survey in
2019 on this.
So
The the focus of the revision to
the plan, the ranges if you
will, is really focused on how
we had lost out to inflation.
And, and not adjusted it.
Or
Approximately 17 years since
2007.
Because of the, the downturn in
the economy.
In 2008, and the fact that we
didn't get automatic raises
every year. It threw this off.
that the focus was really about
bringing it and making it in
inflation adjusted.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
that's my point. It's about time
we do this. Thank you.
Let's see, of Armstrong.
Thank you, Madame Protem, and
thank you, Raoul. I was curious
on, on number 3, it says any
employee eligible for tuition
assistance. Where is the
eligibility stated or are all
employees eligible?
Madam Chair, and Representative,
it is somebody who has been
employed for at least one year.
In a subsection I.
If the employee has been in
legislative employee for at
least one year and um
This is for year-round staff.
This would not apply to session
staff because they don't receive
benefits.
It wouldn't apply to
contractors, session staff.
And like, it would apply to
somebody who was hired as
An employee of the legislature
on a full-time or part-time
basis.
OK, thank you for that, uh,
Madam Pro Tem. It, it always has
kind of bugged me that, that uh
our legislative staff during the
session.
are held to those rules.
Where independent companies are
not, they can't hold to those
same standards anyway. Uh, the
other part of it is.
We are in the process at the uh
in the uh LFC of looking at all
of the staffing and the um
classifications. There's a,
there's a huge
Study that's gone on and we
should get those that
information soon? Is it going to
conflict?
Do you think there will be any
conflicts between what we will
find out and what we're doing
now, and will we be making more
changes during the legislative
session, uh, in your opinion.
Madam Chair and Representative,
um,
I don't think it would conflict,
because number one, legislative
employees are exempt from the
state Personnel Act.
So our pay ranges are not
governed by what Spo does.
Um,
No, I forgot the other thing I
was gonna say, um,
So no, I, I don't see a conflict
there. I, I know what I was
gonna say. One of the things
that the working group did
discuss.
was the possibility of, uh, not
the possibility, but the
initiative.
And I think that's one of the
things that we can discuss
before I leave, we can get
together.
Of making sure that all of the
job descriptions get updated.
Perhaps, hopefully by the end of
the year,
And then have an outside
consultant maybe come in and um
Evaluate them all, make sure
they're slotted appropriately.
Um,
And again, bring that back to
the council for approval. That's
not part of this.
because we we never finalized
that, but it is something that
we discussed amongst ourselves
in the working group.
Because as
As an example,
A lot of the leadership offices
have used leadership analysts
for a number of positions.
And do different things.
Communications is one of them.
So we thought it might be more
appropriate to go back.
Update the job descriptions for
everything, everyone, and then
make sure that they're evaluated
by an objective third party.
Uh,
And, and we slot this, but I
think that's
It's a 12 to 18 month project. I
don't think that's something we
wanted to heckle.
Right now at this juncture.
Thank you, thank you, Madam.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Duhig.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
OK
Mr. Burciaga, um, looking on
the, the second page under I4.
Um, it's talking about other see
may seek other collection
remedies.
Uh,
Let me back up a little bit.
If someone gets tuition
reimbursement? Are you
envisioning that they would
essentially have like a contract
with the legislature for that
tuition reimbursement or that it
would only be dictated by just
the language in this policy.
No, um, Madam Chair, and
Senator, uh, the last sentence
in 3, I think says that any
employee who's eligible could
complete and sign a form
agreeing to the provisions.
So there would be an agreement
of sorts. It would be a contract
in essence.
Again, Madam Chair, Mr. Bursaga,
in that case, I would suggest
taking out the le the the last
two sentences of 4.
Um,
And, and just lay that stuff out
in whatever contract it is the
employee signs so that they know
what they're agreeing to as far
as collection remedies, um, and
so that it's more standardized
as opposed to her.
You know, one agency is sending
folks to collections and another
one isn't. So it seems like you
could lay out those remedies in
the reimbursement form, uh,
And not be so limited here, but
also give the person who's
agreeing to it more noticed in
that form. So I'd suggest, Madam
Chair, just striking those last
two sentences of I. Well, and of
course, this comes from a huge
group. This comes from the
directors, the chief clerks, the
6 chiefs of staff, uh, this
seems like a big enough change
to suggest that this goes back
to that group to look at.
Madam Chair and Senator, I, I,
um,
We could conceivably uh uh do
that as a group, maybe come up
with a form that addresses that
issue, uh, I think Senator makes
a good point that perhaps this
is more administrative.
Policy.
So I'm happy to take it back to
the group.
And if it's administrative
policy where else would it fit?
It so it wouldn't be part of
this, it would be in some other.
Well,
If we came up with a a form that
identifies the process under
which
Reimbursement will be made.
And or
We
Brought back, taken back.
Uh, that it, it may be done in
there, um, I think the reason
we, we had put this in there is
that there was a question as to
whether or not
The money could be taken, and we
checked with DFA. We checked
with payroll.
And they said, yes, we can take
the money back if we.
If the employee owes something.
Need be.
So Senator Dohick, are you
amenable to sending this
question back to the group and
let them come up with the form.
This is our policy. We can
change it anytime we want. I
just feel like it's the group's
work here and perhaps they
should try to deal with this.
Are you amenable to that?
Yes, ma'am sure.
All right. Any other questions,
comments, concerns about this
policy.
We've never, we haven't done
this before. We now have a
dedicated committee, and we have
an annual review. So, uh, this
is a huge move forward for us to
regularize what we do to show
our employees we care about
them, uh, to give salary
increases for those who are good
employees. So to me this is just
a huge move for us to do.
Personal opinion. Uh, any other
personal opinions or emotions?
Waiting for a motion to improve
the policy proposal for the
Staff classification and
compensation plan.
Thank you, Representative.
All right.
OK. Any other comments or
questions?
Any opposition to adopting this,
uh, so.
All right. Uh, so we have a rips
Motoya and uh Repson Martinez
voting no. Other voting members
voting yes.
And rip some Montoya to explain
his vote. So the motion is does
pass. Go right ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um.
I unfortunately I was unable to
be here when the policy was
voted on initially.
And um,
What we're doing today and what
we've done.
Throughout this whole process.
I've been uncomfortable with the
initial
year-round staffing was passed.
Um, by adding it to the fee bill
a couple of years ago, uh, that
Or that, that was problematic
using the fee bill for something
that the fee bill was not
intended.
To be used for
Then, uh, when we should have
debated this in a bill.
We did not debate this in a bill
we ended up
Uh, just adding money to the
budget with language in the
budget.
Um, so this
It's quite a big increase to
state government.
All without ever having a floor
debate about this, and then now
Paul passing this today once
again does not allow the members
of each chamber to be able to
chime in and vote on this. We're
doing this as part of
legislative council, and I, I
just think it's inappropriate to
make major
Uh, appropriations.
And decisions and appropriations
without them going through the
appropriate appropriating bodies
in both chambers, a house
appropriations and Senate
Finance, so
I can't support this today
because I, I think.
This is a massive increase to
To the state budget without
really having
Never had a debate.
Over whether or not this is the
policy that we wanted to do. So
that, Madam Chair, is my, my
objection.
Oh, well, thank you for that. I,
I just do want to remind people
that this is for legislative
staff year round, not just the
district that we've just moved
to. It's really a policy to
improve what we're doing right
now with year-round legislative
staff.
All right, seeing no other
comments on that. Let's uh
continue on, uh, so, um, Raul
staff reports.
And the temporary staff we need
for the special session. Right.
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
council, um, in anticipation of
and for preparation of the
special session, the chief
clerks have hired some staff as
of July 8th.
Uh, in that pay period ends
tomorrow. Uh, we wanna make sure
that the temporary uh staff that
was hired for the special
session, beginning on the the
8th.
Uh, gets paid.
Uh, next week. So this is a
request for council approval to
pay staff.
Pre-session expenses.
Pre-session is something that we
have every year in the feed
bill. There's money there and
it's just simply to make sure
that temporary stat that has
been hired for special gets
paid.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh,
Madam Chair, I so move.
All right, we're on a motion a
due pass for um
Recession staff, uh, any
opposition to this motion, uh,
seeing none of that motion
passes, and uh Mr. Burciak, if
you'll now talk about the
training on human resources.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, at
the, uh,
Well, the last couple of uh
council meetings there's been
discussion about district
legislative staff, district
office liaisons.
And uh one of the things that uh
we have looked at is the
importance of training.
Legislators and legislative
staff, um,
On human resource issues, uh,
particularly for those members
who will be eligible to hire
district staff on or after
September the first.
We have asked our outside
council on Human Resources.
Uh, Pat Ives, an attorney here
in Santa Fe to put together a
training program on the hiring
process to include applications,
interviews, uh, questions that
may or may not be asked offer
acceptance, rejection process,
onboarding or orientation, uh,
and similar general guidelines.
Um, I think that that's
important to put in place.
And I think it's particularly
important for legislators
because legislators will, in
essence become employers. They
will be the ones deciding what
staff should be hired. We want
to make sure that everyone has
the same training.
And so with that, Madam Chair, I
stand for questions or any
recommendations the council may
have.
Thank you. It's also been
brought up that we really should
require this before you hire
staff before you get in trouble.
I've certainly had people come
to me and say, I don't wanna do
this. I don't know how to do it.
This is how to do it properly
and uh in the legal way. So, uh,
if we offer this.
Would it be, when would it be? I
think people are wanting to hire
starting September 1, those that
are eligible. So can you talk a
little bit about how much this
would be, how long it would be
if we would get per diem
attending a training, etc.
Madam Chair and members, uh,
when we spoke with Pat Ives, uh,
she indicated that she would
Let us know by the end of July.
What the training outline would
be like, and uh would give us
some dates, probably in early
August, and this could be
conducted, uh, we could do it,
uh, in person or virtual or
hybrid, uh, but if you require
it, we would like we do for
ethics and anti-harassment
training, we would take
attendance and if you require
it, then we would say.
Part of the
Notice that we would provide
legislators is.
Unless you've gone through this
training, you can't hire once
you've gone through this
training, you may hire staff.
But we would expect to do this,
I would say between early and
mid-August at the latest.
Give them enough time.
To, uh, uh, hire somebody in
September, and I realized that
some legislators cause we've
gotten questions already about
people that they've already
identified. That's fine. There's
not to say that you can't.
We just want to make sure that
everything is lined up correctly
and we don't.
Do something inappropriately
that could come back and.
OK. Uh, Mr. Speaker, Madam
Chair, I would support um making
this a requirement. Um, I would
also urge flexibility with how
you present the training. So I
like the idea of making it
hybrid and also recording it for
anyone who may not be able to
make it, or who may only be able
to make part of the training.
Uh, but I think if you offer
that flexibility, the
requirement then becomes less
restrictive, I think, but I
think it's a good idea and um
all of us probably should.
Take the training and just make
sure that we are up to par with
what is required of us. So I'll
make that movie.
So other comments or questions?
Gosh, we're not very talkative
today. We must be waiting for
something else to be more
talkative about.
All right. So we have a motion
to approve the training required
before legislators can start
hiring their staff.
Any opposition to that, seeing
none, we've passed that.
Um, and
so what's left, Raoul?
Madam Chair, I have one,
announcement, um.
This is something that was
discussed with uh the leaders
late last year at the facilities
review subcommittee. That is
we're gonna replace the phone
system.
The phone system we have is an
old analog system. It's been
around a very long time and is.
You know, we're, we're
struggling to, to, to find
parts.
Um,
What we're going to use now is
something that's known as VOIP,
voice over internet protocol.
Basically you make phone calls
over the internet.
Um, it also has a number of
features that are not available
with traditional phones. The
application to, to do this can
be added to numerous devices,
cell phones, laptops, uh,
tablets, desktops, uh, in
addition, you can have a regular
desk phone, if, if that's what
um you prefer.
Um, it can be accessed from
anywhere that there's an
internet connection.
The um
This will be a big, big help for
the district staff because the
last thing we want to do is try
to set up landlines and district
offices around this, around the
state. This will allow district
staff to put her on their
laptop, their device, on their
own cell phone if they want.
They're not gonna be required to
put it on their cell phone.
But they can if they so choose,
and I've used it on a test basis
and it works very well.
The other thing that's nice is
that we will be able to keep
Existing phone numbers.
So whatever phone number you
have on, on your desk or your
assistant or any of the
leadership staff.
That just gets transferred over
to VoIP.
Um, it will have the chat and
text capability including group
chats, something we've been
trying to do for a long time.
That is to set up a text
mechanism to advise members of
an upcoming interim committee
meeting.
During session of a change in in
uh
Standing committee time or any
of those kinds of things, you
can set up a number of different
group chats.
Her caucuses or committees for
leadership, for staff, etc.
This will provide a tremendous
number of, of new features that
uh have been a long time coming,
um.
We were, we were actually
looking this about 10 years ago
when there was not a lot of
money in the state. So, but now
because we're able to do this
through an existing contract, we
don't even have to go out for an
RFP.
Um
We use Zoom. Zoom is an approved
vendor or their their vendor or
Zoom is, is approved with a
statewide purchase agreement, so
we can just latch on to that and
get started. We've already
contacted them.
We're having a meeting to kick
it off, and we expect these
phones to be in place by
sometime this fall. So you'll
have plenty of hand holding for
those of us who uh will go
kicking and screaming into the
new technology, Shana.
Madam Chair, uh, yes, uh, the,
the provider, by the way, on
this Zoom.
So this is a voIP that's done
through Zoom. We already use
Zoom for uh virtual meetings and
the like, um, and this is just
an added feature, uh, it's
It we're
We're actually getting the first
year, I think most of it except
for the implementation cost the
year subscription, the first
year is free no charge, and then
after that we start paying and
um
Uh
They, oh yes, we have an
agreement for the first year
what they call a white glove
treatment, we will have a
dedicated team to help us with
issues, we're gonna hire
somebody internally to be that
conduit. Uh, we've gotten too
big. The legislature has gotten
too big. There's too much
technology.
To try to
Um
job share, things like this, so
we are.
We're excited about this. I'm
sorry, I won't be around to you,
but.
I'm sure some of you will call
me.
Questions from your Zoom phone.
We're gonna call you on your
landline from our landlines.
I don't.
So will there be training for
there will be training. There
will be training for all users.
Oh yes, absolutely.
You have a little one.
I do have a landline.
Uh, yes, uh, uh, Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Pro Tem. I, I
was curious to ask what's the
price tag?
And, and also the contract that
we're that you're signing for
how many years?
Madam Chair and, and
representative, um.
The first year is free after
this year, it's about $200,000 a
year.
Um,
And it's built, it's built into,
uh, it will be built into our
budget,
uh, that's basically the cost of
voyage systems. We had actually
looked at this before.
And this is a better deal than
we had gotten with other
providers. We also looked at
Microsoft Teams.
Um, and we looked at independent
and
They were as much if not more.
Thank you, thank you, Madam Pot.
OK. Any other uh questions or
comments?
Am I the only one with a
landline up here? I never use
it.
Um, all right.
One other person admits they
have a landline. All right, if
there's no further business,
thank you all for coming today.
Uh.
Yes, now that you have a
director, can I go to Boston for
ULC?
Yes, uh, thank you, uh, uh, for
everything and uh I appreciate
that you have uh
Hired Sea, one of our staff, uh,
I know she'll do a great job and
as I told you and executive
session, I think she will do a
better job than I did. So again,
congratulations to Shawna, thank
you all very much. It's been a
pleasure to see you.
We're gonna have to have some uh
party for you. You're not
getting off easy, so, you know,
cake, balloons, all of that
we're working on it, but in the
meantime, let's all stand up and
give a hearty thank you to
Raoul.
I
And with that, we arejourned.
