This is a working lunch.
So I hope you don't mind that we
continue chewing and
sipping and licking our fingers
while we.
Listen to you, but we have today
a presentation, actually, we
have an updated
Agenda with the more accurate
depiction of
What we have today.
This is a presentation from the
National Student speech language
hearing and association.
And it's Adrian McIlroy.
Bradchurch, the co-advisor for
the Student Association.
Professor of communicative
disorders.
At the Department of Health and
Human Services in Eastern New
Mexico University. And I think
we met you in Portelis when,
when we had our hearing this.
So welcome to Santa Fe. Thank
you for lunch, and we'll turn it
over to you.
Good morning. Thank you for the
introduction, um, Mr. Chair,
Madam Vice Chair and members of
the committee. Thank you for
your time. Uh, I would say this
morning, this afternoon, I guess
now. But um we appreciate it. I
actually wear multiple hats. I
am at eastern New Mexico
University as um Mr. Chair said,
I am the department chair for
Health and Human Services, which
is the capacity of the hat that
I was wearing the day I met you
last. This past summer.
Um, so at that point in time, I
was, I represented all of our.
Departments, nursing, social
work, and communicative
disorders, as well as emergency
management. But today I'm here
really to talk to you about the
SLPA, uh, licener.
And
As a representative of Nimsha,
which is the New Mexico speech
language Hearing Association. I
have worked on the SOPA task
force for the past 5 years.
And over the past 5 years, we
have worked to refine and really
look at um what the state needs.
What is being done around the
United States as a whole and
what best fits New Mexico.
One of the pieces with the SLPA
is that.
Currently we have no SLPA
license in the state of New
Mexico, which is where we get
into a little bit of a pickle
one might say, uh, because we
have a lot of individuals who 1
may come into the state wanting
to practice as SLPAs, or 2, we
have individuals who are within
the state already wanting to
practice as SLPAs.
And they cannot. There is no
license for that. What we
currently have in New Mexico is
an apprentice in speech language
pathology, which is a terminal
licener.
It is not a permanent license
for someone to take in practice.
For all time.
It is designed to be a license
where someone who graduates with
a bachelor's degree could work
potentially while they're um
earning their master's degree.
Master's degree is what the um
Basic degree required for speech
language pathologists to
practice.
Nationwide and also in the
state.
So the SLPA license would be a
license that coming in new would
replace
The apprentice license. It is a
license that would uh suffice in
both instances, someone who's
wanting to practice with a
bachelor's degree or someone
who's wanting to practice, um.
Terminally as an assistant.
So it has benefits on both ends.
The other component is the
American speech Language Hearing
Association has now since uh
2020 developed a national
certification for individuals
who want to practice SSLPAs.
The Assistant piece is a
commonality among rehabilitation
professionals. We have physical
therapy, uh, assistance. We have
occupational therapy assistants,
so the concept is not something
new. The SLPA has been around
for a while. We just have not
adopted that in New Mexico.
Nimsha has
Worked, as I said, along with
the SLPA task force with
individuals around the state who
maybe um previously didn't
understand why we needed an SLPA
license and we've worked hard as
a group with everyone on all
ends of the spectrum.
And that's great because now we
have a bill that everyone
supports.
Within this bill, um for
licenser, you'll see a couple of
things. You have a couple of
handouts in front of you. One is
an infographic, that's a one
page that just gives you a a
nice snapshot summary, so I'll
hit some of the highlights of
those, as I mentioned, it
replaces the, the ASL or the
apprentice license.
The second piece is the scope of
practice. That's something that
everyone typically wants to
know, and it does align with
national standards, the license
we're proposing, um.
adds additional definitions for
the SLPA piece, also for
supervision and for
telepractice.
As far as education goes, uh,
New Mexico.
As were proposing would align
education requirements with the
national standards and the SOPA
would need to meet one of 3
degree requirements to complete
the mandatory courses and
trainings to qualify for that
certification. It would also
need to complete 100 clinically
supervised hours so that they
have training underneath a, a
Supervisor during their
educational training.
It would also need to pass that
national um certification.
Or um
The licenger piece and then the
New Mexico jurisprudence exam
similar to what we already have
in licensure requirements for
SLPs and apprentices.
As far as fees, we've aligned
those as well, you'll see
they'll be on a 2 year cyclical
plan just like um the other
licensers, and the supervision
components, uh,
Licensed SLP would be the
supervisor supervising no more
than 2 SLPAs at any one time.
And also providing both direct
and indirect supervision as
needed.
As far as right now where we
stand, I, I've provided some of
that information already, but I
am more than happy to
Look further answer any other
questions that you guys may
have. I know when I, we met in
the summer, I briefly mentioned
this, um, mentioned the
component that while you were at
ENMU um NMU does have an SLPA
degree.
So we have a degree in the state
already.
Training these individuals and
um we have a force of students
that are already there, they've
been knocking at the door for 2
years now. What can we do? How
do we get licensed, um, some are
kind of on the
On the skirt wings waiting for a
license, others um have gone to
other states to practice because
they can't currently practice in
New Mexico.
So that's where we're at. I
start the questioning with
Representative Thompson because
she's uh she's the sponsor.
For this legislation, this
session, and we give her a
chance to ask to, to add some
comments, and then we'll go
around and give everybody a
chance to ask.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
so much for the presentation.
Um, so I'm still kind of getting
on. I mean, I'm totally on
board, but I'm still kind of
learning what this all is, and I
mean, I, I think all I have to
say is that we need healthcare
providers of all types,
everywhere, and this is just,
and for years there had been
some pushback from SLPs, um, at
least in my ear. I don't know
how widespread that was, but I
heard from a lot.
from that. Oh, they're not
qualified, whatever, whatever,
so this is going to
Standardize their, how they're
How they're licensed in New
Mexico, and I think it's a um
it's sad to think that we've
lost anybody cause we didn't
have this and we can't afford to
lose any more healthcare
providers of any sort. So I
encourage your support, or else.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative Chavez will go to
you and then just go right
around.
I, I really don't have any
questions, I guess, um, so
basically this is a uh
New licensure.
Great, they haven't been
licensed previously. That is
correct. OK. And how many uh
people would this impact? How
many providers would this
impact?
So when you, Mr. Chair, uh,
Madam Vice Chair and
representatives, um,
Representative Chavez, when you
say
How many would it impact? Do you
mean, um, clients that we would
see, or do you mean individuals
for the license, yeah,
individuals for the license. OK,
so currently when I attended the
uh RLD meeting.
About a month ago, I will say
there were currently 34
apprentices licensed.
So that is the number of
individuals who would need to
transition over to the SLPA
license.
Um, as far as individuals who
could potentially practice under
this new licenser law, um,
It's really hard to say because
we haven't had the licensure in
place, and so we haven't had
people applying for that. I will
say as far as individuals that
were graduating at EMU, we have
have graduated now 25
individuals.
OK. Thank you.
Senator No questions, Mr. Chair.
Senator's defense. Um, thank you
very much, Mr. Chair. Um, I
believe that having
Uh, assistance in all the
professional.
categories is very important for
outreach to our rural areas.
So
I'm wondering, Xander.
If besides Representative
Thompson's bill.
We could
Have a bill that says
Any medical professional.
That has assistant training that
we could set up that type of
licensing so that there would be
an umbrella.
Like for OTAs, PTAs, SLPAs, you
know, that this would happen.
I mean, is that a
A possibility.
I, I would say I think we
already, I mean.
PTAs and um
Um, OTAs, I would get that's not
the right.
I haven't been out of practice
that long, but I've forgotten.
So I'm not sure what you're
suggesting, but we, we already
licensed those people. Um, so
I'm not sure what you're
suggesting.
Well, I'm suggesting that in the
event.
That we have medical
professionals that have
assistant training.
And maybe they're all covered as
the representative is saying.
But if not, why wouldn't we try
to do an umbrella that would
just include the profession, and
Andy's putting up her hand as
well.
me, I
come to a mic.
I'm not saying that that
couldn't be done, but um, each
profession has its own section
when it comes to licensing law.
So I would imagine that um, you
know, any type of ancillary or
assistant position, um, would
probably be need to written into
whatever act it is that um it is
assisting, right?
in the license.
I, I don't know. I mean, it's
just, it to me, I mean, I could,
I could look in to see what
other states have done, um, the
NCSL people aren't here anymore,
but it just seems to me, you
know, that these professions are
so different, um, that it might
make more sense to put them in
the individual licensing acts.
But Senator, I will say that if,
and this has taken years to
Come to fruition. So if someone
comes along and says, oh, we
have assistance. Let's do it
this year. I don't think that's
gonna work, but I will put it
out there that if you're
listening worldwide audience.
Um, if you have, if you know of
such a profession, please let me
or one of our staff members know
that you're interested in this.
It's probably gonna be a
multi-year process to go through
their boards, etc. etc. So I, I,
I think we would really get in
trouble stepping on toes.
if we, you know, if there's
something in dental and the
dental board hasn't, uh, isn't
on board, so I think it will be
kind of a slower process. I
don't know that we can do
anything with this bill, um,
because there isn't that
homework and groundwork are
delayed.
So thank you for that and um
going back to Sanders's idea
about under the uniform
licensing, perhaps we could
throw this to the healthcare
authority.
To look at in terms of the
healthcare professionals around
the state. Thank you very much,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Um,
Representative Chasey, any
questions?
Commons.
Take your time, Mr. Chairman, I
actually think my questions have
been answered and I appreciate
it. Representative Her.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I, I don't
have any questions.
Senatorlous.
The working lunch is turning out
to be not such a great idea
or maybe it's such a clear topic
that we don't have a lot of
questions. Representative Cates,
do you have any questions?
Uh
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I, I don't
at this time, except that I
understand the importance of us
increasing our SLPs in the state
and the SOPA's scope of work.
Um, and I
And, and, and having the
universal um uh your suggestions
Xander, I, I very much would
like to look into that,
otherwise we are
Repeating this 12 different
times, so you said and then
we've had other pieces of
legislation that have come even
onto the floor that they hit OTs
and PTs. Hey, you forgot the
SLPs. You didn't do the BTs. You
didn't do, you know, and so we
want to be able to have that
universal language and so thank
you very much.
Senator Pinto.
Mr. Chair, members of some of
these might still,
um,
I think it's more of a comment.
Because when
The IEPs with the students,
especially with my district and
the the state area is
They felt that to meet the needs
of the students, it was OK to do
it over Zoom.
And I was like I don't think
that is um.
A
Um, for that, so just a comment
that that was um something that
basically I think they were
contracting to someone out of
state.
To do those services because we
didn't have someone to come in
person.
I hope that's been.
Thank you, Mister Chair.
Representative Fray, you got
another comment?
So um Senator Pinto, um, I tried
to do PT over Zoom with infants
and toddlers during COVID.
I tried for one month and then I
gave up my contract because it
was so, but.
But I think sometimes, I mean,
you just, you can't get an SLP
or a PT out to Tohatchie on any
regular basis. So I think
telehealth is not.
The best answer, but it's better
than nothing. That, that's
pretty much, um, and you know,
and then depending on the uh
particularly in schools, the
child, if it's like an
articulation thing that may work
great on, on Zoom, whereas if
it's a feeding issue or
swallowing issue, not so much,
or kids with, you know, like my
son with more severe
disabilities, um, that would, so
it, it depends on the
population, but I, we have to
extend our professionals.
As much as we can and I will
admit if this was before Zoom. I
did an evaluation in Moscaro,
um,
For one child and they wanted me
to come back for the IEP and it
was, you know, like a 5 hour
drive, so I did it via phone
and, you know, the parents were
disappointed because she didn't
qualify according to
regulations, um, she performed
better than a lot of her class,
but she had juvennoid juvenile
rheumatoid arthritis. So when
she was flaring, she didn't, but
when I evaluated her, she wasn't
flaring, so, so I, I guess my
point is, you know,
we have to do the best that we
can do, telehealth is not.
You know, optimal, but in some
cases it's, it's, it'll work.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
and Mr. Chair,
we actually, because I worked at
the BIE school too.
And we had someone there.
So I was like, how hard can it
be to have them come down the
hill to serve our public school
students if they're not able,
you know, if they have the
capacity open to do that. So I
hope it can be.
Some alleviation there where
they coordinate. They should be.
For the best interests of our
students. Thank you.
Um, besides eastern, which of
the
Um
Universities or colleges in the
state that offer the training.
Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair, and
representatives, um, there are
no other.
Programs in the state, eastern
New Mexico has the only uh
training program for SLPAs and
on that note, if I may, just
quick address a couple of your
comments and and indirect
questions with the training
piece, one of the concerns with
the training aspect, uh, with
the apprentices, the license we
currently have.
An individual can work as an
apprentice without any kind of
direct supervision prior to
being on the job.
So when they graduate with a
bachelor's degree, if an
individual graduates, they do
not have any clinical practice
training.
The difference with the SLPA is
they have the practice training.
They have the 100 c clinical
minimum hours of in practice
training when they graduate. So
an individual with an SLPA
license would be far better
trained than what we currently
have in the state as the ASL,
the apprentice license. So that
is is also a win-win situation.
The other thing that Senator
Pinto addressed with is the
shortage, right? Cause we do
have a shortage. There are a lot
of individuals who
Maybe do not want or do not have
the ability to complete a
master's degree.
And yet they can complete an
associate's degree, which is
what this degree would be for an
assistant.
So we have the possibility to
train far more individuals in
the state to help with that
shortage being mentioned.
Exactly, so there there's huge
potential with this license as
well.
Senator Stephenix.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So that
brought up another question for
me, and I'm sorry if you already
addressed this. Can any of the
education
For this profession be online?
Mr. Chair and Senator Spanics,
yes, it.
The entire degree as it's built
at NMU is designed.
To be either on campus or can be
completed remotely. In our SLPA
as well as our other courses at
NMU were designed to where we
offer everything in what we
consider a hybrid basis.
Students can take it online,
they can take it partly face to
face or they can take it
completely, um, face to face. As
far as the 100 clinical hours,
we have an SLPA director who
sets up those clinical practice
hours with some.
one wherever that student is
located.
OK, so on, um, not on the
licensing, but on a different
topic.
Because we have quite a bit of
money available.
And um the opportunity
scholarship for uh two-year
degrees and certificates, etc.
maybe part of this, um, and I'm
not taking away from the
licensing issue at all. Maybe we
need to do some outreach about
education for this profession
around the state, and maybe
there would be people within the
communities who would be
interested, whether it's on the
Navajo Nation or in a far-flung
rural area of the state that
might step up.
But thank you very much.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, I
was just thinking about
something, um.
That it was mentioned that this
program is only at Eastern
Mexico University.
And um why are our other higher
education institutions, um,
offering a program like this,
and I worry in the long term,
just like we see with social
workers, are we going to end up
in the same type of situation,
so it's something to think
about, Mr. Chair. I believe that
the reason other schools aren't
doing it is because there's
essentially no licensure. So if
we give them the licensure, I
would expect that you and I and
um New Mexico State, whoever has
speech and speech language and
hearing, um.
Programs would step up to this.
Community colleges, would that
be another option? I mean, if
it's an AA essentially an AA
degree. Mr. Chair, yes, that,
that is a possibility. One of
the great things, um, with the,
you know, the
The possibility, yes, the issue
might be that you do have to
have an SLP program or the
faculty to teach those courses,
so you have to have the faculty
in place in order to teach, um,
something I think that, you
know, my faculty at NMU have
been very gracious and taking on
a little bit more here and there
in order to
See this through and see what we
can make happen.
And I noticed you have a
doctorate in in this field. Is
that, is that correct? Yeah.
Yes.
It
But you obviously had to gotten
that, received that degree
somewhere else, not, not in New
Mexico. Yes, Mr. Chair, I did.
My both my bachelor's and
masters, I completed at EMU and
my doctorate was actually
completed in Florida.
I'd love to offer something for
SLPs in the state, but we're not
quite there yet.
So I uh PT and OTs have gone to
doctoral level, entry level. I
know audiologists have, but SLPs
have not. Is that correct, Madam
Vice Chair, that is correct. I
do not see I work pretty closely
with the Council of Academic
programs for the American Speech
Language Hearing Association,
and I don't see that coming down
the pipe at this point. Thank
you.
Any other comments or questions?
Yes, Senatorio Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I
apologize if, if you already
talked about this.
Um, on your infographic, it says
SLPA replaces ASL. Is that
American Sign Language?
So what I was like confused, so
Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair, and
Senator Lopez, no, it is not. It
is actually the Apprentice in
speech and language. OK, great.
OK. Thank you. Yes, it would
replace the the license we have
on the books right now for
assistance. OK cause that raised
a concern. I just had a
A town hall with epa and the
interpreters there were amazing,
it's wonderful, so.
Thank you.
Thank you so much, uh.
Hopefully, the legislation will
get introduced and passed this
year and hopefully it'll begin
the process of expanding the
availability of this of the
training programs but of the
service that you all would be
providing.
So thank you very much for
coming.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Madam Vice Chair and thank you.
were also for sponsoring this.
We appreciate it. We appreciate
the, the faith and hope in us to
to make changes within the state
for the better, and thank you
all. And, and there are plenty
of lunches left, I suppose, so
help yourself to take 2 or 3.
And thank you for lunch, uh.
And good thoughts out to Margie.
And with that we will take a
little resource until one
o'clock is our next presentation
won't happen until then.
So don't go crazy about this, so
we've got 17 minutes before
lunch and 29 after lunch, so
don't, but don't get used to it.
