Very honor just to do a quick
introduction of our next panel
as you i've had the pleasure to
work with for for awhile now in
it and their bulges such as
deemed colleagues in the area
but here are health and new
maxical i'm too great minds you
have before you hear so kicking
us off today will be doctor
margaret greenwith ericsson
who's with them UNM health
sciences center she's going to
talk to us about sort of those
medical the science around
substance use disorder in
addiction and all that kind of
thing she has a very steamed um
background which she'll go ahead
and talk to you some about in
our other panelist is dr
weighing lenstram who was the
head of all of their behavior
health services division and the
behavior of collaborative during
previous administration and his
worked in air zone aamies now
the head of the whole new system
here for bernalio county how
they're focusing on putting so
much effort around the heart so
we're so pleased to have both of
them thank you.
Well thank you
hello good afternoon my name is
margaret ringwood ericsson and
i'm so pleased to be here with
you today presenting umm I
thought it would just take a
moment to tell you a little bit
about my background and
expertise before I start i'm an
emergency position eoned i'm
also a rural health researcher
my background is that before
coming to the university of new
mexico I worked for indian
health services eight if you
turn to slide to your ce a
picture that I took one driving
between albuquerque when my
family lives and for it to find
where I was working it was like
the most beautiful rainbow i've
ever seen it's only forty I was
also like nine months pregnant
and at semi drove by as I took
it and I thought this is really
unsafe should get back in the
car
end my passion for real health
started in medical school where
I participated in a rural track
so I did my role added my
clinical rotations and rural
sites in on that and working for
anything else services as were
inspiring me to become an
emergency physician and an
academic setting focus on
education of the next generation
of positions and doing research
and programmatic work around
rural health the spirit is so my
areas of expert user and rural
health substances disorder
treatment and access and I in
mental health and a little bit
in health policy as well
so starting off
I have my size out of order I
apologize.
Or talk about the agenda for it
today the first thing is i'm
gonna go through with you are
the three waves of the up
process and then we're gonna
decide into the neural
biological model of addiction
which I promise will focus more
in the behavior is rather than
sort of the intricate science
for today's purposes and then
third will review current
treatment approaches for opinion
use disorder and the impact
offentional on these approaches
if you turn to slide for you'll
see a figure of from the
national institutes of drug
abuse and these demonstrate how
drug overdose deaths have risen
over a time an adventural has
been the primary driver of that
since about twenty fifteen
since the ninety nine days and
i'm sorry there's a type of it
should say instead of twenty
eighteen ninety nine since the
nineteen nineties and which many
mark as the beginning of the
operate epidemic in the united
states over one million
americans have died in relation
to nobody overdoes and what
you'll see from this figure is
that since twenty fifteen elicit
fentinal or illegally
manufacturer sentinel has been
driving those overdose rates and
actually timing of this talk is
pretty good because just
yesterday the cdc release their
newest to test x one it would be
at overdose in the united states
I am these are a nationally in
the mid estimates by states as
well and this is the first time
since the beginning of the
opened upper damage that there
has been a decrease and it would
be at overdose deaths so
nationally they're seeing almost
a ten percent decrease which is
pretty remarkable last year I
think there were sort of a
flattening in and there she
weren't really seeing a decline
and estimates of for new mexico
are somewhere on media six
percent decrease so a little
glimmer of hope turning to the
next slide iron slide five
that was the national
perspective now we all know new
mexico is unique and at new
mexico has a long history with
the point process dating back
far before the nineteen nineties
over fifty years particularly in
a spend your insurance and
communities i'm sure i'm being
news to you to hear that the
counties with the highest rates
of drug overdose are real
rebuster and sierra counties.
And new mexico itself is one of
the
highest rinking states for
update overdose I think it was
ranked six then two thousand and
twenty one and here we release
authentical surging in twenty
nineteen that's when new mexico
started to experience that start
surge and then when you'll see
from this figure
that overdose rates and this is
from the department of health I
think they're working on you
know the twenty twenty two
twenty twenty three data now but
this was released in may and the
graphic and you'll see that
there is been a stabisation and
then as I mentioned of a client
and I think all of us are really
hopeful that this is a glimmer
of hope and a reflection of the
significant investments by new
mexico in developing capacity to
treat substance use disorder in
the state and through evidence
based harm reduction and
treatment programs
so trained aside six before we
launch into the neural
biological model I wanted to
just do a brief definition of
operates because we talk a lot
about things like synthetics and
fence normal and so just a
definition of terms and so op
are a class of drug that are
originate from the puppy plant
it comes from the seeds and the
opportunity drug class contains
both legal prescription pain
medication and also illegal
street drugs
unfortunately many legal
prescription pain medications
like fantastic or main use
action and illegal drug labs and
then sold as street drugs so the
three types of op waves that
people generally speak about are
the what are called the natural
opinions and these come from the
opinion poppy plants directly
their drive directly from the
option poppy plants examples of
this are more than which is a
medication that we use in the
health care setting and then
also heroin which is a street
drug
semi something obvious are made
in labs but they're made from
the precursors of the pipe plan
so they are sort of add you
naturally derived but because
they're manufactured and labs
that can be made to be more
potent and that's your oxycodo
and hydrocodona and i'm sure
you've all heard of oxi content
so that's dropped that that drug
class and then fully synthetic
obvious are medications that are
made completely in labs they're
made from chemical precursors.
Out that minute the poppy plan
make up and their because
they're made and labs that can
be made extraordinarily potent
and potentially as related to
overdose right then we're
potential drug as the very small
amounts can result and drug
overdust and the prime example
of that is sentinel
so it turning to side seven you
can see a graphic you're
describing the three waves of
the crisis so the first way of
nationally begin the nineteen
nineties and this was driven by
a prescription of a rise in
prescription primarily actually
conten I think in the last two
years we were heard a lot about
the sacklers hand produce farmer
and oxi continue and I think a
summary of that would be that
the drivers of this was really
related to insufficient
regulation of the pharmaceutical
and healthcare industries which
resulted in really extreme
prescribing patterns of open
medications particularly
oxygenton there is this commonly
quite a statistic that in two
thousand and twelve they were
two hundred and fifty nine
million oxyco actually kind of
prescriptions written such that
every american could have had
one bottle in their own house
feased with the rising overdose
deaths and the shocking rates of
upurate prescribing the
healthcare industry
dialed back on prescribing in
the late nineties and early two
thousand and by then
unfortunately the damage had
been done we have many people
who became addicted to a string
this time and when they could no
longer access the pills because
people are getting really tight
on the regulations unfortunately
people turn to heroin
primarily which was injection
base and so we also saw a raise
and some of the bloodborn
illnesses during that time as
well
and as a time you've all we'd
still be moved into the third
wave which is really fancing on
twenty thirteen twenty fourteen
twenty fifteen is when we saw a
rise and fentional nationally
and this is again illegally
manufacturer fence and all the
origin of a historically was
based out of china there were
like chinese labs that were
producing fensional precursors.
And there was being traffic
through mexico now a lot more of
it is actually being produced in
mexico and traffic app
ian that's the story of where we
are now are sentimental is very
datably it is it is very potent
very small amounts of it can
cause of reduce and death eight
fentional is mixed in to the
general you know illegal drug
supply so you might think that
you're buying something that has
an oxycodon pill when in fact
actually has pensioner in it and
it is that
it's it's that fact that
straving drug overdoses for
people don't know what they're
taking
tree to slide i'm in a briefly
review addiction we're going to
talk about the the nearer
biological model and then i'll
end the talk with just a little
bit about some treatment so
addiction so substitutes
disorder is a diagnostic term it
refers to the current use of
drugs that cause clinically and
functional significant
impairment and then addiction is
a term that we use to indicate
the most severe and most chronic
stage of substance use disorder
and in this stage there is
substantial assessor of control
are indicated by a compulsive
drug taking behavior despite the
desire to stop using the drug
on flight nine you can see that
we've been involved in medicine
from the concept of addict to
the concert of a brain disease
which has been a biological
model so historically the
thoughts and stigma around
addiction had to do with the
perception that addiction was
really related to ethical
shortcomings e ironed lack of
will power in a personal choice
or a personal decision and what
we know now from scientific
research that's proven this
historical perspective to be
false and in fact it's
potentially harmful at this
point because it fosters
negative attitudes towards
people suffering from substances
disorder and it makes it hard
for them to seek treatment so
contemporary models are modern
models now utilize the neural
biological framework for the
onset the maintenance and
development of protection so I
the nor biological framework
i'll briefly review it here and
her relates to the addiction
behaviors on the next little
talk a little bit about the
stages of it.
So here you can see that the nor
biological framework defines
addiction as a chronic and
relaxing disorder and their
specific neuro adaptations that
occur in this there's no
adaptations occurring three
different stages there is binger
intaxication withdraw and
negative effect and then pre
occupation and anticipation and
what happens is that these new
adaptations work together to
predispose an individual to
pursue substances regardless of
the potential consequences
i'm flight eleven talking a
little bit more about how these
stages interact so the brain has
many regions that are
interconnected to one another
and they formed dynamic networks
which are responsible for very
specific functions so drugs
alter these important brain
areas that are necessary for a
healthy social interaction in
behavior and it drives
compulsive drug use addiction
can be considered a repeating
cycle of these three status so
binger and toxication this is
where the individually uses the
substance it experiences yet and
then you experience its
rewarding and pleasurable
effects maybe you use it more
than once and then that moves
you into the withdraw and
negative a sex stage so in the
absence of that substance you
start to experience with drawal
symptoms and you start to have
diminished levels of pleasure
eoned the rebort and the reward
system
that then takes you to
preoccupation in anticipation so
in this stage the executive
control functions of the brain
which is part of the frontal lob
and become hijacked by the
preceding to our cycles and what
happens is diminished impulse
control poor executive planning
an emotional regulation becomes
very unstable
and the next side you can see
that each of these stages are
linked to a part of the brain so
in binger intoxication that's
our reward center of our brain
that's a revealed ganglian the
drugs over similar circuit it
causes euphoria but with
repeated exposure that circuit
adapts and it makes a very hard
to feel anything other than like
any kind of pleasure other than
when you're experiencing the
presence of that drug and then
also involved is the a mig
dollar which is our emotion
center of the brain.
The middle has involved in
stress it's involved in feelings
of an easing irritability that
people experience when they're
going through withdraw and that
circuit becomes increasingly
sensitive to the drugs and does
people who use people start
using the drug not actually even
to get the euphoria or get high
so to speak but to simply remove
there was negative feelings
which make them feel horrible
the shifting balance between the
preferential protect circuit
which is the executive function
circuit over here and
preoccupation anticipation that
shifting balance between that
circuit and then the baseline
genuine and victim of circuits
results in this composite drug
seeking behavior and reduced
impulse control so the reason
this model is useful and is you
know first of course because it
supported by decades of science
that explain how addiction works
in the brain but also we now use
it on side thirteen you can see
we use it to inform treatment so
medical treatment can help
her store healthy functioning of
the affected brain and reduce a
diction of behaviours there are
three fda approved medications
to treat obese disorder which
can be used in conjunction with
behavioral health cancelling and
sort of a whole system of care
to treat opined addiction these
medications are methodon people
northern and they'll track some
eight the each act in different
ways so if you look on side
fourteen you'll see that I have
a table of each of these
medications and i'll briefly
describe how they are function
and how they're used so
methodone has been around for
forty years it's prescribed in a
clinic being setting a very
specific clinic they said you
have to have a specialised
license to do math around in it
is what's called an agonist
which means that it bonds fully
to the operated receptor and
occupies it but it's a long
acting upurade so in people who
are chronically using up yours
when it bins to this receptor it
doesn't close before you rather
it reduces the withdrawal
effects and reduces the cravings
for the drug
it's also associated with the
fifty percent more our reduction
in mortality.
And it's very effective at
treating a bit used to sort it
there's lots of data to support
it in the in the past years
after methodone and became a
successful treatment there was
interest in developing other
types of medications that were
similar and that's where we see
buper northean so the upper
martin has a real benefit which
is that it can be prescribed by
any clinician in any setting so
methodon has to be dispensed
rate I specialise clinic but put
northern can be given an office
be setting given an er given
really started anywhere and
people can take the prescription
get the medication sold and in
fact actually do their
treatments at home I also
associate it with a fifty
percent reduction in mortality
the way it works is what's
called a partial agonist which
means a binds partially to the
upright receptor but not
completely amp the benefit to
this is that even if you took
more and more and more and more
of it it would never cause their
respiratory depression that's
associated with your ads and
that work ends up causing an
overdose so it's a people
consider it to be a slightly
safer medication although
methodone is also quite safe as
well
and then now try to the last one
not trucks and is it up your
antagonist which means a
completely blocks the receptor
it
you know so when it's when you
people often take it as an
injection of over trials as
common medication people use
they take it as an injection it
blocks the operator sector so if
you were to use drugs you would
not experience the your foreer
from it realistically speaking
and it has pretty poored here
and and poor tolerance by
patience and it's never been
demonstrated to have a mortality
benefit unlike the other two
medications so you'll mostly
hear about being but i've seen
and methodon in terms of
treatment
I wanted to end my talk today
just integrating this into the
clinical context so
you know
I in terms of treatment we need
dedicated treatment centers of
course but also we want to
simultaneously be integrating
addiction medicine treatment
across the health system in a
cross general medical car that
reduces it increases access
since I work at UNM i've
highlighted a few ways here that
you and m is doing this.
To give you all a sense of how
it can be done at our hospital
or at any hospital across the
state a couple of things are
done in the last few years is
starting to do we call it like
mud medications for abuse
disorder so you hold me to say
that moved we are doing
medications for open use
disorder in the impatient
setting you are never started a
new addiction medicine consult
service so if the patient gets
admitted to the hospital for it
let's say
sepsis so a bloodstream
infection related to having used
heroin and they haven't abused
disorder they can be started in
the hospital on these
medications and they can be
linked to outpatient follow up
so at time of discharge they
have a clinic appointment that
can follow up and they can
continue on the medication so
that's been done in a much more
structured way now
we also at unm and it's a
disundergrad partnership with
the county as well for some of
these things i'm going to talk
about um are doing and we do
treatment and very high risk
populations so the first thing
i'll talk about is emergency
department based and will you do
so i'm an emergency phone
historically emergency
departments were not starting
these medications for patience
this is maybe twenty years ago
i'd say it was more of just sort
of giving them a few a junked
medications and discharging them
and assuming it was going to be
someone else's problem however
our field has dramatically
involved in the last twenty
years and we now routinely are
doing starting these medications
in the emergency department
linking patience to care and
getting them treated
similarly and some other way as
that we're working with at risk
populations is with the
metropolitan detention center
and partnership with the county
that there's an physicians and
clinicians now working to start
people are in these medications
to reduce overdoes deaths in the
justice involved population and
then something
method and yes that's right and
we'll do macedon that's right in
january
and then also street medicines
the street medicine is a type of
medicine that is when conditions
go out into homeless encampments
and homeless communities and
bringing medical treatment
directly to those people.
Part of this of course is that
this population has a very high
rate of substance use disorder
and so these clinicians are
working in the streets with
these percent to start them on
these life saving medications as
well and then i'll just mention
and then i'll hand it over to
doctor and strong the last point
on the slight here the new
mexico poison center so in the
last year than a mexico poison
center is started offering
twenty four seven consultation
for a diction medicine services
so if you're a clinician in a
rural hospital and you have it
complex withdrawal patient
someone who are having trouble
managing a good example this
would be labor and delivery
someone comes in who is addicted
to thanks in all in withdraw and
also in labor it's very
complicated situation you can
call this the poison center and
you can get an addiction
medicine position to give you
advice and guidance about the
best way to treat these patience
and then will also be at the
university of new mexico we're
seeking certification to be
certified community behavioral
health clinic which is going to
uh the concept is that it would
integrate substance due to sort
of treatment across the behavior
of your spectrum and and that
would be starting in january so
think you very much for an
having me here today to speak
it's a pleasure to be here with
all of you thank you for the
legislature for this opportunity
thank you to the executive for
their continued partnership with
UNM as well to help us address
the needs of the state doctor
linstrom thank you so much
mister chair members with many
good to be with you thank you
for the invitation some of you I
know from a previous lifetime so
it's good to see you again
my presentation takes a
less academic
approach if you will when I was
asked to do this presentation
and to talk about best practices
I assumed that given how long
that we've been dealing with the
crisis that you've probably had
many presentations what our best
practices relative to
effectively treating the crisis.
In addition to that new mexico
should be proud of being in many
respects of paying ear
ineffective harm reduction we
were far ahead of most states in
that regard
so given that assumption I
thought it might have more
utility to all of you
to focus on what some of the
challenges are in providing
evidence based on behavior
health interventions
in new mexico in
in a in addition to that
i've i've outlined six
challenges in particular to
focus on I actually
thought about the salad and came
up with fourteen but I knew that
the the lc director would
probably kick me in the shens if
I provided you a slide deck with
a hundred slides so
for the sake of brevity i've
decided to focus on just six
i've been in this field now for
fifty three years i've worked in
multiple states and I can say to
you the one consistent complaint
for behavioral health services
universally has been the lack of
access and I would hold that it
continues to be true today
and in given that
a decade ago we implemented new
mexico crisis and access line
and at that time it was a voice
capability only to provide a
single access point available
twenty four seven three sixty
five it was the first time that
we ever had that level of
accessibility with the
implementation of nine eight
eight and the new mexico crisis
access line became a nine eight
eight crisis call center hub we
now have expanded.
To include text and chat and why
is that important will any of
you that have teenagers
you will find and I have adult
children they won't even talk to
me and the phone the only way I
can communicate with them as via
text so when we had in the
mexico crisis and access line
and only offered a voice service
we had no utilisation by young
people and you were talking
earlier today but the instance
of youth suicide and what's
causing all the behavior health
pro- providers and we could do a
whole presentation just done
that question alone
we now with the
implementation of texts and chat
have really high utilization on
the part of young people in new
mexico the other thing that nine
eight eight brings us as being
part of a national that work of
nine eighty crisis center hubs
and some centralized national
capabilities so that you're
prompt when you call nine eighty
that if you want to speak to a
counselor and spanish you can
answer that prompt if you were
veteran there's another prompt
and you'll talk to a veteran
with lived experience if you're
member the l g b t q community
likewise the resort is a
specialised there for you and
just in the last year american
sign language has been made
available through nineteen eight
as well the problem is is that
the
future will trust it a survey
last year and found that only
seventeen percent of americans
know
what nine eighty eight is or if
they heard of it they can't
explain what it is.
The
congressional act that created
nine one one was passed in
nineteen sixty eight signed by
lending johnson and by nineteen
eighty seven only fifty percent
of american set access to nine
one one I had no idea about
their telestarter reading of the
history around nine one one I
grew grew up in cleveland ohio
and urban environment and as
long as it's the sixties I was
aware of nine one one for fifty
percent of american all
americans all those years later
had such acts so it took us over
sixty years to get where we are
today there's that a person in
this room that doesn't know what
nine one one is the whole point
of nine eight eight is to be
able to create a behavioral
health emergency response system
that's on par with nine one one
and we still have a considerable
way to go if only seventeen
percent of people even know
about nine eight is resource we
don't want to take another sixty
years to socialize nine eighty
the behavior all services
division has had an ongoing
public awareness campaign with
the things I would attribute to
consider is contributing
additionally with sustainable
dollars all of over time so that
we don't have to wait sixty
years but within maybe the next
five years we get to a point
where eighty five percent of new
mexicans know about nine eighty
eight if they're in a crisis
there only text a chat or call
away from getting immediate help
peered up with a nine eighty
call center should be assistant
of mobile crisis teams made up
of a clinician and e certified
peer support worker that are
available twenty four seven
three sixty five we've got
particular challenges in new
mexico because.
We are such a world and frontier
state and so the typical model
that you'll see in this natural
guidelines for behavior off
crisis care we can't utilise a
firehouse model everywhere to be
able to have a crisis team and
call and maybe sitting in for
hours if not days in a rural
community so we need to be able
to
look to have
car tracks for practitioners to
be answered on stand by it on
call who can respond rather than
like I said that the firehouse
I would also encourage
consideration around forming in
office of behavior health crisis
response of bhst and providing
it with the funding uh developed
their capacity and
infrastructure as well
just as I know if you're
familiar with the name one one
call centers have traditionally
been known as peace apps public
safety answering points there
are in the prices of changing
their names to emergency
contract centers you've had
presentations on next gen which
is to bring
current technology to our peace
apps in the state and we have
forty one of them is critical
that nine eighty have similar
technological capabilities if
you you're a fight took out my
cell phone my area code for
myself bonus two one six which
is an old hi area so if I call
nine eight eight and I asked for
help and they wanted to refer
resources to me I would actually
be connected to a nine eighty
call center in ohio who know
nothing about what the resources
are in the state of new mexico
so area codes are increasingly
despatched or when it comes to
enhancing this capability and
that's why we need to change.
The having gps technology g I s
technology etc in that way not
only do we know that the caller
is in fact in new mexico but we
can also track mobile crisis
team state wide and know which
ones are activated which ones
are sitting which ones are
closest to the person in the
community in their crisis and
the mobile crisis team can be
dispatched to somebody and
crisis under a bridge you know
anywhere in the state or if it's
in a home environment whatever
the natural environment happens
to be
the other thing you might
consider and i've not seen much
of this in my time in new mexico
and that's the use of
councils of government
the reality is the number of our
counties don't have the
population base to support they
don't have the density
population
to be able to meet many of their
needs and I think it's
worthwhile considering having
behavior health regional
councils of government that
focus on crisis care but perhaps
more broadly behavioral health
when it comes to the building a
crisis trious center for example
it may make more sense to do
that a regional basis and
granted our counties are very
large geographically in time and
distance or is another challenge
but I think these are some
considerations
for for all of us
I would also recommend that we
look at
look locating behavior of
clinicians in are nine one one
crisis called centers the call
centers all have their code set
and how calls are coded and so
when they've been a number of
surveys the naturally are trying
to find out how many calls come
in the nine one one actually
involve the behavioral crisis
there's not consistent coding
and I think that in order for
there to be meaningful
coordination between nine one
one and nine eight eight.
It would be beneficial consider
having behavioral health become
socialized within nine one when
call centers and do a better job
of identifying when it's a
behavior health crisis call and
when it should be responded to
from nineteen eight and that
call transfer
I was real pleased thirty year
one of the mco's report that
they're incentivising providers
to be opened for service and
evenings and weekends and on
holidays when I first came to
the new mexico for a decade ago
I was surprised at the number of
providers who only were open for
services from five or nine to
five and I think that's one
things that should change as
well i'm not going to go through
all of these for the sake of
time I made these more meeting
than I normally would in a
bullet point presentation to all
of you but I wanted you to be
able to take this back is kind
of a reference document so
should questions arise in your
mind in the future or somebody
could situate raises an issue
with you etc you could also
reference this document the last
thing i'll say with regards to
access is that when the most
challenging things is to get
providers to change the way that
they practice I think we're
getting to the point where
thinking everybody needs
individual therapy is kind of a
luxury we can't afford anymore
and when I talk to providers
about why aren't you doing more
in the way of structured group
programming as opposed to
investigator work they say well
we opponentate suggests to
somebody would you prefer
individual therapy or group
therapy they always say
individual therapy
and if you present it that way I
guarantee it ninety times over a
hundred that will be the result
but if you say to a person who
suffering from depression or an
opinion use this order that we
have an intensive outpatient
program that's evidence based
around this particular problem.
We want to enroll you ninety
nine times over a hundred they
will agree
so we could be much more
efficient and not being impacted
by the effects of no shows in a
fee for service environment and
if you wonder what I just said
maybe we can talk about that
when we get tenth asking
questions the second challenge I
want to talk briefly about is
just keeping new mexicans a
little in the presentation you
just heard
around a drug over dole stess
it's great to hear that it's
trending in a better direction
in part of that cdc reports that
some states related to the
question they came up earlier
today or other states doing
better some states were seeing a
thirty percent decline and drug
overdoses so a lot of things
that we've been comprehensively
implementing in integrating and
have variety of different kinds
of care
sites around the state I think
it really beginning to pay off.
I've soated some references
for you with regards to counties
that I think should be
targets if you will for having
the highest profiles when it
comes to behavior house services
when I was serving at hst we had
a million dollar allocation for
behavioral health investment
sounds based on a needs
assessment a we came up with two
counties in the state having the
greatest need that was real
reburn mckilley counties and we
put five hundred thousand
dollars as behavioral of
investment in both of those
counties and were able to do
some things that those countries
before weren't able to do
I don't know if the behavior
health investments I would still
exist I know they don't in the
same two counties but I
encourage you to take a look at
greater investments in the
counties that are having the
greatest problems where it comes
to behavior health and all of
this is not
a model left or of
the problem that you know should
be viewed at in a fragmented way
these are very complex problems
with a lot of inner relatedness
and call more more better and
that's one of the reasons why
i'm not just focusing on the
opportunity use to sort out so
there's more than we can do
relative to how we keep new
machine new mexicans a little a
high priority area that deserves
a tension as we have been for
many years the number one state
with regards to alcohol related
deaths I know we've had a number
of alcohol tax initiatives they
have come before the state
legislature that have failed and
if there's one consistent
prevention methodology but it
has been shown to work
consistently across states is by
raising the price on alcohol and
I know all of the.
Counter arguments are related to
being a tourist state and the
restaurant and liquor industry
etc but if you want to begin to
impact the alcohol related death
problem in all the associated
things to go with it alcohol tax
is the number one best practice
that you could implement in the
next session
I would also like to make a plug
for an especially dockets
these are problem so solving
courts I think we have like
thirteen of them now in berlio
county the problem is they've
been primarily funded with
federal grand dollars and when
the federal grad dress up guess
what happens that special we
prob themselves in court goes
away or gets reduced etc I said
recently in the second judicial
district that you should not be
having to hold big sales to
continue to build on and expand
what has tremendous body of
evidence behind it in terms of
its effectiveness in dealing
with behavioral health related
criminal justice issues
so I want to put in a plot for a
specially darkets as well
the next
i'm going to shorten this even
if the more
that everyone spelled the better
time on its got to do with care
coordination this is another one
of the challenges throughout my
career the scott and consistent
attention and everybody says
it's needed we should be doing
it
and much of the time we don't
and you had some of this come up
during the presentation and the
part of the medicaid m c o's the
reality is is that there are
billing codes for care
coordination i'm not sure that
under
turkois care that they've been
activated.
But the reality is in a fee for
service environment and that's
why so please to hear about
value based purchasing by press
between to get to a point where
providers can have an operating
margin so they can begin to
better invest in their people
there infrastructure their
capacity etc so we have tools
that either have been
implemented met it and discarded
or once currently under
implementation the behavioral
providers don't use one of them
a synchronous that's a statewide
health information exchange and
if there's not a methodology for
requiring providers
contractually to participate in
synchronous and if there isn't a
way to pay for meaningful care
coordination it's still us and
going to happen in burlio county
doing the and the county santa
fe county were very stages of
implementing united states which
is a close loop referral system
research has been done decades
ago that shows that sixty
percent of people referred by
primary care never make the
referral offer anyone of a
variety of reasons it's even
worse I think in behavior well
with the implementation of
united states we have electronic
tool where we can make referrals
when that person meets up with
wherever the service was
referred there is feedback from
that provider and this isn't
just behavioral health but it's
also human service providers as
well and
the another example is we had
opened beds that we implemented
when I was the state director we
now shut it down because open
because was a registrates now
called bamboo health
so if you ever had a a family
member consistent that wanted
help and then you're trying to
search.
Around the state it's a finding
out what would be an appropriate
resource who's got an open bed
what the admission criteria are
etc it's it's a nightmare of a
process this was a tool for us
to know in real time or all the
available beds are all of the
available outpatient treatments
slots and it was shut down
because providers weren't using
it and there were no one centers
or systems accountability and I
don't want to make that same
mistake when it comes to the
health information exchange as
well as with united states the
last area that i'll highlight
has to do with the issue of
recurring funds
recurring funds a lot of times
gets thought about for capital
needs
and the reality is that too
often i've seen
capital campaigns if you will
come and go and without
sufficient business planning
around building a new structure
acquiring land etc in how it's
going to be operated and
sustainable etc two offers it
breaks down
and as we move more more to
person centered care and serving
people in the natural
environment
facilities become less than less
important
the
the reality is that we were
talking about acting earlier
sort of community treatment it
takes on average a year and a
half before you have sufficient
enrollment in such a multi
displanary team which is highly
effective its research base but
nobody's going to pay you for a
year and a half so if they're
start of funds until you hit the
break even point it a year and
half worth of implementation
then no provider wants to take
one this type of practice even
though it's evidence based
because they don't have the
operating research to make.
That kind of investment so one
of my recommendations to all of
you if you're looking at where
some recurring funds can be
spent wisely it's associated
with starting up a variety of
best practices and with that
mister chair members of many I
think we're both open for
questions goods we'll get
started center ruddering issue
for thank you mister chairman in
good afternoon thank you for
your work so so much really
considering the situation we're
in in new mexico it's good to
have people with experience and
lots of commitment thank you
I do have a couple of question
thank you mister chairman I do
have a few questions only
because I may have last year but
maybe I didn't that's why I am
going to ask him
first or my notes trying to get
something else here okay looking
at your paperwork that you
submit it doctor eric so thank
you for that all that great work
you did they're trying to depict
him pictures for us and maps and
so on whether it's a bit of this
from what I understand you have
defined addiction e completely
different way then we've thought
addiction was all this time and
that means that instead of
thinking a person up that we've
think or thought before that a
person may have gotten addicted
because they had some
whatever low self esteem
problems with the way they felt
throughout the up situation in a
i'm just going to make up
something for examples situation
with them a relationship or
whatever it may be they just
ring to feel better for example
well it doesn't seem like it's
that way anymore that you have
defined addictions as something
having to do with specific
neural adaptations and that's
where i'm going to go and i'm
going to be s.
Short because I know the subject
is very important to everyone
but page ten let's go there for
just a second in in nuro
adaptations if it is in fact if
addict addiction is in fact
occurring because there's
something that happens in the
brain okay i'm trying to
visualize or that including the
picture of the brain here that
you have
there is an imbalance apparently
the brain in this new model that
you're presenting and so that in
balance happens at some point
and apparently it yes it happens
when a person drinks to march
and you get it in a person gets
addicted but we know that
happens that's obviously why
people are addict that this may
be all too much for a consistent
pattern or whatever it may be
the main question here is how
does a person get to that if
this is cast by them balance in
the brain circuitry okay then
how does a person get there a
person has to get there for some
reason before that besides you
know the amount of liquor or the
the reason so so tell me about
that because I am thinking that
we probably if this is a case
then we have to really work at
this to know that the way we're
going to approach addiction has
to be different it has to be
from a different perspective so
we can treat people better to
hopefully someday become sober
so tell me a briefly doctor
error etc how does the person
get to this neural circuitry and
balance that you're talking
about yes thank you mister
chairman and committee thank you
very much for that very
important question
and I really appreciate you're
giving you the contacts and an
example so I had a side but I
cut it because I know we have
only so much time but it was
about how people make that
transition and I think that's
what you're asking
eight
so
you know actually use of drugs
by americans is probably higher
than people would imagine.
It's in the statistics are like
one in three people have tried a
drag at some point
e those people do not go on to
get addicted or start processing
into this like narrow biological
model i'm so the question is for
what people do they transition
from trying a drug to becoming
addicted to a drug and then
having these neural changes
inside of their brain so it has
a lot to do with genetic
you know at personal and
environmental factors iand a lot
of research is going on right
now to determine which of those
factors play the largest role
and how they enter play we do
know that impulsivity so the
characteristic of impulsivity is
almost always involved in trying
a drug so that would be a
personal characteristics sort of
your part of our genetic make up
and definitely informed by or up
bringing and the culture that we
live in
I so impulsivity is sort of the
first step if you will and
people being interested in
trying out a drug and then there
are all these factors that I
think you're alluding to
which have to do with the
person's environment and we know
that I the process from trying a
drug to becoming dependent on it
and to going through this
pathway have a lot to do with
your environment that you were
reason your family structure
your support system and frankly
poverty so one of the biggest
predictors and one of the
biggest things that's related to
developing a drug dependency is
related to your social economic
status so if these interplane
factors that will bring you on
this pathway and then one sure
using the drug somewhat
routinely that's what puts you
into this narrow biological
model and at that point there is
very little a person could do in
terms of willing themselves out
of it because that's where you
see these circuits change and
that it makes it so hard for
them to start up even though
it's destroying their lives and
they don't want to be doing it
anymore.
So thank you for that but that
being said does this apply
elsewhere to alcohol or is it
specific to all points or does
the same thing happen to the
brain due to which you just
mentioned mister chairman now
thank you mr chair and committee
yes this would be true for any
addicting substance and actually
this could even be true for some
of the things we find ourselves
addicted to
like our cell phones which I
find myself obsessively checking
all the time it hits the same
reward circuits so
yeah sounds good
it yeah so it's true for all
substances with nor biological
model holds I focus on obvious
disorder for the purposes of
today's talk
thank you very much for that
where you're going to say
something yes mister chair
standard or
there there's one other element
and I don't know how research
based it is there has to do with
the effects of trauma and you
know we estimate that one out of
every three girls are sexually
abused and went out of every
four boys and that's just one
form of trauma there's a host of
others that happen
developmentally and I think
you'll find a high correlation
between what ends up being
addiction and what once trauma
history is in you've had
presentations in the past about
advertised with experiences etc
and the more
trauma there is in a child's
life etc the more likely it is
we're going to develop a host of
problems in addition to crossing
over into reduction
thank you very much for that but
there are being said I guess the
main question for me is does a
person have a chance if this is
the way it works these are the
factors that lead to this in
balance of the circuitry that
we're talking about that
eventually just gets the person
addicted from just drinking
doesn't have to drink a lot of
beers or or a lot of alcohol
that has a propensity to get
addicted more than others as you
said some do some don't.
And so when that happens it just
makes me wonder do they have a
chance of ever getting their
brain balance that circuitry
back balanced over at time and
final question in that process
does that person actually
does the notion that we've all
believed in at least most of us
forever is that the longer use
tastes over the more chance you
have of remaining so okay so
we've been we've been taught
that during presentations and
for many years here and in other
words if a person can stay so
well i'll refer to alcohol
instead of all points so we're
for three months that's great
they have a much better chance
of remaining sober for six
months if a person continues in
a year
they they are truly in a class
where they have a very good
chance of being so how does that
work now with this it does that
even a player
does the tight amount of time a
person remains sober with this
new model that you're talking
about does it mean that thank
you mister chairman and
committee thank you for the
question
so if you look on side thirteen
I have a figure there and what
you can see is it talks about
the three medications for abuse
disorder people in our phone
methodological truck sound and
because they remove the
physiological feelings that the
negative effect that would draw
symptoms because they blunt that
and remove it it allows the
bring chemistry to normalize
over time and so this type of
treatment can be very effect if
people do have a chance of
recovery and there are many
people who are in recovery and
successfully living very healthy
very rewarding lives thanks to
these treatments and alcohol use
disorder these medications do
not work for alcohol use
disorder eight you're talking
about you know when people are
able to get sober and enter
recovery and and that is true
the longer you aren't recovery
the better your chances are and
that is true for op is to sort
out too so I would say I was
there as a lot of hope I would
say that these medications work
very well.
They do allow the brain
circuitry to normalize again and
but it is important to be on
these medications for a period
of time that is not short
because it takes time to recover
from the is addictions and from
these malaductive brain
circuitry behaviors thank you
president if I make a mr chair
and senator
there's a lot of hope on the
treatment their recovery side
but I would also assert in
there's some slides in my
presentation they didn't get to
the hands to do with the hope
around prevention we know that
we can build protective factors
in the children
that they can better self
regulate and some of you heard
me talk in the past about the
good behavior games which also
needs to be expanded in new
mexico it's a primary prevention
methodology beginning the first
grade that has
some of the most astounding
results and everything from true
and see an absentee ism and high
school graduation rates and
reduction and substance use
disorders mental health
conditions etc so I would have a
cater we get more upstream of
these problems we seem to spend
the balk of our resources around
treatment often times late in
the the tradratory of one slife
whereas if we're really going to
turn this round particularly in
our state we need to get up
stream and start focusing more
unpromised primary prevention
than that to me that's where the
real hope is yes thank you thank
you very much for that i'm going
to let other speak because I
know i'm taking too long but
just clarification yes or no
doctor ericsson did I hear you
say that cause I went it was
little doll here on the speaker
that these medications do work
for alcoholism addiction or just
for opioing addiction just for
operate okay so what do you have
that works for alcohol it
anything in here or not in the
system new model we're talking
about
yes thank you mr chairman and
senator.
Yes now tracks on does have some
promise with alcohol use
disorder treatment eight
certainly the
whole exams the behavioral
interventions also have the
light of excellent data behind
them to support that as well
that instrument thank you I have
to have some expertise in this
area as well
I used to anyway
in the reality is in and that's
one of the connectors to is that
alcoholics and animals and our
connects anonymous etc have been
absent space interventions and
sometimes there's kind of a
classion for somebody who
seeking recovery who could
benefit from medication since
the treatment but it goes to
yourself help grow group and uh
told you to want to do that
that's not how you recover etc
when what we know today it's
probably most applicatious way
to initiate recovery and sustain
it
thank you very much mister
chairman thank you for your
answers representative i'm
strong thank you mister chairman
and thank you for your
presentation first time ever
that it has been explained to me
what the medications actually do
so I really appreciate that
because III didn't know what it
did so can you tell me how just
quickly doctor what if if a
pregnant woman is on these
medications what does it do to
the unborn child if anything
mr chairman and and
representative thank you for
that question and so i'm not an
obstation but I have some
knowledge in this area so I can
tell you what I understand and
i'm always happy to follow up
with you with more expert
answers so in general when we
have a program actually unm
commonly grow in milagro is a
hospital service that is
specifically for women who have
a bit use disorder and and for
treating them during their
pregnancy and delivering them
safely and continuing the mind
medications to treat their op
use disorder.
So the literature would show
that before northern
historically we had used and
method on but buba northern is
very safe in pregnancy it is the
medication of choice and
treatment for pregnancy and what
we're doing now at UNM through
the smaller a program is
actually starting patience on
very low doses of beautiful
slowly tay trading them upwards
and then getting into a stable
dose that they can maintain it
through their pregnancy and
avoid using a street drugs which
would avoid harm which would be
much more harmful so there's a
lot of literature to support
that is a safe use and efficient
as practice and pregnancy
and for the child as well yes
thank you for that and so when
the baby is born is the baby
born addicted to the
poop enough people nor free
think you chairman and
representative for the question
i'm so I if it's at a lower
enough dose there's usually
maybe some small amounts of
respectory depression but not
but not
Pregnancies routinely or any of
the this or alcohol yes thank
you or alcohol
that the I when they deliver
those babies often are very
impacted and have a lot of
respiratory depression and have
to be to I see you for a period
of time so these medications are
received for way to maintain
their recovery and the outcomes
for
babies are very good and that
there was babies don't have any
long term effects of having been
exposed to people in our feet in
uril thank you for that I was
i've always just been curious
about that and I had another
vision in my head of what this
was and what happened so I I
appreciate that the other
comment that I just wanted to
make is on
you know the the nine eight
eight and the response team and
everything else I think that all
sounds really really
all fine and good but in I see
here you have work in uh
conjunction with rule and
frontier areas to
uhm to help them set up this
whole system as well the
response team but you know in
rural new mexico and frontier
new mexico we still have
volunteer fire in the
so let's start there with paying
our ems and firefighters and
rule and frontier new mexico and
then we can build the program up
from there so I think it's i'll
find and good but
and that being said two of those
counties that have that are
number two number three or my
counties for for overdoors thank
you mr chairman.
You were just a member within
decent time management
representatives of
thinking mr chairman i'll be
quick and just when I express my
appreciation for both of these
slide tax um think there's a
wealth of information in both of
these doctor linds from ads
specific questions about nine
eighty I just uhm earlier this
year reviewed all of the data
from nineteen eight because like
you mr chairman and doctor I I
felt like it was maybe on under
utilized resource one of the
interesting things that I found
as even though it is getting
tens of thousands of calls
at least over the last fiscal
year less than five percent of
those calls resulted in any type
of community referral it was
actually more like three point
eight percent
it so I I just was really
mystified by that I it I just
wondered if you could shed any
light on
it does nine eight eight not
have access to robust community
for refront system are the
people calling not needing I
find it hard to believe that the
people are calling in crisis
don't need some type of
community follow up so when went
it what might that disconnect to
be
will I just so happens i'm
having dinner tonight with the
ceo protocol which is the vendor
that operates the ninety eight
crashes called center and their
new director and that will be
one of my questions for them
this evening I was unaware of
that particular data point
mister chairman and doctor i'd
be happy to email you the the
data report that I was just
looking at think you and and
secondly can you
just describe what kinds of
juvenile either crisis centers
are or a stabilization services
might be available on bernelia
county or juvenile treatment.
I know our kids in south a
rb in many cases transported a
loss crucials to receive care
were we'd certainly don't have
enough service since out of the
county but i'm just curious
what's going on in burning leo
county
mr chair
representative
the reality is that too often
young people get
in the back of the bus sort of
speak and the focus so often is
an adult services when it comes
to behavior crisis response it's
often been that same phenomenon
and just says we build a crisis
response system for adults we
need to build one as well for
youth and that work in new
mexico really legs quite frankly
we're fortunate a burlial county
is took over a decade for the
university new mexico health
care system and the county to
partner to build a new crisis
trious center we had the ribbon
cutting for that a couple of
months ago
and their crashes trious center
uh provides twenty four seven
three sixty five crisis
stabilization services
and again there are sixteen beds
for adults but they also have a
youth
sociotrick capability
intervention as well uh the is
going to be expanded with some
further developments at unm h
but that's the one new resource
that we have
thank you for that and think
they just also wanted to think
dr greenwood ericsson for all of
your work I know this is a very
difficult area of medicine to
practice it and it's it's very
appreciated.
We need you here thank you
thank you representative loohen
thank you mister chair thank you
to the presenters a doctors I
mean because we're working time
i'm just gonna get to as far as
would you been
studying and looking at in a
learning **** all to is there a
model such as
safes use site for opinions
specifically and maybe other
substances that you've been
looking at or that you would
recommend or you have any
information on
a take it first
mr chair end representative i'm
very familiar with those
concepts I actually
don't know the answer to that
question beyond I would think
they are usually set up by
departments of health or more
state white entities so i'll
turn it over to my colleague to
see your knowledge in this area
again this was another area
where I think we fall short of a
relative to youth
one of the things that the
situation your question I am
sure you've been briefed on the
fact that uh doh has provided
medication since the treatment
now in the overwhelming majority
of their public health officers
but I never asked the question
whether that service extensive
to youth or not if it does that
would certainly be an added
asset that we haven't had up to
this point
thank you mister chair more
specifically
in regards to all the
information and all your
research looking at there is a
model in a couple of states one
particularly would be in new
york these are relatively new
types of models in and programs
and one being run by the
government one but being run by
a non profit where you actually
have all the wrap around
services legislation that i've
actually introduced
in the past and looking to.
Do again but I I don't care any
of that information here because
if we keep doing the same thing
over and over we have reports
time is why these are court
systems are failing us where are
you know our special courts uh
that are not being utilised all
these sort of things we keep
hearing over and over and we're
having christes out of our
street says in everywhere in
every sector of our lives
what are we will where is the
research if there's any that we
could look to to really
substantiate doing those sorts
of things and I know you don't
have the answer for me right now
but it's something that i'd like
to further in conversation with
you are because if we're really
looking for for some uh things
to do for a public and public
health in safety then that is
something we really need to be
looking at because it's going to
provide all those services it's
going to provide a place where
people who have substance used
his order have a place to
to use the substances in order
for them to
really exist and not to
accidentally of reduce so thank
you sir chair thank you for the
time
to chair and if I might
representative as you were
talking
I couldn't tell a few words
referring to prevention over
those centers that's correct
you'll find a my slide that the
one of my recommendations that
the legislature consider uh
leastly pilot project
often times these were referred
to a safe and jackson sites but
with fent no it's not an
injectable drug and when you
took what safe injection sites
etc um
their ends up being a lot of
resistance because it sounds
like you're potentially enabling
once
a diction use etc and so I think
referencing them as a harm
reduction program in the
supervention overdose program.
Is is the way for us to go
second secondarily it would say
is that the answer as I was
trying to touch on earlier isn't
always about center based
services so those two modalities
that are very much evident space
we've tried a number of times to
implement new mexico and
ultimately they've not
particularly successful in terms
of being sustained one of them's
functional family therapy which
is a home base service and the
other one small day systemic
therapy so I think if we made
greater investments around those
two services etc
which is longer term wrap around
service in people's homes we'd
see much better results
I mean thank you mister chair
representative vincent
thank you mister chair and thank
you doctor herits and both
doctors or if you will go to
your slide doctors ericsson on
page thirteen on
the methodon
all the drugs there what's the
house life on those drugs and
what's the longivity somebody
has to stay on and before they
start to get better
thank you mister chair and think
you represent it for the
question and so methadone has a
longer half life than people are
seen and would i'll tell you is
that each of the years so method
on a buper fee are the or the
drug names and then there's
their formulated into different
formulations so each formulation
has different half lives so
methodone generally is about a
day or so people nothing can be
shorter but there are now
formulations of up in our feen
which can be much longer so
injectable but in our phone as a
product that has been around
maybe for about five seven years
at the first one that came out
was called sublicate eight
that was effective but
unfortunately with fence and all
because we're seeing people you
such.
High doses of fentinal and then
they're requiring such high
doses of this maintenance
therapy that that medication was
you had to give so many shots of
it that it was somewhat
impractical so there's another
medication now called brick
saudi treat names and bricks
showing a little promise in
trading fatile so has a much
longer half way
eight can be maintained over the
course of a month so that you
could do monthly injections so
there's a lot of interest in
that type of treatment I i've I
pretty liver patient fetter
sometimes hard to access like
patients were homeless or
patients and who may be at risk
for a day version
thank you mister chair and are
these drugs affordable are they
very expensive
thank you mr chair and
representative for the question
so these drugs in new mexico are
covered by medicaid and so
patients can access them in that
way
for private health plans i'm not
sure which private health plans
cover which of these medications
proxide that long acting
injectable that I mentioned is
certainly expensive and so
it would have to be covered by a
plan for a patient to be able to
afford it other medications the
method own a beautiful arthent
had generic versions so those
can be much more affordable but
then US hottest drugs like with
any type of um drug development
they are extremely expensive and
so the insurers need to pay for
it
to chair
representative I might add to
that one of the challenges that
we have today is a shortage of
beautiful effort not in terms of
the supply change but one of the
unattended consequence of the
opportunity a settlement by
distributors and pharmacies they
are capping of pharmacies that
are appearing to over fill
prescriptions for op products
and beautiful nephew is put into
that.
Bucket if you will and so
they're being cut off so we're
having tremendous challenges
particularly with the major
pharmacies in being able to get
these drug scripts filled and so
I wanted to bring that to your
attention because the only work
round appears to be for the
governor in the ag to declare it
emergency to override those caps
so that we can in fact use the
medication assisted treatment
keep ability that we have and
bring it to fruition rather than
running into dead ends
thank you that thank you mister
chair and I am paid twelve
again I appreciate the picture
because it helps me resignate
with with some of the pictures
because that his exactly what my
brain look like my my first year
in the legislature
in that in that order right
there thank you mister
i'm not so sure it hasn't
changed
to go to his question room would
be even if I if I wanted my kid
thank you very good but they
don't have an issue but if I
wanted to go by the open market
rate do you know what that those
drugs would cost
thank you for the question is to
chair when you say these drugs
are you referring to northern or
method on and like a cash price
for them it would be hard for me
to speculate sense
it's not exactly something that
I know from first hand
but in general people will buy
buba northern i'm as a as as a
way to treat their own drug
withdraw because they're unable
to access it from other sources
and that is a that is a practice
that's done it's often done in
settings where it's difficult
for people to access other
medications or for example on
the cursoral system.
There is diversion of things
like up in our feet and but i'm
not sure why it i'm not sure
what the cost would be
mr chair relative terms it used
to be that someone had a hair
when habit for example it would
cost them hundreds of dollars a
day and the only way they can
support their habit was through
chrome and these drugs by
comparison are relatively cheap
and available on the street I
mean my asset question because
no everybody's family has
someone right
in you try to get him help and
get him in the treatment and
there may not be help and there
is not treatment and if they
discover right hey if I can go
by this and it's a hundred
unlimited hundred dollars a shot
right and I can convince them to
take the shot and not have to
drive from
the use representatives arm
strong county from preserve to
album currently to get a shot
and you can do it at home in and
try to get their family back to
some normal series those are
things that I think I think we
would both advocate that you not
do that sure
the reality is that there are
all kinds of alternatives in
what's available on the street
in the may be presented as a
certain product it may be in
pill form and you look exactly
like the actual pharmaceutical
product etc but you have no idea
which again no i'm just talking
about getting a prescription
from him from i'm sorry I
thought you turn but not going
out on the street
i'm talking some family struggle
because they they can get him in
the treatment they can't get him
to facility they can't they know
they need help and if they can
get a prescription and convince
them to do that it would be much
easier to do for an under day
under age child but once they're
at adults you're not could be
getting a script for another
adult member
thank representative and small.
To chair thank you.
There's no thank you very much
thank you both very much
mister chair
to get medication assisted
therapy into the primary care of
setting how do we do that
mister chair and representative
thank you for the question
so I would say actually at
present that's already happening
and but we certainly need more
of it so
you know historically you know
methodon has to be you know
given to patients added at a
very specific type of clinic
grade so they'll benefit to buba
northern is that any clinician
can prescribe it in prior to
about three years ago there were
something called the ex waver
which you may have heard of and
the ex waver was a federal
requirement that clinicians who
wanted to prescribe you but
north june had to go get
additional training in order to
prescribe it now that no longer
exists which is um a very
important because now that means
every clinician you ask
prescribing authority can
prescribe you but nothing for
patience and what what we're
seeing is that you can even give
this prescription to get back to
the question of mister chair the
you know you can get a
prescription you can actually do
even home inductions of these
medications so you don't have to
be start on the medication in a
healthcare facility you can get
the prescription and you can
start it once you start going
through drug withdrawal and
there's very clear clear
protocols that you can follow so
that's another great option for
someone who doesn't want to be
entering into a treatment
program but to do it in the
conference and safety of their
home
I have another point I was gonna
make but i'm sorry i've
forgotten it primary care so
so with the with the at fault so
to speak of the x waver now any
clinician can prescribe it and
we're trying to move to this
model of integrating substance
use disorder treatment you know
across the health care system
and into primary car so I would
say the first barrier was the x
waver that's gone now I think it
is getting clinician.
Earns to think in the way that
substance use disorder is part
of general primary care I think
we're getting there very rapidly
there is an enormous amount of
interest within clinicians to
treat obese disorder substance
use disorder
because we see it to story
people's is and we see it a
story families lives behind we
as the chairman noted almost
everyone at this point has a
family member or a loved one or
a colleague or a friend who is
suffered from open is disorder
and these medications are
effective and they work and they
see lives so I would say our
primary care is definitely
coming around it's really I
think just a matter of
continuing to educate continuing
to encourage people to use these
medications I think
presentations like this are
helpful that people understand
what the drugs do how their safe
and it's really removing that
stigma that was associated with
that x waver because it was like
oh you can only use this medic
only prescribe this medication
with the specialized license
even though these medications
people northern our far saver
then something I would prescribe
like i'd be more thin so it was
just a holdover so I think times
are changing things are
improving and we're headed in
very good direction with respect
to that thank you mr chair
represents small
and another piece of the dynamic
in my experience is that when we
did have the certification
requirement the majority of them
who had it did not prescribe
and we found it part of it was
the stigmatization they weren't
sure they wanted those people in
their waiting room mixing with
their more traditional patience
in addition to that they had
their own biocese
and found it easier not to have
to deal with what they saw is
the
population that would be
problematic and what we found
was the most effective way to
overcome that was to be able to
pay for
certified peer support workers.
To actually work in primary care
and be a bridge between the
primary care physician and the
folks that were needing
medication assists the treatment
and that we found to be highly
affected
the thing about that that and I
love that sort of example
the so it's
yeah I love the example
as it relates to
well what another question and
this is what I won't go to deep
into it but the
for folks who are becoming
addicted and it's sort of
cheaper easier to your point
doctor the points you've made
cheaper and easier to become
opiated dictated now than ever
before so there is that like the
pipeline and folks who are
becoming addicted that pipeline
it's volume is increasing how we
were to keep folks from getting
into that is obviously a very
big priority
is there any has the executive
sort of engaged with
either of you around sort of
what it could look like in the
future if folks are required to
get treatment for example or if
there's sort of for folks who
were
currently substance use
addictive because frank I find
myself very much and what
represent arms trying to discern
around a gratitude for sort of
the size that explain the
effects of their drugs you've
heard about him i've heard about
him I too didn't have a good
like this is really helped my
understanding in the history of
it it has to be part of a
solution cause it's either sort
of folks got a jail and right
now new mexico is a vismal
providing math in jail we.
Thank that's great in our
correction system we are way
behind when it comes to so
there's a lot of lot of
opportunity a lot to gain
I guess maybe the the it's not
as much a question but it's a
request from the legislative
side as we consider
different choices that may be
made from a policy perspective
we've got to have you all at the
table to help guide with our
excellent health care authority
so that there is a password if
we require people to get
treatment which seems
understandable particularly when
the harm that's being cast to
themselves and to others is
happening we need to have sort
of that right away here's the
prescription at home are here's
you know because people need not
use these well what i'm hearing
is that the medication assisted
therapy that exists folks can
live healthy productive
fulfilled lives even after being
substance use addictive is that
like the big take away from me
to to go away from
yes thank you mr chairman
representative yes absolutely
people can live
fully recovered lives on these
medications and then over time
can actually come off the
medications e to be completely I
mean we consider someone in
winning on a maintenance therapy
and by that I mean there i'm put
the northern their stable
they're not using other drugs
they're able to work they're
able to participate in their
life we call that maintenance
there
over time people probably have
to be on that for a couple years
you can actually come completely
off of it and you know we
consider recovery being on the
maintenance therapy but maybe if
you could consider the next step
to be coming off the medications
people successfully do that all
the time
that's great thank thank you
thank you both there is some
offline questions around.
Exciting to hear about how
burning or county may be
leveraging the g r t and other
other ways that you're providing
matt inside that incarcerated
environment thing likely places
for us to learn perhaps another
parts of the state certainly and
the state correctional uh
facilities because mouth is not
being utilised at least what
we've heard over the past few
years mad is not being utilised
at a high rate there but we can
we can file I can follow up
offline there work with our
excellent staff amanda and
others to do that but this is
very encouraging thank you both
and great presentation chair and
director silly I think helpful
for us to know that there are
really solid solutions that are
increasing in and that we need
only really support thank you mr
chair and represent as far
if you like also relative to an
offline cover station is what
are the pluses of minus of
course in people in the
treatment versus not and
which are those process have
better outcomes
representative dixon
thank you mister chair i'm
actually really excited about
that as a follow up
presentation
I think that would be very
helpful to know and like um
other members have said that
both of these presentations are
extremely helpful in providing
just a better understanding of
of how all of this works two
things really quickly um
doctor lindstrem on your
presentation I just wanted to
say how much I appreciate seeing
community schools as one of the
items that you
recommend for increasing access
because they do think that those
amp can be extremely beneficial
and then question.
For doctor greenwood ericsson
regarding street medicine
do we
what sort of success
success rates do we have with
that you know
there are just there are a lot
of folks you know as I drive
home on central
you know that oh both unhoused
and appear to be struggling with
um you know moud for instance
and so i'm just curious how how
that street medicine works
thank you mr chair and think
you're present of dixon for that
question this is one of my areas
of passion so I appreciate the
question
so the history of street madison
actually is trace back I think
like the originated in boston
there is there's well known
physician who was thinking I
should do the hovered system
like really fancy and he is you
know in his clinics he's seeing
all of these unhouse people and
how much they're struggling and
it seems jim o'connell and you
start thinking you know what I
just seem to get in a van and
i'm a driver i'm with medical
supplies and i'm to go to the
bridges and go to the streets
and go to south boston and i'm
gonna go to see these patients
exactly where they are and so
that was about fifty years ago
forty years ago and that was the
beginning of the concepts of
street matters and so street
medicine is when clinicians go
directly into the community is
into the encampments work very
closely with community
organizations actually and often
fifth based charities who will
allow people to calm and take
showers and have clean meals and
those are good places for
clinicians to go to try to meet
with people to see how they're
doing and you often bring with
you supplies like a truck and
what will they air on something
like that ask that you can have
suppliers like common thing as
wound care
by of course with our own house
population one of the biggest
problems that they face is
substance use disorder.
And so
with these patience that we
interact with when we're seeing
them in street medicine I they
can get started on public
northean and you know many of
them will follow up at different
hospitals or with clinics like
healthcare for the homeless and
but I as you can imagine that's
quite fractured and so one of
the things it's of interest in
that population would be doing
things like those injectable
medications I mentioned earlier
and I was just at a national
conference um in california
where the california department
of health was talking about
doing uhm those types of
medications for patients through
their street medicine program so
that would be I think one thing
to consider I that is very
complicated
because the medications have to
be you know there take into the
patient prescribed there's a lot
of things that need to be in
place but I think there is a
great opportunity to be treating
patience in natwest and there
are models that are starting to
emerge around that
thank you so much thank you
mister chair.
Thank you center share
thank you mister chair
so I I know that we're talking
about opinions here mostly
in and I appreciate the medical
and all that but does that mean
that we don't have any any free
will we can't make any decisions
on our own we can't help
ourselves
mr chair and I think you and
mister senator for the question
I yes I think we absolutely have
very well their points of the
neural biological model or that
are that when the brain the
brain is a very plastic or again
you know we can change with
different stimulai different
impacts different things coming
into our bodies and also just
from our environments and so the
point of the neural biological
model is that what happens as
the circuitry of the brain stabs
functioning the way the
secretary of your brain as
functioning so it makes it very
difficult for these people to
behave in a way that you would
expect them to behave so yes of
course but i'll have very well
but the but the drugs do impact
the brain in a way that make it
very difficult for them to
behave in a way that you would
expect someone to be here who
has not been using drugs
so mister chair and senator five
minute
the way that I think about your
question is the reality is that
let's say for all of us
regarding
whatever it is that we're trying
to make a choice about that in
the universe they've spectrum of
choices this way but because of
are environment our development
our education etc we're not
aware of this and tires
inspectrum of choice were only
aware of this much of
well when you begin going down
this path of approaching
addiction that spectrum begins
to compress.
To ever greater extense so that
by the time you're addicted you
still yes you have some spectrum
of choice but the spectrum of
choice is severely limited I
hope that maybe helps miss
cherry
I think about aa
in so there have certainly been
alcoholics and my family
most of them I considered
functional alcoholics they still
went to work they did what they
were going to do
but you know they drank line
though they drink all day
so i'm not
I don't know the opined world
but I certainly know the alcohol
world
in a but I also know that that
if you're going to send somebody
to rehab in all the doctor might
give him something to get them
to the to the rehabilitation
place but eventually it's aa
that's that's
guiding them do a lot of people
drop out of yes but I think more
of them stay in stay sober in
their proud of the fact that
they were so were for thirty
days in thirty years
in soul there's no doubt my mind
what you're you're talking as
well my experience that okay
addrendline was my drug of
choice for a long time and you
know to get an address and how
you have to scare the snot out
of yourself more and more every
day
um
so I get that in an after bones
and things hurt then I would
start with my it was my
depression staged there until I
had to do it again so there's no
doubt that my mind is maybe not
it's weird is hardly but
but I do think that the that we
are not ignore
the the power of free will I
don't think what you're saying
is wrong but I think there's
more to it so thank you.
Thank you
no it's very interesting to me
because I I put them in my
backpack
and I would love for a union to
do like a you to video on like
this is available in the market
to families rate so they know
that it's out there
is a lot of don't know this like
my kids are dictated drugs and
where do they go I mean to some
center and they're going to tell
me what to do and the options I
mean they could go their local
doctoring to hear you know can
we look at this rate I think
this is critical information
that has to get out right
and get out to the open market I
mean
the good behavior games trials
told me that's a forty one to
return but it changes behavior
and you have to start somewhere
that's very interesting to me
and how we change the behavior
younger in the high school and
then move forward to see what
happened and
i'm all in the training thing
when I lose rate but to try
if you don't try then then
you're taking the options away
from people
but for unimagined love to have
your presentation on the utility
channel and they could I just
push out everywhere right to and
everybody's had it made some
neighbors lost sign right
because of it because there is
nothing in gallop
there's nothing there by the you
know you get a doctor to come in
and prescribe once a week or
something or whatever it takes
then people have an option to go
somewhere and it helps that is a
moose forward
I just think it's so unique I
mean if the press is listening
this is one of the presentations
that you really want them to
cover
and of all our stuff over the
week I mean you really want this
is a problem throughout
you really want to press the
tune this up in in c there's
here's a lot of options that we
have in here's a lot of options
to get people off drugs and.
And do that let me ask you when
you do the the the the medical
tours to the encampment train
and they go on this treatment
where do they go after that do
they want to go home to them do
they want to go where they want
to go because they'll have that
addiction.
Thank you mister cherford as
comments in for your question so
new the unhouse population some
people chronically live will be
called like sleeping rough which
means that this you know
primarily on the streets some
actually engage very well with
the shoulder system
is others I others are pretty
ready to be house now actually
eight
one of the nice things about
street medicine is that it can
work with county city is state
based organizations who are
working on trying to get people
into affordable housing and so
what's what's important about
street medicine is not only the
medical care but also the
connection and someone mentioned
as early but the community the
wrap around services and trying
to work with these people to get
them more stably housed because
many of them would you actually
very very well
and bin on treatment for open
use disorder helps them be
housed as well rate because they
are stable their decision making
becomes more and brilliant like
as you could expect and they're
able to engage in society a
little bit better as well
but but they don't want to be
around the people that are
taking drugs anymore because
they don't have that craving
running and socially they don't
connect with them i'm thinking
that they don't connect with the
many more because they don't
crave the drugs in in so once
that happens your heads want an
answer once it happens it's just
interesting to me that where do
we move on next rate if the if
the creaming is gone and they
don't want that association with
them where do they go next and
how do they they keep moving in
that step
mr chair mr chair
we probably should have another
presentation with regards to a
recovery housing options in the
whole continue
related to that
you heard senator rodriguez
asking about the linkages
program which is a voucher's
program earlier right now
we seem to have plenty of
vouchers our biggest problem
now.
Is finding
people who who own home success
that are willing
to use a voucher
so I think we need a shift with
regards to a rental assistance
the reality of what it takes for
any of us if we're going to buy
a home or rental home if you're
going to rent you need the first
month's deposit security deposit
you need good references etc
many of these people won't
present in a way and don't have
those resources etc so there's a
lot of navigation work we have
to do with them around getting
appropriate
ideas for example as well as
getting them prepared
it with what we call and there
are benefits now in new mexico
medicaid around pre tendency
supports antennas the supports
so but we can help people get to
a point where they can in fact
move into a rental property and
more importantly once they're in
it how do they stay in it and
what does it take to maintain
with living in that environment
that doesn't result in an
eviction with regards to the
issue about not wanting to
socialize with your old crowd
and peers who were users
that can be a goal it isn't
always necessarily a goal if you
had a crowd that you grew up
with in high school and and
they're still your your best
budds etc
you might still very much want
to hang out with them the
reality is is that to do so
really jeopardizes your recovery
says the whole set of dynamics
around that question as well
okay
in
our we can keep going on and
down but I I mean please create
a utibling force I mean because
I would show that out to a lot
of families especially high sc.
When you want to catch addiction
that they know they can go
somewhere no kids cut home
smoking me there
then that's a different story
kids home come home and are on
haroliner took their first fent
knowledge meeting the that link
to getting them seen here cut my
kid on thing not had a way
to stop this chopped off right
now and how do I go to my local
physician and in chart but off
right now and in
for me that's critical in in
removing that and so
thank you for your presentation
appreciate your time
with a low ways to go yet so I
guess thank you I know we both
appreciate the opportunity today
thank you remain are you.
The.
The.
I think we've hit her health
care limit today carrying so it
hit the bullet points
at the dollar amount.
Eric didn't bring us any aspirin
mister chair I could go gay some
aspirin
alright mischair members of the
committee again my name is
direction yeah the analysts for
the health care authority.
Uh all day you've heard about
mostly about behavioral health
substances disorder
medicaid
and so we wanted to cut it bring
it back at the end of the day
now
to the budget request that the
health care authority
made back on september first
so the health care authority
began its first fiscal year in
july combining the programs that
used to compraise the human
services department with the
developmental disabilities
support program and the division
of health improvement from the
department of health.
And then state health benefits
program from the general
services department
last year you all passed
legislation also to move the
health care affordability fund
over to the department that's
been moved over now but now the
department's requesting to add a
new program for just to
administer the health care
affordability
much of the reason for the
creation of the authority was to
improve their access ability
coverage in oversight of health
care in the state to improve
access over the last several
years the legislature priorities
physical and behavioral health
by creating the authority and
jecking not recruiting funding
funding into capacity building
efforts and significantly
increasing medicaid rates pay to
medicaid providers from eternal
and child health physical health
behavioral health developmental
disabilities providers and
several other provider tapes
at this point to improve
coverage the consolidation under
the authority brings under one
roof nearly half the state's
population covered by medicaid
nearly sixty thousand state
employees and local government
employees covered by state
health benefits and other low
income interview with incomes
too higher to qualify for
medicaid but they're they're
incomes are low enough for state
subsidies under under
affordability
I don't know if I mention that
the really beginning of this but
that's what i'm going off of his
under tab in your nearby
but forget to mention
it
i'm moving honest to peach two
uh federal medicaid spending and
budget growth.
With its over three point five
to one matching rate the federal
government's medicaid funds
exert significant amount of
pressure on the state to grow
its overall medicaid budget
composed of the developmental
disability support medicaid
behavioral health and medical
assistance divisions between
four eighteen the year prior to
the pandemic and FY twenty five
medicaids total budget nearly
doubled from about five point
six billion to about ten point
three billion with future growth
likely.
And so I just wanted to point
out a couple pieces that are
kind of growing medicaids
budget.
One of them is the decreasing
federal match rates now last
year for fy twenty five we
took the biggest chunk out of
that now we're looking at
smaller
federal match rate decreases
over the next few years every
year that are economy improves
compared to the rest of the
country our federal matching
rate actually goes down a little
bit so we have a better economy
but we have to put in a little
more money and to and to
medicaid and so we're actually
projecting over the next few
years that will have to uh chip
in a little more general fund to
make up for that over the next
few years so that's one driver
um medical inflation we're
projecting
medical inflations right hovers
right around between two point
seven to
two point nine percent per year
over the next five years and if
you're thinking about that in
terms of ten billion dollar
budget just a few percentage
points that can be a significant
amount of money that we're gonna
be paying into um
medicaid the other thing to
think about is we did we did
just pass that health care
delivery in access act for the
hospitals so we're doing those
hospital rate adjustments that's
going to grow the budget and
then another thing to keep in
mind is services for people with
developmental disabilities
with basically eliminated the
weight list for people with
developmental disabilities
over the last few years it takes
a few years for for them to ramp
up to fully utilise the services
that are available to them under
that under that
and so that
now that they have been on for a
few years they are starting to
utilize the services at a to a
greater extent
and that's driving up costs
also.
I just wanted to point out on
page for you can see
the budget table there
you can see the growth over the
last few years
at the end of the pandemic we
went from you know close to a
million people on medicaid
enrolled in medicaid
and then we dropped down to
about eight hundred and seventy
six thousand and I think the
department couldn't projecting
to bring on about
another twenty thousand or so
in the future or you know right
now um
but then I believe it's probably
going to level our credit bit
after that
um so i'm just gonna jump
straight to the to the page what
people's
the final page on their.
Where we have a table that looks
like this are high level general
fund high level you should be
familiar with those I mean i'm
just going to talk about the
department's fy twenty six and
just hit some of the highlights
if I twenty six request and just
it some of the highlights there.
So
this table is line numbered
there's lines down the sides I
am going to talk about line
three first and that's in the
medicaid program the medical
assistance program
so the department's questioning
forty nine million and that's
too continue the half year rate
address adjustments from the
prior year so for foy twenty
five
the department is implementing
rate adjustments starting in
january
and so that's only half of the
fiscal year of the department's
coming back to ask for the other
half of that funding for fy
twenty six
online four we have health care
inflation when I just talked
about set another forty million
dollars
line five twenty eight million
dollars for
like I said they're projecting
continued enrollment growth
online six twenty million
dollars and that's this is for
some wiser costs and some
contractuals costs and then mind
seven to have that eleven
million for f map for the best
that medical um
that's the federal federal
government's matter
and then
online eight we have eleven
point seven million for county
supported medicaid reduction
moving onto the next program
they're they're projecting
thirty million for and this is
on line eighteen for increased
utilisation within developmental
disabilities
line twenty seven this is in
medicaid behavioral health the
department requested five point
six million for this would be
the third round of rate
adjustments for behavioral
health providers we did seven
million and twenty twenty three
another seven million last year
and the seven.
The next round of that if they
got funded
in income support
and actually across most of the
divisions within the department
the department's requesting
salary adjustments and for its
employees
and she can uh the secretary can
go into more detail on that for
an income support online forty
five that's or where we get hit
with the most and that's for
sixteen point four million
dollars in there
and with the mr chairman that's
that's all they I have on their
although i'd go ahead and pass
it over to the secretary
for further comments
madam sector before you fire up
on peach tenning your
presentation and we have your
staff review those numbers
that are any number
and you can go ahead and start
it and your staff right behind
you they can look at that number
is your chair thank you for the
flag i'm gonna have my team
article look at that's fine
thank you
before you begin mister chair
can you just get clarity on one
thing
you we have some nine record
requests as well in our budget
request would you like us to
cover those this afternoon
okay
thank you thank you again to
what's coming but I understand
mr chair
thank you again I really I
really do appreciate the time
you all are spending on health
care too in particular behavior
a hall they know it's been a
long day and sort of in the
unfortunate dreaded three
o'clock hour so we'll try to
make it exciting her for you all
um I am here to really talk
about our budget preview
recognizing that um two things
really one is that we will
continue to work in partnership
with the lfc in the staff over
the coming weeks and months are
we do meet quarterly to go
through a medicaid budget
projection we have a.
Next quarterly budget projection
in october and so I would like
to invite anyone from the
committee you would like to join
in those discussions that's
where we really can get into the
detail it is early days yet we
are just did not very beginning
of that for twenty five and so
we're basing this budget be a
sudden an early projection of
what we will need and twenty six
but recognize that that will
change and we look forward to
working together I can have
minimize any gaps in those
budget requests going forward
i'm gonna go ahead and skip over
slide to address or mission
vision and goals this morning
but on slide three a minute just
give a very brief update on and
some of the challenges and
successes of the health care
authority want to be a fully
transparent about that we'll
talk about the best budget
request or nondashrecreating
requests and then we have a
couple of other requests that
are not tied to general find so
the health care affordability
find as well as I am state
employee benefits
moving on to slide for I just a
reminder that the health care
authority serves fifty percent
of all new mexicans or nine
hundred and ninety thousand one
hundred and forty one people and
the healthcare authority
includes all existing units from
the human services departmentary
what used to be called the human
services department including
medicare behavioral health food
through the snap program i'm in
our income support programs we
also now include from the
department of health the
developmental disability
supports division that overseas
the d d waver program and the
division of health improvement
which overseas and health care
facility license saying and
quality and we also now include
from the general services
department the state employee
health benefits program
uh purchasing coverage now for
seat employees and local public
bodies and from the office of
the superintendent of insurance
the health care affordability
that transition to the
healthcare authority grew the
agency by about four hundred
employees a week at about twenty
four hundred fte today.
On slide five are not going to
read through all of these but I
do want to highly we are very
excited at the health care
authority we are really starting
to see a lot of the synergy is
and the purpose for bringing the
agency together there's lots of
room to improve the way we're
working together and how we've
been doing things and state
government and so we're really
excited a couple of things they
wanted to left out for today's
presentation about how the
health care authority is better
serving new mexicans we've
identified a lot of need for a
better collaboration between the
development or disability
services division supports
division medicaid and income
support division to streamline
access to the dd waiver program
make sure that we are getting
those rate increases done on
time and just overall better
collaboration and an unimportant
to ear thing to note the
division of health improvement
which has run on deficiency is a
for a few years we have resolved
those deficiencies through
better optimising of federal
revenue that will create an
additional two point seven
million and federal funds which
will address any deficiency is
them you won't see those
requests from the agency um we
are working beauty closely at a
cross agency is to insure better
member safety and successful
care transitions particularly
around complex nursing facility
transitions and in particular
when there are closures of our
facilities that we found a lot
of synergies and working better
together where leveraging
medicates expertiers to improve
state health benefits are that
includes how we're looking at
the seed health benefits from an
actual perspective i'm in
strategizing on how we do
projections and the procurement
in the future i'm in lastly just
wanted to call out give a shout
to the child support program we
received a national award for
our work that we have been doing
to establish a parentage child
support orders and help parents
find jobs
on slide six we were really
excited this is the kind of
thing that I snired that the
health care authority to get
really excited about.
And this week the census bureau
released new data showing
substantial improvements and
child poverty in new mexico we
now rank twenty second in the
nation as a direct result of
investments and safety net
programs this is really directly
related to investments that you
all have made a partnership with
us and and I had to improve
access to food health care and
other income supports we also
want to call out the positive
impact of the snap per grammar
new mexico's a economy are
generating over six hundred
million and local economic
activity every year we will be
expanding the snap program to a
two hundred percent fpl and
expanding our senior food
supplement in october just a few
couple of weeks
unfortunate.
And there's an extra billion in
there
is from the hda that hospital
program uh that is a old rate
coming up without any extra
general fund investment those
assessments are being paid by
hospitals to leverage that
federal match but you see that
in the bottom line of that you
agencies budget our general fund
request is two point one billion
that's a one hundred and eighty
six million increased from afoil
twenty five or nine point three
percent the base request cash
drivers are really associated
with the medicaid program that's
about a hundred and fifty nine
million the development of
disabilities waiver that's
thirty four million and then
that income support request at
sixteen million are expansions
are very small this year we do
not come in kind of seeking to
her grow a bench of programs so
we are really only looking at
about twenty three point three
million in foy twenty six
expansions that's just a one
point point two percent increase
over five twenty five I do want
to highlight that are full
twenty four reversion rate was
one point seven percent and our
agencies funded vacancy rate is
the lowest I have ever seen at
two point six percent
slide nine just a high level
roller by p code in the mean
cost drivers here on this slide
in the interest of time i'm
going to cover everything that's
over a three percent increase
since that was the growth a
target that you all had
established so for the income
support administration that
general fund increases thirty
seven point five percent really
those funds would be years to
continue that eight percent
salary retention incentive for
case workers that was funded by
this legislature as part of a
snap a settlement with the
federal government to improve
the snap program that also
supports some increases in our
customer contact center and then
reducing that funded vacancy
rate to support those hundred
and fifty eight of the.
But he wrote services and we
just got a little bit above that
three percent target at five
point four percent I mean that
is really largely driven by
replacing non recurring opinions
had on that revenue with general
fund
we have and then the medical
assistant civision are that's
the administrative side of the
medicaid budget at eleven point
eight percent that reflects some
increase in contract cars there
were some reductions in our
administrative budgets after
twenty five that we're trying to
crack for their and some
additional funding for fte to
support the oversight of the
mcos and our new programs I want
to say that our medicare program
staffing is about a quarter of
what other programs are in other
states of similar size we are a
pretty understaffed anything
that creates a lot of risk for
the state with these billions of
dollars that we're talking about
it's like ten I think i'll just
cover at a high level I mister
really covered those cars
drivers are pretty pretty bunch
exactly to our budget there so
we are looking at that and
twelve
that budget total budget need of
sorry like
the hundred and sixty six
general fund grows growth in the
beast without expansions in a
hundred and eighty two point six
million a general funded growth
with expert.
Team did you have any mister
chair do you mind if I turn to
the team because this was as
widely a reference that four
hundred and fifty three at the
bottom that I caught that
there's a batch up to the
mountain there's a
miscalculation that should be
one fifty nine point seven we'll
take it out your budget
either
okay
and again I think we're are
targeting that
three point one percent is our
projected inflation rate are and
a list of about eleven million
and f m that's reflected in the
budget.
I'm on slight eleven we talked
about our case worker work force
and I just want to reiterate
that maintaining the isd work
force isn't necessary to meet
federal timelines and accuracy
standards and really proud of
the work that agency has done
our performance is the best has
ever been in the last two and a
half years we are currently
providing snap benefits to new
maxicans in fourteen point eight
days and we are providing
expedited snap benefits for
people who need food immediately
within three days so you can see
what those peaks were back in
february we have a new
leadership of that division we
have worked really really hard
to get those numbers under
control that is the result of
that work however we are at that
negative vacancy rates and our
request will include that
ongoing request to keep those
am staff
and that salary retention effort
in order to keep kind of
retaining our case workers and
keep them happy we also have
nine recurring requests to
improve training we I really
feel like we need to do that
investment for a lot of reasons
but one of the things that
happen during the pandemic was
we cut down a lot of turn and
turn over in the work force we
have a pretty new work force and
want to get them the experience
and the making these benefit
determinations
on slide twelve we also have
some non recurring budget
requests we've got ten million
in the budget for food banks
five million for the division of
health improvements improvement
that is really
an idea that we had around
trying to improve
safety standards for residents
in new mexico's boarding homes
i'm gonna talk a little bit that
about that ever slide on that
for baby house services division
we have a five point two million
request for those cbh seas
income support we have some
additional investments it
investments in particular.
Around our snap program
also in isd admin support for
some additional training you all
are probably aware that we have
a decades long consent to create
our
isd
regarding access to medicaid and
snap benefits really think that
investing and training will help
sort of get us at an exit pat
path out of that content decree
and then we have about six
hundred thousand for our kevin s
settlement to a to really invest
in making sure that we are
evaluating the quality of
services were providing that is
something that we agreed to do
as part of the cabinet
settlement and so you see that
in the budget request there and
then we have a request around
the issues of new ebt cards for
our summer ebt program those ebs
cards that are expensive and
those are the benefit cards
was insurer that was coming from
and so those cards are actually
expensive there has been a price
increase as the summer grocery
program has rolled out and we
also have some non recreating
budget requests for medicaid and
d d s dear was my understanding
that with the agency we be
brought back to discuss those
and greater detail
i'm in a skip side thirteen
that's really related to the
ccbhc is and are you all heard a
lot about that today
on slide fourteen we really want
to talk about boarding homeless
insurer this is an issue that
has transitioned over to the
healthcare authority from the
department of health and is now
with my agency um in twenty
twenty depert of health inactive
emergency rules to regulate
boarding homes
those boarding homes provide
affordable shared housing for
people who need support of
environments such as older
adults people with disabilities
and individuals in recovery
in ad twenty or twenty two
twenty two analysis estimated
that there are about thirty
seven un license sporting homes
across new max code this present
a real safety risk for some very
vulnerable new max accounts.
However due to financial
barriers meeting the life and
safety requirements is really
difficult for unlicensed
sporting homes and if we go and
enforce the current regulations
we will end up shutting down the
boarding homes and make the
harmlessness problem worse so
what i'm asking for as an
additional fund that we could
use to kind of invest in these
wording harm so that they can
meet those safety unders at
which point then I can think we
can really focus on enforcement
on slide fifteen we are
requesting some additional
phones from the health care
affordability find this is not
general fund traditional general
find it is generated by a
certain new mexico's health
insurance companies we are
requesting phones to support
a additional coverage expansion
for new mexico's uninsured to
protect a b well new mexico and
rollies from premium increases
to improve oral health by making
dental coverage more affordable
and to strengthen small business
health coverage affordability
providing more assistance plans
with lower deductibles
and then finally in terms of
state health benefits I want to
just mention that we are not
requesting any supplementals
word efficiency is related to
the found
secretary alex customer smith
already has presented to you on
the slide I just want to state
that I think there are five
things we can really do
immediately to improve the
health of the fund and the first
which we are actively engaged in
is getting better data so that
we can negotiate better prices
this is imminent this is
something that we really can do
quickly as a quick when for a
new max account we will be
engaging in the next few months
on a better price negotiation
with our providers we are really
looking hard at the pharmacy
benefit to make sure that we are
really really evaluating whether
we have the best product for the
state of new mexico we are going
to be looking at those employee
benefit here is currently that
those have not changed at the
salary tier.
For which people kind of are
tipped into a higher or lower
car sharing bracket that or for
premiums and that has not
changed since two thousand six
are and so we think that some
adjustment may be needed we are
we're doing a claims and tegrity
audit and we are insuring better
fiscal accountability in that
fund and that is our bone and
with bad am going to
start talking mister chairo and
turned over to the committee for
questions
there was one question this
morning I forget who who's
asking it that they were going
ask at this afternoon maybe you
remember the one thing I want to
ask before we really get started
on on page twelve
you said the
beer held service programs p
seven sixty seven rate was for
the can ask correct it's a wife
mr chair erm on sla twelve yes
that that item is it is for
kevin as an i'm a codefendant in
the keviness litigation would
refund that fully not do
something as for a supplemental
at the same time and mr tear
it's a one time it's a one time
expense it's not a bit budget
expense
yeah but but you're asking for a
supplemental in the bottom of
that
it should just be a special one
time funny
mr chair
we can take a look at that thing
has been just been six hundred
and seven thousand
as a supplemental like it was
going to cost more in your you
want language for example
mrperiod terry understand thank
you representative armson
thank you so much for your thank
you mister chairman and thank
you for your presentation I I
too agree on that evaluation
tool one of the things that I
heard yesterday
cyfd secretary say is that they
had put out a rfp and they had
received eighteen apple
entities applied and they were
only going to take ten.
Why would we not take as many as
we can point it comes to chuck
child behavioral health so
that's one thing the other one
is the behavioral health
services program additional
funding to support
implementation of seven
certified community behavioral
health clinics can that not be
done through the rural health
care fund um or is it are they
not in rule any mexico
mr chair representative i'm
strong I mean we we've kind of
treated the fund as a
competitive and open application
and we are outside we're going
take that fund then use it you
know guess we can connect it
back and think through whether
that makes sense i'm not all of
them are in rural new mexico in
that stage that's the rural
healthcare fund does have some
limitations on where you can
locate services but it is
something that we can take a
look at yeah I haven't thought
of that okay thank you and then
mister chairman madame secretary
i'm gonna sound like the mean
lady here but why would we
supplement
a private business
not following the rules
when it comes to these
the boarding homes I mean if
this was up i'll just say at a
plumbing business that wasn't
following the rules you'd be
shut down or you'd be fined or
used whatever I understand the
homeless issue
but we should make them follow
their rules
help them follow the rules
that's what i've been seeing
about rld and other entities
there's no pathway to see okay I
want to open open a gas station
what rules do I need to follow
what licenses do I need to have
where do I need to go to get
those and and there's no pathway
it's just like while figured out
lady you know that's what I feel
like and so i'm just I have a
problem supplementing that
I don't have a problem.
Holding their hand through the
process
mr terror representative arm
strong yeah I appreciate that
perspective and i'm not even
sure that I really disagree with
you but I do think that there is
a a problem in the current
system and that problem is they
don't get paid we don't pay the
boarding homes there's no
financial don't have any
financial incentive to make them
comply um the way you made with
a gas issue and that really is a
incentive to open for business
and so what what a have right
now is hospitals kind of
discharging people to the is
unsafe environments I can go in
and I do have through my agency
the regulatory teeth to shut
them down but i'm not sure that
will work and I I just feel like
without some kind of
some kind of counterpoint what
they would say which is they
don't they don't have money to
like invest in fire safety or
those things and people are
living kind of in and safe
circumstances without bad i'm
not sure I can do that I mean I
could I would probably just shut
them down and so we we will look
at ways of offering that
technical assistance I can say
that it hasn't been successful
since twenty twenty and so i'm
really open to ideas if you all
have suggestions for how we can
do a better job or thinking
through you know what might help
it is pretty challenging when
you don't have that financial
sort of hammer that you can say
women are with hold phones until
you improve a that's I think
their challenging party don't
have any fate there's no
financial steak in the game for
any of these providers
so mister chairman out of
secretary so these providers are
a private entity that
charge for this that the state
may not pay but they are
individual may pay is that
correct
mr chair representative I think
so I think sometimes.
Their private I think sometimes
there are just opened by
landlords and i'm not sure what
you know tools there's not a lot
of oversight in terms of the
financial side of it and so I
think
you know there's at what I would
like to do is tell a hospital
you can't discharge people to an
unsafe facility um but
I don't know what where those
people will go in the absence of
of that and so you think that's
the canon drama just trying to
create a little bit of an
investment find that they could
draft frame so that they can
make those improvements but
you're you're concerns are well
founded and i'm really up into
discussion if there is a better
path on that thank you for that
that's that's my I mean I just
we cannot subsidize our way out
of these issues we just can't
it's it's I i'm looking at
the dollar amount on the
increase
in the budget and i'm I we just
can't keep doing that I have
compassion and I
feel horrible for the people and
but we cannot subsidize our way
out of this issue and I but I do
think there's a pat through
regulations and licensing that
we can hold people accountable
if you're gonna open that type
of facility follow the rules if
you don't follow the rules
there's accountability for not
following the rules so I I
appreciate you thinking outside
the box they'll think you mister
chairman
he represented
thank you mister chair
amount of secretary you
mentioned pbms and you were
gonna start looking into some of
that how does that look are you
gonna be negotiating anything
will you be making
recommendations on legislation
mr terror representative i've
been sent at this point what am
really trying to do is figure
out what better products we
could get for state employees
i'm that's kind of my starting
point
then see if we can leverage that
across the different agency is
that o.
I'm part of the enter agency
benefits advisory committee so
you know a partner is that
retiree health and public
schools insurance authority to
see if they'd like to join up um
we have will be hard today for
state employees is a very
traditional pbm
that has some pros but it also
has some real kinds in terms of
transparency and pricing
and so there there's a lot of
competition out there now I
think it's a market has seen a
lot of entry points of like pbms
that are committed to real
transparency there are state
consortiums that have pulled
together to create state
employee pbs that we could join
so the way that i'm starting
that announced
battery done hilarious
is to get
messaged received
noted and but mister tere I
representative it's really to
try and get it replacing you
know many of them will run a
retracing analysis for free and
so we're just really trying to
evaluate all of our options I
don't think great point where
we're I could say if we would be
recommending legislation yet but
we are trained it kind of
achieves them savings and some
better pharmacy practices and
our benefits for sure
thank you mister you know we're
working with a few legislators
on some pdm stealth and i'd also
like to talk to you about that
thank you
senator woods
to quick yes and no questions
on page twelve
you got a request there for a
funding the medical food banks
is that for all the food banks
in the mexico
mr chair sender words I don't I
don't know I don't know how that
funding is distributed but I can
ask the team behind me with it
with that.
That would be a yes that's a yes
okay any other one has had been
any progress made on ebt cards
as far as putting a picture
identification on
mr chair
so okay you have mister chair
senator would you ask me for
yesterday no question is really
quick response but you're not we
haven't made progress on putting
photo ideas on cards but we have
launched a new fried system
and nat frida system actually
can detact when people are
trying to use those cards
fraudulently i'm selling usually
people will charge like a dollar
and if that successful they'll
charge a larger amount so we are
able to now identify those
patterns that just went live in
july I think and so we're able
to see when people may be
selling those ebty cards on on
the market so we have made
progress there a bigger concern
mister chair is sale of these
cards to unauthorized users
thank you
thank you represent it
thank you very much mister chair
thank you madame secretary thank
you mister
a few questions first madam
secretary on the large number of
employee full time employee the
expansion
that's
how do we look at that because
it you know as we look to invest
obvious that the huge price
drivers just around our medicaid
reimbursements and some of the
other really sort of more
refunding for more and better
results is that sort of the case
in the
with the employee expansion is
can any of that lower be taken
up in other ways
knowing that we have so many
other important in.
And I think very much shared
commitments to increase funding
mr representative I think you
know we did utilize staff
argumentation contracting for
the unwinding
there are rules in the snap
program that a merit worker as
the government employee has to
do the determination and I don't
know if you all are aware but
now we are we are required to do
a by federal law interviews
again so we had to resume
interviews are this month for
snap which is also more time
consuming and so I don't you
know we can sort of look at
other avenues for medicaid about
thirty two percent of all
medicare determinations are
meeting real time without any
touch by a worker at all we've
got to try to maximise itemation
strategies but most of our
customers are receiving both
programs and so most of the time
a mirror based worker and is to
touch there eligibility
determination because it is a
it's got snap attached to it and
there's that merit based
requirement i'm so you know I
think we're really just trying
to I think you know this there
there's been a chipping away the
administrative i'm staffing of
the agency
which I think you know wasn't
totally unfair in that we were
having a really hard time
filling positions are anything
all would fairly ask well you
know if you can if you have two
hundred vacancies at all times
like why would we find these and
that has really changed though
and turned around and so now we
are really in a position where
we don't have room to higher and
in fact kind of gonna have to be
thinking about attrition
strategy is for our case load
case workers i've really been
trying to get the team is really
hard to think about case worker
to caseload ratios like how many
do we need for our projected key
slowed and just have a
scientific request each year in
terms of staffing of that you
don't see that it's tied to
kissload and so that's really
what that a hundred and fifty
eight after years for it's just
to manage the caseload
projection.
Okay thank you thank you mister
chair thinking about him
secretary
it's a challenge but I
appreciate and we should have
been able to ask and and the
context
on the dd waiver increase cast
how do we
sort of control and manage those
costs particularly as there is a
project it is more folks are
going to be needing and joining
those services
I was the other initial
expansion or or elimination of
the waver a lot of that was done
you lising federal funds these
sorts of much higher costs
weren't anticipated again it
goes into the bucket of sort of
really aggressively rising cost
pressures and whether or not we
can sustain those now and
farther into the future
mr
representative small I mean
you're absolutely cracked that
that super allocation has its
expenses that came with a pretty
sustainable price tag and that's
really with striving it in
addition to sustaining read
increase in so there have been
read increases every couple of
years we have implemented those
and now I believe the dd program
is on a re is that every three
years every two year rate study
so it is possible will be
increasing reads every two years
I guess the the best way to
control the price increases
would be through imposing
another sort of improvement cap
I think that you know that comes
with some greater predictability
but also a challenge not serving
new mexicans
I rd director is here so if if
with your percommission mister
can ask if she has additional
feedback
and the additional back on
controlling proof you can come
up.
Hi a good afternoon i'm jennifer
rodriguez the director of the
developmental disability
supports division so we do
annually look at low utilized
services and ensure that they
are not deplicated anywhere else
that can be incorporate them
within the system or within a
different type of service model
so that would be a cost
containment strategy
we also look at
the age of people as well and so
when you talk about constant
containment we serve people
across the life span and so it's
a little bit different court
sometimes because costs do tend
to increase over time simply
because especially with our most
resent allocation at super super
allocation we brought thirty one
hundred new people into our
system and forty percent of
those people are under the age
of eighteen so they will
continue to are age of course as
we serve them across their life
span and then have access to
maybe residential services once
they turn eighteen so there are
cars containment measures that
we could consider such as
assessments that would determine
where people could far related
to a resource allocation
methodology that does not exist
right now for our largest
developmental disabilities the
dd waiver we could look at
limitations and we have not we
were involved in litigation
seven years ago which eliminated
all of our sort of budget caps
if you will and service caps so
there are mechanisms to do this
and we have as I said we had
done it we were asked to remove
it and so this is the system
today so we could look at things
like that and and I think you
know we are currently working
with the legislative finance
committee through a program
evaluation reviewing the cost
containment strategies that they
did ask us to or that you all
asked us to employ six years ago
I believe it was an you will see
that we demonstrated that we
were able to.
Utilize some of the
recommendations and we were able
to implement them however then
we were asked to eliminate our
waiting list and so that sort of
took things right out the door
when we brought on like I said
thirty one hundred new people so
it will probably be time to do
that again and consider how we
do sustain this large population
and not have a waiting list at
the same end satisfy providers
and you know cost of living
increases by rate studies and
potentially increasing rates I
think it is a very fair question
and I think that is something we
will need to deal soon over the
upcoming years thank you
represent they don't thank you
very much thank you mister chair
the in the great that the
program evaluation is happening
yeah the more that were talking
about it it's a shared point of
pride the elimination of the
weight list but you we it's
great that we have to be working
together again to sustain and I
think being in conversation with
also with the service providers
and with the new mexicans who
were receiving these vital
services and for a very long
time had not been able to
receive the services it's life
changing and out so
yeah appreciate that
I think we you you've gone over
a great deal else
noted is very positive the
decrease in childhood poverty is
there anyone component that you
were to trivia that drop to
obviously there has been a
number of things we've employed
as the legislature
increased in sort of you know
increased money for families
through the working family's tax
credit childhood tax credit
other sorts of strategies
anyone big thing and I asked
sort of as we again struck in
your work to maintain our level
of service increase that level
of service understanding sort of
the places to really be.
Careful about messing with the
uh that's why I asked that
question is your chair
representative thank you it's a
really thoughtful question I
yeah I think that the the
factors that contribute to
what's called the supplemental
poverty read our really those
income tax credits and then the
expansion of public benefits
including snap so anticipate as
we go we're going to be
expanding snapped her two
hundred percent of poverty next
month so that's going to be a
substantial increase in that
program
my understanding is that the you
know the folks who are working
on the supplemental poverty
calculation are also trying to
think about how medicaid
actually does count it is not
actually included in that
calculation but for example that
I continuous eligibility for
children zero to six that was
launched in january I think it's
a huge financial burden off of
family is an eat I think that
the folks that do that
calculation really thinking
health care should be factored
in and those medicate expansions
but it's not yet today so we
think certainly those
investments but I think there's
earn income tax credits have
been really essential in sort of
it improving and come and then
the other factor that goes into
that calculation is cost of
living so you know that's why
you see states like california
are just really kind of thinking
to a lower level when that's
factored in and so you know kind
of maintaining a a good cost of
living here in new mexico will
be really important got it thank
you very much thank you very
much mister
thank you as your chairman good
afternoon
again carry and the slice lady I
forget your name jennifer of
course I should know thank you
very much for your presentation
in your work I just want to make
a quick comment only because
we're and I was getting laid and
were pretty beat here but with
respect to the dd waiver I can't
forget mate that I don't think
anyone here can forget that ever
since I came in this twenty nine
years ago I saw.
The same numbers of people
waiting on the waiting list
approximately six thousand
people of the most vulnerable in
new mexico literally these are
the most volume near twenty four
hour care can feed themselves
developmentally delayed can't
sweep can't hear a lot of men
can't see it's it's that
population that needy population
that we're serving with a dd
waver there are six thousand
people and they had to wait up
to twelve years to get services
the list continued to climb and
they would take a few people
after waiting less and more came
in and so it just remained that
way and suddenly the list pretty
much disappeared how did that
happen well i've always in all
honesty I had a question that
how did six thousand people come
off the waiting list so quickly
worded the services came
certainly and who decided that
it turns out that some of that
information from your
predecessors came to me and and
said that apparently they
couldn't reach some people so
they took them off the list and
so others for different reasons
well quickly let me just mention
that how could they reach these
people again i'm talking about
people who can't feed themselves
or anything how can they reach a
person who is death born death
never heard sound lives in a
silent world can't speak and has
developmental delays and
partially blind how can they
reach someone by phone they said
he didn't answer the phone well
the person was daffy didn't have
a phone nobody put a phone in
this house there was no need for
a phone he had no way to hear
then he can speak you and if you
had a little hearing so at that
person comes off the list and so
I I guess with that in mind I
keep it it's like a scary
thought to think that that could
have happened and so.
Somehow the list is now gone I
understand arpa phones and what
we did there and someone thank
you all for your work on there
but I can't help but to have
nightmares thinking about the
possibility that a lot of these
people would have come off the
list without the services that
they needed so so much for that
but I have to just this is just
a word of caution and
take it for however you want to
use it but truly the the
assessment tool or a form of
assessment that we're talking
about now jennifer
I I think we have to be truly
very careful as to what kind of
assessments we do on these
people
I have been there I personally
went into a home and I sat there
with the person in the people
from doing it was unable at the
time you were contracting with
unam to do these assessment
tests on people from the dd
waiver to determine at what
category they would fall and
determine the level of services
that they would get depending on
what you are decided and the
outcome of that assessment till
said that's how they would get
their services some got more
hours by provider some didn't
depending on what the assessment
told decided well let me tell
you what mister chairman I went
there personally one day and I
said in the home I wanted to see
what the this assessment to was
about because I was getting
quite a few complaints
from people so guess when I saw
the person doing the assessment
to using this assessment that
we're talking about could be
changed around a little bit I
don't know was asking the
individual a person who couldn't
take care of himself in any way
was asking him okay here's the
next question the next square to
check in you can check it right
here and do you can you brush
your teeth
well
as best possible they explained
and try to he try to speak.
That nineteenth yes
I won't go into the greatest
detail for the sake of time but
let me tell you what I know
personally that that person
could not rush his teeth first
of all
they didn't have the right
questions on that assessment
tool the next question should
have been do you get help do you
need help to brush your teeth
but the person couldn't
understand half of the question
anyway with a developmental
delays but that question was
never asked so guess what
happens they put ya doesn't need
help to brush your teeth doesn't
need help for this in this in
this the person ended up with
the score they they were
labeling and a through a through
f I think if you if you got it
if you were very development or
disabled on dd waver you got an
e or or a d or whatever it may
be a bit pursuing to the store
the person ended up with a much
better grade
and less services and so
that was terrible bad assessment
tool
displaced taken out and I was
one of the biggest proponents
and I am happy that I stood up
for that because and many others
here supported it because it was
definitely not the right tool to
use and so I guess i'm i'm just
wanted to caution as we talk
about assessment tools for the
special population and the dire
needs that existing this
population and and that we did
oh and then one more quick thing
mister chairman is there the
enrollment cap that you talked
about carry are you mentioned
that maybe perhaps one of the
things we can do is look at you
mentioned a few things and thank
you for trying and you mention
and may be perhaps a roman caps
well you know how can you how
can you provide an in an
enrollment cap a cap of numbers
as to how many people were going
to accept in the dd waiver or on
the list itself
you know there there's no way
that we as legislators or
anybody can determine how many
people out there are a disabled
to the extent.
And that they would or would not
qualify that's where the
department comes in and in the
providers and the families or
whoever it is if they have
families a lot of these people
don't they literally have
providers come to their home to
help them and so it I just you
know who we mentioned these
things it worries me because I
won't be here next year starting
january first as you've heard
i'm sure i'm retiring but I I
would hate to see these things
go back and re generated with
the people that were here to
care for an insert we are here
truly to be their voice because
literally they don't have a
voice not only to speak for
themselves but i'm talking
literally they can't speak for
themselves there so just one at
many other little bit mr chair
and senator I do want to clarify
i'm i'm absolutely not
advocating for an enrollment cap
I think does the question was
around ideas around containing
carson
that was that was the way that
was the strategy that was used
previously not a great strategy
I think we all worked really
really hard to gather to
to eliminate that enrollment car
but it is one idea or one
strategy as the program is very
expensive
we will I think are in response
to this though kind of come back
and we can have a follow up
conversation will do more
thinking representative about
what those what those things
could be
that would be sort of the lease
damaging things but you know
always when you're looking at
controlling healthcare costs and
anything it's you know kinda
comes down to your enrollment
what you're paying providers and
what benefits you're providing
and those are kind of the big
cost drivers and so those are
where you have to look for those
levers unless you can kind of
think about creative ways to
control those cost cost growth
curves so it was I just want to
clarify it wasn't advocating for
it in wrong account thank you
thank you very much means just
just to wrap it up and on that
topic I mean for sixteen years
house here and we never been
able to get rid of that less
we finally achieve that goal
range.
In so now how do we do we have
due costs contain because you
can have other people that are
still coming on
in some services are better than
none
than waiting for five seven
years to get on that I mean
that's that's a bigger issue to
get those people services some
type of services then just seen
oh it's going to cost us more
here and it's going to cost us
more here in but I mean getting
them the basic services in
getting it started
I may be at center road rigs how
long was that list before then
twelve years it would take
twelve years of a six thousand
people and it would have heard
around sixty five hundred forty
five hundred fifty five hundred
never ended
so a lot of people would come
sorry a lot of people would come
off the list just because either
died in all honesty during that
time or something else happened
they fell off the rules I I try
to help one person mister
chairman that had no boys no
hearing he was a norphone native
american he ah I I did volunteer
work there on the side there for
him because he truly had nobody
he can speak and I did some some
signing for him
and just a express what he
wanted to say for him when I
could it turns out that he was
on the waiting list for about
ten years and then and then the
last two when we called to find
out if what the situation was
why wasn't be getting services
and they had lost him from the
thing so they want to start him
all over that's what happened
mister chairman I mean that come
along ways now we got to figure
it out rate
mr chair I mean
as senator rodriguez eight
totally agree I mean I feel like
our system of care for people
with disability is is
unfortunate and I feel for every
family member who is trying to
navigate through a system and
the concerns that they.
Have about their loved ones and
their safety and they're well
being and I know how hard it is
for families and the role of our
agency is to be glad yators for
those people uh so we we really
can stay on reading the do that
kind of prepared to also talk
about problem solving we know
the budget is a challenge and so
yeah those are the tensions that
were really struggling with
we've got an expensive program
of vulnerable population and
limited funds and so how do we
can have matched that up takes
more than me to do that thinking
I think I just would love to
partner with all of you to think
through how to solve those
problems you get something that
that's key to legislators right
and when we got to make a
determination do we want to fix
the dd waver problem or do we
want to start cutting in
whatever agency to make those
adjustments for those of our
more people those are the big
choices that legislators have to
make and people don't realize
that right to a help a person
that has no ability to help
themselves or to help an agency
that may not even spend the
money right and that's where the
political war is common and we
got to make the real decisions
in in so we're gonna look hard
to lot of their stuff in when
agencies come in what you want
me to do I got a pick rate who
do you think i'm gonna pick i'm
gonna pick the people that need
to help ray laying in a pic
buying another vehicle or
for them to crash five days
later whatever but I mean those
are the tough choices that
legislators have to make in
insurance as as everything
starting a tightening growth
we have to look at that I met
with the food banks and they
said that we can
food hunger across the mexico
for about thirty three million
and
that's coming from them they're
supposed to give me an adrian a
chart I mean that's a low price
low hanging through that we
could get in food hunger and new
mexico right that helps a snap
program.
We don't have to have as many
snap benefits it helps it
through throughout but you keep
brazing the bar on snap in the
poverty level one it is going to
keep expanding an at some point
that's going to break
right so you can keep raising
the level you're going to say
here's the level in
sometimes I don't know whether
parents can work or not work but
the snap problem every hallway
they just get pissed off as I
was standing and grocery line on
time in the lady went in there
and but two hundred dollars
worth a candy on her snap
right
and that's not what's designed
for
yes I still remember that clears
a day and then got in an
escalate and drove it.
And I I just get frustrated with
that they some of the flea
market
seemed that lately but they sell
the snap card this
in so that's not what it's for
how we get that under control
there some of the key brazing
the level I mean people i'll
keep
keep the benefits not really
look for alternatives we find
the food banks and in can end
through hundred of mexico I mean
that that's a cheaper thing to
meet to do gives them an
alternative when they're snap
runs out
but maybe you should sit down
with them guy that runs a road
ran a few bank and sell key how
do we make this all come
together at one time
instead of reason that level the
other thing is you know we are
told when he did the acce that
combining all this is going to
create lower costs and see this
money in
haven't heard any of that
it's give us more employees give
us more staff I mean the fte
situation is is not going to go
over very good the sheer until
we get the pace that he
completed and see where actually
really need to be at the higher
employees at a wage that
there they do for their job
and so we're gonna figure that
out first before we begin this
massive expansion of I need a
hundred and fifty more ftes or I
need forty five more fts will or
a pain the
you have roughly six hundred
may have to use the avenue mr
chair of my agency has twenty
four hundred please to repeat
those twenty four hundred
correctly before we add an
additional hundred and fifty
rate as it does twenty four
hundred are well trained in in
show up to work and they know
their jobs and you'd rather keep
a good employee then saying I
don't i'm in a higher hundred
and fifty new ones in that pay
you what you should be paid
cause then will really create
inefficiencies
but i'm still waiting for the
day to hear that he is creating
the lower cost for.
For and this is what you go to
all mister chair I hope you'll
give me more than a couple
months I I really you know that
agency launched on july first
thought the agency launched
jungle I first I I you know we
are working actively on some
better price negotiations this
is probably the first time in
years that the agency hasn't
asked for a supplemental to
support employee benefits and
we've eliminated deficiencies
for the division of health
improvement that they've carried
your over a year over a year I
think there's there's some
efficiencies that have happened
in just a few short weeks things
will get better we're really
excited about it I mean he
looked forward to proving myself
to you III am happy that you are
throwing down the challenge at
her and it look for return to
kind of working with you on
where we're making those
improvements I also wanted to
just make one comment related to
the snap expansion because that
is all federally funded I just
wanted to can you clarify that
no opposition at all for me
under food bank support I may
think it takes a whole network
of strategies to take your
hunger and a really grateful for
the investments that the spotty
has made into the food i'm
security of new mexicans but I
just wanted to clarify that
because that isn't costing the
general offend but two years ago
was when we started the age
start that conversation started
the framework to build that then
we passed it in this last year
rate in that kind of risk and so
one of two years of plan
internet should start at some
efficiency because you can't
wait for him see what's
happening with with recurring
money it's flattening in flat
new and it's going to get
tighter entire in so that's why
I can start off as we have to
make decisions rate is
legislature doing pick
me pick the food banks to be
picked the dd waivers do we pick
what are we pick and those are
tough choices that we all have
to vote on and we're held
accountable
and so I think those are those
are some things
I know it's a big job twenty
four hundred ploys is the
largest employer in there in any
state agency I believe.
And so better
you should take credit and just
not see
there are a couple of agencies
they are making CYFD o h larger
maybe transportation
we have the biggest budget
though you could make sense that
good and since entering your
estimate of mistake but the you
want to straighten me some hour
but I mean that that is a large
challenge it is adjusting that
so but appreciate your time we
appreciate the preview that your
pension sharpener out and get
sure calculator so we can get
pages corrected thank you mister
thank you for your time today
trolls what we need to wrap up
on
would you like to quickly go
through some of the mislaughs
business sure
under miscellaneous business our
own agency budget projections
are behind tab are running a one
percent project is surplus right
now that's looking good
the bar report on tab s most of
this is pretty routine like uhm
the budget adjustment for ped to
receive the money that it gets
from early childhood department
for pre k to send out to school
districts that and expected one
one it's new and that we got a
continue to work to figure out
is the secretary of state
received authorization through
sent but one oh eight
to basically if they're find for
election costs and collection
costs come in higher that they
can basically pay those and get
replenished from the general
phone through the state
controller
my concern is that the you had
put enough money into that
election fund to cover three
elections it's only been able to
cover the primary and wasn't
able to cover all of that so now
each election is looking like
it's going to cost fifteen
million dollars so.
Went from like you know maybe
ten million dollars in two
election years to thirty million
so
that's something that maybe we
needed to start digging into
this fall with an a program of
valuation it's not on the list
yet but there was a bar to
basically be able to start that
process and pay for the primary
primary election cost and then
know that
the november election class my
projection is it will come in at
about fifteen twelve correct me
and i'm wrong on that though but
that was every every election
ran in the stated and the mexico
whether you're running for me or
what you're rather for counting
commissioner whenever it was all
those elections were were paid
for by the secretary of state
and then they had to get the
receipts of the cost and get the
reimbursement in the drawdown I
don't have the receipt there's
there's they've put into place
good memorandums of
understanding and budgets with
the counties for their portion
they've laid out criteria for
the counties and no you can't
hire too many people but we
don't want to have to few people
to work the polls there have
been a policy decisions made by
the legislature to have
increased election cost for how
much we pay the workers for
the tapes of some of the
equipment that we're using so
but that was anticipated
but we're still trying to there
are state
secretary of state cost for
certain data contracts and
things like that that should be
pretty standard and we're still
trying to work with the
secretary of state to understand
the delta between what we
understood the cost we're going
to be when we are developing
that the budget recommendation
and what they're experiencing on
the ground today so sending the
auditor until then look
I think that's what we're going
to recommend is put is adding
them to the evaluation work plan
but not until after the.
This falls election and I with
tell the committee they're going
to have the resources they need
to run the election even though
they have depleted that fund
that's the only thing i'd point
out in the bar section cash
balances under tab t
fairly stable
the fte count behind tab u so
this is a table that tells you
the vacancy rate by agency keep
in mind is they can see rates
can be both the funded ones that
will look at
when we get into your fall
budget hearings as well as ones
that they might not have funding
for so you can see
the health care authority in the
middle has about nineteen
hundred fte that doesn't include
the temp employees that they
added
so about twenty percent vacancy
rate
generally when we've looked at
this over the last year about
half of those positions that are
vacant would be have funding and
then the other half may not have
funding and the conversation
should be when if they don't
have funding and they haven't
had funding for many years why
are you keeping them on the
books if you're able to to get
the job done and then when do
you really need in terms of new
resources that will be a key
conversation offer some people
know they keep among the books
especially you funded fte's to
do the swaps of the in the year
and more that money out for
whatever they needed
so that's where the bar report
look become increasingly
important and will have tables
for you to see how much was
barred out of the two hundreds
for those surpluses and other
areas of the budget
and then last mister chairman on
tab w is the program of
valuation unit work plan they're
a busy at work with a number of
different projects the next ones
coming up
for large program evaluations
will be the corrections re
instrument and supervision
programs evaluation.
Really doing that a process
evaluation of
how does it work where do they
release the offenders did they
drop a market a street corner
like they do the jail do they
move him to a halfway house how
are they connecting to services
if they're starting are they
starting medication assisted
treatment before they leave the
prison or they are connecting
him to employment services how
does the supervision work when
they're back in the community
all that
I realize that this summer that
we have a lot of new members and
we've done a lot of work on
education we have many high
poverty schools that are
actually very hyperforming and
we've gone out to do a key
studies on those as well as
other research and that's where
you see the characteristics of a
high performing school that's
where that came from we wanted
to look and recreate that study
postpan democrat and to see
what's changing are there's
keycactoristic still the same
how do we incentivise that when
key one is just having high
expectations for all your
students organizational culture
should leadership using data
also contrast that with the lope
low performing schools what
kinds of things do we see in
terms of practices at that
school site that could be
amiliated and to get better
results I mean there are some
high poverty schools that we've
looked at that are like an
eighty percent proficiency you
know just really hitting out of
the park so that will be an
exciting one
we have a statutory requirement
to do in a valuation of the
health insurance premium
surtacks and health care
affordability fund we've just
started that with our newest
employee dr good la that will be
ready for the committee in
january then we've got a number
of progress reports updating
prior work that we did one is on
the rail runner there's going to
be some interesting facts that
come out with that writership is
slowly ticking up but it's still
not to precovered levels
how cost effective is that
investment that we've made the
dd waiver will be a really
important.
Progress report for you I just
based on what you've heard today
we've also started a policy spot
like these aren't program of
valuations per se but it's a way
to shine a light on a narrow a
subject
funding is being deployed as we
speak for the electric vehicle
charging network
how is that going what's the
plan where they are going to be
implementing those things how
does it work what do we know
about the scale of need and the
ability and pace to get there if
that's if there are goals to
build that out
we started the quarterly status
reporting for the major non
recurring appropriations will
start providing that on a on a
quarterly basis to you like
we're doing for capitality and
i'm probably start a rating
system like we have for
capitality as well so you can
quickly tell the kind of
progress that we're making
also
at the beginning stages of
updating a project that we did a
number of years ago on school
transportation as you have may
have heard from some of your
school districts some of them
had wildly different
distributions that they received
this year not caused by the
elimination of the density
factor that was taking money
from urban school districts but
there has been an introduction
of new things within that
formula as well as enrollment
changes i'm in ratership changes
that cause some of that so we're
going to be digging into that
transportation program
finally the next priority that
we're proposing to do work on
is updating and going out and
looking at our pre cape program
in depth we've not looked at
quality of that
but we want to make sure with
the large investments that the
state is made in prek knowing
that we've had good results from
what we had pre covered are we
still seeing the implementation
of that program implemented at
about very high level to ensure
that we're getting the kind of
outcomes and maybe better
outcomes than what we had.
With the program free covered
and below that you see a parking
lot of potential other projects
including the election costs
will be listening intently awful
to your conversations
as a committee on the budget as
well as other internet
committees to anticipate what
kinds of research we can do to
help answer questions that you
consistently are raising
throughout the fall and the next
legislative session
with that mister chairman
lec participate on those
education studies we work very
closely with them usually not
like you'll see
presentation tomorrow at a joint
presentation where they both
were both l c staff and LFC
staff were evaluating some below
the line
appropriations to see how
effective they were so we're
been working very closely at the
staff level with with alliancy
but but going over this modeling
for these reports and programs
alan lec is not doing any of
this work
not on some of this one and we
would involve them at whatever
level they want to participate
if they want to do work on the
school transportation when we're
willing to park it with them
they do have a a separate
workplan that they're working
through to deliver content to
their committee as well and I
only say that because they they
say all of these are we stuffing
on our toes on educational
issues right but if they're not
covering that someone has to
cover it to both why aren't
reforcing them to participate
with us of it they get that
they have to do the work in not
just complain about the report
we can reach out to the interim
director about that
I mean
they just complained about their
important about the work so
given some of the work
themselves at the meeting
so I would yeah I would like to
update the committee on a couple
of items.
When you can start looking at
our website you're going to see
an increasing number of
interactive dashboards
that you can go and pull data at
your own leisure and see it
visualized that we are in the
process of getting all of our
staff a new microsoft called
power bi and basically it's
their ability to to merge and
use lots of big data in being
able to visualize it is it for
analyzing we're going to have a
bunch of these things internally
but we're also going to be
putting a lot more out publicly
facing you can go online and see
the general fund detail of the
different revenue sources that
go into the general find all the
way back to the nineteen sixties
and it kind of growth rate that
we had in nineteen seventies
versus the eighties how much was
coming from severance taxes
versus personal income tax
there's also one where we're a
scraping data from the sunshine
portal on risk management claims
and a reorganized that data and
a more useful easy to understand
format
so if you want to see how much
cyfd was paying out and see what
in civil rates claims that you
be easily able to do that and
then what it looks like over
time so there's going to be more
of those things probably a lot
of which you get in volume three
are probably going to start
getting published but just know
your staffer are getting into
that bigger data analytics
internally and will get folks
trained up on that
any other questions
do you think senator dollars.
Thank you
charles
do we have any information on
how the program with all from
the state for a straight of the
hotshots as a how that is going.
We can get an update I think the
two cruise that you funded
have been stood up there I don't
know the status of the facility
space that they were looking at
over near story lake uhm but we
can check to see what kind of
work in activity is going on
with those hatchet teams very
well thank you
you'd think we are to do a
budget review or death we have a
good executive before each
budget review like we used to
and then talk about over him
here in the morning in the
afternoon and look that before
we hear budget hearing to go
back to that format.
And mr chairman were prepared to
do whatever you like
the
yeah I mean basically it's
reviewing the with the staff
recommendation will be
at a very high level we can also
do that the week before
virtually it does or other
options and suppose to go into
executive session
thank you mister chair I think
the week before you the the zoom
briefings are a great
opportunity to sort of get ahead
it gives us the materials I know
a lot of a lot of our members
really try to dig into the
materials ahead of time and so
that week before actually turns
out to be super helpful and I
think reads to really good
understanding and engaged
and it will be a bigger deal
mister chairman when you get
into the bigger agencies and
november in december so you've
got time to think about it
november is going to be all the
mostly small agencies
I don't not a lot of money in
october.
Link were good thank you for our
staff sorry turn my guy that
they have live in bars for you
at this this event but every
other one
well thank you guys I guess
we'll see everybody tomorrow
at the same mail tonight at five
thirty and then
tomorrow the locations at the
trisco high school so make sure
them but that in your google
maps and don't show up here
because it will be empty.
Hello what is adequate time.
I'm only come off the top of the
major okay so when you get off
the freeway just go west and the
road ends it's reather can miss
it however there is some
construction right before we get
on the bridge chair and so that
is always a slow down so you
might want to give yourself from
the freeway exit i'd give
yourself about twenty minutes
yeah.
Why it's all over the place when
the kids get there I don't I
don't know honestly in a way to
return we start tomorrow at
eight
think schools and yeah i'd give
yourself twenty twenty five
minutes when you get off the
freeway because you never know
about that gap that's being
redone right before the bridge
right representative
john
is there being able you direct
traffic into the parking lot we
get hung up but could you could
you publish your cell number
representative daily crew and
you gotta get him a special
office
you can always go up to nine
mile hail turn right and come
back down the other way
in it may be shorter in time not
in mails okay thank you guys
appreciate it see you tomorrow
