Uh, I cover educational data
issues, all things data, uh, and
today we're going to talk a
little bit about uh data quality
from our perspective as
researchers for you. Uh, we did
talk a little bit about this
yesterday, so we'll sort of keep
reinforcing that theme of high
quality data leads to high
quality analysis leads to high
quality policy. Um, I'm joined
today by uh, Paige Kowalski,
who's the executive vice
president of the Data Quality
Campaign, a national nonprofit
that deals with data issues in
other states, uh, and uh
particularly help states try to
transform their data systems to
be more transparent, more
responsive to the needs of
stakeholders so that you all can
get the data you need to make
better decisions. I'm also
joined by Michael Smith and
Stephanie Mays, who are doing
some work out of uh iCASA in New
Mexico Tech. That's the
Institute for Complex Additive
Systems analysis. I got it
without reading it. Um, that is
a, uh, a group out of New Mexico
Tech that's been uh studying
data governance based on
appropriation they got this year
to begin some work on data.
governance, do some asset
mapping of what is happening
regarding data governance across
the state, uh, and then bring
recommendations to you all about
a path forward. So, um, I wanted
to begin the presentation, uh,
with, with a little bit of kudos
and uh acknowledgement of the
work, uh, of some folks in the
room, uh, the public education
department is uh has been really
great to us this year, uh,
providing data whenever we ask
for it, uh, giving us the data
that we need to, to put together
these reports for you all. Um,
And they they work really hard
to do that. So I want to give
them my thanks and my
acknowledgement of that, um,
before we begin, sort of a
difficult conversation about the
quality of that data. Um, and
second, I want to uh acknowledge
Joey, who is in the room as
well. Uh, Joey, you heard from
earlier this year, uh, when we
were in Los Alamos, uh, is the
director of the New Mexico rise,
the longitudinal data system is
currently housed at HED, um,
any, any conversation about data
governance, uh, particularly in
other states, uh, it talks about
interagency data governance or
getting all of the agencies that
contribute data to the
longitudinal data system to work
together to, to make sure that
that data is high quality.
Uh,
beginning with the staff brief
on page one. I want to highlight
just a couple of things for you.
So, uh, when we talk about data
quality or high quality data,
data, uh, we can begin with sort
of the bottom of page one, a few
terms or a few hallmarks of what
we consider to be high quality
data.
So data quality, uh, there's
many, many things that you can
use to uh track the quality of
data, but what, what I
particularly think are sort of
the five baseline things that
you need for a high quality data
set, uh, or accuracy data in
that data set should be
accurate. They should be
accurate reflections of the true
nature of things in the world.
Uh, completeness, we shouldn't
be missing any school districts
if we ask for a data set that is
for a statewide uh analysis,
consistency, or that the data
should be able to talk to each
other from one data set to
another, they should be able to,
uh, be merged together pretty
easily.
Granularity or or sort of the
level of the data, right? So if
we're doing, uh, an analysis of
student proficiency rates that
should be at the student level
and if we're doing school
proficiency rates, that should
be at the school level and at
the district level and so on and
so forth. Uh, and it makes it
very difficult if we're trying
to do a student level analysis
using district level data.
And then finally timeliness or
uh the idea that data should be
available when you need it uh to
inform the policies that you
are, you all are going to be
looking at during the
legislative session. We need
data in advance of the
legislative session so that we
can build those analyses for
you.
Uh, I've been talking a little
bit about why you all need data.
Uh, I do want to, in the middle
of page two, just remind you all
that everybody needs data and
everybody needs data for
different purposes. Uh, so
families need data to answer big
questions about students'
journeys through high school and
into the workforce, school
school and school district
leaders need information that
allows them to quickly target
interventions, uh, and
policymakers like you all need
data about whether your
investments are having their
intended impact. And even PED
relies on data to
denied implementation of
programs. So, uh, understanding
how schools might be struggling
to implement a program is
something that they can pull.
From high quality data.
Uh, I want to sort of give you
all a peek behind the curtain
here, uh, into our perspective
on data, uh, the type of work
that we do for you and how data
quality impacts our work and
impacts um your ability to, to
understand how your investments
are working. Uh, so we'll start
with the work work plan that you
all approved uh early this year.
So you all approved a very
ambitious work plan. It was very
lengthy, um, but there were 4
things on that work plan that we
considered sort of program
evaluations or we want to.
to take a stab at program
evaluation this year. And those
four things were our evaluation
of the family income index, uh,
a study of structured literacy,
a study of career and technical
education outcomes for students
and the teacher clinical
practice models that you heard
yesterday, uh, and he gave a
great presentation on.
During each and every one of
these projects, uh, issues
related to data quality
presented significant challenges
for us to uh analyze the impact
of your investments. Uh, we'll
walk through just a few of those
briefly or FII analysis or
family income index analysis,
uh, was hampered by a lack of
granular relevant data. Uh, we
initially wanted to see how
schools spending decisions of
the FII funds that they got
impacted whether or not the
those schools were successful.
Unfortunately, the data were not
available in a way that allowed
us to understand how the family
income index was specifically
spent at each school. We
couldn't make any sense of, of
how schools were spending their
family income index to get the
results that they got to. So the
the results of that analysis,
well, it sort of depends, right?
Uh, some FII schools are doing
well and some are not, and
here's what we found um based on
schools capacity, and then there
was a little caveat at the end
of that analysis.
that said, we need to improve
data quality or we need to
improve data reporting practices
on FII expenditures. Uh, the
second analysis that I'll call
attention to here is the
structured literacy analysis,
uh, you all heard last month,
uh, Merritt and I gave you a
presentation of structured
literacy initially because
structured literacy is a program
for teachers to train teachers
on the science of reading. Uh,
we wanted to look at what is the
impact of that training for an
individual teacher before they
got the training after they got
the training, right? So that
requires 2 years of analysis,
and it requires us to know which
teachers got that training in
which years? Uh, unfortunately,
data doing data at that level of
granularity were not available
and so we shifted gears and we
said, well, these schools were
considered model schools, these
schools were considered support
schools, uh, and so we'll do an
analysis of whether that was
effective, and the resounding
answer at the end of that was,
well, it depends. Uh, some of
the schools do really well, some
of the schools don't, and we
would love to.
have better data on, uh, the
effectiveness of structured li
literacy at the teacher level,
uh, see how those teachers
impact individual students.
Uh, finally, uh, our CTE
analysis this year, this is
probably the biggest gap in data
that we faced. Uh, we wanted to
understand how students
participation in a CTE program,
uh, impacted their outcomes and
uh we did not get any data on
student participation in CTE
programs, uh, and this is
despite the fact that we know
this data exists because we have
to report it to the federal
government every year, uh, for
Perkins. So we know this data
exists, we know which students
are, are.
doing, uh, CTE programs, but we
as staff for you could not get
that data to do an analysis of
whether we could see any
outcomes, better graduation, uh,
better, uh, proficiency rates
for those students.
Uh, I won't totally rehash what
Annie talked about yesterday.
Uh, there are some new faces
today, so I will sort of go a
little bit into detail about
what we saw on the EPP analysis
or the analysis of teacher
residencies, teacher clinical
practice. Um, at the top of page
3, you've got a little table for
you, um, that has some
anonymized examples of some of
the things that we had to clean
or deal with in the EPP data
sets that we got. Um, so you can
see on the left, uh, so
SE data set and then on the
right, uh what we would consider
to be a more clean data set that
would be easy to analyze, and
you can see on that messy data
set, first of all, there is a
thank you. I'm going to advance
this. Um,
So you can see on this messy
data set, uh there is uh uh an
ID number that was unique to the
students at the EPP, but that
wasn't unique to their state ID
number. Uh, and so as a result,
we had to merge data sets based
on teacher names and you heard
Annie say uh yesterday that
that, that caused a lot of
issues. Uh, the reason for that
is that the names weren't
matching between the state data
set and the EPP data set. So you
can see, uh, the name field in
that.
messy data set, things like uh
Alexander Hamilton. It's not the
same as Hamilton, Alexander,
right? And that would not be
caught in this uh merge that we
did for names, uh, something
like George W. is an incomplete
name and I don't know if you're
talking about George Washington
or a different George W.
Uh, John Q. Adams would not have
been caught because there's a
middle initial there and Samuel,
Sam Adams, uh, would not have
been caught because uh there's
um the inclusion of an
additional name in that
teacher's name. So that that's
the reason that when we tried to
move from the sort of messy EPP
data that we got to this cleaner
sort of statewide data set. Uh,
we've lost a lot of the data
that we wanted to analyze, uh,
and you can
at figure 1 at the bottom of
this page, uh, that step right
there in the middle where we
match teachers to IDs by name.
We lost about half of the
teachers that we wanted to
analyze.
I want to briefly talk on page 4
of your brief about the data
sharing process that uh LESC
staff worked with the department
to get the data that we need to
answer your questions. Uh, the
first thing starts all the way
at the beginning of the interim
and it starts with that LESC
work plan that we talked about
earlier. Uh, one of the problems
with our data sharing process is
that we create our work plan in
a vacuum. Uh, the work plan
that, that you all approved that
was
super ambitious, uh, was an
attempt to uh put together some
ideas about what would a high
quality evaluation of these
programs look like, and what are
the data that we need to answer
those questions. Uh, part of the
problem with that is that those
data, while we think that they,
they exist, they might not
actually exist, or they might
not be in a format that allows
us to analyze them.
And so, uh, be thinking about
that in terms of sort of that
long term planning and vision
conversation we had earlier this
morning, right? Uh, if we're
creating our work plan in a
vacuum about the, the ideas, uh,
that you all want to look at
over the course of the interim,
uh, it might not be effective
because it, uh, PED is not in
the room creating that work plan
with us or telling us what is
possible, what isn't possible,
what are collected.
Uh, sort of on that note is the
second item there, PED data
systems primarily serve the
department's operational needs.
So PED collects data uh in Nova,
for example, or in OBMS uh to
track enrollment to track
student enrollment and to report
on that or to monitor schools
compliance with a particular
program. Uh, they don't
anticipate when they're
collecting this data that uh the
legislature will use these data
to inform uh analyses during
the, the interim.
So in some ways, uh, we don't
really, uh, the data are
collected in a format for which
they might not have intended to
be used, uh, and so, uh, that,
that creates issues when, when
we start to use data for ah
things that that might not have
been captured in the data
system.
Uh, the third issue there is
that PEB maintains many data
systems across its many bureaus,
uh, and each of those data
systems sort of lives within a
bureau at the department. So for
example, the uh the IT arm of
the department oversees Project
Nova or Stars as it used to be
called, um, the assessments,
research and evaluation, sorry,
assessments, research evaluation
and accountability bureau or
area um manages their school
proficiency or their school
assessment data sets, uh,
And their school budget bureau
manages OBMS. So all of these
data systems sort of have
different rules, and there's no
guiding policy across the entire
department about what needs to
be included uh to make the data
systems talk to one another.
And then finally, uh, on the
next page, uh, quick shout out
to PED's Policy bureau and uh
once you sort of take some
ownership and some
responsibility of the fact, uh,
that we asked them for a lot and
they do a lot for us. uh, and
they are heavily burdened by
legislative requests. So we've
got a spreadsheet that, that
they maintain that, that we have
access to, to track uh the
requests that we send them, uh,
since June of this year, we
have, uh, both us and LFC
combined.
I've asked them for 120
different data sets and uh of
those data if you sort of like
equate that to the number of
weeks it's been since then.
That's about 6 data sets per
week. Um, that is a, a
phenomenal workload for the
department and it gets in the
way of them analyzing the data
that they, that they can do. So
they have a bunch of policy
analysts in their policy shop,
uh, who want to to do this type
of work that we do, or I don't,
I won't say that they want to,
but um I won't.
claim to know what they want to
do with their time, but, uh, a
lot of their time is filled up
by uh answering uh LESC's
request answering LFC's
requests. And so, uh, quick plug
that if some of this data were
made available online in a way
that we could query it very
easily, uh, that could solve,
uh, vast majority of those lists
because we're typically asking
for the same thing every year.
All right, let's shift gears to
the main topic at hand. I've
sort of laid out the problem for
you and data quality. Uh, I'm
going to propose to you, uh, one
solution that has been effective
in other states as this idea of
data governance. Uh, so what is
data governance? It's, it's an
umbrella term, and there's no
set definition for it, so I've,
I've provided for you, uh, in
the middle of page 5, a couple
of uh definitions that uh tech
organizations use for, for their
data governance.
policies. So Microsoft, for, for
example, define state government
governance as a system of
internal policies that
organizations use to manage
across, uh, manage, access and
secure enterprise data, uh,
Google includes additional
details in their definition,
data governance is everything
you do to ensure data is secure,
private, accurate, available,
and usable, including the
actions people must take, the
processes they must follow and
the technology that supports
them throughout the daily life
cycle.
Uh, the National Center for
Education Statistics talks about
state education, data governance
specifically, uh, and those
initiatives typically have 3,
domains or they focus on three
domains and those 3 domains are
listed in table 2 on page 5.
those are greater organizational
coordination, higher quality
data, and improved usability of
data. And you can see listed in
table 2 the benefits of each of
those sort of focus areas of
state state data governance and
initiatives. So under
organizational coordination, uh,
it helps establish a clear
ownership and responsibilities
among the departments that deal
with data. Uh, it reduces and
eliminates redundant efforts. It
can facilitate more frequent,
better quality communication,
and it can standardize business
practices over time.
Uh, the benefits of higher
quality data.
It brings errors and
inconsistencies to light before
the data go out to, to the
public, and it can improve the
accuracy and reliability of data
when it's used for the types of
things that we do with it, uh,
to evaluate legislative
investments.
And finally, improved usability
of data, uh, it makes data more
timely. It increases data
security and it can improve how
data is used to inform practice.
So very briefly, uh, I'd like
you all to turn with me to
Appendix A, uh, Appendix A is a
very tangible walkthrough of
some of the data quality issues
that we just discussed regarding
the teacher residencies, uh,
In the column on the right, you
can see some sort of callout
boxes there, pointing to
specific issues or specific
breakdowns that happen in our uh
in our evaluation of EPP data,
uh, sorry, you have teacher
residency data, and you can see
how data governance might have
improved that, uh, particular
problem with the data that we
faced.
So, for example, on the LESC
work plan, uh, if the LESC were
to uh establish a research
agenda in collaboration with
sort of a data governance
council or oversight group, uh,
you could set a statewide
research agenda and that
statewide research agenda could
be for everybody so that
everybody knows what needs to be
collected and uh what needs to
be evaluated.
Uh, you can see where we started
to see issues with the accuracy
of data that a data governance
policy could improve staff's
capacity to evaluate their own
data so that they, they aren't
reporting inaccurate data to
LESC.
Or to PED.
Uh, data governance policies
could require everybody to
report the same data, uh, and do
it on an annual basis.
Data governance policies could
make sure the data sets are
examined for completeness before
they are shared with the public
or with LESC, uh, policies could
require all reports to include
necessary information such as a
unique ID for teachers that
allows us to merge data sets
together.
Policies could ensure that data
are shared in a timely manner,
uh, such as 30 days after a
request is made.
And then finally, uh, data, or
sorry, not finally, data
governance policies could make
sure that your validation, the
validation of student assessment
results, which is one thing that
you all rely on happens sooner.
Typically, we'd like to have a
student assessment results maybe
in August or before the start of
the next school year so that we
can understand sort of our
baseline going into the next
school year, uh, we didn't get
uh validated assessment results
until earlier this week, uh, or
I'm sorry, it was, it was last
week. Um, and then finally,
strong data.
governance will improve the
quality of data, uh, and we'll
ensure that the analyses that we
put together for you are more
reliable so that you can use
them to make strong policy
decisions.
All right, let's turn back to
the brief itself, and we'll
start going on page 7,
discussing how some other states
have dealt with data governance.
Oh
I would be remiss if I didn't
mention, uh, we've been working
on state AI policy this year.
Uh, we, you all heard from us,
uh, in, I was in Chama. Um,
that, uh, so that AI is really
taking off that stakeholders are
beginning to use AI and that uh
we need to sort of develop a
coordinated state response to AI
to make sure that uh when it's
used, it's used to improve the
quality of education, uh, rather
than substitute for a teacher in
the classroom.
And so we've been uh working
with Future Focus Education, uh,
going to policy or stakeholder
engagement sessions with them,
uh, and have a few bullet points
here on those themes that emerge
from those stakeholder
engagement session sessions, um,
all of those themes are things
that a statewide policy for uh
AI should address. Uh, and as
you read through those themes,
some of these are things that
need to be sort of consistently
evaluated, um, making sure that
somebody is paying attention to
that.
there was some body at the state
level responsible for data
governance, uh, our proposal is
that that body might also be the
appropriate place to house uh
state AI policy, and you'll see
when we talk about other states,
how other states have sort of
arms of their governance
councils or advisory councils
that are supposed to focus on
specific things, maybe one arm
of our data governance council
could be uh the AI Data
Governance Council. Uh, all, all
of that is to say that PED is
working on
on a uh statewide AI policy,
they are collecting stakeholder
feedback from across the state,
uh, and we anticipate that
that'll be put together sometime
in the next few months.
All right, data governance in
other states. Um, so a lot of
other states established their
data governance bodies as sort
of councils or sort of these uh
interagency work groups to uh
manage their longitudinal data
systems and uh so we've got a
few examples of that for you
here. Uh, the first one is in
California. Uh, they've got a
California cradle to career or
C2C data system, that is sort of
put together as a longitudinal
data system and govern.
by a 21 member governance board,
uh, and you can see the members
of that governance board are
listed on
Page 7
Um, and they include the state
superintendent of public
instruction, institutions of
higher education, the student
aid commission, uh, states
commission on teacher
credentialing, health and human
services, labor, educators and
legislators. 21 members is a lot
of members, but
California is a big state.
Um, the governing board also
oversees the work of the Office
of Cradle to Career Data. That's
an independent neutral office uh
that's created to build the data
system and to ensure wide,
appropriate and legal use of the
data system and the governing
board also hires the executive
director of that independent
agency.
And you can see in the last
paragraph there, um, to
facilitate that work and
creation of the data system, the
legislature appropriated $2.5
million split across several
entities that would be doing the
work.
Uh, in Colorado, uh, they
created a longitudinal data
system and an accompanying data
of governance board, uh, and the
bill doing it established the
governing board that is composed
of 5 members, uh, with 3
advisory members as well, and
that includes the CIO, uh, the
state CIO, the director of the
early childhood department, the
commissioner of Public
Education, uh, director of the
Department of Higher Education,
and their director of labor and
employment.
Uh, and then there are
additional advisory appointments
by the governor, the attorney
general, and the state board for
Community Colleges.
Uh, once again, they, they uh
break that big group into two
smaller advisory boards. Uh,
there's a systems build and
implementation advisory group,
which is very technical and very
focused on the technology
required for the data system and
then a sustainability
interagency advisory board as
well.
Uh, in Kentucky, Kentucky, uh,
established what's called the KY
Stats or the Kentucky Center for
Statistics. Um, that is a
semi-independent agency uh that
is uh also in charge of
overseeing their longitudinal
data system, um, but they also
serve a number of other
purposes. Um, they, they serve
as sort of this, this
independent agency that
collects, analyzes and links
data across multiple sectors,
multiple programs, uh, and they
provide high quality analysis
based on
data in all of their systems,
uh, to, to, uh, hope to inform
the work of their legislature.
Uh, and you can see that KY
stats over time, they grew from
this body that was supposed to
uh only manage the longitudinal
data system to a body that would
uh perform that high quality
analysis.
And then the final example we've
got for you is Virginia. Uh,
Virginia is sort of an
interesting, unique case.
Virginia has actually had a
longitudinal data system since
2012 and over time, the uh
issues and communication and
collaboration among those uh
data systems create a lot of
fragmentation and so, uh, the
Virginia actually put together a
task force or or work group to
study uh the the processes that
are happening right now.
and then come up with some kind
of coordinated plan, uh, for
streamlined governance structure
in the future. So they, they're
sort of visiting this as like an
ongoing piece of the work rather
than uh uh sort of building it
from the ground.
All right. And then on page 9,
final page on policy
considerations and
recommendations for you all. Uh,
and this is where I really hope
to get some of your uh input,
uh moving into legislative
session. Uh, for those of you
that are interested in this
issue and want to take it
further, uh, let's work together
and figure out what structure
works best. Uh, I also want to
put in a plug. I hope to work
very closely with, with the
individuals in the room that I
mentioned earlier that are
already working on data
governance, um.
Because it's very important that
we're all in alignment on this.
So, uh, we've got some options
for you here.
Listed in ranking order from
there sort of lowest complexity,
but maybe lowest effectiveness
to highest complexity but maybe
highest effectiveness, uh, at
the very bottom. And so, uh, so
starting from the top, you could
establish some statutory
standards and deadlines for data
sharing, and you could uh put
together something that says,
you know, we, we need our
proficiency data in August every
year and we need our teacher
workforce data in uh September
of.
career and things like that,
that would, uh, establish sort
of this stringent timeline for
the department, uh, to get us
the data that we need. Uh,
reason that might not be as
effective is that it doesn't do
anything for the department's
capacity to do some of this work
and it doesn't streamline any of
the efforts. It just sort of
says, this is what we need and
this is when we need it. So uh
step up from that is uh uh
statutory provision that could
require PED to establish some
internal structures, uh, if, if
you all sort of create those
guidelines and statute about
when you think we need data, uh,
we could, um, a PED could put
together uh some internal
policies governing that, and you
could require them to meet
certain standards in those uh in
in statute, essentially.
Uh, your third option is, uh,
sort of a task force, right,
that would get everybody in the
room to talk about data
governance, uh, this might not
be super effective for a couple
of reasons. The first is that it
really slows down the timeline,
uh, you all sort of need the
data, uh, tomorrow and um it's,
it's not, uh, you know, taking
another year to study the issue
and create a task force to do
that. Uh, it doesn't, doesn't
make, you know, it, it gets all
the right people in the, in the
room to have the conversation
and make sure things aren't left
out, but it is a little bit
slower than moving forward. And
it's slightly duplicative of the
work that's already happening at
New Mexico Tech, as you're going
to hear, um, they've already
done some great work on figuring
out what state agencies need to
move forward.
Your 4th option is an
interagency data governance
board that would sort of mirror
some of the other boards that we
just talked about in other
states. Um, this could be
something that includes, you
know, PED HED E C E C D C Y FD
get all of the people on a data
governance board, uh, and start
to have the conversations now,
uh, rather than a task force
that would take a year before
that conversation happens.
And then finally, your fifth
option is to, uh, in addition to
that governance board, establish
an independent agency that would
sort of oversee the work of that
governance board that would act
as sort of neutral staff that's
responsible for collecting and
cleaning all of that data. And
if you want, uh, could be
responsible for making those
reports when necessary. So those
are your five options. Um,
they're not.
Um
Independent of one another, you
can do sort of any number of
these things together, um, but I
wanted to present them now,
certainly sort of a foundation
of where we might be going
before I hand it over to the
rest of our panel. So, uh, thank
you, Mr. Chair, and I will turn
over to page now.
Yeah
Chairman Romero,
members of the committee, can
you hear me? Do I have to get a
little closer, maybe?
OK.
I think we're good. Um.
Thank you for having me here
today. Um, thank you, Director
Cina, and to Tim as well. Um, I
think you're in really good
hands with these two. That's a
brilliant report. I think this,
um, is something I've been
working on for 20 years. It's
not super intuitive, so I'm
always impressed when people
just pick it up and start doing
the research and come to the
same conclusions that I'm about
to share with you. So hopefully
this won't be too boring, um, I
am Paige Kolski. I'm the
executive vice president of the
Data quality campaign. We are a
national nonprofit nonpartisan.
And, uh, policy and advocacy
organization. We're based in
Washington DC. We've been around
for 20 years and um, and our
mission is simple. We just
advocate um to change the role
of data to ensure that it works
for everyone navigating their,
their unique journeys through
the education and um and and on
their workforce journey and
We primarily, um, I, I would
say, you know, 90% of our work
really is helping folks like you
think through state policy,
state data systems, what does
that look like? all grounded in
best practices. We're not making
anything up. We really do kind
of go back to what is working,
and I would say after 20 years
of having these conversations
and working pretty deeply with
almost every state, um, the, the
kind of examples that Tim just
shared with you, the, the ones
I'm going to share with you are
are one of the few things we
feel very certain.
about in terms of what works and
what doesn't, um, as far as best
practices go.
So I always like to ground any
data conversation and why, why
are we collecting all this data
we can get down into the weeds
really, really quickly about
data, but I like to bring it
back up and talk about why this
matters, as Tim mentioned, you
all need data, um, so that you
can understand what programs are
working, what should you be
investing in, what should you
not be investing in, but at the
end of the day, we're all here
because we're trying to help
young people and adults alike
navigate those journeys, and
this infographic just tells that
story really well of what that
looks like when
young people are starting their
education journey in their early
learning experience all the way
through into their career and
these key transition points
where you need information. Tim
talked about the lack of CTE
data. You have young people
engaged in CTE programs, and
they're not sure what's on the
other side of that. And prior to
making the decision to choose
CTE versus another path. It's
always helpful to have good
information about if I know I
wanna be a nurse, which this
character does. Is this a CTE?
is this community college, is
this a 4-year program? Should I
join the military and be trained
there.
Hi, this is my favorite
infographic we've ever done. I,
we picked nursing everyone. I
have members of my family who
have gone through every one of
these routes. They're all very
successful healthcare
professionals, all these routes
will get you there, but we are
all different people in our
journeys should look
differently, and we should have
good information that helps us,
helps us get there.
So as I just said, like having
this robust information that is
linked across um helps not helps
students and families um around
your state, but is to mention
also helps folks like you start
to understand what are our
policies, how are we going to
answer these questions, um, I,
I'm sure if, if, you know, if
you spent 10 minutes, you could
come up with a list of 100
questions you'd like to answer,
and these are no different, um,
you know, trying to understand
what uh what what are our K-12
programs that are leading to
successful workforce outcomes
out there.
Um, you're all kind of engaged
in that business of trying to
answer those questions and get
and get policy done. Um, in
2023, uh, DQC released a series
of use cases that we think of as
an access agenda we've watched
states and supported states and
and helped folks think about
those policy questions that they
should design their systems to
answer.
For 20 years, but the one thing
that we found is while every
state has built these data
systems, people don't have
access, um, and, and even in the
states with the most robust data
systems Tim mentioned.
Virginia earlier. They're known
as having a great data system,
and I worked on on the work that
he was talking about and I'm in
a room of 40 people from
Governor's aides down to, um,
you know, legislators like
yourself and heads of agencies
and and data folks like Joey and
and everyone's frustrated.
And they're like, why do we have
so much data and so many state
data assets, so many dashboards
and websites and initiatives and
MOUs and RFPs and you name it,
and we still can't answer all
these questions and get what we
need to go forward. So we
released a set of use cases
knowing that y'all are having
these conversations about what
are we going to do to get the
data out of the systems? Do we
even have the right data in the
systems. So these use cases
really are about getting it out
and should be driving you to
think about how will we govern
it once we
decide what we want to do, um,
what will be our priority as a
state.
Who are our priority audiences.
Obviously you are one, but you
should be thoughtful about is it
parents? Is it district
superintendents, is it mayors,
community members, higher ed,
um, and, and the use cases
really are meant to help you
start having that conversation
and, and narrow them down.
We've seen over time, I
mentioned all 50 states have
linked up their data. They have
some level of robust P20W um
SLDS data system. When I started
this 20 years ago in the first
round of federal funds went out,
the first states started
building it. They were really
these um like for reporting,
right? We're gonna report up to
the feds. We'll put out some PDF
lists of indicators, then the
researchers started to get
involved. You started to see
more research being done with
these data systems, but as I
just
said what we didn't have was
access. What we didn't have was
more real time dynamic reporting
that could really get at some of
the fine grain details of what
we need to know. It's 15 years
ago, understanding what percent
of our high school graduates are
enrolling in college, that
seemed like an impossible task,
and now that's a routine thing
that states are calculating all
the time. The questions that you
all are asking, and this is what
we see with data. Once I get an
answer to this question, I go,
that's great. Now I want to know
this, right?
And it kind of snowballs and
we're now in a place where the
questions you all are asking,
the problems you're trying to
solve across workforce and
training and and universal pre-K
and funding food and security,
um, all of it, it's so
interconnected. I know you feel
that, and yet our data is
sitting in these silos and even
when we bring it together, it's
not governed in a way that's
gonna get it out so you can
start using it to solve those
problems. So we're starting to
see this emerging view of let's
start thinking about our data
systems.
differently and how they're
governed so that we can do that.
And I'm sure, I mean, these are
just things I hear from all
over. I'm sure you have heard
these, you've said these, I
can't find the data, I can't get
it. We're investing in an SLDS.
I still don't have what I need.
My constituents tell me they
don't. We have school choice.
They can't pick a school. They
don't know if student debt is
worth it. How can we get better
information?
So we have a set of state policy
recommendations that are about
how do you start to modernize
your data systems towards some
of those uses towards access,
and I'm not going to talk about
all of these today, um, although
Tim mentioned number 3, which
I'm excited is happening. A lot
of states are starting to do
that. I assume like many states
you have a ton of assets out
there. You have initiatives and
dashboards and websites and data
collections and MOUs, and I bet
if you mapped it all out and put
it up like on the wall
somewhere.
You would go, oh no, that's a
lot. Who's in charge of all
that? Um, how are we deciding
which ones to to make better or
or get rid of who's using any of
them, um, are any of them kept
current? So it's a valuable task
if for no other reason, um, it
always creates an interesting
aha moment about how much you
actually have out there. So the
one I'm gonna focus most on
today is the first one, because
if you can get your data
governance.
In place and solid and strong
like Tim talked about the other
9 so much more smoothly. The
other 9 can happen without it.
You can protect privacy. You can
get access out there. You can
get, uh, uh, you know rolling
out access and all of that, but
when you have governance, you
start to have a coherent aligned
systematic way of deciding what
to do, when to do, who gets
prioritized, but also it creates
the sustainability across
administrations across
leaderships. So that's what
we're seeing.
has been really the big
advantage of this over anything
else. Um, Tim's definitions of
data governance were perfect. um
data governance is not new. It
really is about how do you get
your arms around your data to
ensure it's protected and
private and high quality and
accessible and actionable, um,
but the kind of data governance
that I'm here to talk to you
about today is that that policy
level. The technical data
governance is more than likely
happening. Um, you've got
agreements in place and
protections and processes and
all of that, but without the
leadership over over all of that
in a decision-making role. Um,
it can be a little bit for
naught and will frustrate you
in, in what you can get from it.
So we are talking about when we
talk about this, um, about data
governance, we're talking about
a formal leadership level body
responsible and accountable for
making these.
So I'll spend a minute here on
this chart, um, it's wonky and
um but it does a nice job of
explaining um a particular
process. So Tim described data
governance. He talked a lot
about this bottom, right, this
bottom part of our data
governance pyramid is where our
IT folks are, our researchers,
our privacy experts, our program
managers, they're deciding what
to collect. They're drafting
best practice MOUs. They're
sharing data back and forth,
that chart he showed where all
the the the
The messy data, I think you
called it, that's, that's those
folks, they're cleaning it up,
they're identifying problems.
Now they may find us, they may
go, you know what, every year we
have this one problem, and it's
because we don't have X in
place. But we don't have the
authority or the resources to
get X in place. So you might go
to your K-12 chief and say,
well, we need this. And they
say, well, I can't do that'll
fix our problem, but it won't do
it for higher ed.
We need to talk to higher ed.
Oh, we need to connect to
workforce, and we need to bring
that person in. And you may find
that 7 years later, those people
have turned over once or twice
and you still haven't solved
that problem. And that data is
still messy and you've still
never answered the question. So
what this allows you to do is
escalate an issue up to a to a
leadership, a policy led
leadership board, who will make
the decision, who will say, yes,
we are going to solve X to get
rid of that problem.
And we will make a
recommendation to the
legislature to
it provided additional funding
or FTE or because you have the,
the heads of your agencies now
that they've committed to the
solution, they will bring their
resources to bear on the
problem.
you start to see things move.
You start to see the problems
start to to get solved and you
actually start to see the needle
moved.
And then what happens up here at
the top, they make these high
level decisions, you bring them
things and say, hey, what are we
gonna do? We don't collect
Social Security numbers. So
here's 2000 people, we routinely
can't find. What should we do?
So you're going to make a
decision, you're either gonna
start collecting those or you're
going to find a new way or
you've decided it's OK. We're
not gonna find this 2000 people.
So on that CTE problem, you, you
just have to make that decision.
Do we want to answer those
questions, or do we not? And if
you do, it's a matter of
Determining um across a series
of options that that staff would
bring the board what um how they
want to go about solving it, and
then implementation comes back
down. So, and, and this happens
with a group of folks like you,
you will make a decision and
then it goes on to the agencies
to implement. They bring
problems back to you and say,
please can we have more money
and it and it keeps going that
way with data, we don't have
that in place, um, and then this
middle part we call this
translation piece. These are
folks. These are like your ex
executive directors of your
state board of ed. This is like
John and Tim, right? People that
staff boards and do the research
and and talk to the the folks
implementing here at the bottom
of this pyramid, who can suss
out what you all need to hear in
in a way that you need to hear
it and write a report like Tim
just did and, and shared with
you.
And can present different
options and then you can make
decisions and come back down.
This is sort of the magic bullet
that's not happening in states.
It's this top when you hear
states say we have data
governance, they're talking
about this bottom part and
they're not wrong. But what we
see too often is our policy
leaders are absent from the
conversation.
And, and that creates a lot of
the um.
The inability to solve problems.
So when you can get this in
place, when you, when you have a
strong leadership level body.
This is what you get out of it,
sustainability across um across
administrations, your governors
will come and go, your
legislators, your K-12 chiefs,
higher ed folks, and when you
have and, and, and if you're
just operating off of a signed
agreement or a handshake, any
one person leaving is going to
disrupt that. When you have a
board that's a majority vote, as
you well know, two people leave,
2 people come in, you still
The decisions that you made, the
work can still go forward.
Accountability
All of the great work that Tim
talked about that is happening
already. Nobody in your state
probably even knows that it's
happening or who to talk to
about it if they had a concern
or they wanted to make a request
or they had a new idea, so it
creates some accountability
who's in charge? Where do we go?
Who do I call?
Um, transparency and trust, you
all have a website. Your agenda
is on there. I think there are
people able to watch it online.
The minutes will be posted. We
need to do that with data, like
data is a very political
concept. Y'all are gonna make
decisions based on what you
decide is working and not
working, being transparent with
data builds a lot of trust into
the decisions that you're making
and helps people feel um a
little bit better that you're
collecting their data.
Policy alignment, again, we do a
lot of great data things. They
aren't always aligned with what
you all are trying to accomplish
as a state. So you may have
somebody over here that has a
cool idea and some um
philanthropy money and they're
gonna build a dashboard and
that's great, but could all of
that been used to drive this,
uh, a CTE thing maybe if, if you
all decide that's what matter.
And this is the path forward to
ensuring, um, robust policy or
privacy and, and security.
Um, it's in place.
So I'll talk a little bit about
just what we've seen in other
states, um, we started this in
Washington State in 2007. Um,
they passed a law. The
legislature created the ERDC,
um, education research data.
Center, maybe, um, and they,
they created it to link up all
this data to serve them.
So if you read that, it's a,
it's a great system. It's a
great website, but right now
they, they really do just serve
the legislature, um, which is
great, but they, you know,
probably should be thinking
about other folks. Maryland came
along in 2010. Maryland is the
one that sort of came up with
that board, the idea of this
governing board, and it really
started to change things and
people started to pay attention.
Kentucky, Tim talked about um KY
stats. That is the model
everybody's trying to get to in
the country is how do we get a
KY stat. And, and I will say in
the last couple of years, the
number of states who
called me saying how do I get KY
stats has like quadrupled since
COVID. Um, they really are worth
looking at. Um,
And then we started to see
states start to move a little
faster. North Dakota did this.
Uh, Tim talked about California.
It was a big lengthy but high
quality process. They got to a
really good place. Yes, they
have a really big board and very
big budget, that is a very big
state. Once California moved on
this, we started to see a lot
more movement. So in last year
we saw Alabama, Montana, Rhode
Island move, 24 Colorado, I
think 25, uh, definitely
Virginia, um, a couple other
states, maybe you all, um, but
what's fascinating about these
states, you might notice some
really interesting mix of red.
blue and purple states in here.
These are not political
solutions. These are
administrative solutions to
administrative problems. There's
this is is um a way to sort of
wrap your arms sometimes around
the the chaos that you see in
your data to to try to get a
handle on it and um if you
looked at every one of these
laws, you would see identical
provisions and language.
And most people um over the last
15 years when they say like what
state should we look at? We were
always pointing to that
Kentucky, Maryland, Washington,
because 15 years in, they were
the states still with the data
system. I had mentioned to him,
I was out here maybe a dozen
years ago, having the same
conversation that resulted in an
executive order and at the time
we didn't know, we thought, oh
this is great, this is another
model. In addition to Marilyn's
lot, now we've got this
executive order in New Mexico,
but you all know when a governor
leaves an executive order.
May or may not stay. It may or
may not have a lasting um impact
that you want. So we don't
really recommend that anymore.
Um, and there's been a couple
other models along the way that
looked promising, but sort of
fell by the wayside, and these
were the three states that 15
years into their work are still
producing tremendous work and
have
An insane amount of credibility
and trust in their state and
among all their participating
agencies, um, where you don't
see that very much in, in other
places.
Um
This is just another way of kind
of laying that out. Tim talked a
little bit about how these
states did this, um, California
and Virginia did start with a
legislated, uh, task force, um,
and by the way, all of those
states I worked with every one
of those states to do that work.
So I know the intricacies of the
pros and cons of of everything
that they're doing, um, we just
wrapped up the Virginia task
force. The report just went into
the legislature November 1,
they're drafting a bill right
now, so we'll see how that comes
out, but it is largely
based on what California did.
Um
And then again, just a different
way of the same information just
to show this from a timeline
perspective. A lot of people
say, well, how long does this
take?
California spent 18 months with
their work group and then I
think once they were done, um, I
mean it the legislating didn't
take very long. That was maybe 5
or 6 months, they stood up their
governing board and their cradle
to career office in late 22,
they're about to roll out their
first dashboard this fall.
So it took a while, but they
they got a lot of buy-in with
the task force and a lot of buy
in through with the board, but
they had zero data system.
That's data not linked up
anything, and I gave them a lot
of grief about that since I'm
from there and they're big and
they invented digital everything
for all of us, and yet they
still hadn't done anything and
uh and now they've kind of
leapfrogged, um.
Even some of our leading states
with this work.
So some things for you all to
think about next, um, is really
looking out, you know, what are
those best practices from, from
every state. That is what other
states have done, that is what
we just helped Virginia do. um,
we just worked with Colorado,
um, to get that law done and
really look at how, how can what
other states are doing? How can
you pull out these best
practices and apply them in your
own unique.
Um, place. They're not all gonna
look the same. They are all a
little bit different while still
adhering to um certain um things
around decision making,
accountability, transparency,
and um, um, um.
that will come to me. Um,
Thinking about emerging
technologies, um, Tim mentioned
AI. I think this is a great kind
of board to add in some AI
responsibilities because
There are some promising uses
that folks are talking about,
both on the back end to build
the data system, to clean the
data, to match it, but also to
enhance a user experience. If
you've ever tried to read a
chart late at night, um, even,
um, whatever your degrees in
education may be, it's hard, um,
especially a parent, and like I
love the idea of a little tool
that I can click on that will
just stay in sentence form with
this chart is supposed to say,
and I'll have to figure out the
X and the Y and all of that. So
AI is another way to go.
All of these things that I know
you all are trying to do,
getting that agency, getting the
governing board, it is really uh
Uh, straightforward transparent,
um,
Expedient way of getting this
work done.
And that's all I have for you
today. I'm happy to answer any
questions, but maybe that's,
maybe that's at the end.
Thank you.
Uh, Mr. Chair, senators,
representatives, my name is
Michael Smith. I'm the director
of ICASA, the Institute for
Complex Additive Systems
Analysis.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, Stephanie Meyez, I'm
so happy to be here with you all
this afternoon and talk about
this very important issue. I
have the privilege of working
with ICASA at New Mexico Tech on
the state of governance project.
So with that, we are gonna jump
right in. I am conscientious of
the time, and I think we're
going to be extra concise in our
presentation. Much of the
content we are sharing with you
all today is um not on screen,
and it's back on screen. Um, it
is very much in alignment with
what Tim and Paige have already
shared. So I will, um, just jump
right in. Our agenda today
includes overview of what ICASA
is. And what we're doing at
Casa, specifically around data
science in the public interest.
We'll also talk about the
statewide data governance
project, as well as share with
you some preliminary findings
from our research.
And we'll discuss the future of
the project and really dig in on
how you all can engage moving
forward.
I had here a section on talking
about the importance of data
governance. I think we just
spent the last 40 minutes
hearing about the importance of
data governance, so I would just
echo everything that Paige and
Tim have already said, it's
important for outcomes and some
important for your all's ability
to make data-driven decisions,
both on the fiscal side as well
as on the policy side, and for
people running programs to have
access to data to understand
what's working and what's not
working.
Um, so with that, I'm gonna turn
it over to Michael to talk about
ICASa. Sure, um, Mr. Chair,
senators, representatives, uh,
first I wanna say um wonderful
job to Paige and Tim, that was,
that was really good, you guys
would get along with a psycho.
Um, OK, so more about ICASa
really, really quick. So I costa
began in 2001, so there's a line
item in the legislature that
says ICASA gets funding, and
we're funded through research
and public service projects so
we're we're an RPSP, um, so July
of 2001 is when it started and
funding has incrementally
increased over the years, um,
uh, I think we started around
300,000 and now we're about 1.1.
$2 million in funding, um, our
mission over the years has been
protect critical infrastructure,
uh, solve complex systems types
of problems, uh, for mostly the
Department of Defense. So from
2001 to 2017, we had a very
specific DOD customer, um, and
agency agencies that we
supported, um, all of all of the
problems that we supported
involved data.
And systems and processes and
helping subject matter experts
with their solve their problems.
Um,
It involved stovepipes of data.
How do we aggregate that data?
How do we tell a story with that
data, um, you know, pulling out
intelligent information to help
them make decisions, basically,
in 2017, we lost that very
Important contract due to leaks.
From the agency that we were
working with, um, a guy named
Edward Snowden didn't help
contracts across different
universities. Um, so New Mexico
Tech is one of the places that
lost the contract.
Um
So, we really had to learn how
to do business development
again, and we thought to
ourselves, all right, we're
known nationally, we're known
internationally, um, let's take
all the good information that
we've learned and experienced
that we've learned over the
years, and let's help our state.
We consult, we can do this. We
can solve problems within the
state of New Mexico. So in 2017,
we began working with different
state agencies, Department of
Public Safety, a 2nd District
Attorney's office, First
judicial District Attorney's
office.
Um, helping them solve their
problems. Um,
Next slide
Oh, I guess I could.
Uh,
so while we're helping these
different agencies solve their
problems, we created a portfolio
name, Data Science in the Public
Interest. So we, we solve data
science in the public entrance
projects. Um, so we have a group
within ICASA that is focused on
state of New Mexico types of
problems, um, working with
subject matter experts, working
with their data, helping them,
help, helping them do their jobs
faster, more efficient, um,
based on the technology, um, and
the
Software development and our and
our researchers implement to
help them implement solutions.
I think, I think that's, that's
good for now, since we're a
little limited on time.
So as you can see, iCosa is
uniquely positioned to take on
this chart to really map out
what our existing data
governance infrastructure looks
like in the state of New Mexico
and you all appropriated
$480,000 during the 2024
legislative session. And um
really are interested in
learning more about what data
governance looks like in New
Mexico and it was interesting to
me to hear on Paige talk about
your recommendation under number
3 in the
importance of mapping out assets
and I believe it was Tim, your
recommendation number 4 that was
very similar and um it's
heartening and validating to
hear that this body is also um
prioritizing that and has funded
this this initiative.
Given that we are in the initial
stages, we are um excited to
share with you some preliminary
findings. Again, I had a section
on how it relates to the LESDA
don't necessarily know we need
to dive into that since we've
talked about it for the last um
40 minutes or so, but I will say
that this is a 2-year
appropriation and our
methodology is fairly complex.
We have been approved by the
institutions by New Mexico
Tech's IRB.
And it includes a deep dive
landscape analysis and mapping
of data quality controls of what
systems and controls are in
place to ensure that data is not
compromised at the agency level,
how agencies are sharing data,
how they're collecting data, how
they're utilizing data,
particularly across agencies and
to also identify those areas
where data sharing and
collaboration is happening and
is happening effectively. In
addition to that, we have a
qualitative survey.
that we've released to all of
our stakeholders. You all may
have already received this
survey as well, and we're really
interested in better
understanding how you're all
engaging with data and what you
feel like the needs are um
around data. In addition to that
were um conducting a deep dive
best practice analysis of what
other states are doing and
really interested in working
more closely with Paige and Tim,
um, on the education side. I
think that's another um
important piece to highlight is
that
this particular statewide data
governance project is not
specific to education. Education
is a key component of it.
However, our project really
encompasses all issue areas
across the state.
So, as I mentioned, our, um, oh,
I would actually like to mention
within the methodology, one key
component is technical
application.
So really leveraging the
projects and the work that's
already being done at iCASA
working with state agencies,
particularly those projects that
engage multiple state agencies
and um identifying what are some
of those challenges, what's
working with collaboration among
agencies, we presented at CCJ
yesterday, so we were here
yesterday talking specifically
about some of those projects
within the context of criminal
justice. I'm Charles Rock is
here with us. He is our senior
software developer at iCASA.
And shared some very interesting
findings around the work in
criminal justice. So the
technical application piece of
the project is a big one, and
you all will likely hear more
from us about that in the
future.
Our preliminary findings, this
is based on our initial
stakeholder interviews, and
they're very much aligned with
the brief that Tim shared with
you. I believe it is on page 1
and 2, the key takeaways. What
are some of the challenges that
were identifying within the
context of data governance in
New Mexico. And I'll just start
at the top. Really, it's, it's
there there's some collaboration
happening.
Um, across agencies around data
sharing, however, they're often
really siloed by issues. So for
example, in education, there
might be some data sharing
happening between PED DWS and
HED with LESC.
However, how are there um data
sharing initiatives taking place
across to maybe CYFD or HSD, um,
we know that a student perhaps
may be receiving multiple
services from multiple different
agencies that aren't specific to
education. Maybe they're
receiving uh public support
around health care. So how can
we help agency heads and you all
as policy makers, um, make sure
that those agencies' data are
able to speak with each other to
interact.
Just one another and um provide
you with the information you
will need to make the decisions
you have to make. We've also
identified, and I think this
won't be news to anybody in this
room, that agencies are under
resourced when it comes to
engaging with data and
technology, um, and not just on
the system side, we have seen
that there are systems that are
outdated, um, that unfortunately
are not able just from a
technical standpoint, able to
interact with other systems and
other agen
There's also a very clear gap in
personnel and technical
expertise at the agency level.
Not all agencies have analysts
such as Tim and, you know, or
senior software developers like
Charles within their agencies to
be able to help them engage with
their data better.
Um, and then we've also
identified that there are
limited data management
protocols in place, I talked
about the systems and the
softwares and different agencies
using different agencies using
different vendors, um, making it
a challenge to interact with one
another. I do want to lift up on
the positive side, there is a
real appetite across the state
and within the agencies and even
our quasi-governmental agencies,
like, for example, the New
Mexico Sentencing Commission on
to really collaborate and to to
solve
for the state governance issue
and to build a strong foundation
of data governance
infrastructure that will help
all of us in all of our issue
areas and in our various roles.
Um, and that that collaboration
is really driven by the end user
and that policymakers are at the
at the table for these
conversations as well. So I
really appreciated that piece,
page that you lifted up in your,
I actually thought your pyramid
was great. It was very
intuitive.
um.
So what is the project look like
moving forward and here in, in
your um in your packet, you can
see it is, as I mentioned, a
two-year appropriation. We're
going to continue gathering data
and engaging you all in other
stakeholders through early 2025.
Um, we are not mandated to
submit an interim report,
however, we feel like it's
important to keep you all in the
loop to answer any questions
that you have to support
initiatives like the one that's
um like the ones potentially
That Tim spoke about in terms of
legislative solutions. Um, and
so we will submit an interim
report to the LFC and to you
all, um, in January of this
year, we aim to begin phase two,
the technical piece that I spoke
about in the spring of 2025
implement and complete that
phase 2 in the fall of 2025 and
submit our final report to you
all and to the LFC in the spring
of 2026.
I think um as members of this
legislative body, you all have,
uh, very important role to play,
not just in setting policy and
making financial decisions, but
also contributing to the public
discourse around the importance
of, of data um page referenced
this early on in her
presentation, which I really
appreciated. I can't remember
specifically the words you use,
but data is not always the most
sexiest of a topic. It is,
however, extremely important.
And I think you all understand
that and I think you all being
ambassadors.
to that, um, thinking in that
narrative is extremely important
as you talk with your colleagues
in the various chambers as well
as externally, so that narrative
piece um would be a call to
action. We also would ask of you
and then thinking through those
potential policies, the bills,
and um legislative initiatives
that Tim referenced and also
thinking and considering about
funding for our phase 2 of the
statewide data governance
project.
And that concludes our piece of
the presentation. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman and members of the
committee.
All right. Thank you all so much
for the presentation. It's great
to see you back, Representative
Maas.
All right.
members
Questions
Oh, OK. Represent Garrett?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
It's good to see you all in the
same room today, yesterday.
I, I guess, um, Tim, going back
to what you said, and this
applies to ICOs and everything.
I'm looking at page 9 policy
considerations.
And you mentioned that it
wouldn't be, there's 5 levels.
I mean, ultimately it looks like
number 5 is what we need.
an independent agency
responsible for staffing and
data governance board.
Can, can you guys, especially
from my Casa and Tim, can you
just comment on that?
you know, I once did a a PR
thing in New York City. I asked
100 people what they meant by
towards the more more perfect
union, and I was thinking of the
Constitution and roots of our
country, 25% said uh trade
unions, 25% said the union
underwear.
25% said marriage and
relationships. So it's like when
we talk about what we need data
for, it's like
You know, there's education, but
then there's all the things that
Paige talked about career in
college, um,
Um, corrections that, you know,
economic development. Can, can
you just
Kind of give me a picture of
what
You think in relationship to a
state independent agency or in.
Uh, certainly. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and thank you,
Representative Garrett. Um,
I'll, I'll start and then I'll
hand it over to our, our
colleagues from ICASA. Um, the
What you've got in front of you
on page 9 is sort of steps,
right? Or or not steps, but sort
of graduating degrees of, of, of
complexity and of rigor and of
uh difficulty to do. And so,
well, number 5 is uh potentially
the most uh effective solution
that you have in front of you,
uh, and it's what a lot of other
states are doing around this
issue. Um, it, it's also
probably the most complex and
difficult to get done. Um, and
what, what I would want to do
if, if, if that's the
direction that you're interested
in going, uh, is worked very
closely with, with PED with HED
with the other agencies, uh, to
make sure that we build it in a
way that um number one honors
the work that they already do,
uh, and allows them to continue
their work without uh without
sort of interruptions that like
we saw with Project Nova where
we had basically a year without
good data, um, and, and sort of
number 2 would be uh to elevate
the work that they do in a way
that, that um streamline
streamlines their processes.
Makes things highly effective.
So, um, my intent would be, uh,
because that's an extremely
collaborative process, um, it,
it, you know, it would be
difficult, but I don't think
impossible to get done this
year.
Mr. Chair, senators
representatives.
When I read number 5.
I look at our ICO's experiences
from 2017 until now, and I feel
like that is what we are, we are
doing, um, it's not, I don't
feel like we've been established
as the the trusted agent to do
the work. I think that's
something you all would have to
do, but I, I feel like that's,
that's what we, what we do do.
We
You know, I don't feel like we
have a political side. We just
are technical humans that want
to solve problems. We want to
sit down and help y'all do your
job better. Um, we understand
technology, we understand
science, we understand research.
That's, that's the way we think.
It's.
It's fun for us, so.
Mr. Chair, Representative, if I
could just add, um, I hope it's,
I hope it's clear that this is
not a coincidence that we talked
about long term planning this
morning and their governance
this afternoon, and I think, uh,
to Michael's point, some of this
is already happening. We have an
LDS that's getting there. We
have folks who are looking at
data governance across the
state.
I would, I would say the same
thing I said about a lot of the
other good efforts that are
happening in education is that
they're happening.
But whether or not all the right
folks are at the table talking
to each other about what that
means for all these different
systems and whether or not.
To your point, we're all talking
the same language. I think is is
is an important step here.
And it could be that sort of
that next place where people
actually sit down together to
determine what's already
happening.
And then how do we get to the
next, the next level, if you
will.
Yeah, cause Mr. Chair and in
relation to what you just said,
one of the things from the
sporting was, we have fragmented
excellent work.
And just the fact that yesterday
you guys were, I don't know if
all of you were there, but, you
know.
course corrections and justice
and
And uh getting them.
Sometimes these committees are
messy because the same group can
present to 6 different
committees.
Instead of having
The issue with everybody from
the 6 committees together.
Anyway, thank you.
in Luhan.
I appreciate the time. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Um, um, as we
are planning, and I appreciate
that too, the plan, the, the
long term plan, the planning I
have to.
Um, as with the data governance
systems and everyone.
Speaking the same uh.
technical languages.
The access languages for
disability communities. How are
we integrating that into our
planning, Mr. Chair.
Uh, certainly represented, uh,
Mr. Chair and Representative Lu
Han, that's, that's an extremely
important point, uh, and, and a
point that maybe I should go
back, uh, as well, um, the, a
very strong voice coming out of
our AI stakeholder engagement uh
was from uh tribes pueblos and
Indian nations, um, to ensure
that their data, uh, that
they're, they're putting into
sort of these AI models or
whatever, um, the, the state
ends up putting together for AI
is protected and secure and so
Um, that, those types of
considerations are, are the
exact conversations that a data
governance board should be
having, right? Uh, and so
representation on that board,
uh, from, from the communities
that you mentioned from our
tribes, nation and pueblos, um,
should, should, um, very much be
advocating for those types of
policies.
If, if I can add, Mr. Chairman,
Repsentative Luhan, thank you
for that question. That is one
key research question in the
statewide data governance
project is what is data
governance look like currently
and what's in place as it
relates to an impacts our most
vulnerable communities, so thank
you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and
I'm bringing that up too because
I am actually looking at a bill
for a digital accessibility, so
that, that would be part of a
big part of this conversation.
I, I would hope and I'd love to
further that conversation, thank
you.
Other questions from members.
All right. Um, I did have one
question. Um,
Mr. Smith and and represented
May if um
When you talk about the budget
piece and phase two, the
technical piece. I was wondering
if you could elaborate on what
was planned for phase 2.
Mr. Chair, senators
representatives as we go through
the data governance piece and
talk to each in English, uh
sorry, each agency.
Uh, the technical piece would
be, OK, now how can I cos it get
in there and help each agency
with their problems.
Mr. Chairman, Representative,
um, uh, just to build on that, I
think we are have the
opportunity as we are having
these stakeholder conversations
to identify some unique
challenges um during the CCJ
committee meeting yesterday. It
was brought up that there could
be an opportunity to support the
real-time crime.
One stop shop working with the
administration center um and how
they're engaging with other
judicial entities and how
they're sharing data that there
are some challenges there, and
again, this isn't too throw
anybody under the bus or too
oftentimes the challenges really
are centered around lack of
resources, um, and so it's not
an unwanting or a pushback, um,
but I think to um Michael's
point, really were identifying
those technical opportunities
and application.
op port un ities as we uncover
them and they become apparent
during our interviews, Mr.
Chairman. Great. I certainly
appreciate that. I mean, because
being able for
Us as policymakers, um, staff
that's working with us on the
research side of what we're
working on having this
information, not just
necessarily like you all
mentioned here with an
education, but what's happening
elsewhere, um, it would be
tremendously helpful and a big
help for us, um, in the work
that we do and interpreting it
and then deciding um where we're
going to go with that
information, um, but thank you
all very much and we look
forward to the work ahead.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you. Thank you.
So we'll go ahead with item 10,
so everything's behind tap 10
members of school attendance, so
continuing on with school
attendance. So we have Jessica.
With us
Along with Mr. Adams.
From CYFD.
Oh, please, Jessica, when you're
ready.
All right. um, thank you so
much, Mr. Chairman, members of
the committee. Um, this
afternoon, I'm getting some
echo. Let me move this screen
back a bit.
Uh, this afternoon, we're going
to be continuing our
conversation of school
attendance. You all have been
working on this, arguably for
years, um, it's looked a little
bit different in our post
pandemic um environment where we
saw chronic absenteeism soar,
and one of the items that you
all have asked us to look into
is the CYFD component, and so
this is following up on a couple
of presentations we've already
given you. You'll remember about
a year ago actually, we did a
very large kind of statutory
review, and then we
Come before you twice on
attendance, um, so we are joined
by a Mr. Corey Adams, who's the
deputy director of juvenile
Justice Services with CYFD and
um we asked Mr. Adams to really
kind of speak through what
happens um when CYFD is engaged
on school attendance. Just as a
primer for all of us, this is
referring to at that tier 4
level, um, there is a call for
um excessive absenteeism to
actually be reported by local
school.
Boards are governing bodies of
charter schools and actually
then work with superintendents
or those head administrators to
engage CYFD and potentially make
referrals to that. And so, um,
Mr. Adams has some different
data for us to actually see the
depth of how many of those
referrals are happening and then
just kind of walk us through
what that actually looks like,
so with that, I will pass it
over to Mr. Adams.
Sure. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee and,
and a special thank you to
Jessica who's been a tremendous
help throughout this entire
process. This was kind of thrown
together last minute as far as
me coming up here. So I really
appreciate the assistance. Um, I
thought I would start today
really just kind of go through
kind of how the process works,
uh, with juvenile justice and,
and how we tie in to um to
absenteeism. Uh, I did bring
some some data for FY 23 and FY
24 was probably best if I go
through and kind of explain the
system and that
I think that will kind of help
explain the data a little bit,
so, um,
We'll start off just by saying,
um,
Attendance is attendance issues,
absenteeisms is incredibly
important to to CYFD and and JJS
especially when I say JJS in
juvenile justice system. I'm
referring to juvenile probation
officers who all work under,
under me. So, um, it's
incredibly important to us. We,
we acknowledge, we recognize,
uh, data tells us that if, if,
if we have an absentee or a
truant student and that
continues over a period of time,
it's very likely that that, that
individual is going to end up
In the referred back to the
office for a delinquent offense
within the next year. I mean, we
ran numbers on that. I was a
part of a committee that did
this in Curry County, and we
looked at our numbers, we
tracked our numbers specifically
over a year, and, and yeah, we
determined 75% end up back. um,
within the next year for a
delinquent offense. So, um,
What, what
The role of juvenile probation
plays um in these referral, in
this referral process. Once they
reach that, um,
Tier 4 status. The schools will
make a referral. They send that
referral, um, to the juvenile
probation office. Uh, there is a
handout there, um, absenteeism
referral that is on the PED
website we generated that
referral so we'd have a uniform
referral statewide, uh that all
school districts could use. I
worked with PED to get that on
their website. Um, so they can
go in and fill that information
out. They make that referral,
they send all collateral
information as well, uh, the
probation office will review the
referral.
Um, typically it's the chief for
the JPO supervisor in that
district that does that and then
they will appoint, they will
assign it to a, a juvenile
probation officer, as long as
the referral is uh complete.
Um, after that happens, the JPO
will then uh schedule a meeting
uh with the schools, at the
schools, with the with the
client, with their family, um,
to review all the, all the
information that's been
provided, review what attempts
have been made by the schools
to, to have an impact on the
students um at school
attendance, um, what we're
looking for during that, during
that meeting is, um, kind of an
outside perspective, uh, you
know, there, there are some
things that we have access to
that.
The schools might not, um,
there's some things that, you
know, some situations that we've
come across that, again, our
experience can, can be very
valuable in those situations. So
we'll offer support to the
schools, to the families, and,
and try to come up with a
collaborative decision on what's
in the best interest of that
child moving forward. Um,
We will make a decision, uh, and
then process our case and we've
got several options on how we do
it. I, I think it's important to
acknowledge when we talk on in
juvenile justice terms and in
juvenile probation. There's
really two different types of
cases that we deal with. We deal
with informal cases, which are
cases that don't go through the
court system. They're just
handled through our office with
an agreement with the family and
the client, um, and then we're
talking formal cases, which are
cases that actually flow through
the court system.
And the judge will make a
determination, so, um, truancy,
absenteeism falls under the
informal category. It is not a
delinquent act in this state. So
our hands are a little bit tight
when, when we get there to these
meetings, um, we don't walk in
with quite the stick that I
think people think we do at
times. Um.
But again, our goal is to try
to, to try to get to the, you
know, to get to what's causing
these, these absences. What's
causing these issues? And then
try to help the client or help
the family in any way that we
can to encourage them to go to
school. So, um, we can
As you can see from the data, if
you can switch to FY23 data, um,
I've got it kind of broken down
as far as how all the referrals
are handled, um, or were
handled, uh, assessed and
referred when I'm talking about
that. I'm talking about a case
that is, as JPO comes, um, into
involvement with the case, maybe
the schools have already
referred to a program, or the
parents have already set
something up, we're satisfied
with that. And so we'll close
the cases assessed and referred
and just kind of monitor and
make sure that they're following
through with what has already
been set up.
Uh, you'll see CCA reject
because absenteeism or truancy
is not a delinquent act in the
state of New Mexico, um, and
with the changes in the act from
a few years ago, there is no,
there's no CCA referral. We
can't, we can't refer it to the
district attorney. There's no
legal action that can be taken
against the family or the
client. So, um, we, we have
attempted to at the request of
school districts and we've had
some DAs at times say, hey, send
us this case and let's see what
we can do. Ultimately, those
over the last few years, they
just get rejected because
Cause they legally they can't
proceed through the court
system.
Um, informal conditions cases
are cases where we will refer a
client to um a community-based
program, some something
available, uh, to address the
needs of that client. It's,
it's, it's just depending on
what the, what each individual
case, you know, shows, and then
the JPO with their knowledge of
what's available in the local
community. We'll, we'll make
that referral, assist the family
in doing that, and, and sign it,
get them set up with whatever
program they need to go into,
um, and then we'll follow up
with the program. We'll monitor
and making sure that they're
attending, making sure that
they're
Get what they need to get out of
it. When we talk informal
supervision.
We actually have, uh, it's
called an administrative
probation agreement. It reads
just like our standard juvenile
probation agreement for
delinquent offenders. Um,
But it is a voluntary agreement.
It's an agreement between the
family and the juvenile
probation officer that we, that
they will follow the that client
will follow the set of rules for
a period of time. Um, and then
we will, um,
Again, we'll monitor, we'll
check on the client on a regular
basis. We kind of run it like
probation, but the, the
difference is really if they
violate that, we don't, we don't
have a lot of teeth behind it.
It's, it's, we document and and
keep that information for if a
client ends up back in our
office again later on, but, um,
there's not a lot that we can do
through the leak through the
court system. Um, and then
you'll see no further action at
the bottom and no further
action. Um, there's a lot of
different reasons that cases
would wind up in that category,
um, one, again, the situation's
already been dealt with.
By the time that we, we become
involved and we get there. So
that may be a reason for it, um,
because this is not a delinquent
act because it is an informal
thing. It's really voluntary in
the family and the client's
part, so they basically can tell
us no, we, we're not doing this,
and um we do our best to
convince them and try to show
them how it's going to be in
their best interests and this
and that, but they, they, they
have the right to say no, and if
they don't want us involved at
that point, then there's really
very little we can do beyond
just, again, documenting and,
and keeping track of the
We had that referral and that's
how they chose to deal with
that. So, um,
As you can see from FY 23, there
were 647 total absenteeism
referrals uh sent to the, to the
department. Um, again, 113
assessed and referred, 160 were
handled through informal
conditions with 126 of those
cases being completed
satisfactorily, um, informal
supervision was 37 clients, and
again that no further action is
a big category, 336. Um,
I should, I should back up for a
second on the no further action
cases. We will also
Document some cases is no
further action if the school
does not send us a complete
packet.
Um, if it doesn't have
documentation of the missed of
the missed classes and things
like that. If it's not a
complete packet, um, there's
another handout here that says
the school checklist follow-up
request. That is just, uh,
again, a, a standard letter that
we send back to the school again
after we review the referral. If
there's something that's, that's
not there, that's missing, that,
that needs to be a part of it.
Uh, we'll send that, that form
letter back to the school and
they have 30 days to respond
back to us and get that.
information back to us so we can
move forward. If they choose not
to do that, then we have to
close out the cases, no further
action.
So, um,
We can look at, uh, numbers for
FY 24. Also, if you like, it's,
it's, we were up to 8040
referrals, so we had a 200
referral increase over that
fiscal year. I do apologize. I
was not able to get FY 22
numbers, uh, printed, but I
can't tell you in FY 22, we had
410.
Uh, true to your referral
statewide, and, and I'll get it
to you, I'll, I'll put it in
this format and get y'all a copy
so you can see where those come
from on the back of those
handouts, um,
You can see the referral source
in county, typically when, when
it says school, that's from a
school district within that
county. Uh, the other will be
sometimes it's law enforcement,
sometimes it may be a parent
referral, um, these technically
in our system are family in need
of services referrals. So
anybody from the community can
make this referral. So, uh we'll
receive them from, from outside
sources at times, maybe, uh,
different providers that are
aware of this problem or
whatever, they'll send us the
referral as well, so
Um, but just to get an idea of
where we, where we're getting
referrals from, and, and, and
kind of why we've seen some of
this fluctuation over the years.
I mean, you've got, um,
You know, you've got some
significant, I mean, just, just
looking at the difference
between um Eddie County and FY
23 had 76 referrals in FY 24,
they had 201.
Absenteeism referrals, uh, uh,
Curry County in FY 23 had 161
referrals, um, and then in FY
24, they had 12.
So, I, I, I'm not sure, I don't
think it's necessarily the
school district is, you know,
all of a sudden handled all
those cases, I think a lot of
cases just weren't getting sent
our way. I can.
Speak to some of the issues that
have gone on in some of the
districts. I've, I've had some
conversations with folks in
those areas so I can speak to
some of those things. Um, if the
committee would like, but, um,
really, I just wanted to kind of
lay out the basis for how we do
this and then um make myself
available for questions. Uh,
this is the juvenile justice
system is complicated. The
absenteeism is incredibly
complicated. Um, it's hard to
describe it all. It's best just
to kind of respond to questions
and try to educate you as best
as I can, so, I will turn it
back over to you.
Great.
Thank you so much. So
Representative Baca.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, uh, Mr. Adams for
your
Uh, presentation on the process.
Um,
One of the, the things that you
kind of said that kind of struck
me a little bit was about the
communication between the school
districts. It, it has been, you
know, and through my committees.
I have
Really emphasized.
That we cannot be functioning in
silos. And so the question, Mr.
Adams, is what types of
activities have you done to
increase partnerships.
And communication with our
school districts because I think
that
Um, that
We, we probably need to do a
better job on both ends. So, can
you tell me, uh, Mr. Adams, uh,
thank you, Mr. Chair, uh, Mr.
Representative, um,
So it, it, this is something
that I've been in this position
now for 3 years, and it's been a
bit, it's been a prime goal of
mine to improve communications
statewide to try to educate
folks, and I'm not just talking
about school, which is I'm
really talking law enforcement
and, and judges and DAs and
everybody's familiar with their
part in the system, but nobody
has a true picture of the whole,
very few have a picture of the
whole system, so, um, one thing
that we've done over the last
couple of years, we're doing
some, uh, community summits, uh,
juvenile justice summits, uh,
we, to this point, we've done 3.
My goal is to do 3 a year, um,
we've done, uh, this, this past,
over the past year, we did one
in Lee County. We did one in
Curry County. We also did one in
San Juan County, um, and at
those summits, what we do is we
do a presentation from juvenile
Justice again explaining this
system, we invite all community
partners, including school
districts, including law
enforcement, everybody else to
explain as best we can kind of
how this system works, where
everybody fits into it, what our
role is in this, um, so, so that
is
And a, and a portion of that
presentation is specifically
about absenteeism. So, so we
talked to the schools about
that. There's a lot of um
districts statewide where there
is tremendous collaboration
between the JJ JJS office and
the school and the schools. Um,
we're welcomed with open arms
into the schools, it's
We they were called on on a
regular basis to help and then
there are other school
districts, um, who have chosen
to
Not have us there, uh, similar
to kind of how we've gone with,
you know, like school resource
officers, some districts
absolutely want them other areas
that they don't want them. There
are areas of the state that the
school districts don't
necessarily want us there. And,
um, we're doing what we can to
improve those relationships. So
again, we attend all meetings
with the, with the clients that
we can with those schools, um,
we're doing, uh, meetings with,
you know, uh, uh, principals of
schools where we're starting to
see attendance issues, things
like that, trying to see what we
can do collaboratively, uh.
Um, another thing that we're
doing is trying to increase
Continuum site statewide, see
where he has a pool of money, a
pot of money that can go out to
community statewide to help
provide funding and programming
specific to that community, in
order to do so, the community
has to have a continuum side up
and running, the schools where
there are those continuum sites
running. The schools are a big
part of that. And JS will be a
part of it as well, and they can
bring in new programs. We're
looking to expand. We've got
Curry County on the list. We've
got Lee County on the list for
expansion. We're doing meetings
with Otero County San Juan.
Also, so, so we, you know, we've
got 4 different kind of areas
looking to come into that. So I
think it's things like that that
we can do to try to improve
those processes. And again,
just, I've made sure that my
chiefs, my leadership within our
local districts, there's an open
door policy for anybody within
that community if they want to
go talk, we need to collaborate
because we're gonna work
together.
And, and thank you, Mr.
Chairman, and, and thank you,
Mr. Adams for that. Um,
I guess my, my point for all of
this is really about.
That we
We need to partner and how many,
how many, how many fill officers
do you have? How many um sites
you have throughout the state.
So if uh we, we go by judicial
districts, so there's 14
judicial districts statewide,
um, and that's how juvenile
justice is set up. We've got 2,
I believe it's 27 offices and
I've, I have roughly 110
juvenile probation officers
statewide.
Um, I, I, I've got some other
individuals working for the
department, um, in different
capacities that that will assist
in some of these things, but 110
when we talk juvenile probation
officers statewide.
In, in, in part of Mr. Chairman,
uh, part of my
I thought about is.
When you talk juvenile
probation, it has.
A very, it
In some ways, you know, a
certain connotation that comes
to mind.
But when you talk about
community connections and
resources, that's quite a
different way to phrase.
And work with these things and
then like as I said before, I
think back into uh committee
that I had in Carlsbad, where I,
I came after CYD pretty hard.
And the result of that was
actually an exchange of
information.
To sit down at the table with
these folks, not when there was
an incident, but when there
wasn't an incident so that we
could, I gave my cell number,
and guess what, they use it.
So I, I also, I encourage that
it it can't be one of those,
hey, you know, and I understand
that it's a two-way, you can't
be the school's waiting for you
to go to them, you can't be
waiting to go to the schools,
but I do think that it has to be
a very intentional.
Effort to to bridges because
policy is not going to fix our
issues. Um, procedures are not
going to fix our issues. People
are going to fix our issues and
the relations that we build, um.
The um
Blessing, Mr. Chairman, and I
again, really briefly, you've
talked about all the cases here.
What are the reasons for the
non-intendance? Why, why
speaking to those families.
Because, um, it's important for
us to understand as policymakers
and appropriators.
How we can address this
statewide issue.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Sherry and
Mr. Representative, um,
Again, I, I, I just want to
reiterate, it is very important
for us to collaborate with the
schools and, and again, I, you
know, there are experiences
taking place within certain
districts and, and certain
jurisdictions statewide, where
those relationships are tough,
but there are some um
relationships going on in some
communities statewide that are
um absolutely tremendous. They,
they are, they work hand in
hand, so community events from
the school's JPO was there, JPO
is doing a community event and
the schools are there, that sort
of thing. There's that kind of a
Of interactions going on on a
regular basis, so, um,
As far as what um
You know, some of the causes of
this and what we hear, um,
absenteeism before, as I've
moved up the chain within the
department. I, I, one of my
specialties was dealing with
absenteeism. I, I spent, I spent
probably 5 years dealing with
only informal cases and really
focusing on absenteeism, and
there's a lot of different
reasons why from from students,
it's um bullying is a common
one.
that, that's a common, that's a
common denominator. We hear it
on a regular basis. Um, at
times.
It's with the families and with
the clients. There's, there's
this feeling that the schools
have not done enough at times
to, to help with the situation
so they get upset, so their
student doesn't go anymore. So
it's our job to kind of go in
and try to kind of be a mediator
between those two and get that,
get that back up, but there's,
there are, um, there's always
one that stands out in my mind,
a case that I that I worked with
personally and it was, it was an
attendance case that I was on
this client. I mean, a lot. He
was not attending. It was, and,
and finally one day I had to sit
down with the young man and
We were going through some
things and he finally said, why
are you pushing this for me? My
entire family works at the
dairy. That is what I want to
do. I've already got a full-time
job out there, um, this is my,
this is what I want to do.
I don't need to be. I work
nights, I don't need to be in
school during the day. We talked
about alternatives and this and
that and found a different plan
for him to make that work, but
so it's different scenarios like
that that we're gonna go
through, but um
You know, I, I, I think for me
the, the, the bullying stuff,
there's, there's a, there's a
population of students that
quite frankly, don't want to get
caught up in the drama at the
school. They, they just don't
want to deal with that. Um,
there's a program that I'm aware
of statewide that's working with
the community college, they'll
do, they can go into and, and
get a college degree at the same
time that they get a high school
degree and it, it was designed
to kind of help some of these
students lower income to kind of
move along and what's, it's
turned into is
The higher performing students
from high school, I want to go
to the college and do that
because they don't want to be on
campus.
Because of the issues that are
going on there, some of the
security concerns and threat
concerns that that they're, and
again, these are things that I'm
hearing from, from students and
families, so, um, it's, there's
no one reason causing it all.
Uh, uh, it's, it's a very
complicated issue.
Absolutely and Mr. Chairman, and
the, again, just really, do you
guys have a formal process that
every student has asked those
questions as part of that you
come into contact with referral
or is it more case by case
because
I, I, you know, it.
Do you guys have a formal
process? Is that part of your
intake when you receive this
case? I see Jessica shaking her
head. Is that, thank you, Mr.
Chair, Mr. Representative. Yes,
we, we, we conduct what's called
a preliminary inquiry on all
these. We received the referral
and, and it's, and it's a
preliminary inquiry is how we
categorize it. It's, it's a,
it's a meeting with the client,
with the family, with the school
administrators or whatever,
whoever's there and we review
everything, lay it all out on
the table, um, including the
issues that that they're having
with the schools and um so yeah.
Yeah, there's, there's a process
that happens where we give them
an opportunity of also um had a
lot of those I've had a lot of
those, those are preferred to be
done at the school, um, but
we've had some parents call and
say, can we come and talk to you
first. And, and so we'll do
those meetings if they, if they
requested that. I mean, our goal
is to do whatever we can to help
the youth get back into school.
And I, I, I know I heard you
make a comment about
Collaborative efforts and this
and that, probation on one side.
I just want to make it clear,
probation is not law
enforcement. Juvenile probation
is not a law enforcement
officer. I am, my, my goal is to
make sure that when we deal with
the kid, we don't see them
again. That is what I'm, that is
what I'm working towards. And I
know.
There's a, there's a lot of
stuff going on with the
legislature on it, what they
want to do, I understand that,
but the law as it stands right
now, my job is for the care and
rehabilitation of the youth that
we serve.
And so that is what my staff is
doing. And if, if it changes if
the legislators so sees fit so
to change the children's code
and all that and make those
changes and we'll adjust. But
right now, that's our goal and
our goal is to keep them out of
the system.
Try to keep them out of the
system.
I assure you, Mr. Adams, I do
know very much about the system,
um.
My, my final um question, and
this is actually directed
towards Jessica and Tim.
In our attendance practices
right now, we do not make a
distinction between excused and
unexcused absences. We also do
not make, like my, my daughter
is on the high school dance
team, and in the fall sports,
they dance at volleyball, they
dance at
Um
Football
Uh, they're all over the place
and so.
Soccer
And when we're looking, you
know, it, it's, we talk about
the root cause analysis, and
it's different for every kid,
but our current system of just
looking at your absent.
I'm sure right now she's brought
the real Rancho Center right
now.
She would be considered absent,
and that's something that I
think that we need to look at
and address is how we make that
distinction in how we practice,
you know, how we track that and
how we do that, that's just my,
my, my take on it. Thank you,
Mr.
Thank you, Representative Lujan.
Thank you. Um,
Mr. Chair, I appreciate the time
again, and I, I just wanna say
thank you for bringing up the
Children's code.
Um
This weekend um courts and
corrections, uh, committee, we,
we had a visit from our DA from
Berna Leo County, and he had
lots of recommendations, um,
regarding our youth and um the
Children's code. Are you, do
you, are you aware of those
submit those recommendations and
changes in the.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
uh, I, I have seen it. I've um
Um, fortunately I have not been
a part of the conversations
leading up to that. Others, uh,
within administration happen.
Um, I, I, I would certainly love
the opportunity to, to make some
comments on some of those
things, but at this point, um, I
will wait until I'm asked to do
so by the department.
Thank you Mr. Chair, um, one
question I did bring up during
the conversation was that exact
thing, um, where was the voice
of the CYFD in that
conversation, some of those
recommendations, so I would
highly recommend as a legislator
that you be part of that and
then and your expertise, uh,
lend itself to some of those
recommendations and and the
discussions that are being held
with the the district attorneys
requests or recommendations as
we move forward, Madam Chair,
uh, Mr. Chair, excuse me.
Um,
when we are, uh, so, so I hope
that moves forward, and I'll
jump into a different question.
As we are talking about our
attendance, um, in our schools.
How is CYFD? How is your, your
department working with our
absentee coaches in our school
districts, is that the, is that
where you are connected with
them, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, um, Madam
Representative, um, this, yeah,
that, that's where we make the
connection a lot of times. Uh,
there are some school districts
statewide that have those
attendance liaisons, there's,
there are a few districts I
could name out that, that do a
tremendous job, those, those
liaisons are basically in the
JPO office. If not daily, you
know, they're in their weekly
discussing some of these cases.
There are other um other
districts where we end up just
going through like an attendance
secretary or something along
those lines. Um, so it's just
depends on which this how the
school districts want to do it.
Thank you, what do you find, Mr.
Chair, what do you find the most
effective, um, collaboration,
uh.
With your work is happening.
I representative, uh.
The more involved we are, the
better, the better the results,
and I'll say this, um, and
again, this is from my personal
experience in going through this
in a district is, is, is we
looked at.
How many attendance referrals we
would have had over a year, and
then we tracked them over the
next year and saw how many, you
know, 75% of them ended up back
for delinquent acts, and then,
so we started a program, we're
just on our own within the
schools, this is what we're
gonna do. We're gonna, we're
gonna have a real emphasis on,
on highlighting, you know,
connecting with some of these
kids who were absent in this and
that and um it was, it was
funded through continuum funding
through CYFD and, and again,
what we found was we cut our
numbers in half. And we weren't
really doing anything other than
just being there.
Uh, it was just eyes on the, on
the client, on the student, this
and that, having that, creating
a bit of a connection there and
kind of talking to them and and
doing that, it just helped for
them to know that somebody was
there. It wasn't a perfect
system. I wish we could have
done a lot more, but just that
involvement. So when you speak
about the school attendance
liaisons that are, that are
doing these things. It's
incredibly important. I, I, I
would love to see more. I, I
know there are some districts of
the state where you've got to
leave one liaison covering
multiple schools and
That's incredibly hard to do,
especially if you're trying to,
we know that if you can make a
connection with the client,
you're gonna get better results.
And so it's really hard to do
that when you're not there all
the time and the, the students
aren't knowing you this and
that, they don't know what your
role is, that sort of thing. So,
um, to me that's, that, that's
incredibly important. I would
like to see more of that done
statewide.
Thank you. I, I appreciate that
as we are, um, having our budget
meetings and we'll be, uh will
be part of it and I see
or else the analysts here, um,
so he can look forward to me
bringing that up during our
discussions, um, and I agree
with you. I, I talk with my
school district here in Santa
Fe, and that is, that is one of
the, the requests that they have
for for the funding because
right now it isn't clear, um,
Yet, I guess how much they're
going to, how much they're going
to receive or if it's enough or
where they're going to be
getting their funding because
they want to continue and
actually expand the program
because it is beneficial and to
hear that also from you, um,
helps us with that um
discussion. um, Mr. Chair, on,
on, uh, I guess it's the page
number 640.
You know, this, those are just
totals in your presentation on
the 3rd page.
Um
In the 4th box down when
The last sentence that says that
um.
Can be referred to the court
system in if the client violates
the terms of the agreement under
the informal supervision. Do you
agree with that, Mr. Chair, or
do you feel like that there
should be uh interaction with
the courts, going back to maybe
some of the recommendations from
the um the DA.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, Madam
Representative, I, this is, it's
um
It's hard. I, I, I, I, there
needs to be more to you. There
needs to be something because
right now as it stands with the
absentee, it's where the kind of
the last.
Line and, and where does it go
after us? Well, there's really
nowhere for it to go and, and
knowing that we don't really
have the capacity or the ability
to enforce, we're having to give
families and clients to agree
and and while a lot can be said
that we get better results kind
of with that, that, that
approach, there are times when
it, it takes a little harder
line approach, and we do not
have the ability to do that
right now. Uh, and so,
I, I don't know what the answer
to that is. I'm, I'm not a huge
advocate of putting more clients
into the system. I, I, I, most
of the clients that we come into
contact with are, are there and
you look, start looking at their
history and there's significant
drama as they get into the
system, the system can at times,
uh, for trauma on them, and, and
it's not, it's not what we're
intending to do, but it just
happens cause that's how how
complicated the system is for
the family. So I'm not a
proponent of putting more kids
into the system, but I am a
proponent of of having a little
more teeth.
Thank you. It is a balance and
that that was a really good
answer. I appreciate that and
again, going back to these
multiple conversations that
we're having in in this regard,
I appreciate your time and your
thoughtfulness to this
conversation. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you.
Representel more.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. um, and,
uh, thank you, Mr. Adams. Um,
I'm um, I work for a local
school district in Valencia
County and um and we've heard
from multiple school districts
across the state, and I think
I, I, I won't, I won't say all
of them, but most of them
express a acute frustration with
this whole system that once it
goes to tier 4, it's nothing
happens and it goes by and it's
just this this vicious cycle.
What is it, is it, um,
I guess before I ask that
question, so, so it's, it's
basically a one department, it
gets to, to, to uh cheer for, it
goes to yours and then at that
point you decide whether it's a
student issue and it's a CYFD
issue or if it's a, a juvenile
justice, I mean, no, that, that
was gonna be justice issue or if
it's a lack of care or neglect
type of issue um with CYFD. Is
that, is that kind of how when
it gets there, that's how you,
you separate the two.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam
Representative. Uh, yeah, that
is exactly, that's one of the
things we're doing during our
preliminary court where, um, we
are mandatory reporters,
obviously, and we're looking
for, for signs of if there is
potentially educational neglect
or other signs of abuse or
neglect going on in the home, we
will, uh, then make a sky
referral, uh, statewide central
intake referral. Um, it is, it
is important to, to
differentiate the um
Juvenile justice will handle
absenteeism referrals at middle
school age and uh um for
elementary age, we're much less
effective. It it's, we have a
hard time getting through some
of those students and, and so
for those cases, those referrals
are typically gone. They go
through the protective services
side of the department where
they're looking at educational
neglect and that sort of thing
when we're talking that age
student, but we will absolutely
look for it. Um, with, with the
older clients as well. And, and
if we come across it, we make
that.
OK, thank you, uh, Mr. Chair,
and, um, Mr. Adams, I, so, so my
question is, how can we, cause
you said you go by uh you're
divided up into the judicial
districts. So is it that
specific judicial district that
is not
Following up or doing something
or like, cause, cause I, cause
I, I, as we're listening, I text
my, my truancy officer and, and,
and I asked, I said, has there
ever been meetings in all of
the, the ones that, that, you
know, from, um, for this when
you, when you refer to uh tier
4, and he goes, and, and he told
me, he goes, no, they kick it
back seeing lack of evidence.
And, and that's their
frustration and, and
unfortunately, there's a lot of
families and the ones that are
chronically that way, they
understand and they know how to
work the system and they and
they know that once it gets
there, oh, they're not gonna do
anything, and we can just ignore
it. The kids know it. I mean,
people, people get used to the
system. So, um, um, I thank God
that's a smaller percentage of
students, but it's still,
there's a lot of frustration
with the people that are truly
trying to do their job because
this is like you said, there is
no teeth any further, but then
they don't feel like there's
anything being done within that.
How can we remedy that? How can
we work with these school
districts, so they feel like
you're actually or or your
department is actually
partnering with them. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, Madam Representative,
I, it's in that there's so much
crossover between that question
and even then going back to the
delinquency side of things is,
is how do we prove kind of what
we're doing is or what we're
doing on some these things
because the school might not
always be aware, uh, you know,
if it, if it's
something that ends up falling
into the department's house,
well then there's a lot of
confidentiality issues that go
along with that, with, with
clients as they come into our
system and so there may be ways
in which we're handling it, but
the schools are just not privy
to, and we, you know, we, we
have an obligation to protect
information, so we want to share
when we have an opportunity to,
but there's sometimes we can't
share. Um, there's a lot of
these times when I hear, and I,
I've heard from a lot of school
districts about what we send it
and it just gets kicked back.
Um, well, it gets kicked back
with this request saying
This was missing from the
packet, like we, we need that to
enter it into our system. We
need that information to show,
hey, this, cause otherwise,
we're gonna get into that
meeting and the family's gonna
say, oh momma, your kids here,
they're just not marking them or
they're something else has
happened. So we need to have
everything in, in front of us to
go into that meeting, prepared
for whichever avenue the the the
family and the schools are gonna
go. If we don't have that, we're
not, we're not going to be very
effective in our media.
And so, um, when I've come
across situations like that,
I've, I've, I've reached back
out to the schools. I've had my
staff reach back out to the
schools, to whoever's sending
those referrals and this and
that and trying to explain more
of what we need, but to answer
your first question is, is it's
really not necessarily district
by judicial district by
district, it is school district
by district, um, is what I'm
finding. I can tell you, um,
again, I'm sorry, I keep going
back to Curry County, but
that's, that's where I'm based
out of now. Um.
Or one school district uh for a
long time, they, they sent a
lot. There are other school
districts in that county, but
I've never seen one absenteeism
referral from.
Um, and so, again, you've got
some big districts in the state
that are choosing and, and, and
I'm, and I wanna be clear, if,
if the school is dealing with it
appropriately. I have no issues
with that. I, if we don't need
to be there.
These informal cases, um, we're
judged a lot of times
legislatively on what we do on
our formal case load. So we know
the importance of informals at
the field level and, and it's a
stress, it's a stressor, it's a,
it's it's an emphasis for me and
for my staff. But we're gonna be
graded on what we do with the
formal case load. And so that at
times t tends to take priorities
sometimes, and so if we're not
getting those attend rules, then
it's just we have more time to
focus on these, but it's not a
desire on our end not to, um, I
We'll also add their, there were
some issues coming, coming out
of COVID, you know, I mean,
schools had a drastic change. We
had a drastic change in how we
operated it as well. Um, and
then kind of getting back from
that as we've gone through some
administrations, changes and
things like that. We've seen
some, some changes in staffing
in some different areas, and so
they've had to, to work out some
different agreements with
different school districts, um,
saying, you know, we, we really
don't have the manpower to go to
the school. Can you come and,
and do these appointments here,
and some school districts have
been
very open and yes, we'd prefer
that, some have said.
No, we're not doing that. And
again, that's, that's not my
call to make. It's theirs, so,
you know, all we can do is make
sure that we've given them an
opportunity to do it and if they
want to take it, then they can.
OK. Um, thank you. uh, Mr.
Chair, Mr. Adams, so
I'm just trying to figure out a
solution, cause I, like I said,
I've heard from many school
districts. Um, they're
frustrations. So is the
recommendation that they should
that school district that feels
that frustration should contact
your department and say, OK, can
we partner with you? Can we, you
know, what is it that we're not
doing? Can we, is there a
training that we need to look at
so I know how to properly fill
this stuff out, like what is it
that we can find some type of
solution because right now it's
just, oh, why bother?
cause it's just gonna come back
to us and nothing's gonna be
done. I mean, and that's their
frustration. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, Madam Representative,
this is, um, yes, absolutely.
They need to reach out to their
local district because, because
every chief that I have in the
state will be willing to go and
meet with them, um, every
supervisor that I have will be
willing to go and meet with him
and, and again, coordinate
cause, cause, cause again, we,
we see the bigger picture. If we
can't do something with this
now, and that's a client we will
likely not deal with later on.
So we're gonna put all the, all
the, we're gonna do everything
we can to help, but.
That's, that's as long as they
want us there. So if they're not
getting that interaction, they
absolutely need to reach, reach
their chief. If they can't get
them, then yeah, they call me
directly. I will make sure
somebody will be.
And, and, and Mr. Chair and Mr.
Adams, I, I agree with you with,
with that if we don't do it now
because I, I mean, I live in a
small town, so I know, I know
the, the, the few students that
are, uh, I know their families
and I know 2 or 3 years down the
line, what happens to these
kids? Um, if we can get them
there and get them graduated and
hopefully in a better job or
hopefully in something,
something else, um, uh, but, uh,
you know, a teacher's
frustration always is if I can't
get them in my classroom, I
can't teach him anything, so,
uh.
So, but thank you, thank you for
answering my questions, Mr.
Chair, if I can, uh, Madam
Representative, just to, um,
Uh
You know what I mean, I, I, I
appreciate your comments on the,
you know, where we want to get
with this, and again, it's,
it's, um, I, I just, I wanna
make sure that I emphasize
again, this is um
It is incredibly important to
us. Uh, this is, this is not
something that, that, that we
take lightly. It's, it's, yeah,
um, and while it's not a
delinquent act, again, our goal
as a as a as a probation officer
for all my staff is to, to, to
get kids on a path to lead them
to be successful citizens.
Whatever that path might be, and
so, um, if we can't address
this, um, at an early age you
get them in school, then we know
that's gonna help him, so.
Thank you. Thank you.
Questions from members. Um, so I
have a few questions and, and
thank you for joining us, Mr.
Adams, because I've been
primarily the voice in in trying
to get um you all here to, to
talk with us about this issue,
um.
And um,
OK
Yeah, I think represents Vlada
had been in the legislature when
we passed the attendance for
Success Act, uh, representative
Garrett, um, and this was a key
piece to it, cause like
represent Mido Amoya had
mentioned, like, this is, and
you mentioned Mr. Adams is like,
this is the endpoint and and
CYFD's involvement is, is
Is it as far as intervention and
where we go to get these
students back in, in school, and
I just want to say one other
thing before I get into my
questions about um uh what
represent Baca brought up was
also like,
With that we don't make that
distinction between what types
of absences there are. And, and
this is something that at the
time, we also went back and
forth on, and I think we settled
as a legislature on an absence
is an absence is an absence,
because for me as a teacher, um,
I have my class and what we're
doing for that day, and it's one
thing for students to, um, you
know, I could give them the
worksheet, I could give them the
reading, I could tell them what
to do, but I don't think that is
a substitute for the discussions
that we had in class, the
working through vocabulary
discussions, clarifying
questions, being able to have me
there, um, and, and that's
something that I, I think we
definitely at the time got
because yes, there's a place for
all different activities in the
school site.
But also my class as well has
the class of um um
Miss Moya and everybody else um
during this.
That school day, um, to make
sure that we're getting the most
out of our students and that
they're getting the most out of
us because, I mean, I take my
role as a teacher as seriously
as I do here, because, um, in
the legislature because I'm a
public servant here, but I'm
also a public servant in my
school, in my classroom, in my
constituency or my high
schoolers and their families.
And I'm paid to serve them, um,
and this is a part of it. Um, I
was talking with our director
here about how this
um during the presentation about
how this ties in with the um
presentation that we had this
morning on, on restorative
practices too. Um, I think the
one thing in this bill for
teachers where it mentions
teachers is that we take
attendance.
Every day that I'm there, I'm
accounting for my students who
are there. Those that may be
tardy, and then the attendance
teams are really the ones that
are collecting, sorting through
the data and making referrals.
And I guess, um,
That that would be my, my first
question is, Mr. Adams, like,
What has been your experience
with attendance teams and their
referrals and what's the process
from those referrals to what you
all are working.
Thank you was shirt. So, um, I
mean, the process for the
referrals is, is as I laid out.
I mean, the schools, uh, they
received the attendance, they,
um, once they reach that tier 4
status, they with this referral
form, send it in to us. They've
got required documentation
that's going to be there, and
again, it once, once it's
received by us, it starts a
process. We're, um, I mean you
talk about the distinction
between, um, you know, unexcused
and excused absences and while
that doesn't always factor in
whether or not they make the
referral or not. It's, it's
certainly something that we look
at.
Cause we want to go into the
meeting again prepared for that.
So, um,
Again, I, I think the, the areas
of the state that are being the
most successful maybe in dealing
with this, or at least the most
kind of on the ball and deal
Again, I, I think the, the areas
of the state that are being the
most successful maybe in dealing
with this, or at least the most
kind of on the ball and they
have those um attendance workers
in the schools, those, those
social workers that are really
doing that, they really have
kind of that history, so they're
able to come and and almost do,
I wanna say a warm handoff cause
they're not, uh, we don't want
them to give it up to us and
then just walk away. It's, it's,
but it's a, it's a warm handoff
and a, you know, a, a
collaborative effort with those
groups, and that's all we.
That always works out better,
so.
And I appreciate that. And I
guess um more specifically is um
what sort of interventions have
you seen as being successful
both from the attendance team
side and then um uh uh in any
interventions that you all have
done with students or families.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I, I, I
wish I could say that, oh, this
program is the perfect one. I, I
honestly, if I could, I probably
wouldn't be here right now
because every state in the
nation is dealing with these
issues. So, um, it, it really is
dependent on the student. Uh,
I've seen, um, programs that are
culturally relevant that are,
you know, that, that really, um
can connect with a student, kind
of, you know, where that student
is coming from, tend to be the
most successful. And again, that
that's either whether it's going
to a program, uh, a group
program like uh boys council
Girls' Circle programs are
tremendous programs. They've
actually done some, so there's
been some positive results
coming out of, out of those
programs with, with attendance,
um.
But, but really any program that
is, you know,
That's, that's gonna meet the
needs of the clients and each
client has a different needs, so
that's um it's hard to pinpoint
one specific thing. I will, I
will point out a couple of
restorative justice programs,
um,
Work really, really well in the
juvenile justice system, uh,
when we talk about delinquent
stuff, I've, I've, I've heard of
some schools attempting to do
some kind of restorative justice
stuff with attendance type
issues, um, I have not heard a
lot on the results of that, but
I think that that may be
something that would be
promising to explore looking
forward, um, mentorship
programs, things like that. Big
Brother, Big Sister, things like
that when we've got
opportunities to connect the uh
a student who's having trouble
with, um, an adult or a mentor
or somebody that can, you know,
show
from a different path or help
them see it, not necessarily not
lead them to it, but just show
them that there is a different
path that they choose to take
it. Um, those programs are the
most successful.
And, and I appreciate that, I
guess, um,
Because in the enforcement piece
of the attendance for Success
Act. It talks about additional
interventions and possible
monitoring. Um, have you all
been involved in monitoring or
any sort of, I guess,
outsidescribed methods of
dealing with um
These students
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So, so
when we talk about that, we're
talking about the informal
conditions that we do or we
refer to a program or, you know,
we may have the client work on
something specific for us, um,
in dealing with it in informal
supervision where we're putting
them on this, you know,
probation agreement and having
an expectation that they'll
follow it. Um, we have some
districts they, uh, statewide
that do, um, attendance
contracts in different ways. I,
I know they're done through the
school sometimes, but we've had
some where the probation office
has done it in, and those tend
to be
Um, you know, those are
effective for some. So, um,
again, I wish I could say there
was one size fits all, there's
really not. It's, it's, it's
each client is it kind of has to
be approached individually and
hey, this is what we need to do.
So, thank you. And, and I guess.
Being that it's so complex, how
do you all deal with that, um,
in terms of, I mean, part of
this was to provide resources
for those students, whatever
might be available in those
communities. How do you all
handle
That workload and plugging in
those students with where they
may or may not need to be. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Now you're
getting to the root of what,
what it is to be a probation
officer, so, uh, but, but the
reality, that's what we do,
it's, it's, it's get the whole
picture, because we'll receive
uh and it's the same way with
delinquent acts also, and we
received a report, it gives you
a narrative on what happened,
but that might not be the whole
story, and so our job is to, you
know, connect with the family,
connect with the client. Let's,
let's get to the root of what
the problem.
as it may not just be, you know,
I can't tell you how many times
on a delinquent side of things,
I'll get a client in for
shoplifting, and then the, the,
the
quote unquote punishment for
that, never even really deals
with shoplifting. It was
something else that led to the
shoplifting, and that's what I'm
gonna do it. It's the same with
absenteeism. A lot of times
it's, it's not necessarily
something specific. It's not a
teacher that they don't like or
something like that. It's just a
matter of, you know, there may
be something going on in the
home, uh, that, you know, um,
different things that, that just
maybe the, the parents haven't
told the school about, they're
embarrassed to tell the school
about for whatever reason. Um,
so, so we really have to dig,
um, to, to get to.
what's at the root of that
problem, and then, um, figure
out what the best way to to deal
with that is, and that's, again,
whether it's, but we do that on
a daily basis, whether it's
Delinquent probation or whether
it's, it's fences, so.
And, and I guess that leads to
my other question is that are
these cases of attendance are
they a part of the workload for
juvenile probation officers in
general, so they're just a part
of the entire caseload or their
specific
Uh, um, JPOs that are assigned
to attendance issues
specifically. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Uh, in each district
we'll do it a little differently
and I've given my districts a
little bit of freedom to, to
kind of adjust for whatever, you
know, whatever their needs of
their communities are, um, there
are some areas of the state that
yes, they'll have a specific
staff that's assigned, that's
what they want. So that's,
that's what they deal with and
so they'll deal with all the
attendance issues in that, in
that area there may be two
staff, um, there are a lot of
other districts around the state
that they're just, they're
d iv vi ed up just like the
regular uh delinquent cases, uh,
and assigned out that way. So,
um, it's really, however, each
case, each district decides to,
to deal with it, um.
I, I don't really have a
preference and I have, there's
no, there's no difference on
outcomes, um, it, it, it helps
when you've got somebody that
deals with it all the time
because it is
They're knowledgeable in it, but
I can also tell you that for
probation officer and
absenteeism, a truancy case is
some of the most frustrating
things that we'll have, that we
have to deal with, because
again, it's, it's not, um,
With probation cases, we can
always say if you violate this,
we're gonna take you back in
front of the judge and the judge
is going to do this or we can
issue a warrant and you know,
you're gonna go to, so we have
something to, I don't threaten
it, but we can't tell them, hey,
this is gonna be the outcome. On
an absentee is in case we can't
really do that other than to
say, look, if you don't follow
through with this, or if you
guys aren't willing to agree to
do this. We're just gonna
document it because it's a
referral to our, and when you
end up back on a delinquent
case, that's, we're gonna
Take that information um into
account also, uh, with the
delinquent thing. So, um,
There you go.
And, and, and what's the follow
up like that?
What does, what does that look
like? So once you make a
recommendation or outline some
sort of plan to try to get these
students back in school, um, and
it gets referred back to the
school district. What is the
follow up with the attendance
team, the administrators at the
school, as far as
Um, with CYFD.
I think it was. So are you
talking on uh cases that have
been like set like we sent back
saying we need more information
or cases that, hey, we've gone
in and done the PI and making a
decision. I think making the
decision primarily. So, thank
you, Mr. Char. In most cases,
uh, again, that, that's why that
PI is taking place there, uh, at
the schools, we've got everybody
kind of there or it's in the
office with everybody, you know,
in attendance, so it, it tends
to be, we prefer to, we prefer
kind of group decision making on
some of these things because
Uh, again, it doesn't do us any
good to set a client up for
failure, um, with some of the
stuff that we're doing. So we
want to make sure that it's
something that the family can
comply with that the that the
that the youth can get behind in
the, the schools can support,
so, uh, you know, we, we attempt
to do that if it's a
specifically difficult case
where we can't come to an
agreement there, the probation
officer will take it back. We,
we regularly do it, it's called
teenings, um, where there is a
uh a meeting between the
probation officer there super.
adviser, the chief will have uh
clinical staff from the
probation office there that can
be a part, we'll invite school
officials to be a part, um, and,
and again, we'll, we'll kind of
sit down and hash out, uh,
potential outcomes, um for how
this would work or what we think
would be best if we can't come
to an agreement and
That's how, that's how we do it.
And, and I guess my last
question is, is, and I think you
spoke in part to this a little
bit earlier was um the use of
the Children's code because part
of that is that once the
referral is made, um,
Uh, the, the attendance for
Success Act says that um
Students should be considered to
be neglected child or a child,
um, in need of services because
of excessive absenteeism and
thus subject to the provisions
of the Children's code. Um,
In what sort of way has that
been used? Have you all used the
children's code in any of these
cases that you've brought to us.
Thank you sure. Yeah, yeah,
absolutely. We, we talked
earlier about making the sky
referrals. If we see any signs
of neglect or abuse or anything
like that. Um, certainly with
those younger level elementary
age students, things like that,
a skyros made and, and
protective services starts their
process in that investigation.
If we see it with an older
client, um, you know, the, the
maybe non-compliance things like
that. One of the things that we
do before we do a preliminary
inquiry is, um, we'll search the
case. Is there, has there ever
been a history of protective
services involvement with this.
If there is, we'll encourage
their worker to come and be a
part of the conversations moving
forward, um, if they're not,
then, um, if we think it's
something that needs to be
brought to their attention,
we'll absolutely do it. And, and
then we'll follow up with with
the protective services workers
and um whatever assistance that
they need with the case, and
we're there, we're there to
support and work together.
Great. And I, I really
appreciate you being here and,
and being willing to answer
questions because I think this
is a key piece of the attendance
for Success Act that we have in
order to make this system.
system it is and to get our
students back in school that I
think a lot of our schools have
have come to look to for
guidance and rely upon. So
things that we can do to
strengthen the department, um,
in the work that you all do in
order to uh get our students
back in school, please let us
know in the ways that we can
help. I think for sure, and I
will say I, I'm, I, I, I was,
uh, had the opportunity to meet
with um Deputy Cabinet Secretary
Padilla, uh, last week in
regards to some stuff there's a
uh I think a task force being.
Created, I mean, um, to, to work
on this, and I'm gonna be part
of that moving forward, so so
I'm very excited about that, the
partnership, um, that we can
have there, you know, I think
we've, we've worked well with
administrations and the, with
the PD in the past, but again,
we have a change in
administrations and all the
players change and it's, and
it's, I think trying to connect
people with who they need to be
talking to right now, so.
Yeah, I, I appreciate that and
if there's any room for the task
force for us, said LESC, we
would certainly appreciate that
to see what, um, um, may or may
not need to be done as far as
attendance and attendance for
success. Thank you so much.
Thank you all very much. Thank,
thank you, members of the
committee. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
All right, folks, so
Um, OK, I'm counting. Um,
So we have some business that we
haven't done yet. So we need to
approve our agenda that we're
almost 2/3 of the way through
already. Um, so do I have a
motion to approve our agenda.
Mr. Chairman, to approve today
this agenda in November agenda,
the November agenda, right, not
just today. It's awesome. Do you
have a second? All right, um,
multiple hands, so I'll give
that to represent Moya. Is there
any objection to adopting our
agenda, seeing none.
We have an agenda, and then the
minutes from our October
meeting, so hopefully you
represent a lot of you did your
reading to report out on those
minutes or dramatic reading of
those minutes, preferably, OK.
No? OK. Can I have promotion?
All right.
Thank you, Representative.
Can I say second Pope.
Um, any opposition?
Seeing none.
We have our minutes. All right.
Maybe next time represent a lot.
Um,
All right. So we're going to
Go to our, obviously we're a
little bit early, but we'll
start with the folks that are in
our audience here and see if we
get our Zoom populated with
anybody that wishes to make
public comments, so thank you
all for signing up. Um, you'll
have up to 2 minutes, um, to
address us about the issue of
your choice. So we're here to
listen. Again, thank you for
being here. And then we'll start
with um Nine.
Please, please, if you would
make your way up to the
microphone.
Thank you for joining us. We
really appreciate your
participation.
And you'll have up to 2 minutes
once you start talking, so
please, welcome.
Mr. uh,
you said 2 minutes?
Yes, please, and we have the
clock up there if you need a
visual cue. Thank you. Uh,
sometimes I'm just
Looking into captioning and
looking at
people and uh thank you very
much gets distracting. Uh, well,
it's uh how I track.
Um, thank you very much. My name
is Nat Dean. I am a disability
advocate and I'm a person with
multiple disabilities.
And I may not need the 2
minutes. Excuse me. I wanted to,
um,
Really compliment the
presentation about uh the
restorative, and now I'm raton
Public Schools restorative, uh,
Roadmap,
because this is the thing I've
been talking about all along.
We've talked about restraint and
seclusion as an issue, is that
it's the modeling and knowing
that the team that's being built
that supports the modeling is
modeling exactly what that would
be. So that if we utilize
conflict control.
As adults are officers using
force to control.
That is the model is that is the
mechanism that one would utilize
to uh to do conflict resolution
is through force, and the
collaborative approach to
conflict resolution is a
collaborative approach where
where you build on the um model
that they so beautifully
explained, which is build
positive relationships and focus
on preventative strategies,
improve culture and climate
within all of our organization
with our families, with our
stakeholders who are
The learners and reduce
substantial suspensions in time
from learning and mitigate any
biases in our disciplinary
actions, and the exact
interventional strategies that
are utilized to prevent
absenteeism is if you can get
there and you can have a
positive experience. You're
gonna want to get there and
increase the positive
experiences. Thank you very
much, Mr. Chair, madam, Vice
Chair, I believe. Um, I don't
see vice chair and members of
the committee, members of the
public. I so much appreciate
your service. And as we
And the interim and move into
the session, it will be an even
heavier lift and I always
appreciate that we lift that
together. Thank you.
Great. Thank you for joining us.
Uh, Sarah.
Sala.
So welcome, you have up to 2
minutes.
Thank you. Good afternoon, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
thank you for the opportunity to
speak today. My name is Sarah
Salazar, and I'm a parent of a
wonderful first grader here in
Santa Fe. Um, I wanted to bring
your attention again back to the
attendance for Success Act, I
believe there was an oversight
when it was created and that it
left out any distinction for
students with disabilities. Um,
there are considerations for
extracurricular activity
participation, pregnant and
parenting students, religious
training, and tribal.
obligations, but nothing for
students with disabilities.
I will briefly share my
experience and with your
permission, Mr. Chair, I've
provided more information on
those standouts. Um, our first
grader has multiple disabilities
that affect his ability to
learn. He has a chronic illness
that turns severe with any virus
he picks up at school.
Um, and he also has a very low
incidence of vision disability,
vision impairment, uh, that we
see a specialist provider for
weekly and everything is in
Albuquerque. Um, we have a
section 504 plan in place that
provides accommodation for these
frequent absences and has a plan
for mitigating learning loss,
uh, education is critical,
critically important to my
family, and we fully support
keeping him in school as much as
possible.
Unfortunately, it's not always a
choice for students with
disabilities. Um, so a few weeks
ago we received a notice that
our child's attendance is at a
tier 3, with ongoing care that
we know about and cold flu
season coming up. We're probably
gonna wind up at a tier 4. This
is really scary as a family and
as a parent, and we're doing
everything we can, um, but we
just feel like this was an
oversight in the law to not have
any special consideration for
students with disabilities. And
so
I respectfully request your
leadership to address this.
Thank you very much.
Great. Thank you for joining us.
We appreciate it.
All right, we have
Stand rounds.
In a minute, stand, so you have
up to 2 of them to address this,
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much.
Well, that's a live mic. Let me
sit back here.
So first of all, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, we
want to congratulate you.
On your choice of your director,
John Senna.
We have tremendous confidence in
him.
Our organization both
superintendents and the
educational leaders of the
state.
We want to thank you for making
that decision, John, welcome. We
look forward to working with
you. Now, Mr. Chairman, I'm
gonna tell you how we're number
one in the state of New Mexico
cause I want to give you a
history lesson. In 1974, the
state equalization guarantee was
produced, but in 1976,
The state of New Mexico took on
the challenge of special
education.
By amending that equalization
guarantee to fund.
A special education students.
We are the only state.
Including all 49 other states
and the District of Columbia
were the 1st $1 for special
education is the state dollar.
The 2nd dollar is the federal
dollar.
I've been reminding my
colleagues of that because as we
look at national policy, things
that may occur or may not occur.
I want people to understand that
in New Mexico, we will continue
to stand number one, and we
should not apologize uh.
Last point, Mr. Chairman.
Yeah, 31 seconds, wow. So last
point, Mr. Chairman, uh, you saw
two tremendous examples of why
we support local control when
you had the restorative
practices, presentation this
morning. I want to remind all of
us.
Those were done by local
decision makers.
Using local control to get
local.
Solutions, a local problems.
That's why we say we need to pay
attention to local control.
Thank you. Thank you.
All right.
Next on the list.
Joey and
I couldn't think fast enough of
a fake name to like stop your
pacing to the front as a joke,
so I went with you. Thank you,
Mr. Welcome. You have 2 minutes.
I've been uh listening to you
yesterday and today over at the
office across the street, so
thought I'd come over and say
hello and congratulate you as
well on your selection of John
Senna as your director and uh we
we've worked with him a lot in
the past that we respect him and
think very highly of it.
Second of all, I wanted to
invite you to our annual
convention that we're having
this year, December 12th through
the 14th in Albuquerque, uh,
will be taking, of course,
conducting some training and
also electing our officers,
approving our our budget and our
legislative program.
Uh, so, uh, we have some great
general session speakers
including John, that'll be there
to provide an update on your
committee activities. So please
uh come by on that Friday
morning is the general session
on the 13th.
Uh, the other thing I wanted to
just remind you that we will be
here to present to you at your
next meeting as our individual
associations and also as our
partners group. So we look
forward to seeing you then and
uh again, thank you for all the
work that you do.
Great. Thank you, Joe. We don't
have anybody else in the
audience.
We have one person on Zoom.
All right, so we have Jan
Williams. Hi, Jen, you'll have
up to 2 minutes. Welcome. Thank
you for joining us.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
committee members, um, as you
heard, my name is Dan Williams.
I'm a STEM advocate and a fellow
of the Society of Women
Engineers, you've heard from me
before. Some of you are aware
that I'm part of a group that's
advocating to create a
centralized stem innovation
network in New Mexico and this
was briefed at LESC in July and
you're going to hear more about
it in December, but I made a
connection today with two of the
briefings that I heard over the
last two days on topics that are
absolutely crucial to underpin
whatever efforts we undertake.
with this bill that I'm talking
about uh to ensure access to
STEM learning and exposure to
STEM pathways for every child in
New Mexico. We cannot reach
every student and offer access
to equal education without
ubiquitous broadband access and
digital device accessibility.
Everything we're doing to
achieve that goal, um, is, um,
going to be really important and
uh to this stem innovation
network and uh all the other
education efforts that we've
been talking about, and
similarly, we
track our success, uh, in the
desired outcomes for the STEM
innovation network without the
longitudinal data on students
through their academic journey.
So I want to thank you all for
hearing such rich input on these
essential issues. I, I think you
all understand how important
these things are to underpin
everything you're trying to do
and to improve education
throughout strategic investments
which was yet another topic. So,
um,
Special acknowledgement as well
to the LESE director and staff
for their thorough research and
thoughtful presentations, and I
thank you for your time.
And for Director Senna, you're,
you're no longer just John, you
are director Senna.
Thank you so much. We appreciate
you being here and joining us
and actually the closed
captioning on Zoom workplace is
pretty good.
So relying on it. All right, so.
Endorsement of sorts, I guess,
unofficial, but.
Thank you also, we don't have
any other public comment that
concludes our business for
today. We'll see you all back at
9 o'clock. So, thank you, folks.
