That was quick.
Representative Johnson, Mr.
Chair. Madam Chair, colleagues,
and our guests and, uh,
presenters here today. I'm
representative Wanda Johnson. I
represent House District 5,
which entails McKinley in San
Juan Counties. I represent the
east side of Gallup and 15
Navajo chapters. I'm glad to be
here. I always like to be on
this campus.
Thank you so much.
And Senator
Liz Stefanik, Senate District
39, parts of six counties,
Bernolio, Santa Fe, San Miguel,
Torrance, Valencia, and a little
bit of Burn Leo. Thank you. It's
always a pleasure to be in this
committee. I was in water and
Natural Resources the past two
days.
Thank you all. I think everybody
else had a chance to introduce
themselves, so Mr. Chair, I have
an announcement we have an
announcement from the vice
chair. you. Good morning.
Yesterday was Mr. Chair's
birthday, and we missed it. So
we have a cake today and if
someone would start us on Happy
Birthday besides me, I would
appreciate it.
Day 2.
happy birthday to you.
Happy birthday.
Hey.
Happy birthday to you.
And makes 82.
Oh, I'm sorry, Yvette Ramirez
Ammerman, the CEO of the primary
care association.
is here to bring us up to date
on what's happening.
And how we might be helpful
during the upcoming session.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Members of
the committee, um, it's a
privilege speaking before you
today.
Um, I'd like to offer my deepest
thanks to those of you who have
supported us for decades in the
legislature and continue to do
so. We really appreciate those
of you who have made it out to
clinic visits and site tours and
been able to see the incredible
diversity of what community
health centers are.
So I want to talk a little bit
today about who we are, what we
do, and then the challenges that
we're facing and what we're
asking of you and I know that
many of you will have questions.
We have been in the press. I am
happy to talk about that. I'm
hoping we can wait till the end
to see.
Um,
So I've been CEO of the Mexico
Primary Care Association this
time around for about 20 months.
Um, it is a great time to be
there. We have a lot going on.
Good morning, Senator.
And PowerPoint,
so keep that in mind.
But community health centers
have also been serving New
Mexico for over 50 years. We are
the backbone of New Mexico's
primary care safety net. So if
you look at page 2, this
describes our mission.
To promote the imm advancement
of high quality
And responsive to the
communities that we serve.
We are one of the best
investments the state and nation
can make in healthcare.
For every $1 invested, we've
saved $6 in specialty and
hospital care.
Next page.
Here's the basics of a community
health centers becoming
federally qualified health
centers. Also lookalikes are
very similar to us. It is a
designation that requires an
application process and has
expectations of ongoing
reporting and monitoring.
Every organization that is a
federally qualified health
center must be located in.
A high need area or serve a high
need community, rural
underserved. So many of you are
from the Albuquerque area. In
Albuquerque, we have Albuquerque
Health Care for the homeless. We
have First Nations with which
serves urban Indians who are in
Albuquerque.
And many, many uninsured folks.
There was the idea when we began
that any healthcare provider
should be governed by the
patience of that provider. So
one of our requirements is to
have 51% of our board of
directors, our governing boards,
be patients of the clinic's
services.
And I just want to say that we
are all not for profit. That
means the money that goes to
community health centers
federally qualified health
centers stays in New Mexico. You
can be assured of that.
We provide a comprehensive array
of services, and we accept all
people regardless of ability to
pay, and we do it on a sliding
fee scale according to their
income.
And last, we have an ass quality
assurance program. I'll talk
about a little bit later that
promotes ongoing quality
improvements. You got to hear
about some of them with echo
yesterday.
Um.
Next page, so page 4.
This is federally qualified.
Health centers and look-alikes.
Providing geographic access to
care. So if you look at this map
and I probably could get you a
bigger one. I was hoping we'd
have a big projection, um, but
you will see that we are in
places where no one else is,
right? So whether that is Gmado
wagon mound, uh, Alma Gordo, um,
we actually have some Vio Rancho
as well, uh, gel, um, Silver
City, Lord.
s burg Raton, those are all
places that we are Gallup
grants. We have clinics in all
of those areas, um.
We have over 200 locations.
And we are serving 32 out of 33
New Mexican counties.
Last year, we cared for 331,000
New Mexicans.
I do want to make the point
right here that as you can see,
even though we've heard a lot
about our urban centers in the
news, 80% of our community
health centers, federally
qualified federally qualified
health centers are in rural and
frontier areas, 80%.
So I want to talk about a little
bit about what's behind a name.
As I have listened, even if I
wasn't here to your proceedings,
um, up till this point, I have
heard a lot of people come into
this space and talk about being
clinicas or family clinics or,
you know, community health
centers
when they aren't the same as we
are. They are not held to the
same standards that we are. We
are hyperlocal.
And so I want to talk about
One of the oddities of community
health centers federally
qualified health centers. We all
have different names. It's
really hard to know who is what.
So I just want to name a few.
Um, we talked about Albuquerque
Healthcare for the homeless, Ben
Archer, uh, down in Hatch, um,
Hidalgo Medical Services, Silver
City Lordsburg Deming, first
choice, Albuquerque, First
Nations, Albuquerque, La
Clinicca de Familia who serves a
whole group of people through
Las Cruces.
San Miguel, all the way up to
Chaparral, um, La Familia Santa
Fe las Ciccas del Norte
del del Norte El Rito Abeque.
Lessue de Ria Riva Tierra Maria
Presbyterian Medical Services
and to be super clear, this is
not Presbyterian Health
Services. They did start way
back when, both with the
Presbyterian Church in the
1800s, but they're completely
different entities. We are the
nonprofit community-based
entity. Presbyterian Medical
Services. Uh, Southwest Care
centers and Sunrise clinics,
that's just to name a few.
Um.
Next page. I already made the
point. 80% of us are in rural
access point areas and frontier.
So this is how our numbers of
clinics break down.
Medical services, we have 112
sites, dental services, 61,
behavioral health services, 101
sites, many of them co-located
with medical and dental. We
believe in the one stop shop
model, which is if we get
someone that's unlikely to
access care into one of our
clinics, we want to make sure
that we give them the most
services we can because we may
not see him for a while again.
And I, I want to talk about our
behavioral health services. When
on April 6th in 2016. Another
health, uh, behavioral health
provider from Arizona.
Closed up shop, put on, sorry,
we're closed on the window and
left the state.
Right? This is after we had
decimated our behavioral
healthcare system through, um,
Allegations of fraudulent that
weren't there.
Um,
it was at that time that
community health centers
federally qualified health
centers were asked, or soon
after that time to step up, that
we would take over places where
these, these behavioral health
centers had not survived.
This terrible situation of being
called fraudulent, having to
prove that they weren't and then
having companies come in and
leave within a very short time.
So we were asked to step up and
we have, and we'll talk a little
bit more about that, um.
We in particular there's 101
sites. When you look at where
our behavioral health sites are.
We have 4, clinic systems which
in particular have taken this
on.
That is the backbone of the
rural behavioral health
infrastructure of the state.
Um,
We have school-based health
centers, 80 of them. We work
very closely with the
school-based Health Association.
Um.
Next page, I just always feel
like even though everyone talks
about federal poverty level,
they don't often really think
about what that means. So, you
know, if you're below 100%,
you're making $31,000 for a
family of four.
You know, 46,000 for a family of
4 at 150%. Community health
centers in New Mexico serve 60%
of all New Mexicans living below
100% of the federal poverty
level and it's low.
So, um, I apologize that I I
don't have 2323 numbers for
this, so there's going to be a
little bit of a disparity, but,
um,
In any given year, these are
pretty consistent. We serve
24,000 migrants seasonal farm
workers. 13,000 homeless
patients.
Almost 15,000 school-based
patients.
7500 veteran patients
24482 prenatal care patients. We
have almost 1 million medical
visits, dental visits, 221,000
mental health and substance
abuse visits 483,000 again,
where we stepped up.
Health education, case
management, 76,000 Vision and
other visits, 12,000.
So these are our most vulnerable
New Mexicans that we are serving
totaling about, uh, just shy,
well, 176 million visits in
2022.
So how do we keep people out of
expensive
hospital visits, ER visits,
specialty care, um, we've
already been recognized by New
Mexico Department of Health and
New Mexico Healthcare Authority,
um, that we provide preventive
services, treatment and control
of chronic diseases and we are
critical for low income and
vulnerable folks.
We provide wraparound services,
um, translation, transportation,
uh, we have outreach and
eligibility workers who when
Medicaid was unwinding, we were
signing them back up if they
were eligible.
Um, low low income energy
assistance, LIheat, low-income
water assistance LWAP.
Um, TANF, we signed them up and
we do case management and
transportation. I said, yeah.
So we've been the leaders for
decades in training community
health workers and before they
were certified community health
workers and had great data to
support them we already knew.
they had been around for 40
years called promontoras, and
they were people with deep roots
in the communities who informed
our healthcare, who understood
what people's needs were and
treated them with respect and
with the cultural competence
that they deserved.
Um.
So I, I, I'm gonna pause there
just to talk a little bit about
um.
Our visit and um representative
Cates isn't here today, but she
visited our behavioral health
center in, um,
In Las Cruces at La Familia and
one of the providers there
really.
Explicated why we're so
important. He had a woman come
in that had diabetes and she had
been doing stellar for a year
and she came in and her A1C was
off the chart.
And he kept asking her, you
know, can, can you tell me if
anything has changed in your
life? You know, is anything
going differently? Are you, you
know, able to get your
medications, you know, is, is
everything OK? And she wouldn't
answer and she wouldn't answer.
With persistence, he finally got
her to answer and he found out
that their air conditioning in
their apartment had gone out.
And so to keep cool, she was
eating popsicles all day, you
know, the little popsicles all
day.
And she was so ashamed to tell
him that she was eating
popsicles all day and that their
air conditioning had gotten out,
had gone out. Um, this provider
called in promontora community
health worker, and said, how can
we help this person get back on
track because she's in a
dangerous area and um they
contacted the power company. The
power company was able to get
them an air conditioner and she
was back on track. This is all
conducted in
Spanish
I don't know that other
providers would have taken the
time to get out of her something
she felt very embarrassed about,
but this provider did. That's
how we roll.
Um.
And I just want to talk about a
couple of quality indicators. We
report on 16 different measures.
Um, we are better than the
national average on controlling
hypertension and diabetes,
depression, and dental sealants.
It's not a perfect record, but
it is strong and we work very
hard to meet all of those
outcomes measures.
Um
Behavioral health and substance
abuse screenings and
intervention. When we stepped
up, it was our understanding
that we would be paid reasonably
for those services. We are still
working on that and I, I have to
say that, uh,
We weren't doing much behavioral
health 25 years ago when I was
in this position, but we are now
and we're still trying to wrap
our arms around the billing and
the services provided, um, we
hear different things like some
people, it's just not worth
billing, even though their
service is provided.
And so we're going to work very
closely with the healthcare
authority to try to work through
these issues, um, thank you,
Representative Chavez, um, the,
the issue with, um, community
health workers being certified,
having billing code numbers for
the, you know, first time is
very exciting, but there are
obstacles to making that billing
work. And so we haven't yet seen
payments.
So many of us have not yet seen
payments. There's a
You,
um, electronic health records
that are able to do it, but a
lot are not, um.
So
Next page, page 10.
I am really reluctant.
To put this page out because it
is averages of patients by
insurance. It is unduplicated
patients.
And it really hides the
incredible spectrum of how many
different clinics serving
different communities, have a
different patient mix and a
different insurance mix. So if
you look at the kind of light
blue you'd see 20% uninsured
patients. Well, I know for a
fact, and let me introduce my
great, um, staff people. This is
Deb Rochford. She's our chief
programs office.
So, this is Melissa Manlove, our
chief compliance officer. These
are the people that helped me
put this together. They crunch
the numbers and they really dug
deep to figure out what's going
on with community health centers
with federally qualified health
centers.
Why are
Some in such distress. So, so
that's why I say I really want
to pause here. So there are, you
know, clinics that serve much
higher than 20% uninsured. You
know, it's up to 44% of their
patients are uninsured and
getting on a slide lengthy
scale. So I, so I don't like the
way this masks.
The outliers that are really
just doing the good work. Um, we
have 39% Medicaid. Thank you to
all of you who in 23 and 24 gave
us $2 million from the
legislature, which was then
matched to provide, um, an
increase in the rates for
Medicaid payments. We haven't
yet seen the 24 money but we're
in talks with um with uh Dana
Flannery, and we expect
That that will happen in October
and so we are very much looking
forward to that and appreciate
the two-way conversation that
we've been able to have.
Um, 17% is Medicare.
And then we have 23%.
is private. And I just want to
say.
Clearly, both with Medicare and
with private. They do not pay
necessarily for all of the
services that we provide.
Medicare doesn't pay for dental.
So if you go into our dental,
you know, if you get dental care
from us, we are probably taking
a hit on, um, the services that
we provide for dental, um.
about private, does that include
commercial insurance and
self-pay, or is it just
commercial?
Sorry, I need to go light can be
on there.
OK.
Um,
so the uh the self pay for
uninsured is, is in the, the
20%. But there is private
insurance, commercial insurance,
be well in that 23%.
OK. So, so.
On your chart here as private is
is commercial. If somebody pays
their own, it's under uninsured.
OK.
No, actually, if they get, if
they have any kind of insurance
coverage, it's included in that
23% if they are underinsured, we
still provide the services, but
they are included in that 23%.
But we are probably having to do
bad write off or find some other
funding stream for the things
that they get, um, that are not
included in their own insurance.
Same thing with Medicare, you
know.
Advantage plans may not have the
same kind of reimbursement or
cover the same services that we
provide.
And we are, we're required to
provide it. I mean, that's part
of being federally qualified. We
have to provide the same
services to everyone that comes
in our doors, so.
Um,
Let's see what else about that,
um.
Yeah, so, uh, we still lose
money on Medicaid patients, and
we'll talk a little bit about
that.
Going forward even with the
extra dollars you provided, we
are still losing money on
Medicaid patients.
Uh, page 11 is challenges in
recruitment, retention.
Um, and training of workforce.
I have listened to.
Many, many hours of this
conversation in this committee.
I am not going to read this
slide to you. I'm going to point
out, um, that I think we are
especially adversely affected
because we don't have the money
for the kind of salaries that
are being expected.
I will also say that if another
provider opens up in a community
in which we are located and
They're allowed to operate at a
loss and still be reimbursed.
They may very well take our
providers and it's happened.
So
Um, the other thing I will say
is that residents and new
graduates take a lot of extra
time, um, please pay preceptors.
Um, challenge number 2.
You guys know this, um, there is
no way that any kind of payment
source has been able to keep up
with inflation in the last few
years and um.
With that, I did want to pause.
It's a, it's a slide that I took
out of the slide deck. I tried
to keep it.
So that we'd have lots of time
to talk afterwards, but I do
just want to pause for a second
and talk about the impact of the
pandemic.
So one of the impacts of the
pandemic is that our folks when
they come in to see us, have
much more serious and severe
issues. So they take much longer
to serve, um,
Primary care clinics federally
qualified health centers across
New Mexico. We saw over 200,000
patients during the pandemic,
and these are the patients who
are hard to get. So, you know,
people within the local
community, we were serving,
especially in really critical
frontier areas, um, we continue
to distribute free home tests as
well as provide diagnosis and
treatment. Um,
There was a period of time where
we were getting uh American
Recovery Act funds, and those
funds made sure that we were
able to keep
Our dentists who were not
having, not seeing patients at
that point. It helped us to
improve our clinics so that
there was social distancing, um,
and really just retain staff all
across the state.
Those are all gone. All that
money is gone and it was a hard
cliff for some of the clinics
and is part of
issues
Um,
Cybersecurity, huge. We got to
do it. We got to pay for it.
There's a few clinics who've
been hacked and we just have to
stay on top of it and it's not
cheap.
So before I kind of do some wrap
up, I want to spend some time on
page 13.
Um,
Loss of existing revenues and
patience.
So
I think across the board it's
safe to say that the financial
stability and robustness of
clinic clinics across the state
has been compromised. I wanna
talk about, and again, this is,
you know, we were really asking
the question why are so many
clinics having such a hard time,
and the answer is really
complicated. I mean, there's
some very simple answers, but
the answers are complicated.
Um, we'll start here. So.
We have federal funding, um, to
help us pay for uninsured
patients and sliding fee
discount patients, right? That
funding has been flat since
2015. No increases.
Talked about the end of
COVID-related supplemental
payments.
And then there is the revenue
stagnation and loss and delayed
payments. And this is
multivariate.
Um, I will say that last year
the state rural primary Health
Care Act funds, which is
completely different from the
governor's rural Health Delivery
Fund.
Although it's confusing, um, we
had 4 different delays on
getting money out to providers,
and that's money that supports
their overall, um, operations
right now, we are in another
situation, and this is not
necessarily DOH. This is
administrative services
division.
I think DOH has done their job.
We're getting stuck in the
procurement part of this, and
That bears some more looking
into. Some of you are, are on
top of this change hack change
is an intermediary of the
billing,
um, United Healthcare
Presbyterian Healthcare, um,
were dramatically impact. We, we
were providing to them paper
bills again.
And so I had a huge amount of
backlog of delayed payments,
really hurting our clinics.
I don't need to talk to anyone
in this committee about
credentialing delays. Let me
just say it is a sad thing that
we cannot be in a place that all
of the MCOs have the same
credentialing process and that
we don't have to spend immense
administrative time doing this.
And Jerry, I heard, I heard you
on that.
Sorry, Mr. Chair,
I, I, I thought we had a
commitment that that would not
be part of the new contracts,
but
It is, it still is. They still
have the opportunity to do their
own credentialing and it makes
absolutely no sense.
Thank you Mr. Chair. We couldn't
agree more.
Um, Medicaid unwinding.
When people lost their Medicaid
eligibility.
Sometimes they didn't know until
they showed up in the clinic. So
they were going to get services
no matter what, whether or not
we got paid by Medicaid.
I will also say, having been
going out on site visits and
talking to people, eligibility,
um, people who do enrollments,
they say.
We're not really sure where they
go. They don't necessarily get
on be well. They don't
necessarily come back to our
clinics without their Medicaid
coverage on the uninsured side,
we're just worried that they're
not getting care and are they
ending up in emergency rooms.
That is one of the things we
don't have a complete answer
about, but we're working on it.
Contracting and billing issues.
What can I say? slow billing,
um, out of compliance with the
laws. It is like teeth pulling
sometimes.
Um, increase in prescription
costs, and we're going to talk a
little bit more about that
towards the end, um.
Yeah.
Uh, so,
Couple quick summary pages. Um,
we are providing more services
to more low income and rural
communities than ever.
We're providing better quality
care and utilizing management
tools and technology to make it
even better. Talked about having
increased our behavioral health
capacity to almost 500,000
visits in our clinics per year.
And we continue to be economic
engines in our community, and
I'll use a quick example of um
our visit to Portales to La Casa
debuna salute, uh, so when, and
thank you so much everyone that
showed up to the clinic site
visit, but one of the things
that Serina Montano talked about
is is the the
The resources that community
health centers bring into a
community. So they were able to
um, build a, um, a senior center
behind the clinic and that, um,
senior center was paid for by
city, county, community
development block block grant
money and, um, FQHC dollars from
the primary care capital pool.
So, like, just an incredible
amount of bringing things
together, partnership.
That
result in really great services
for the community and many of
our communities, um, centers
have senior centers.
Um, we're economic engines, uh.
We have 4000 staff across the
state and those are people who
are working in these communities
and keeping these communities
alive.
Next page, um, we have
bipartisan support, um, and some
of that is just that we are both
rural and urban and, and tend to
have an understanding that we
are the safety net
infrastructure.
Um.
Yeah.
I've said all of that other
stuff, so we're gonna go to the
last page and then I'll, um,
pause for questions. Um,
We really think that there
should be some sort of
recalculation, especially with
Medicaid of the FQHC costs so
that we are not losing money on
Medicaid patients. We are
looking for another increase of
2 million, which is then matched
to end up being 6 to 9 million
that is paid out to FQHCs. What
I'm going to say about that is
that is not the complete answer
for us by far.
Overall, most of our clinics
have lost Medicaid patients in
the last year.
And we also did it, um,
longitudinal look at from 2019
to now, we have lost overall
Medicaid patients. Um, so more
money to Medicaid, we have to
bill for it. We have to do the
services to receive the money is
not necessarily the answer for
us.
Um,
We just ask that you
continually, um, help with
monitoring, um, processing times
for payments, you know, we want
to be able to talk to you when
it's just not working out. We
work really well with the
Healthcare Authority and MCOs,
they come to our meetings, we
talk about billing problems. We
help each other and we're doing
the best that we can to stay on
top of these systemic problems
with billing.
Um, we are proposing, uh, to add
12.5 million in recurring funds
to the real Primary Health Care
Act for recruitment and
retention.
We are very concerned that the
rural primary Health Care Act
fund, which has been around
since, I think, 1982 is not
confused with the most recent in
it passed in 2023, the
governor's rural health delivery
Fund. Very different things. The
rural primary Health Care Act
actually supports underserved
services provided in urban areas
And rural areas also used for
recruitment and retention. We
are very concerned that that the
two have been conflated when
they are not similar in any way.
Um
And then we're looking, and this
is the last one, and it's a
complicated one and it wasn't
planning on.
Delving into it, um, in this
committee, um,
340B was mentioned yesterday, I
think Ruben Escobel mentioned
that there's some extremely
costly medications, right? Well,
we have for years, um, been able
to get discounted
pharmaceuticals, right? That has
started to erode. Pharmaceutical
companies are trying to restrict
the amount of discounted um
medications that
We can receive and it is
nationwide and it is painful.
Um, we cannot adequately provide
care if our folks can't get the
prescriptions to be compliant,
right?
So, um,
We have a handout on that if
you'd like to hear it, um, we
can talk more about it. It is a
very complicated issue and, um,
would take twice as much time as
we have here, but, but we would
love to talk to you about it.
Um, so.
With that, um, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, I
thank you so kindly for your
time and I stand for questions.
Thank you that before I go to
the committee, I just, I want to
clear up a couple of things so
that we're all on the same page.
When you talked about the
administrative services division
was the problem in getting the
money out from the, are you
really talking about the
Department of Finance and
Administration.
Because you said the Department
of Health had done their part.
That's for the administrative
services division would have,
that's what they call it. Maybe
it is DFA. I know that they
haven't hired the staff that is
supposed to do our procurement,
um, even though they are almost
fully staffed at Department of
Health and, and really a high
functioning group that we are
very appreciative too, but my
understanding is the procurement
officer for this has not been
that that position has not been
filled.
This was last week's
information. Maybe it's changed
this week.
Then could you explain for us
what lookalikes, I mean, are
they, do they get the money or
where are they and why are they
hiding under the camouflage,
you're being a lookalike. Why
don't they just come out and
reopen so lookalikes are an
interesting thing, so, um,
federally qualified health
centers and look-alikes have to
abide by all of those things on
page 3, 51% of the board must be
patients.
Got to serve everyone, have a
sliding the scale, be an
underserved area, all of that
stuff. The two things lookalikes
don't get that FQHCs get is they
get federal tort claim they
don't get Federal Tort Claims
Act coverage.
Malpractice happens for us with
the feds.
It's a huge thing. The other
thing that they don't get is any
federal money.
So
A lot of lookalikes would like
to become FQHCs and are working
towards that.
So
yeah.
Yeah, so we have, um,
Sunrise, uh, Gallup Health
Services.
El Pueblo.
Casa is not one of those
Southwest Care Center.
Thank you.
Yeah
Uh,
and then.
Is there a fixed percentage of
the budget that comes from the
federal government or, or is it
a flat?
Block grant essentially that you
get that all the clinics get.
What determines how much money
you get from the feds and what
percentage is that of your
budget roughly
do. I'm not sure if we have it
by percentage.
This is our digging deep
spreadsheet, um, it is not a
percentage. It is based on
number of uninsured.
Um, yeah, it is based on number
of uninsured. So, um, and it's
every, I think it's every 3
years, um, that it's relooked at
number of uninsured in that area
serve in their service area, so
you have that we very clearly
define our service area and the
population that we serve.
All right, let's go to the
committee then and, uh, is there
anybody in the committee with
the question?
All right, let's just start
here. Let's just start down
there with Representative.
No, let's start over here with
Senator Lopez, and we'll just
come right around this way.
And, and we don't have unlimited
time, so try to keep your
questions concise.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, um.
That Ms. Sammerman, for your,
uh, presentation.
There's always, um, first of
all, thank you to the FQHCs that
provide care in many of our
communities around the state.
It's OK. We're all still
learning this thing too. Um, but
thank you again for what
Services are provided in many of
our communities, and Mr. Chair,
of course, last time we were in
Portales and had a chance to
visit, um, one of the FQHCs and
services provided, which
reminded me of one that's in my
community called First Choice.
Um, and
It's been a struggle, um, and,
and I know I can speak from
experience within my own
community for what First Choice
has been going through over
years and COVID didn't help any.
Uh,
but I know that, um,
One thing I'd like to to put out
in cyberspace out in.
For conversation is to see what
we can do to make sure that we
are helping the boards of
directors.
Um, because the boards of
directors, Mr. Chair, as you
know, are central, they're
guiding, they're in charge of
the entity. You know, we had La
Familia and Santa Fe that had
some issues, um.
And uh you know, First Choice
has been through, and I think
we're, we're kind of bottomed
and we're, we're on our way up,
but it's, I really think that we
need to.
And I've spoken with some folks
at the Attorney General's office
as to what we can do to make
sure that the board members who
sit on these very important
Decision making positions need
to make sure that they have
training and support.
Um, because no matter how hard
The health professionals are
working and doing their job if
the board can't make the proper
decisions and doesn't understand
fiduciary responsibilities and
all the other important.
Um,
Responsibilities then it
it doesn't help.
And it's not just about first
choice in, in my community that
I know, um, that I can speak of,
you know.
Succinctly about, but there's
other communities too, I think
who could need and do need some
support. And I know, Mr. Chair,
there's always costs that are
associated and sometimes many of
these board members can't afford
even, you know, pitching in from
their own pocket to pay for
training and other things. So
that's another area for us to
see what we could do to offset
or help within our own. I, I
don't know, there's just some
more things that we have to to
discuss and work with because
again, it's training of those
important decision makers, um.
And understanding their role
with the CEO and kind of what we
did, Mr. Chair, years back, uh,
with regards to school boards
and the superintendents, and we
had to change the law.
Where board school board members
couldn't go to individual
departments and try and
micromanage it is, you know,
there's a board responsibility
working with the superintendent
and the superintendent does the
work. Um, and I, I've just seen
not just in my own but in other
communities where board members
want to micromanage and it's,
it's just, it's, it's not good.
So I just wanted to mention that
and think that's that's an area
that needs to be worked on
continuously, um,
And I'll just leave it at that,
and I know members will have
other questions, but I just
wanted to bring that to the
forefront. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator.
Representative Chavez, thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you for
your work. Thank you for this
report. Um, I've had the
opportunity to meet many
wonderful staff, not just
providers, but the staff that
that really, you know, the
workforce that make these, um,
clinics, so successful. So a
couple of questions that I have
one,
do you know why you're losing
Medicaid patients.
Are they going elsewhere? Do you
have a sense of that?
We don't exactly. I mean, it, it
is one of the things that
We really wanted to look at was
where are we losing them. And so
that kind of brought out the
like.
One on one conversations with
outreach and eligibility workers
of, you know, what, what's
happening with these people,
certainly there's a percentage
that are getting insured.
Um, also, uh, other primary care
providers as of January 1, we'll
be getting a big bump. We expect
to lose more, um, in January,
when when that happens, um.
Sometimes the shiny new,
um, it looks a lot better, uh,
we're really well equipped to
serve them with our wraparound
services, but we don't have a
great answer for you right now,
but we're working on it. OK.
Thank you. Yeah, I was wondering
if maybe the loss in enrollment,
those who lost their Medicaid
might be a factor. Um, and so
then my, my other question has
to do with you, you mentioned
some things that would help on
this page and it, you know, I, I
really support the idea of
Increasing the rates so that we
can pay the providers more. I
know that they're going because,
you know, the pay is not the
same, um, but other than you
mentioned that one as as
something that would help and
then also, um, paying for
supervision. Are there other
things that you are not getting
reimbursed for that would um
help if you were.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Chavez, so there are several.
Things I mean we've made
progress, right? We're excited
to have community health
workers, um, paid when that
happens. Um, we certainly don't
get reimbursed specifically for
our case management to folks,
um, translation, transportation,
when we sign up people for other
um things like L heap and Lewa.
So every time we do something
extra that takes time and
energy, it is often not
reimbursed. And then there's
just the.
You know, the other things with
underinsured and, and Medicare.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I think
that's something that we should
also be looking at, um, so that
the the clinic continues to be
viable. I do know that, um, you
know, there was one clinic that,
that had to shut down in Belen,
um, and that's very concerning
because I think that um the
FQHCs are really the front, you
know, the, the place that keeps
people out of the emergency room
and maintains their healthcare.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Royal Caballero.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you so very much for your
presentation, uh, again, this is
another area that's due to my
heart. I've had the privilege
and honor of helping found, um,
several community health clinics
in southern New Mexico in the
colonial area and in El Paso and
uh clinical filial lafa
was one of the ones that I
helped found. I was a founding
member. Many moons ago. So and
it's flourishing, so
I, I invite everybody who
happens to be in Las Cruces or
in that area to go visit because
it's an exemplary, um, clinic.
So I thank you for everything
that you're doing. Page, um, 13,
you mentioned under challenge
number 3.
And I, I looked at, I mean, I'm
referring to the revenue
stagnation area and delayed
payments. I'm interested in
knowing,
um, there's I saw you take a big
sigh. This has always been a big
challenge for for any of us that
work on reimbursement basis. So
have, have you figured out why?
And then where are they coming
from the delayed payments, and
how long are the delayed
payments?
Mr. Chair Representative Royal
Caballero, um.
It varies. Uh, we have this
wonderful billing committee that
is able to identify where
there's areas that are a problem
and helps the group fix it. The
fact that the MCOs come to those
billing committee meetings is
very helpful.
But
It has not prevented delays
popping up all over the place.
I think we we need to look at
that.
More closely and figure out how
to break down that bureaucratic.
Uh, barrier. A final question. I
know the approach that we used
many, many years ago that
worked, um, and that continues
to work in the colonia areas
particularly is using
promotoras, people from the
community. So I'm wondering if
any of your or if all your uh
clinics use that approach of
using promotoras because they're
the promotores are the first
line community members, uh, that
have a handle on
And
their neighbors and their family
and friends that are suffering.
So do you use promotores at all?
Mr. Chair, representative, um,
Raybo Caballero we have been
using frommoorras forever, for
as long as we've been around,
um, you know, we love that
they're certified now through
the community health worker
program, and they are absolutely
one of the critical parts of of
who we are and what we do. They
do health education. Sometimes
they do home visits. It's really
extensive, the kind of reliance
that we have on them. Um, I have
The breaking of our personnel.
They usually come under let me
make sure this is right, yeah,
um, enabling services staff and
328 across the state right now.
Thank you. We need to talk more
about the promotoras all over
the state. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
Representative Jaramillo.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you for your services. I,
um, lived in Magdalena as my
children were young and when you
guys came to town, it was so
exciting. And, um, in speaking
with Mayor Basker, Doctor
Bashker, his concern is shared
with me that, um, Presbyterian
Medical Services, um, and, and
the loss of physicians and uh
how that affects our community
all the way to the Arizona
border
I just want to point out, if
Presbyterian Medical Services
left, we would not have medical
services, uh, from Socorro to
the, to the border of Arizona.
And, um, so with that being
said,
And school-based services as
well. Um, with that being said,
what, what we discussed is, um,
I'm an owner of an outpatient
physical therapy, uh, clinic,
and I know that the hospital for
their reimbursement for the same
services receives 3 times as
much as our clinic does. So is
there an add-on code that you
guys can use in a rural and
frontier areas that will double,
triple.
Your, your income base.
Mr. Chair Representative
Trujillo, I wish.
It is true. Um, you know, same
services provided by different
entities get reimbursed
differently. Um, it is part of,
you know,
What we are asking for on the on
the last page it's like let's
figure out how to really
maintain this infrastructure
because once we're gone we're
gone.
And we have held on sometimes by
our fingernails in communities
which were really going through
rough times. And this is another
rough time.
So I thank you for that
question. I.
I would love to explore with you
how that might happen.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Well, thank you for that, Mr.
Chair, and also delayed
payments. I, I recall a time
when I, uh, our organization was
owed $2.5 million and I put up a
mortgage on my home to be able
to pay my employees and did not
think I would survive the, the
glitch that was happening with,
with the MCOs. So when we hear
those glitches are coming, we
know it's going to be very bad.
So I urge this
committee really to look at how
we can do add-on codes for
Medica.
for Frontier and rural areas so
that they can then access
additional funding to keep
healthcare in our most
vulnerable areas. Thank you so
much.
Thank you, Representative
Haramil nothing
of senator Cedo Lopez, do you
have a question?
Thank you Mr. Chair. Thank you
for everything you do for our
communities. This is just really
great and it's a great, um,
presentation. I was curious, one
of your, um, the, in your
summary, you say you have
bipartisan support for primary
care at the federal state. Um, I
used to be an executive director
of a nonprofit and we and uh
serving, uh,
Domestic violence victims, um.
Uh, primarily immigrants or
outreach through promotores was
through immigrants, but of
course we would serve all. Um,
and we got we had contracts with
the city and the state that were
really helpful for a lot of our,
our, um, costs because since our
outreach was to immigrants,
Medicaid was just not a
possibility for us, and I'm
wondering, um, do, is it
possible to get contracts from
the city and state?
And do, and do they do your
members get them?
Mr. Chair, Senator Cedillo
Lopez. So that is part of the,
the, you know,
Across the board, um, but it
does, it does happen. I wish it
would happen more.
OK. And um the other question I
had had to do with, um,
This issue that we're talking
about sort of a follow up. Who
has authority to
Who has oversight authority
about these glitches, these,
these delays. I know exactly
where you're talking about when
you're by the skin of your teeth
praying that the federal
government comes in with their
payment in time to pay,
uh, yeah, to pay the, the wages.
So who has oversight? How can we
address this?
Mr. Chair, Senator Cedo Lopez.
If we're talking Medicaid, it's
medical assistance division.
Um, who has authority over the
MCOs to push them when they're
not getting the money out the
door, um.
And having said that, it's
incumbent on us to be able to
give them timely information on
when we're having problems.
Sometimes that's a little bit
difficult to do, to to really
isolate where and hone in on
where the problem is. We try to
do that to the best of our
ability and, and keep current so
that medical assistance
division, um, knows when we're
having struggles, uh, so we work
on that.
And, and is that the primary?
Uh, personally or entity we deal
with, uh, Mr. Chair, I, I
encourage us to, um,
I don't want a strongly worded
letter. I'd really like a
conversation with them. Um.
To help address that because
ultimately, any oversight could
also come from us.
In terms of seeing why, you
know, seeing how we can remedy
these delays. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you Senator Representative
Ferrari. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and thank you very much for all
of the work that you all, um.
do throughout the state and
providing health services, um,
it's so important, especially in
our rural areas. Um, my, um,
The question has to deal with
your behavioral health and
substance abuse screenings and
intervention, um, and also with
tobacco use screening and
cessation. Are you able to
provide the treatments or do you
make referrals and also like,
especially with like tobacco,
um, cessation, do you refer
people to the quit line or do
you actually give them the um.
Medically assisted, you know,
treatment.
For alcohol or drug abuse.
So Mr. Chair, um, representative
Ferrari.
For the most part, we are
providing
Educational services, um, within
the clinic setting. It is also
part of what community health
workers, um, and different parts
of our staff do. um, I think
that we tried to equip people
with all of their options, so
Quitline, that type of thing. We
work with all of those.
Um,
With the behavioral health
services. There are certain
clinics who are at the forefront
of providing those services,
others less so, and so those,
those four clinics that I said
are really providing what is our
behavioral health infrastructure
are doing that.
I do want to make the note that
there are a couple of services
that they are providing that are
usually done in inpatient
settings and we were doing it at
a fraction of the cost. So, um,
yeah, so if you were able to be
reimbursed or or get extra
funding, this is something that
you might be able to expand and
provide directly.
Absolutely, um, we certainly, I
mean, again, we are wrapping our
arms around what we're doing
with behavioral health, um, and,
and looking at our compensation
for that and um haven't quite
finished that analysis, but
we'll certainly be in touch with
you about it. OK, thank you, and
Mr. Chair, and just on the
tobacco, um, it.
You do just refer or do you also
provide, you know, patches and
things like that that people
might be able to immediately
start.
Stop, stop smoking.
OK.
Thank you to Melissa Manla. Um,
they are available to us and
maybe we don't do them to the
extent we should.
We may not be doing them to the
extent that we should.
Um, Mr. Chair, that would be
great if you could increase that
so that people can not have to.
Depend on going to something
else, but just start right
there. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Johnson will go
to you and then work back up
this way.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam
Chair, and uh thank you for your
presentation. I have a question
regarding the dental.
Program.
You're my big sister, so I do
everything you tell me to do.
So
Gallup.
Can you tell me about we don't
have dental services in Gallup.
In general, now we do, we have
great dental clinics and then we
have, um, dental program under
Indian Health Service, but for
The indigenous and, you know,
homeless and those types of
constituents.
We, we need dental care.
So I'd like to visit with you
offline to see how we can, um,
improve those and, and provide
those services in the Gallup
area.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Johnson, I would love to have
that conversation with you.
Thank you. That's all I have.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Pinto.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee, and thank you
for the work you do. You
mentioned something about the
coding.
And I'm just trying to um my
capacity of my mentality is not
the recalling very much, but I
think there
We're not able to reimburse. So
I really appreciate your
advocacy on that and I just want
the members of the committee to
know I think we do need to do
some work, especially because of
this year and what we're trying
to do to make sure that we are,
um,
If we are providing those
services that we're able to have
our providers reimbursed. Thank
you, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee.
Thank you, Senator.
Representative Herndon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Madam
Presenter, uh, it's unclear to
me where is your budget housed?
Who's responsible for it?
I think each clinic gets money
directly from the feds.
So we don't give them money. The
state doesn't.
Mr. Chair, um, Representative
Herndon, so we have multiple
sources. We get money from the
federal government. We get money
from the rural primary Health
Care Act, which is monies that
we receive.
over decades, right, um, we get
reimbursed for services rendered
for Medicare and Medicaid.
We get private insurance.
To a certain degree, many people
are underinsured and uh I feel
like I'm missing something.
Well, my bigger question, Mr.
Chair, is does the state in our
budget do we allocate money to
them directly through any
agency, any entity.
You do, so, so in two different
ways, uh, one is the rural
primary Health Care Act, which
provides direct funding to our
clinics.
Um, in both and serving both
rural and underserved
populations, so that is direct
money that is reoccurring.
Um, also, in the last two years
when you, when you have provided
$200 in rate increases that is
directly from, um, the
legislature and that comes back
to get us closer to our costs on
the people that we serve who
are, um, covered in Medicaid.
And that goes
To the health department, I
think.
The both of both of those go to
the health department,
the rural primary Health Care
Act dollars come from Department
of Health.
Um, they're the ones that were
kind of pulling on to make sure
it happens and then the Medicaid
come from the healthcare
authority. So when the
Department of Health submits its
budget, you make a budget
request through them. Is that
correct?
Mr. Chair, uh, representative
Hernan, that would be correct.
So you've asked for several
increases I'm looking at the
page of 16. What's the total
amount of budget increase that
you're asking for this year?
And budgets are due September 1
and has that total amount been
given to the Department of
Health?
Mr. Chair Representative
Herndon, um, we received
All of the 2023 information in
August and we've been madly
trying to crunch those numbers
so that we could come up with
something for you and and for
Department of Health. So what we
are looking for is to get back
to where we used to be with the
rural Primary Health Care Act
funds, um, as recently as I
think 10 years ago, 15 years
ago, that has been eroded over
time. So we are asking
But the answer to your question,
I think that you're trying to
get it, is no. We have not had
the conversation with Secretary
of the Department of Health.
And uh had we had the
information sooner, we certainly
would have.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Well,
You're asking for money and one
of the things that should be
happening, Mr. Chair and members
of this committee, is that you
should have the opportunity to
at least have a conversation
about putting the money in the
budget and what you need, but if
that isn't happening, we have a
big problem here. And um, and we
need to figure out how to
resolve that. So either give
additional time for them to
submit their budget so that she
has the opportunity to have a
discussion with them because all
of these things are incredibly
important and particularly Mr.
Chair, just to wrap this up,
looking at these behavioral
health.
Services and how they've been
eroded and the fact that we have
so many teams who are requesting
behavioral health services and
there there's no money there to
give it to them, so I just uh I,
I think that this committee has
a responsibility to talk to the
um
Talk to the chair of the of the
appropriations Committee and LFC
that they need more time to get
their budget requests in. So
thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative Vincent, do you
have any questions? Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Almost sounds like a broken
record. We hear it all the time.
I've literally heard that for 2
years. Um, and, you know, in my
personal business, if I had a
loss of revenue.
That's a big old problem.
I need to fix that immediately.
And I noticed that, or you
mentioned that you haven't had
an increase in rate since 2015
and, um, you know, if you're
having a loss of revenues and
you haven't had an increase
since 2015, you would think that
we'd put some trigger points in
there to, to fix that. And
sometimes I wish I could just go
to those department heads and
just take over for just a
minute.
Just get them headed in the
right direction because we want
to help people. Um, you
mentioned, and I've, I've heard
this all week as well. Uh, you
mentioned, um, you didn't say
being paid fairly, you had
another word and I couldn't
remember what the word was, but
as far as your pay to your
employees go, is that fair and
balanced kind of across the
state, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Vincent.
I wouldn't say that it is easier
to recruit people in urban areas
than it is in rural areas and
there are times in rural areas
if you're gonna get anyone to
come out and serve that
population and not have the
schools they want, the job they
want for their spouses, you
know, all of those things,
you're going to pay them more. I
will also say though that in
urban areas now we have a lot
more competition for the same
providers we have.
Providers that left first choice
that went to Presbyterian
Medical Group.
And we're paid a lot more.
Thank you for that. And you
know, I, I heard you mention,
um, you know, how Medicare,
there's certain things that
you're not reimbursed for, but
you go the extra mile and you do
them anyway. And that doesn't
pay the bills. I know you got a
good heart and you're doing it
for the right reasons, but it
still doesn't pay the bills. And
I just, I, the last thing I want
to know is why is there such a
disconnect.
If you're going to provide
services, um, and, and dental's
one of them, and I come in and I
need my tooth filled and that's
not, uh, part of the, the.
The service and, and this, what
if you didn't have a good heart
and you didn't feel it. I just
leave there without a feeling in
my tooth, Mr. Chair.
Mr.
Chair,
uh, Representative Vincent, uh,
That's what happens if you go to
a for-profit dentist. That's why
there's not perfront, not for
profit dentistry happening in
our clinics because whether or
not you're insured, uninsured.
Um, you're gonna get the care
you need.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Hickey, you have any
questions?
I'm on my timer.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
The, um,
One of the factors that I didn't
see here on page 11, uh,
reasons, uh, that there's a
challenge is that the providers
who are left.
Holding the bag, so to speak.
um, and probably even before
that because of the financial
crunch.
The
uh disconnect between
administration board members and
providers on the number of
patients they're seeing an hour
and that is one of the main
reasons I'm hearing in the
community, not just in FQHCs but
everywhere as to why physicians,
uh, and other providers are
leaving. It's just, it's a, it's
a premature burnout factor and,
and they're not just leaving.
Because they go to press and
they're gonna get the same
thing. Yeah, they get some more
money and pretty soon that wears
out and then they're leaving the
state. So we also have to
address this burnout factor and
the average number of primary
care visits in general should be
somewhere around 2 to 2.5 an
hour, not 4 per hour, and just
ask the patients how good it
feels and then they ask the
providers how good it feels
because they can't feel the
referral needs and so forth or
they're spending their time
trying to refer to specialists.
We aren't there anymore and so
what do you do? So this is all
tied in, um,
But I, I wanted to point out
that uh piece in particular,
what's frustrating to us is we
hear about this, but we don't
know where to go and we're told
Hsa is the only one that has
accountability and authority. I
recall that back in uh uh the
early 90s, there was a court
order to, uh,
Put some of the uh or one first
choice in receivership. Um, and
I don't know that we know what
to do. So it's very complicated,
but I'd like to spend my last
minute here just saying to the
board and looking at your
revenue situation, and I think
revenue is a root of, of a whole
bunch of this, how you get that
from Washington. I mean, that's,
that isn't us. But being able to
get the, the, the.
Charge for each visit, the
dollar amount, um, I'm
understanding you about around
200 something, um, and it
probably needs to be 500
because, well, I, I would say
yes because you've got to cover
what you're not getting in
Medicaid patients in uninsured
and you're not going to get that
from the federal government and
I don't know unless you can find
another way. Um, I don't know
how else you're going to get it
unless we specifically go to bat
for you.
Get an overage so that you can
cover all your loss areas. Thank
you.
Thank you Mr. Chair. um, Senator
Hickey.
People are coming to us with
much more complex conditions
than we've ever seen before, and
we were already dealing with
people that only come to town,
you know, twice a year when they
have an emergent condition and
we were serving them. So, you
know, post COVID, we are dealing
with incredibly complex people
that against the pressure that
we have to produce so that we
can get paid is an incredible,
it's, it's a rock and a hard.
Place for sure.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. In between
gets killed. That's the.
OK, thank you, Senator
Representative Chasey.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Ms. Emmerman. I just want
to thank you for all of your
work, and I don't have any
questions and sorry I missed
some of it earlier. Um, I think
I may have heard a little bit of
this because we're still singing
the same tune.
Let's hope that we can um move
on to new music. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Thompson. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. I don't really
have any questions, but, um, I
think Representative Tracy just
kind of summed it up. We've been
doing the same thing since I got
elected in 2012. And I'm beyond
frustrated, um, we, we,
I can't remember who it was
yesterday talked about how much
the budget of the legislature
had shrunk. We are like 13% of
The state budget, and yet we're
supposed to oversee everything,
um, and I, I, I won't speak for
all of my colleagues, but I'm
betting that
Close to 100% are just as
frustrated as I am. We, we, this
credentialing thing we have been
asking for, for at least 5 years
that I know of. And, and it
feels like
with the speaker about getting
us some more power, you know,
whether it be subpoena power,
whether we have secretaries come
in front of us and just tell us
stuff. Nothing is on paper, um,
and we know that it's not the
full picture and sometimes it's
just flat out lies. And I am
beyond frustrated. We, um, we
talk about our declining
workforce, it's no wonder. I
mean,
everybody says it's malpractice.
It's it.
That may be part of it, but the
fact that you have to get
credentialed by each of the MCOs
is ridiculous. The fact that you
have to put your house.
In a mortgage your house to pay
for care for your patients. That
is unconscionable.
And, and I, I'm, I'm riling up
the troops here saying let's go
for it and let's finally take
some power back and say, you
know what, we oversee this and
we're not gonna take it anymore.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
But that's a very tough act to
follow, but, but I did want to
ask your, well, 22 things
actually. First,
but Jerry Harrison's of, of,
uh, health, what is it,
healthcare resources. You use
them, right? Why would you need
money of your own to do what
sounds like the same thing? Are
you talking about?
Just giving them more help or
what are you talking about? Yes,
so um.
This is for recruitment and and
retention is a recruitment group
that we have worked with for
decades. They recruit
specifically for community
federally qualified health
centers. Um, I think they may
have a few other contracts or
did over time, that money that
we're talking about, that $12
million to the real Primary
Health Care Act, we expect that
about 2 million would be
earmarked for them. What I am
talking about about putting
money back into the
Primary Health Care Act is that
that could be used for salary
increases so that we could be
competitive.
Recruitment in the sense of a
nicer carrot dangling more
orange carrot in front of him.
Yeah, OK.
The real issue that I was hoping
we could, we could get into
Senator Lopez alluded to it.
Senator Hickey alluded to it. I
guess we've been, we've been
spinning our wheels over, I
don't know what's going on with
La Familia in Santa Fe. I just
read a little bit about it, but,
but first choice in Albuquerque
has been a real sore point and
by my count, in the last 18
months, they've had 4 separate
executive directors. They paid
off 3 of them.
I mean, basically had to pay
enormous chunks of their budget
to 3 people that aren't working
there.
Because they hired them and then
got rid of them so fast that
that they still had a claim to
some money. And so when you do
that, something that money had
to come from somewhere and it
came from operations. It came
from being able to raise the
salaries of everybody else that
came from being able to expand
services.
And, and that's just bad
policymaking by the board.
We, we don't have any authority
over these private nonprofit,
independent.
51% patient, which means 51% of
the people that are being
served, and you think that that
would give them a stake and
But, but it's not their money.
You know, if they make a
mistake, they're not paying for
it.
And that's, so our frustration
is that threatening 70,000
people that get care through
first choice.
And maybe it is stable now. I'm,
I'm glad to hear Senator Lopez
was at a at a board meeting and,
and, and is confident that
they're on the right track.
I, I, I'm, I've heard that 4
times in the last year, so I'm,
I'm waiting to, to, you know, to
see a little bit of proof, but
we have no authority and what
would, what would be the
attitude, and I know we're
stepping on.
And thin ice here when I when I
venture out to say what would be
the attitude of giving the
legislature some kind of or
state government, since we are
putting money in, it's not
totally federal. The health
secretary, when I asked him
about this on Monday, he said,
well, hers is one responsible
for. Well, hers has totally
dropped the ball. I mean,
They're a non-presence as far as
I can tell, in, in, in
monitoring this and we did
appoint a monitor from the
health department. I have no
idea what, if anything happened
from that.
But it was kind of like, well,
we'll monitor it, but we really
don't have any authority to do
anything about it.
And the Attorney General said he
would do something if
information was brought to him,
but
what do you think I mean, I
think clearly the public needs
to be protected from, from board
members who, who make really bad
decisions as a, as a collective
whole.
How do we, how do we do that?
and what would be the best way
of structuring a response to
that?
Um, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee.
I'd like to talk a little bit
about first choice, um.
Throughout there's several CEOs,
we have provided tremendous
amounts of technical assistance
to their staff and to the CEOs.
Um.
Over the period of COVID, we
were doing no board training. It
is something that we do. All of
the things that Senator Lopez
talked about are things that we
train boards to do. We did a
training in May, didn't catch
most of the first choice board.
As, yeah.
So,
Let me first say that the board
has completely turned over.
Some of the people who had been
part of the systemic problem are
gone.
So this is why we feel
optimistic. The, the current CEO
who's the former dental
director, Doctor Dye has been in
FQHCs for a very long time,
understands it, um, so.
Because they were behind on
their audits. They are trying to
get their audits current now
they believe that they will be
current within the next 6
months. Um, but because of that,
they did not receive rural
primary care Health Care Act
funds.
And so in terms of, you know,
our, our ability at the state
level to say, hey, you know, get
it together.
We said that and it didn't make
a huge difference.
I absolutely went to every
single person. I mean, I've been
doing this work for a very long
time that I could at Hsa and got
no response anywhere. Sometimes
just
Literally no response, um, or
You know, sorry, I can't help
you response. We're doing what
we can. I was terribly
disappointed to have that
happen.
I, I do want to say um that I
believe first choice is in
recovery mode that we are going
to get to a place, uh, I, I
don't think.
We are anywhere near serving
70,000, I think at its apex, it
was, I think we're probably
nearer to 30,000.
Um, patients in 55. OK. So, lost
a lot of really great providers
and now have to get them back
and build it up.
Um,
In terms of your power, I just.
I need to thank um Senator
Lopez.
Because she showed up at a board
meeting.
And she eloquently and
passionately talked about how
important it was that they pull
it together.
And um.
I think that was a pivotal
moment and I'm so grateful for
her. It was a pivotal moment in
Those board members who had been
obstacles.
Resigning from the board and our
ability to have a new born. I
talked to the board chair. He's
already reached out to request
board training as has the new
CEO Dr. Dai, um, we're working
on doing some intensive
trainings with them in October.
Um, I think they are on the
right track, uh, but it's been a
long road.
Well, I want to thank you and,
and thank Senator Lopez too for
for.
Stepping in and trying to make
the situation better. So, but
you didn't answer the question,
do we need do we need to give
the legislature or the state,
let's say, not just the
legislature, but state health,
the health department, for
example,
shouldn't there, we spell out a
little more muscle for them?
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee,
I think that it is possible
because rural primary healthcare
Act funds do have monitoring and
oversight as well.
Um, so that when there are
changes, they can stop payment.
Um,
Other than that, it is.
It is largely a federal thing,
but you as individual
legislators have tremendous
power to lean in on, you know,
Hsa lean in on boards, um, we,
we will certainly do our part,
but in terms of actual
monitoring.
I don't know.
Senator Lopez,
you have a thought,
Mr. Chair, I learned so much.
Always so much more to learn.
Um, I think there's some things
that we can do through the
Department of Health, when we
sent a letter, if you remember,
um, to the, the board last year,
almost a year ago when I um
Talking with Secretary Allen,
who wanted to send a monitor to
oversee what was happening at
our first choice, he want, they
wanted to charge first choice
also for the monitoring because
there was no money, quote
unquote in the budget to cover
the cost if an entity is having
an issue and they can't afford
it, then they're supposed to pay
$50,000 even $50,000 is part of
a salary for somebody, right? So
I think there's some
restructuring that we need to
look into to within the
department.
Department of Health because
they may not have all the tools
or whatever it may be, Mr.
Chair, but that, that's, um, you
know, you could also, I mean,
there's no other levels of
referral that the secretary can
have. And I think that's
something we need to look into
so we can offer support,
utilizing those dollars FQHCs
supports and such that needs to
happen. Um, hers is another
story. I mean, there's a whole
bunch of stuff that I have
learned, Mr. Tro, like the
system needs an overhaul. Thank
you.
Thank you, Senator, and I think
that's an excellent idea of if
we're gonna approach it,
approach it through the
Department of Health, giving
them a budget to work with so
they don't, I mean, that is kind
of ridiculous to charge the
people that you're monitoring
the money
and if you don't, if they don't
pay you, what do you do? Don't
if you don't pay us, we're not
going to monitor you, OK.
That makes it fairly simple, uh,
senator Serio Lopez.
Thank you. In regards to that,
isn't that part of the
responsibility? Our statutory
duty was to do that. So any, but
I'm actually going to go off on
a, a completely different
direction, and that is, um, I
was asked to serve on the board
of one of these, and the ethics
um.
There's an ethical ethics
opinion saying they couldn't
accept any state funds if a
legislator were on the board, so
obviously, I, I'm not doing
that. Is that correct? Is that,
should we have that revisited
because.
No, no, this our state. There's
an opinion letter, um, that is
in the files. It's now in the
files. I asked for it, um.
Senator Stefani, you, you had a
comment on that has been there.
That has been the opinion for
many, many years and so most
legislators who are aligned with
something, I remember Senator
Tollman,
OK. That's, that's good to know,
but I, yeah, no, there is an
opinion letter because I
requested it, so it's very
clear.
And I thought that was
unfortunate and there is one
cautionary note that I would put
out about individual legislator.
I mean, getting involved as a
way of solving this.
It, it's really dicey. I mean,
we, we really only have
authority as a corporate.
But
Not as individuals. I have no
authority. So
whatever effect it is for us to
get involved,
we're really stepping, we're
really violating the separation
of powers, but what are you
gonna do when you see a problem
and, and, and, and doesn't seem
to be any other solution to it.
Uh, Senator Hickey, then
representative.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just as
something Juan maybe belongs in
brainstorming.
But
Um, you know, the LFC is
monitoring more and more health
care issues since the state
funds some of the
Or fun is funds the QHC budgets,
there may be an ability to do
some at least warning monitoring
to us as a legislature coming up
in terms of how their financials
are doing. Um, but otherwise
these things seem to grow and
then we don't get involved till
later, but it's just a thought
that that could be a part of
someone's activity there is to
look at those budgets. Thank
you.
That would be not an individual
legislator, but the legislative
body and
uh Representative Royal
Caballero and thank you to the
Senator because I was going to
address that.
As well, I think that's our
role, but finally, uh, on the
other point is that we also play
a real instrumental role in
influencing our congressional
delegation
on because of the majority of
the funds that are coming and if
there's a bureaucratic
um issue or, or barriers that we
need to break down. We have a,
we play a key role in contacting
our congressional delegation
each office in each senator has
a
that's dedicated to health and
human services. They have, and,
and they have direct links to
the departments, to the areas,
to the every connection. So I, I
think that we need to be a lot
stronger in uh making sure our
voice gets through their voice
through us to to the feds. Thank
you.
Well, thank you, thank you all,
and this is clearly something
that we, we, we will need to be
picking up when we get into our
brainstorming. How do we, how do
we frame our response to this
situation?
Thank you that uh
for for the presentation, really
helpful information that fills
in a lot of gaps in our
knowledge and appreciate it.
Thanks. And we'll try to do what
we can to to push the uh the
budget through, although it is
Representative Herndon said it
is late in the game, but, but
we'll do what we can. The other
thing is the funding cycle is a
never ending cycle. So you may
not get it this year, but if we
start working on it this year,
maybe by next year you can get
it.
Let's, let's try. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. I appreciate your time
and attention. Thank you. Thank
you very much. Now we'll move to
the healthcare authority's
report on the developmental
disability waiver.
And we have with us the director
of the division.
It just moved over from the
health department to the
healthcare authority, uh,
Jennifer Rodriguez, and we have,
uh, Kathy Slater Huff, the
deputy secretary of HCA. Just a
quick announcement, um, there's
birthday cake for the chair over
there if you want some, feel
free. First come, first served.
So when you're ready, just.
Lunch a
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
Uh, as the chair announced, I am
Cathy Slaterhoff. I'm the deputy
secretary of one of the deputy
secretaries of the Healthcare
Authority. Uh, I appreciate your
time today, uh, allowing us to
be here to talk about one of our
most vulnerable populations. Uh,
we will be giving some updates
on, uh, several things, uh, that
are, that are happening this
year and have been happening.
Uh, first of all, the end of our
waitlist, our developmentally
disabled.
wait list
Some process improvements that
we've been making to ensure that
people have, uh, no gaps in
coverage and access to care.
We'll give some updates on
provider capacity and rate
increases, uh, program costs,
and some information about the
wellness visits that the DDSD
has been doing. Um, and I want
to announce, uh, turn this over
with your permission, uh, Mr.
Chairman,
Be,
Better. Uh, and I, I'm very
happy to have Jennifer as part
of our team. She has been with
DDSD for a while now, but has
stepped up. Uh, she really has,
uh, the compassion, the
knowledge, and the commitment
to, to serve this population,
uh, very, very well. So with
your permission, I'll turn it
over to Jen.
Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair and
members of the committee. Good
morning. It's very nice to be
here today as as Kathy
mentioned, I'm Jennifer
Rodriguez, and I am the very
newly appointed director of the
Developmental Disability
Supports division. Very briefly,
a little bit about me, um, I
have spent my entire career
working in the field of
intellectual and developmental
disabilities. I started as a
direct support professional, so
somebody who does the hands-on
support with this population.
Um, during college, and, and I
graduated with a degree in
communicative disorders. Um,
after that, I spent the 1st 13
years of my career working as a
developmental disabilities
waiver case manager, um, in our
northeast region here. And then
the last 12, almost 13 years now
at the developmental
disabilities Supports division
in various roles, such as the
statewide case management
coordinator, DD waiver, program
manager, community programs
bureau chief, deputy director,
and now I'm thrilled to say as
The director. Um, so I'm really
excited to be in this position
and be a part of the new
healthcare authority. Um, we did
move from the Department of
Health July 1st to the new
health care authority. Um,
I believe strongly in the
mission of both organizations
that I represent specifically
the developmental disability
supports division. I'm very
passionate about supporting
people and advocating for people
with IDD and their families in
our great state of New Mexico.
I'm honored to be able to be
here today to present to this
committee some of the really
amazing accomplishments that
DDSD has made over the course of
the last year. Um, and I look
forward to hearing your
suggestions and, and comments
and questions and, and how we
can work together to
continuously improve the
supports that we provide to our
most vulnerable population.
So we're saying that, I'd like
to ask you to turn to slide 5
and meet Gabriel.
Gabriel is a young man with an
intellectual and developmental
disability who has just spent
the last 10 years on our waiting
list waiting for services. Uh,
he was allocated, which means he
was given an offer to join one
of our waivers in 2023, when we
were going through our what we
called our super allocation, but
what that actually translates to
is when we started to eliminate
the DD waitlist. Um, the
allocation process, however, was
very cumbersome for him and his
family.
And when he finally was able to
start receiving services months
later, um, what him and his
family discovered was that there
were limited providers available
because so many new people had
just recently entered our waiver
programs. So he needed
occupational therapy services,
and there were no therapists
available where he lived because
they were all at maximum
capacity.
With that, the family, Gabriel
and his family also expressed
concerns that the staff that
were available, maybe they were
overworked and needed a pay
increase and they also
questioned the quality of staff
and the higher risk of abuse,
neglect, and exploitation
potential with staff who might
be overworked. So New Mexico has
4 home and community-based
services waivers, and they're
typically referred to as the DD
waiver, but there are actually
4. These are persons.
Centered programs, um, that
offer a community-oriented
approach to service delivery for
people with intellectual and
developmental disabilities. Um,
and we tend to shorten that
because that too can become a
mouthful. We say IDD, but that
means intellectual and
developmental disabilities.
The waivers continue to serve
thousands of New Mexicans, and
today we will highlight our
accomplishment of ending a 13+
year waiting list. Our efforts
to streamline the level of care
process, our need to expand
provider capacity and choice,
the way we invest in our
providers through rate increases
and our commitment to do
everything that we can to keep
our waiver recipients healthy
and safe.
So we'll start at the beginning
of the story, which was ending
our wait list. So on slide 8,
you will see the drastic
reduction of people waiting for
services.
GDSD began eliminating the wait
lists or again what we called
our super allocation in November
of 2021. At that time, there
were over 4000 people on our
waiting list and waiting for
over 13 years for services.
Each of those 4,000+ people were
offered an allocation or a spot
on one of our waivers, the
developmental disabilities
waiver or our MeVA waiver.
By the end of this calendar
year, we will have brought 3100
new people into our service
system.
But just so you know, people
apply for our waiver programs
every single day and on average,
about 5 new applicants, or it's
not 5, excuse me, 500 new
applicants every single year.
The DD waitlist can remain flat
with appropriations that allow
for continuous allocations. But
rest assured, if somebody is
needing services faster, maybe
they have been involved in an
abuse, neglect, exploitation
situation, maybe they lost a
caregiver. They had a DD
commitment or if there's a
general lack of resources
available to people that cannot
ensure their health and safety.
There are mechanisms to enter
our waiver program.
So what is the allocation
process. If you look on slide
10, the allocation process is
how we refer to people getting
into service into waiver
services.
So our our super allocation
ending our waitlist, coupled
with Medicaid unwinding resulted
in some processing delays for
new allocations as well as
renewals.
So the healthcare authority
increased staffing levels at the
Income support division and the
call center to assist with the
large influx of applications and
call center volume.
The application process
currently requires people to
meet both financial and medical
eligibility requirements. For
new allocations, so all of these
new people who were just coming
into our system. An initial
medical determination is always
necessary.
For renewal, so these are people
who have been in our services
for more than a year. Um, an
annual medical recertification
requirement becomes very
burdensome for individuals and
their families because they have
conditions that are not expected
to improve from year to year.
So improvements are currently
underway to streamline what this
is called the level of care
process. So improvements are
underway to streamline this
level of care process and make
it less burdensome for the
people that we're serving and
their families and the
healthcare authority has
currently written, uh, or is
drafting, um, an amendment to
the Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services, CMS, the
federal government, um, to allow
for these types of efficiencies
through the level of care
process.
So, again, back to the waitlist.
So when you bring in 33,100 new
people into a system, as you can
imagine, um, we need more
providers. So ending a waitlist,
um, again, over 13 years long,
um, does absolutely 100% result
in the need for more providers.
In 2023, DDSD participated in a
provider capacity assessment,
which identified our system's
greatest areas of
demonstrated on slide 12 in the
table is our top 4 greatest
areas of need, which happen to
be in our clinical type of
services, the therapies. Um, our
waivers offer speech language
pathology services, occupational
therapy, physical therapy, and
behavior support consultation
services. Nursing services were
also highlighted as being a
great need.
Um, in our FY 25 strategy we are
prioritizing the expansion of
provider capacity to not only,
uh, um, expand on the provider
agencies, but also to be able to
offer greater choice for waiver
recipients.
So you can see in the table on
slide 12, just to be clear on
what you're looking at, um, it's
broken down by the 4 different
therapy disciplines and you'll
see there is a total, I'll start
at the top. So there is a total
of 31 provider agencies across
the state that do provide
behavior support consultation
services. However, if you look
at columns, uh, 3 and 4.
It compares out of how many are
actually available, um, who is
at maximum capacity, which means
they exist and they are
providing services, but they're
not taking on any new people. So
the very last column, you'll see
a lot of zeros, ones and twos.
Those are the agencies that are
accepting new waiver recipients,
um, in the areas of zero,
obviously that means there's
none but one does not offer
people the choice of, of which
therapy, uh, provider agency
they would like to choose to
provide them support.
So you can see that this table
demonstrates a great need. Um,
and this is just for our
clinical type of services.
Um, adding to provider capacity
needs is the national direct
support professional workforce
crisis. So that too, uh, we
refer to direct support
professionals as DSPs. They're
also referred to as uh direct
care workers. So we're talking
about the people who do provide
the hands on day to day support
for the people in our waivers.
DDSD and other state partners
such as aging and long-term
services and the Department of
Workforce Solutions are working
together and received a grant to
really look at the direct care
workforce in our state. This
grant is really um to strategize
and incorporate best practices
related to recruiting,
retaining, um, and making sure
our workforce is competitively,
uh, compensated for the work,
the very hard work that they do,
so.
You'll see in the table on slide
13, um,
Some statistics from a national
organization by the name of
Achor, which is the American
Network of Community Options and
resources. They did a State of
America's direct support
workforce crisis survey last
year in 2023. And the very first
number that's bolded for you to,
um, to notice is that 95% of the
country, not the state of New
Mexico, but the entire country
reported having a moderate to
severe shortage of direct
support professionals.
We are not alone in this,
our providers. DDSD is required
and committed to looking at our
rates every 2 years.
In 2023, during the legislative
session, House Bill 395 passed,
which required DDSD to collect
demographic information on our
direct support professionals
throughout our waiver systems.
Um, the first report of its kind
is due back to this committee
and will be presented in the
month of September.
Um, the, the another really big
initiative that occurred just
this year was the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services,
or CMS, passed a new final rule
called ensuring access to
Medicaid services. This rule
calls for a wage pass-through
mechanism for each state to
employ by the, uh, by 5 or 6
years, um, in the future that
makes sure that our direct
support professionals are
receiving, um, at least an 80%.
percentage of the overall
provider rate that our provider
agencies receive for providing
these services in hopes to, you
know, increase the, the DSP
workforce and again ensure that
they are competitively employed
and we are able to expand the
the the pool of DSPs available
to us.
So let's talk a little bit more
about rates. So if you look at
slide 15, this slide is intended
to demonstrate DDSD's commitment
to always, um, continuously
looking at rates and providing
rate increases to our providers,
um, every time we are able to do
so.
The last comprehensive rate
study occurred in 2023. All
recommendations for rate
increases were adopted by DDSD 0
of the recommendations to
decrease rates were accepted by
DDSD. So let me say that again,
we did not decrease any rates
from the recommendations of the
rate study. Currently, there are
3 waiver amendments, so our
developmental disabilities
waiver or DD waiver, the
original.
are medically fragile waiver and
Army via waiver have amendments
that are just wrapping up the
public comment process that
incorporate these 2023
recommendations for rate
increases and will be submitted
to the federal government in the
month of September.
Additionally, DDSD received a
$10.2 million appropriation from
the legislature and were able to
use that to give our providers a
cost of living adjustment in
2024 of 5.32%.
So let me just.
Am I understanding correctly
then the comprehensive rate
study that was done in 2023,
those rates are not in effect
yet. They have to be approved by
CMS before they go into effect?
You are correct, Mr. Chair. So,
OK, so I think a lot of the
providers have been saying,
you know,
Why, why is nothing changing,
but it's because CMS has to
approve it first? Is that, is
that the issue?
That's correct. We have to
receive a legislative
appropriation to support the
rate increases and yes we do
need to amend our waiver
applications and ultimately
receive approval from CMS before
we can implement those rights.
Thank you. So when did you
request this from CMS? My
understanding is that you, you
had a big delay, um, before you
even request it from CMS, which
puts it off another 9 months or
whatever.
Uh, Madam Vice Chair, we have
not sent the request to CMS yet.
That's what I was just reporting
on that we anticipate sending
that in the month of September
to CMS. So if, if, if I may, um,
expand upon this a little bit.
So the rate study was completed
by, uh, June 30th of 2023. So
then the division and leadership
reviews the rate recommendations
and make decisions based on what
those recommendations, um, are.
So we, as I mentioned,
made the, uh, recommendations
and, and adopted the
recommendations for all of the
rate increases. The next step is
to make sure we have a budget to
support rate increases. So we
received, um, the adequate
amount of money in our FY 25
budget, which just began July
1st. So now we are in the
process of, as I said, it takes
a little bit of time to do a
formal public hearing process or
public comment process, starting
with tribal notification
public comment process, and
public hearing, which just
culminated on August 23rd. Now,
we will, uh, finalize the, the
input that we've received from
the public and submit the waiver
applications to CMS in September
that, yes, incorporate these
rate recommendations from the
2023 rate study.
OK, go ahead.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
So we were, as I was mentioning,
we were able to give our
providers a 5.32% cost of living
adjustment in 2024 due to a
legislative appropriation. Our
next comprehensive rate study
will be occurring in calendar
year 2025, a request for
proposal will be issued in the
next 30 to 60 days, um, for the
next comprehensive rate study
and what will be slightly
different related to, um, or
compared to the previous year's
rate study is that in
2023, when we did a rate study,
we looked at the highest
utilized rates across three
waivers. As I mentioned at the
beginning of my presentation, we
actually have 4 waivers. One is
very new, um, and very, very
small. However, in the 2025
scope of work in the request for
proposal for the next rate
study. We will be looking at all
4 waivers and each of the
distinct rates for all services
that are provided, so this will
be a truly comprehensive rate
study and again will occur.
calendar year 2025.
What is the 4th 1?
The supports.
The supports waiver?
So,
so for the committee, um, we
have, uh, as I mentioned, 4 home
and community-based services
waivers. One is our
developmental disabilities
waiver or the DD waiver.
The second one is the Mvia
self-directed waiver. The third
is our medically fragile waiver,
and the fourth is our supports
waiver.
And that's the one that people
Get through the regular MCO
system.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Vice Chair and
committee members, no. Um, this
is offered through the
developmental Disability
Supports division. Um, this was
an initiative that was, um, that
began when we had a 13 year
waiting list, and we were asked
to create a 4th waiver with a
limited budget and limited
service array to be able to
serve people while they
continued to wait for many, many
years for our more comprehensive
waivers.
So this is about 5 years old. We
are actually coming up for
renewal, so this is, uh, I
believe the 4th year of its, um,
implementation so we'll continue
having it even though the
waiting list is
That is correct
Yes, Mr. Chair. OK.
OK
Um, one more thing of note, we,
um, for the first time ever are
having a provider summit
actually tomorrow, um, hosted by
the governor and our cabinet
secretary, Kerry Armijo, um, and
this is in, um, the, the
intention of the provider summit
is to really connect with our
provider network to talk about,
you know, some of these exact
same issues. And one of the
issues that we will in fact be
discussing with them tomorrow
are their needs around our rates
and the upcoming rates study.
Um, the other thing of note that
is not on your side, but, um,
our previous speaker was, was
discussing this, um,
demonstration of our commitment
and, uh, an investment in our
providers by way of increasing
rates when we can. When we
received our American rescue
Plan funding, uh, during COVID.
We utilize the vast majority of
that money to invest in
temporary provider rate
increases. So in the first year
we gave all of our providers.
A temporary 15% increase to
their rates, year 2, we gave
them a temporary 10% increase to
rates and year 3, a temporary 5%
rate increase until all of that
funding was exhausted and at
this point in time, it has been
exhausted. So, um, just, just
another way that we, like I
said, we do try to increase our
rates wherever we can. We know
our providers need it and
certainly the direct support
professionals need it as well.
So, next slide, um, I'm jumping
to slide 17, as you can imagine
when we increase our waiver
population by 3100 people. Um,
and increase our rates, we
increase the overall cost of our
program. So bringing 3100 new
people into labors results in a
substantial increase in the
overall program cost. For our
proposed FY 26 budget, are
requesting an additional $80
million.
In general funds to support our
programs.
87% of DDSDs overall budget is
used to directly support the
individuals receiving services.
Um, another, um, item of note
with all of these new people
entering our system, we call
them new allocations. Um, it
takes typically about 3 years
for people to fully excuse me,
utilize, uh, their budgets and
to complicate things further, it
maybe not complicate, but to
make planning a little bit more
challenging for the future.
About 40% of those 3100 people
that we just brought into our
waivers.
Under the age of 18. So this is
like the youngest cohort of
people we have brought into our
waiver programs in many, many,
many years. And so what does
that mean for cost? These people
will continue to increase in
cost over time, especially when
they turn 18 and have
residential supports available
to them, um, and when they are
22, they will no longer be
receiving supports through EPST
and the school system. So the
costs of our waivers and the
cost to continue to support the
people will continue to grow
over time.
Additional costs that were
factored into our FY 26 budget
request again incorporate the
rate increases, um, not just the
ones that we're about to
request, but we need money to be
able to sustain those, um, over
time.
We want to continuously allocate
all new people who apply to our
waivers. That costs money to do
so. Um, we are receiving a lower
federal match compared to what
we received last year.
We need fewer vacancies within
DDSD to be able to adequately
support the increased population
of people that we are serving
through our waivers and we are
investing in an electronic case
management system to better
monitor the people that we serve
across all of our waivers.
So
I want to take us back to the
people though, the people that
we serve and share our efforts
to ensure health and safety of
the almost 7900 people we are
currently serving through all 4
of our waivers.
So over the last year and a
half, the developmental
disabilities supports division
has made great advancements with
its strategies to keep people
healthy and safe. This started
with a revised mission statement
outwardly addressing that we are
committed to keeping people free
from abuse, neglect, and
exploitation.
We created and went live with a
brand new bureau within the
division that is solely focused
on risk management and abuse,
neglect, and exploitation
prevention.
March 2023 marked the beginning
of a new initiative that we have
maintained and are extremely
committed to continuing with
DDSD and the division of Health
Improvement staff visiting all
waiver recipients face to face
in their homes at least 2 times
a year.
We modified all of our waiver
service standards to incorporate
new requirements for various
provider types to see people in
their homes.
We have developed a predictive
risk model to assist with
scheduling these what we call
wellness visits and DDSD has
formalized an abuse, neglect,
and exploitation response that
is deployed anytime we are
notified of a potential A&E
situation that needs immediate
attention. We reach out, we work
with the teams, we work with the
families and individuals
themselves to ensure that they
are safe and that they have
additional resources or new
resources maybe.
Depending on what their
individual situations are. Some
additional abuse, neglect and
exploitation strategies that
DDSD has implemented, um, are
the use of an electric, excuse
me, electric, electronic
records, excuse me, to capture
information from all of our 4
waivers. Again, we utilize that
$10.2 million to give our
providers a cost of living
increase in order to help
maintain adequate staffing
amongst our service types
throughout the state.
We have incorporated, uh, at
DDSD programmatic and
reorganizational recommendations
that came by way of a contractor
that we just worked with for the
last year and a half by the name
of Accenture. Um, these
recommendations were intended to
increase efficiencies within our
organization, as well as align
our organizational structure to
our organizational priorities
and needs.
Also, for FY 25, so our current
budget we did request and
receive an additional $67
million to be able to continue
to offer allocations to people
as they apply on our wait list,
cover all of the rate increases
that we've previously talked
about in this presentation. And
obviously cover all support
services.
We have developed new
partnerships and collaborations,
um, with community partners and
other state entities in our
efforts to continuously improve
upon keeping people healthy and
safe. The box on slide 2
represents some of the
organizations we now work
routinely with to make sure
people are getting the resources
that they need. They are healthy
and they are remaining safe.
There is no one size fits all
program for people with
intellectual and developmental
disabilities who are dually
diagnosed.
Um, we have a much younger
cohort of people that we're
serving with new, um, complex
needs that are somewhat
unprecedented in our system and
so it is absolutely critical
that we do maintain these very
important relationships and
continue to work together. Um,
some, some examples of that are,
are local law enforcement, uh,
hospitals across the state.
The Attorney General's office,
of course, um, the division of
Health Improvement and our
colleagues at Children, Youth
and Families Department. So now,
let's circle back and let's see
how Gabriel is doing today.
Gabriel is currently receiving
services through our
developmental disabilities
waiver. He was able to find an
occupational therapist who
recently began accepting new
clients and was able to hire new
staff at their agency and expand
to take on new, new people due
to the rate increases through
the cost of living adjustment.
DDSD, um, by way of their
ongoing health and wellness
visits were able to speak with
Gabriel and his family at one of
these visits in their home and
they shared with us the
frustration and burdensome
process and and delays that they
experienced when they were
finally able to start receiving
services. So that gave us really
great important feedback that
allowed us to take that feedback
and make improvements to
streamline the level of care
process and allow others.
To get into services faster.
Um, the family and Gabriel also
shared how frustrating it was to
have to wait over 10 years to
start receiving services that
their family, um, particularly
Gabriel, absolutely needed,
critically needed. Um, so they
shared with us that they hope
that no other New Mexican with
an intellectual and
developmental disabilities will
ever have to wait that long to
receive the desperately needed
services that they need.
Thank you.
Well, thank you, very thorough,
uh.
Impressive presentation before
we go to the committee, I did
want to give you a chance to
respond to public comment that
was made in this committee on
Monday. I don't know if you were
able to follow that, but we had
a provider who said they're
currently being sued.
By
employees because they
They were hired as contract
staff and, and because they,
they didn't have the money to
pay.
Competitive wage or to pay for
overtime, they had resorted to
several providers have done.
Converting employees to
contractors to try to balance
their budgets and and keep the
people that again, that.
Provider has been notified by
the feds that they're breaking
the law. They can't do it that
way. What, what steps are we
taking to help the providers who
were in that position.
Is there anything we can do at
this point to fix that?
So, Mr. Chair and Madam Vice
Chair and members of the
committee, um, the developmental
disability supports division was
not directly involved in that
litigation. However, I am
familiar with what you are
referring to. Um, the
developmental disability
supports division does not
mandate one way or the other,
um, for our provider agencies as
to whether or not they hire
staff as subcontractors or
employees. On the contrary, we
allow them
To hire them in whichever way it
works for their agency. So we do
not take a stand on whether it
has to be a subcontractor or an
employee, we support both. But
since the feds have said that's
illegal, shouldn't we be
supporting employment solely
employees.
Mr. Chair, I think, um, we need
to talk with, uh, our council
and, um, also I,
I don't know the right answer on
that. Um, we have, there are
labor laws in the state that we
have to adhere to as well. So
we'll try to get an answer back
for you, um, uh,
about the appropriateness of, of
which way to go for that. I, I
think, I mean it's a crucial
issue and if the providers, if
we say, well, we're not going to
tell you how to do it.
But one way you're doing it is
leaving you open to suits and
legal action, we probably should
be protecting them a little
better than than that, um, yes,
sir.
Um, so let's go to the committee
and we'll start with the vice
chairman.
Go ahead, so how can we say that
we
Pay for things that are illegal.
I mean, they've been determined
illegal and yet we're still, we
as the state are still allowing
people to that just seems
totally backwards, wrong and
ridiculous.
Uh, Madam, uh, uh, Mr. Chair,
Madam Vice Chair and members of
the committee. I absolutely
appreciate the question. Um, I
think what we also rely upon is
as as uh Cathy had mentioned,
the labor laws, um, in which we
are not able to mandate one way
or the other. However, the fact
that this did occur with one
provider agency in our system.
Um, ultimately, our mechanism
for the or the methodology
Of our rate study and the
utilization of subcontractors
versus employees is also a
factor that is written into our
waiver application. And so
ultimately, the federal
government will, um, allow us or
maybe not allow us to continue
to utilize both methods of, of
hiring staff to perform these
services. So absolutely need to,
to, um, uh, really be aware of
the litigation and the outcome
of that litigation and if that
has impacts across.
Our waivers for our provider
agencies.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I may take
a little longer. I'm getting a
ton of, um, text, so I'm gonna
start with that, um,
So I, I got something that said,
the hearing that you spoke of,
just wrapping up was originally
scheduled for June.
But you had to reschedule
because the hearing links did
not function.
I mean, you had 15 months.
Or a, a year, let's just say a
year to get everything you had
to wait for this, you had to
wait. The least you could do is
get your system working so that
you could do, it should have
been done in June and instead
it's being turned in in
September. I don't need an
answer, but I'm saying it's
ridiculous. Um, let me just keep
going to what, what people are,
um,
Um,
Let's see, um.
Let's see, with the established
DD waiver rates many small and
mid-sized agencies may be in a
position of not making payroll
as the year continues. They
admit that speculation.
5.25.32% doesn't touch
inflation, um.
SL did not receive rate
increases in the last study
other than 1% for Category 4.
They can't keep up with
inflation, no staffing is
available, can't expand or serve
new clients from the mass
allocation or recent allocation
existing rate study with updated
numbers on the subcontractor
line 40%. It's really much
higher for taxes and benefits,
health care, regulations,
medical leave requirements,
exempt employee law increases
80% rule that you spoke about
will hinder providers more, no
money for.
and oversight.
We can't wait for the next rate
study to find what the system
will, what will the system do in
the meantime, um.
Additional clients only means
more underserved recipients
unless administration
regulations are reduced. They
are not. Ra study uses
subcontractor wages in last rate
study. Fixing this line item
remarkably adjust the
reimbursement rate. Employment
law dictates, uh, direct service
providers do not meet
subcontractor criteria for SL.
The most involved services that
did not receive increases. Some
services do allow for and just
going back to when I was a
contractor, um, part of the
definition is you have to
provide your own tools, you
have, so these people are not
meeting, never were meeting the
require the IRS requirements for
being contractors and I'm just
gonna keep on going and, um, I'm
just throwing it out there, uh,
Will HCA budget request on slide
17 include enough money to
support provider rates that
would allow providers to pay
direct care workers, 150% of
state minimum wage as required
by HB 395 from 2023 session. And
my, I mean,
$15 or whatever that they're
paying. I drive by a McDonald's
every day. They start at $17 an
hour.
Who, I mean, I've said this
before, working with my son is
for the most part, it's
wonderful, but when it's not,
it's really scary. So who's
gonna take these jobs and I, you
know, a rate study rate study,
it's like we can't pay anybody
till we do a rate study. We do a
rate study and 4 years later
it's still not in place, um, I'm
just beyond frustrated. Again,
um, and then the, the talk that
you've ended the waitlist. Well,
people are no longer on the wait
list, they're just waiting for.
services because there are no
services. So it's disingenuous
to say, you know, we've ended
the wait list. We've just
changed them to a different
waitlist. A wait list because
there are no providers because
we don't pay providers enough
for for for living, for
supported living, for therapies,
for anything, we don't pay
anybody enough, many friends are
therapists who used to be DD
providers. I'm hearing in the
dozens, um, of, of.
Therapist who said, I don't take
Didi waiver anymore. It's
ridiculous that they don't pay
us and then again back to
Representative Jaramillo, you
know, you expect these agencies
and, and providers to wait for
months to get paid, you hear
complaints about the whole
billing system. I heard a
complaint this morning that
there's a pilot and that the
agency has required 4
new positions to just do
billing.
That's ridiculous.
I mean, if we're that we're
spending so much money on
jumping through the hoops that
we don't have any money and
we're not paying for it, but we
don't have any money for actual
services, um, OK, let's see.
Uh, the delays are ridiculous.
The summit is interesting, but
when I talk to people, many,
many people who should be around
the table are not around the
table. It feels like it's a one
of those show and tells, you
know, where, oh let's get people
together and say we did it, but
the people who who will complain
like me, I mean, I am invited.
I'm shocked. I may not be when I
get there tomorrow. I may be
uninvited because of what I'm
saying today, but I, I am, I am
beyond
sick of this. My son has been on
the waiver for 13 years, he
waited for 5.5, which was like
what and people say 5.5.
0, who else do we make for
weight for 5.5 or 13 years, and
I have a friend who waited 15,
so, so we don't, we don't treat
anyone else like this. We are
treating people with
disabilities like they're trash
and you know, they can wait,
they can wait. No, they can't as
a pediatric physical therapist,
if you miss.
Out on those critical times
you're never getting it back.
You're never, I mean somebody
gets so with cerebral palsy gets
so um so tight that you can't
fix that and I I don't know what
I'm gonna do, but I'm putting it
out there once more today that
I'm not gonna take this crap
anymore and I'm gonna do
everything I can to make sure
that we start everybody says,
oh, the most vulnerable, the
most vulnerable. Let's put them
to the side and not give him any
money. I'm just throwing it out
there. Anybody who wants to join
me, come on. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Representative Ferrari.
I share a lot of the same
concerns how the state can, um,
tell our providers, um, year
after year that since they don't
have enough funds that they
should go to the model of where
they contract.
And now they're being penalized
$1.5 million
for using that model, and now
the state's just washing their
hands, saying, well, we can't
tell them what to do, but it was
promoted that they go through
the contracting model because
they did not have the funds to
continue the services if they
had to pay for people as
employees. And I think it's
egregious that now the state um.
is not backing them up and is
not supporting and getting those
um uh reimbursements high enough
for them to be able to pay
their, uh, employees as they
should and with, um, out being
sued, um, and I'm worried about
the other providers, um, you
know, what are they looking at?
We don't want to lose them. We
already don't have enough. We
need to reinforce and support
them so they can continue, uh,
Um, and even, you know, flourish
if we can to get more funding.
Um.
I think representative Thompson
has mentioned the things that
I've been worried about, but
also when you, my question, Mr.
Chair, and, um,
Directors.
When you tout about the wellness
visits, um, by staff. We've
heard.
Stories that the people going
out aren't always qualified to
really, uh, and the list of
things that they have to go and
check off aren't really
practical or um.
To the point of services that
the person might need. Have you
been able to change that, get
more qualified people.
Mr. Chair and representative
Ferrari and members of the
committee, absolutely, and I
want to especially thank, uh,
Representative Liz Thompson, as
well as Representative Kate
Holmes, who, um, hosted a
listening session early on in
the uh initiation of the ongoing
wellness visits. Uh, you are
correct. Uh, we did receive, uh,
a lot of negative feedback when
the request to start these, uh,
wellness visits initially
occurred. That was in March of
2.
2023. So, um,
We did. We were asked to visit
the entire population in a very
short period of time, so we did
ask other colleagues from other
state departments to assist us.
Um, these people are not experts
in the field of intellectual and
developmental disabilities as
staff at DDSD and and our
colleagues at the Division of
Health Improvement are, uh,
since then, yes, as, as I
mentioned, a listening session
occurred with our, at that time,
temporary our acting, uh,
developmental disabilities
director, um, with the public,
um.
Turkey to hear from families and
what they were experiencing. We
have made, um, substantial
changes based on that feedback.
To the extent that, um, moving
forward from the spring of 2023.
So we are a year and a half
later now. Um, we are only doing
visits with DDSD and DHI staff
who are in fact trained and
experts in the field of
intellectual and developmental
disabilities. Um, we are doing
all scheduled visits with
families to make it less feel
less intrusive.
Um, and we have significantly
revised the kinds of questions
and, and items we were looking
for when we originally started
those visits, so we have made a
lot of improvements, uh, based
on feedback from our
constituents, um, who did share
negative experiences with those
wellness visits.
And um
with um the event or the
Um, town hall with the governor
tomorrow, um, I think it's I
agree that it's disingenuous
because all of the budgets are
already baked in the cake from
the agencies and any.
Thing that you have to address,
you won't be able to increase
the budgets for because they're
already done and have to be in
by Tuesday. So how is it that,
you know,
This wasn't scheduled long time
ago and not just.
When it's too late.
Mr. Chair, uh, members of the
committee, uh,
We are moving towards making
getting every bit of comments
and we can from people. We do
have, you know, uh, rate
increases, uh, in our budget
request or our, our budget does
help push our, our initiatives
forward, so we'll get the
comments that we can if we, if
it's not enough for this next
year, this year, coming year
we'll request more in the coming
year. I'm sorry, Mr. Chair and
Madam director.
It's, that's not responsive
enough to the needs that are
already way behind, but thank
you.
Senator Cero Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you for taking on this really
important job. Um, it's, it's,
as you know, there's a long
history and a very difficult
history that you have to get
beyond, so I really wish you the
best and offer
support in getting through it.
Now saying all that, did you
listen to the public comment the
first day, um, regarding just
tragedy after tragedy of of
story, and I read that.
I mean, I heard that and then I
read the slide you have about
ensuring health and safety of
waiver recipients. And I have to
say I was disappointed, um,
because it just sort of lists
partnerships and no process um
for
For, for addressing very
specific um
concerns. Um, I guess I'm asking
you to respond if you will to or
or I don't know if you've met
with him, but to respond to that
and what the agency is going to
do with it, you know, about it
and also a little bit more
detail about what happens if you
find something in these homes
that endangers people.
The steps that are taken because
this slide.
Just listing partnerships, just
doesn't do it for me in terms
of, of what specifically I'm
talking about slide 20
doesn't do it for me in terms of
feeling comfortable that these
people that there's oversight
and that the that folks are
protected,
yes, uh, Mr. Chair, um, Madam
Vice Chair and Senator,
absolutely. I will refer you
back to also slide 1919 and 20
both address, um, some of our
Abuse, neglect and exploitation
strategies. However, I am happy
to answer your question and
expand upon that. Um, so part of
the, the intent of our two time
per year wellness visits is to
lay eyes on our constituents,
see their homes, see what type
of environment they're living
in. And of course, if there is
any potential abuse, neglect, or
exploitation identified there,
that is absolutely reported for
our investigatory agency, um,
and my colleagues are, in fact,
here from the division of Health
and
improvement and maybe my with
your permission, Mr. Chair,
choose to join us to maybe help
expand upon what happens when
somebody, when a report of
suspected abuse, neglect, or
exploitation occurs. Before I do
that, if I may, back to our
strategies. Um, so we did work
with a contracting agency and
part of our recommendations for
a reorganizational design and
alignment with priorities was in
fact to make sure we did have
adequate.
Staff, um, assigned and, and
solely focused on the abuse,
neglect, and exploitation
prevention. Um, what that
entails is really looking at
every single reported, um,
suspicion of A&E, uh, looking at
the provider agencies in which
they reside and receive supports
from working with those teams,
the group of people who support
each of those individuals to
make sure that they have the
necessary resources, um, as, as
well as the partners that you,
you mentioned on Slide 20.
Um
But also to work with national
partners to understand what our
best practices for supporting
people with IDG and the
prevention of abuse, neglect,
and exploitation. People are
obviously safer when they are
seen. That is why we also, um,
updated some of our, our service
standards requirements for all
provider types that see that
our, our clients, the people
that we serve through our
waivers on a regular basis. So
no longer can people just do all
of that remotely. We are asking
that they
Visit with them face to face,
lay eyes on them, see their
homes, see their environment,
um, so those are just a few, um,
to name a few, and really
looking at what our risk factors
in this population. What puts
people maybe at greater risk.
We we serve people who choose to
um be homeless, for example, who
are addicted to drugs and
alcohol. Um, you know, we, we
can.
Provide as many supports as we
can possibly offer, not just
within the DDSD realm, but other
resources. But at the end of the
day, um, you can't force people
to do certain things. And so we
are just making, um, uh,
continuous efforts to, to
maintain contact with these
people, offer them the resources
that we can and offer them
support and help if they are
willing to take it, so, um, I, I
think that that's important to
remember when you're dealing
with people.
Um, we can set them up for the
best success, but if they are
their guardians choose to make
other decisions based on their
own, um, you know, preferences,
we respect that. So, um, I, I
think it is a very, very fair
question. It is a very difficult
concept to think that we are
going to be able to see what
happens in everybody's lives 24
hours a day. Um, we are doing
our best to be able to have as
many sets of eyes on people
routinely.
Um, and work with national
experts in this case on how can
we, how can we as a state do
this better because we too are,
are very interested in doing
better and even 11 incident of
abuse, neglect, or exploitation
is simply not acceptable, um, so
these are some of the strategies
that we are employing and, and
hopefully will be more
successful with in the future.
Have you met with the public
commenter and investigated the
allegations that were raised.
mean you specifically, but the
agency.
Uh, Mr. Chair and, and Madam
Vice Chair, if it's permissible
of you, uh, I can ask my
colleagues from the Division of
Health Improvement to speak on
investigations. They are the
investigatory body, um,
who look at our, our programs
and also um reported, uh,
instances of abuse, neglect, and
exploitation.
Are you prepared to speak on
that right now? Yeah, come on up
and do that, please.
All right, good, good morning,
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, my name is Dan
Linari. I am the newly appointed
director for the division of
Health Improvement. Um, so yes,
we became, we came prepared to,
to speak on on the process as we
heard some of those concerns as
it relates to the investigation
process and that investigation
process lies with the division
of Health Improvement. Um, so I
want to be able to speak through
that. I also prepared a document
that outlines that process for
the committee. So if it's
permissible to you, Mr.
Chair, we can hand out these and
then I'll talk through this
document as it relates to the
investigations.
this.
As those are getting handed out,
um, if I just may, uh, introduce
myself briefly again, um, I'm
happy to be with you here this
morning, uh, particularly happy
to be with you here in Socorro.
Um, so my background is a
physical therapist. Socorro is
what brought me to New Mexico
and my first role in healthcare,
uh, as a physical therapist. And
so the last 10 years of my
career have been in quality and
patient safety leadership roles
in last Monday began my role as
a DHI director, so.
Thank you again for allowing me
to speak to this process. I
created, um, kind of 22 flows of
this process as it relates to
the investigations. Um, one kind
of a general overview of that
investigation and then another
as it relates to the criminal
investigation process as I know
that was a point of discussion
on Monday, so to start at the
top of the document, the intake
of that allegation, that is what
DHI, uh, that's what is what.
We take in the start of that and
that intake of the allegation is
done on a 24/7 basis, so DHI has
staff dedicated to take um those
allegations, and with that we
triage those allegations. The
priority assignment levels that
list right below there,
emergency priority 1, priority 2
is how that is triaged and moved
forward in that investigation.
Um, the next step being that
45 day investigation that DHI
completes and then once or if
substantiated DHI works with
that provider on a preventative
plan approves that plan, and
then on a regular basis meets
with UDSD to review those cases.
Now, again, I think a point of a
discussion on Monday was how are
these more serious allegations,
particularly these criminal
investigations handled, and that
is outlined below on that
Next float chart that you see.
Um, so when these cases are
triaged and that 45 day
investigation starts if there is
a criminal allegation found
during that, that is when law
enforcement is engaged in the
process. Uh, and then through
that, the law enforcement agency
agency would complete their
investigation and then bring
back that information for us to
complete ours and then as that
is substantiated.
Uh, those individuals would be
referred as necessary to the
employer abuse registry where
they are held in that for at
least 3 years. Um, so just some
quick data on that, uh, for
fiscal year 24, 131 referrals
had been made to law enforcement
as it relates to the criminal
investigation process.
Uh, so that's, uh, directly kind
of what the process looks like
on page 2 of the document, I
gave, uh, again, overview of
responsibilities, so DHI being
the investigator working with
DDSD, um, you know, who's the
contract holder for the provider
agencies, the provider agencies
themselves, uh, and then law
enforcement. And below that gave
you some overall data, um, in
relation to the investigations
and so
24, 23, and 22, we provided in
this chart as far as the total
cases that came to the division
of Health Improvement, the
substantiated cases, and then,
uh, percentage of that total and
then lastly, the abuse cases. So
when we think about what cases
most likely is law enforcement
going to be involved with. It's
the abuse cases particularly
those of physical abuse. Um, so
you see that, you know, over the
last few years, there
has been more cases coming to
DHI also more substantiated
cases and increase collaboration
with law enforcement as it
relates to those abuse cases,
so.
Um, Mr. Chair, thank you for
explaining the process. Have you
met with the, with the person
who complained and investigated
those allegations. The agency, I
don't mean you in particular, I
mean the agency.
In this process.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, me personally, I have
not met with, um, that person
directly. Um, however, uh, Terry
Cotter, our deputy director of
DHI is here and and and familiar
with um some of those
allegations and so as those come
forward, yes, we, we do address
them.
And are they in the progress in
the process of being addressed?
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I, I don't have a
direct answer for that
particular case. Um, but I would
like to take that back and
provide you an answer afterwards
if possible. I think it's very
important because it wasn't just
one case, there were cases, and
it was a devastating story, an
indictment of the entire of the
entire, in my mind, an entire
all the work, um, and so I, I
appreciate this. I
that in the future. In other
cases, and I, I really, I know
we're both new, um, and I just
hope that you will take it
seriously because it's it, it
cut, I think the whole
committee's attention about how
How terrible that story was, and
nobody, nobody deserves, uh,
what, what those, those people
experienced. And I do want to
just make one little point about
the wellness checks. One of my
constituents called me about
those wellness checks that
started in January. I think she
called me in February, and her
son was totally traumatized by
the experience, um, I said, OK,
what you need to do is contact
them and complain. Is she
already had, she felt like she
was threatened with
This is, it was just a mess. Um,
and so I, I hope you learned a
lot about not using trained
personnel because what she
described sounded hideous,
particularly with the with the
young man that um
If you knew him at all, the way
they approached him was.
Absolutely the wrong way to go
about it. So thank you, Mr.
Chair, and I appreciate the
extra time.
Thank you, Senator. Senator
Stenix.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you for the presentations today.
Um,
I did miss a lot of what
happened.
Sorry. Um, I did miss, uh, what
happened in the past couple of
days because I was in another
committee, but I'd like to um go
back to the premise that, you
know, every time the New Mexico
state legislature changes law or
enhances benefits or funding, we
expect it to occur, um.
And
Uh
If there are barriers to doing
that.
We need to be informed so that
we can correct it, but my
question is, um, and I was going
to say earlier, and I think
people are doing it already, if
people are not getting rate
increases when we prescribe
them, they should go to court.
And just, you know, get it
decided that way. I mean, we
have a big education lawsuit. We
have an environmental lawsuit.
Why don't we have a lawsuit on
this? But anyway, when you go to
the federal government.
To get approval for enhancing
rates, how long does that take?
After we have legislated such.
Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
members of the committee, and
Senator.
When we communicate with the
federal government. The
responses could take up to 90
days.
OK, so is this Mr. Chair, is
this a state plan amendment, or
is it just approval for a rate
increases. Senator, is an actual
waiver amendment, so it is not
the state plan, but it is, as I
mentioned, the three different
waiver. It is an amendment to
those waiver applications. So,
um, Mr. Chair, the approval of
the maximum amount of time would
be 90 days.
Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
members of the committee, I
think that would be the best
case scenario. OK, so Mr. Chair,
what I'm where I'm going with
this is that if we have done
something in the budget or
through legislation. It doesn't
usually get enacted immediately.
There is a lead in time for this
so that there should be
appropriate time and, and you
should know as we're going
along, whether the governor is
going to sign it and approve it
to kind of get everything in
order. And I have been
there before, so I know these
things take time, but if the
legislature is giving its
intent, then we just have to
kind of jump on it and move
ahead. The only other thing I
wanted to bring up today and I
think it's been brought up
several times already is, uh,
getting everybody, uh, off the
list is great, but I'm really
wondering about community
capacity and community capacity
doesn't just happen overnight.
It might happen with uh
Higher rates, but you know, the
recruitment, the training, etc.
has to be all taken into
account. Thank you very much,
Mr. Chair. If you want to
respond briefly.
Mr. Chair, uh, Madam Vice Chair
and Senator, I would love to
respond to that and we don't
disagree with you at all. One,
we do need to do better with
getting things submitted faster
to get the money into the hands
of our providers and of our
direct support professionals,
uh, faster, 100% agree with you.
Um, furthermore, um, on the, I'm
sorry, I just lost my train of
thought. What was the second
thing you just talked about?
Thank you. Uh, community
capacity, yes, so that is
exactly why we monitor
That very, very closely, um, so
we do know and recognize that
this was something that we, um,
would, and we did anticipate
ending a waitlist, needing more
people to provide those services
and supports. Um, we are working
with New Mexico's higher
education institutions to try to
recruit people from those
universities who are completing
curriculum that support some of
the service types that we offer
on our waivers. We are
recruiting on a national basis.
We do have other
strategies in place because we
agree with you 100%. We
absolutely need to expand on our
provider capacity and
furthermore, choice for people.
So, um, couldn't agree more, we
have asked for collaboration
from our provider agencies from
our advisory Council on Quality
to help us do that. I, I would
encourage and invite you if you
have any other ideas too, we, we
agree that the need exists and
we are actively trying to um
To mitigate that. So thank you,
and we agree with your comment.
One last, uh, idea, the, um,
Uh, college up in Espanola, they
do, um, I don't know what they
call it, they're like uh very
condensed, uh, workshops to
train a nurse or medical
technicians, nurses aides, and
maybe they could do something
just specifically for this, but
they do it like in a month or 4
weekends or something like that,
so, you know, maybe we need some
crash courses at our community
colleges or institutions. Thank
you very much.
Thank you, Senator
Representative Jaramillo, any
questions?
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
A little bit of a background. I
have a 32 year old daughter with
autism, and uh we have struggled
with uh therapeutic services her
entire life, and I'm also a
speech language pathologist who
used to provide services on the
DD waiver who no longer does
that for various reasons that I
think we need to discuss today.
Um,
part of the issue, um, that
we're looking at, I know we're
going to do a study and we're
going to talk about it,
but direct uh support
individuals. I believe you
reimburse at 7.
$17 an hour, 32% of that could
go as costs for the employee if
they're non-contract, which
leaves us with $11.56 to pay
them, but that doesn't keep the
lights on. So, um, for my child
who I know, you know, my, my
goal was never to die so that I
could always care for her and be
here with her is not going to
come to fruition, so, um, I
don't know who I could hire for
$11.40.
To ensure that she maintains a
healthy,
Life, lifestyle and existence,
quite frankly. So unless those
provider rates are increased to
at least $300 to $35 an hour, I
don't see how you're going to
maintain, um, your workforce.
And, uh, and I don't see how
we're going to provide services
for these 3100 individuals, 500
additional individuals a year on
this, um, on this program. So we
talk about the decimation of the
DD waiver and how that happened
and and as a provider, I can
tell.
I quit being a provider because
of the restrictions on the
provision of services, um,
Fear for my own licensing
because of what I was being
asked to do on the waiver and
not asked to do on the waiver
and uh and provide a
reimbursement. So I, I chose to
reinvest in a life insurance
policy, um, for my child so that
I can die and she can be cared
for. So, um, with all of these
things, uh, presented to us.
Please tell me what you have
done to increase ancillary
service providers in our area
knowing that I look at my
see that there are no providers
in my area. And um how have we
address these issues and then I
want to bring up an additional
issue of therapy providers who
are feeling like, um.
They are being penalized through
audits of their their uh their
provider, their Medicaid
provision under different um
models and, um, and, and this
fear that they will be subject
to either paying this back or
fraud, and I know that you have
heard about this because the
provider network has been
screaming about this happening.
So if you can um share with us
your thoughts on that and then
also just as a side note.
Um, your statement of choosing
to be homeless is is really
Difficult for me to, to address
because I cannot imagine.
My child.
Who is disabled intellectually
disabled, making that choice.
And I would never ever want a
provider to assume that.
That was her choice. And so that
goes to my fear of never wanting
to die.
I never want to hear that again.
From this department.
Our people do not choose to be
homeless,
choose to be unsafe.
We cannot lead with that. We
cannot believe that.
So if you could please answer my
questions on ancillary service
provision.
Yes, Mr. Chair, Madam Vice
Chair, and Representative Hemio,
um, as I, as I mentioned and and
listed in some of this
presentation are strategies that
we, um, employ on on an ongoing
basis. There's always a need for
more providers. It's just hit a
critical need with bringing more
people into the system, um, in
the last two years. So we do
what we call call for providers,
um, across our existing provider
network as well as nationally,
just to highlight the service
area.
In which we need additional
providers and, um, hopefully
entice people to come do this
meaningful work in our beautiful
state of New Mexico, um, that is
one we advertise through
national listserves as well. So
when we post jobs we post them
not only through our local
channels here in New Mexico, but
we also utilize national, um,
uh, list services and, and, and
forums to, uh, hopefully again
bring people here. So those are
two strategies. Um, and, and as
I mentioned
previously, we are looking at
partnering and doing
presentations at our higher
education, uh, institutions here
in New Mexico to helpful
hopefully, um, be able to have
some of their graduates come and
do this type of work in our
programs. Um, we are looking for
this, this upcoming year to um
complete a social media or or
activate a social media
campaign. Um, again, just really
highlighting the meaningful
work, um, and why people might
want to come do that here in our
state, so.
Those are a few to name for you
today, but again, we have asked
for assistance because the need
is great, um, from our, our
provider community. How can we
do this? What is the best way?
rates is 100% always going to be
part of the equation raising
rates is certainly a strategy,
um, you know, that we, we
certainly, as, as I mentioned,
if we have the funding we have
never had funding and said, no,
we're not going to increase
rates. We will always increase
rates when we can because that
is
strategy. It's an effective
strategy. Um, and beyond that,
you know, just to continue to
monitor the provider network. We
have a unit dedicated to this
enrollment and, and monitoring
of our existing network of
providers, um, that is why we
engaged in a provider capacity
assessment in 2023 because we
anticipated this need continuing
to grow as we continue to bring
more people off of our waiting
list. So this is not something
that we have done or
Completed this will be an
ongoing effort until we have a
healthier provider network to
offer more choice and service
delivery to people on our
waivers.
Mr. Chair, I might add that a
healthier provider network comes
with partnerships and, um, when,
when I look at even hiring
providers, they're not just
looking for pay because I don't
pay as much as everybody around
me, but what I offer is a
supportive service. And, um, and
from what I'm hearing from the
therapeutic um network is that
they don't have a supportive
partnership.
And I'm certainly hearing that
from providers who provide
direct support service and uh
part of this lawsuit for
contract staff. I see why they
chose to do that.
Because they don't have the
money to pay for it.
But um this is happening
throughout the DD waiver system,
and we need to be able to trust
our our state entity who's
supporting not just therapy
providers but also our most
vulnerable children and really
embrace the fact that they are
the most vulnerable and how can
we work so that we have people
who want, who have a passion to
work because it's hard work.
Who come into the system and I
think it, it comes with trust
and respect. And I, I believe
that that part has been missing
for a while. I hope you bring
that to the DD waiver, um,
because there's so many families
who are counting on this. Thank
you.
Representative Royal Caballero,
and I would urge members to try
to be a little more concise our,
our vice chairman has given a
timekeeping for the moment, but
if you could kind of keep it,
otherwise we'll miss lunch and
you don't want to miss lunch
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and um,
I wish this was a topic that we
could be, um.
More time
Constrained on and but I, but I
appreciate everything that has
been said up to this point by my
colleagues, um, beginning with
Representative Thompson, who
expressed a great deal of what I
wanted to express. I think what
I want to say.
Before I ask my question is that
Um,
A lot is determined.
What we do, how we, how we do it
is determined by our mindset.
So if we continue to
Address these.
Incredibly
Life important um.
circumstances.
From an individual perspective.
Of
What causes the problem?
And we lose sight of and we use
Terminology and phrases such as
choosing to be.
Homeless or choosing to be in
these situations. The population
we're talking about here.
did not choose.
To be in these circumstances.
They did not choose to.
And I want to address where I
think the problem begins with is
if you look at your mission
statement, the very beginning.
I'm, I've been a trainer in
nonprofit world in
community-based world.
And we would never use cost
effective.
As part of our mission
statement.
When you put costs involved.
From the head, from the top
down, then you're already
setting up people to look at
things from a different mindset,
so that and from a bureau
bureaucratic mindset.
As opposed to a community or
collective, uh, well-being
perspective.
I bring that to your attention
because everything that I heard
today.
is a bureaucratic response.
It's a bureaucratic response and
we're not looking for
bureaucratic response because
the children and families that
are affected are not
bureaucrats. They're part of our
communities. They go to the
store with us, we see them in
the healthcare facilities. They
go to church with us. They're in
schools with us. They're
everywhere with us.
So this is, this, this, Mr.
Chair requires.
Us to remove that bureaucratic.
Tendency and response and look
at it as if it were our family,
our neighbors, um, everyone that
we're interacting because lo and
behold, we don't know if our
grandchild.
will be affected or a niece or a
nephew.
So that's that determines the
direction.
And the effectiveness in my
view.
Of how a program, how we should
be delivering services. I teach
a public policy
course every other year.
In the School of Public
Administration and and others.
And this would be a perfect case
study of what not to do.
The problems that were given to
us and shown to us on the first
day during public comment.
And how you responded.
Today is it perfect case study.
Of what not to do.
And, and
Based on what I just said.
I'm very concerned.
As a caseworker, as a former
social worker, uh, I guess you
never give up being a social
worker, um.
2 home visits a year.
is not going to protect.
And save our children from what
you indicated.
Is the abuse, neglect, and
other, it's not.
So just from a practical
perspective, Mr. Chair.
You, you've got to relook at
that. That's not going to
happen. It's in that's an
ineffective response. I would
never as a supervisor of
caseworker unit whatever put in
just two visits, home visits a
year,
especially with that's something
that's not the services they
get. That's when they get the
monitoring.
So they get if there are
services, they get more than,
and I'm gonna try to make sure
you
you a little briefer. OK, so
that was the main point that I
want to make. So thank you for
clarifying. And then the final
the one question I do have, and
it's really important because I,
I just feel that.
The mindset really controls a
lot of what we do in our
approaches, but, um,
When you talk about the
electronic um data keeping and
record keeping and entry of all
of that.
Are we
Do we know, do we have a handle
on
the
Providers, caregivers, families
having adequate access to um
All of this electronic record
keeping data and the reason I
say that is because that's a
great they would be an excellent
way to measure through
transparency and access and
feedback.
We had a presentation about
feedback, so that that was a
real key question of mine. Thank
you.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
and Representative Caballero,
thank you for your insight and,
and feedback. Um, and certainly
we will take all of that to
heart, um, to answer your
question, and then if I may have
the liberty of responding to a
few other points that you made,
um, yes, that is critically
important for a family guardians
and individuals themselves to
have access to any type of
electronic uh client data
management system. Um, we
currently don't have a client
data management.
System, which is why we are
needing one and budgeting for
one. however, what we do have is
an electronic record currently,
um, that has some information
that you might find in a client
data management system. Um,
individuals and their guardians
absolutely have access to that,
um, system. So they are able to
do that and uh we don't have to
get back to the provider
capacity component, you, you're
right. I mean, that would be a
great way to monitor that and
know where.
The need is we don't have an
electronic system that monitors
that, so that is a system of um.
We have a provider enrollment
unit that when providers can no
longer if they're at maximum
capacity and they could no
longer take any new people on
their caseloads. They notify us.
We do track that, which is how
we have the data to share with
you and, and, and that's just a
sample of 4 of over 50 services
that we might offer across all
the waivers. Um, but yes, that
is absolutely a module that is
being planned for that will help
us monitor and track not just
the availability of the.
as a whole, but maybe for
example, therapists, you have 5
therapy agencies. How many
individual therapists though are
at each of those agencies and
how many of them are taking on
new people, so absolutely, um,
the need is, is definitely
present. um, and, and if I may,
I just want to formally
apologize for my words if they
came across offensive. We
operate a system of, of
person-centered support, so we
do put the person first and in
everything that we do. Um,
guardianship.
becomes a hot topic in our world
as well, because sometimes I
could ask you to keep your sure
answers a little briefer.
Yeah, so I, I just want to
clarify that sometimes people do
have legal guardians that make
their choices and decisions with
them and on behalf of them, but
sometimes we do have individuals
that we support who are in fact
their own guardians and who do
maybe make decisions that we
would not consider to be good
decisions, but we meet people
where they are where they are.
So my point in, in demonstrating
that there are all kinds of
people that we serve or that we
go to them and we continuously
offer them supports wherever
they're at just to.
And maintain, um, you know,
contact with people, see people,
ensure their health and safety,
and provide whatever supports
they're willing to accept from
us. Thank you. Representative
Chavez.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair. So
I've got actually 3 questions,
um, a couple of them came in via
text. The first one is um.
While there have been rate
increases for this population,
um, is it correct that at least
1200 of the most vulnerable and
needy clients will see actual
decreases in the rates for
services for supported living
level 4 and intensive medically
needed clients, um, and if your
answer is that this isn't the
case, I'd like to see
documentation of that.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
and Representative Chavez. Um,
that is incorrect. I have
documentation that I am happy to
share with the committee. Um, I
think what's important maybe
where there could be
misunderstanding. As I mentioned
to you, we had um temporary
funding available through the
American Rescue Plan that we did
distribute to our providers over
the course of a three-year
period. Each year decreasing
until the money was exhausted.
Again, that was temporary money.
The rates returned to the
baseline rates, the
we exhausted all of that ARPA
funding. Um, there is no
decrease in supported living
rates at all. There has not been
over the last 5 years. I, I'll
just go back 5 years, but, um,
the race resumed, the, uh,
baseline amount prior to the
receipt of the temporary art
funding.
And then my next question is,
um, how long was it?
Um.
Before independent contractors.
Well, let me see. Um, there were
direct care workers. Let me go
back and sort of reframe this
direct care workers who were,
um, classified as independent
contractors. So what period of
time did it take or how long did
it take before those workers
were no longer um.
Treated as independent
contractors and paid overtime
for any work that they were, um,
that they worked overtime. So
Representative Chavez, I
unfortunately cannot speak to
that. I, I, again, we don't, um,
DDSD does not manage or monitor
the way individual provider
agencies classify their
employees or subcontractors, so
I'm, I apologize, I cannot
answer that question.
Alright, I'd like to follow up
with you on that one. And then,
and then the other um uh
question that I have is on the
handout, the two-page handout
that you, that you distributed
and and it's the investigation
data and from FOI 22 to FOI 24,
the number of substantiated
cases has increased. It's gone
from 393 to 645, and I would
venture to say that there's
probably more cases that go
unreported that haven't even be,
haven't even been looked at. So
what is
The agency doing to actually get
into and monitor um some of
these agencies, group homes,
whatever, to really, um, you
know, uh, look at the kind of
care we heard a presentation on
Monday that was horrible, um,
and I would not want anybody to
live under those kinds of
conditions.
Mr. Chair, uh, members of the
committee, uh, yes, so those,
those numbers have increased
over the last two years. Uh, and
what we're doing as an agency
is, um, you know, our, our
responsibility at DHI as the
regulatory oversight is to make
sure that we're not missing
those cases and so, particularly
for the intake process, we are
continually evaluating, trying
to understand and standardize
that intake process to make sure
that we do not miss
cases that are not that are
should be substantiated that are
not. And so that is what we're
working really hard as an agency
to do moving forward. So that
for one, we're positively
identifying these cases that are
substantiated and then quickly
responding to those
substantiated cases.
Senator Lopez. Oh, thank you
very much, Mr. Chair, and kind
of ditto with all the questions
and comments that have been
made. But I do want to say thank
you for being here with us
today. Um, this is not, um,
How would I say, work, um.
Carrying thought, whatever, you
know, verbiage you wish to use.
It's not easy for the population
that we're talking about,
especially as they grow older. I
too have a son who's on the
spectrum, and I too have
concerns that when I pass on,
you know, he has a kind heart
and he trusts everybody.
Um, and I was just sharing that
with Representative Chavez. So
when I move on.
People who have a disability,
learning disability and such are
exploited in many different
ways.
And
Uh, with the testimony, I was
not here, but I've read, but
we've heard some of the stories,
as many of you have over the
years too. Um, yeah, the whole
issue of some of these
atrocious, awful, ugly cases
that have made the news.
I think are just the tip of the
iceberg in many other instances
because some of these persons
cannot respond as we can.
If they have a kind heart,
they're not willing to accuse
somebody because they don't want
to get them in trouble. It it's
just part of the, you know, what
goes and I have conversations
with my son quite regularly, um,
so he can understand not
everybody has a kind heart.
Um, uh, but Mr. Chair, this,
this always needs so much more
time for us to discuss and with
regards to questions, but when
we talk about investigations,
um, you know, what is your
relationship with aging and
long-term care because these are
adults also, right? So if you do
the investigation and you have
some substantiation, what is
your relationship with aging and
long-term care, who also has
oversight with abuse, um, and
neglect for adults.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, that is correct. We
do have a relationship with them
in that and, and previously they
have been involved with um some
of the intake and allegations
and triage of those events so we
do work directly with them also.
And Mr. Chair, as you know, it's
always about the different
silos.
figuring out how to work
together instead of this is
mine, that's yours. So I'd like
even more information and time
on that.
Excuse me.
Money is always important
because if you can go to
McDonald's or other places to
work for 15 bucks an hour. Why
should you go and work in an
environment that
Requires a heart, caring, and
it's labor intensive, so we do
have to pay better, Mr. Chair.
The other concerns, and I
happened to sit on the wings
commission, which is sponsored
by the Supreme Court looking at
guardianship in the state. And
you know, we've had issues many
years coming as to how guardians
exploit dollars and monies, um,
that are set aside for persons
who have a disability and we're
still working on on a proposals
for the legislature, but that's
another area, Mr. Chair, that we
still have to, I think, do more
investigation from our
perspective as a legislature.
For training and accountability
for the guardians. And those are
the companies too who run some
of these facilities, group homes
or whatever you wish to call. We
still have to do a better job in
working on that too. But again,
thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator, and, and for
those of you concerned that this
is not going to be our only
opportunity to talk about the
developmental disability
program, uh, we, we do have
planned in October in Rio Rancho
to to hear from some of the
providers and we'd like to have,
if possible, to have the
department there as well to
respond to whatever they hear to
keep us up to date. So this is
not the only time, but we did
want to give the department a
chance to bring us up to date on
their plans and, and what they
antic.
doing so.
Representative Johnson, we'll go
to you next.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, committee
members and presenters. I have a
question for you, sir,
regarding, uh, risk and quality.
I was looking at your
investigation process and I
wanted to know why it takes 45
days.
I feel like that's a very long
time to follow up with a
complaint or a grievance.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, to give you a
full answer on that if it's OK.
I have the uh deputy director,
Terry Cotter, who's been closely
involved with that, if I may uh
let her answer that briefly,
please. Thank you.
Yeah,
oh, I'm sorry, it's uh CMS
requirements. It's a, a national
average for investigations. APS
uses it as well.
So could you say that it may not
take the full 45 days. OK, thank
you. And then my other question
is, um, not for you, sir, but,
uh, on page 19.
Why?
Is there a different, there is
there such a uh a big difference
in census between May and June.
For visits completed.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
and Representative Johnson, um,
great question. Thank you for
asking that. So we do our rounds
of visits by in 6 month
increments and so we, that's how
we make sure the total
population is seen 2 times a
year. We base that on a calendar
year. So we actually started
this round in January and in
June, we completed them by the
end of June, so it's just a
demonstration of, um, where we
sort of, uh, did,
Visits on the front end of that
six month period. And at the
end, uh, we, we try to make sure
that we leave time at the end of
a six-month period to make sure
anybody who maybe was out of
town or, you know, wasn't
available, that we had time to
see them. So you'll see why
again then in July, it, it
spikes back up because July 1 is
when we start our second round
of, um, the biennial visits.
OK, thank you. And then my last
comment is I too have a nephew.
He, he's also on the spectrum.
However, he was denied service
in his application because his
IQ is very high.
And true he is very smart. He's
a reader. He's good at math.
He's a natural.
Uh, freehand artist,
but we know that he's not gonna
be able to, to take care of
himself and and live.
With the life skills that he has
now. Can you explain any part of
that. Thank you.
Yes, thanks for that question.
Uh, Representative Johnson and
and Mr. Chair and Madam Vice
Chair and members of the
committee, we have eligibility
criteria, um, for our waiver
programs and the uh diagnosis
of, um, being somewhere on the
autism spectrum does not
automatically, um, permit people
to qualify for our waivers. Our
waiver eligibility criteria is
based on having an IQ of less
than 70 and then having
subsequent, um, uh, adaptive
behavior.
Type skills, uh, deficits in
three major life areas, um,
particularly related to
activities of daily living and,
and things of that nature. So
what can happen, um, for various
people who are on the autism
spectrum is that they do have a
higher, um, IQ. They do not have
those, um, those deficits and,
and those functional areas that
we look at, therefore, they do
not meet, um, eligibility
criteria for the waiver.
I'm happy to take a look at, at
this situation, but I suspect
that that is, um, where he might
have fallen into.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
presenters.
Thank you, Representative
Johnson. Senator Pinto, do you
have any questions? Yes, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
thank you for your presentation.
Um,
There are several questions that
were passed along to me.
One is what external
stakeholders, did they
collaborate with to formulate
the new strategy on abuse,
neglect prevention.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
members of the committee, and
Senator Pinto, um, we
collaborated with a contracting
agency by the name of Accenture
and worked with a team of
people, um, to look at our
organizational structure,
prioritization, um, resource
alignment and, uh, A&E
strategies.
And where these best practices
implemented when they designed
the program.
Uh, Senator Pinto, can you
clarify designed the program.
Can you guys decided to do this,
um, what, what did you
incorporate in there from these
people that you collaborated
with?
Great. Thank you, Senator, for
the clarification. Um, yes, we
did implement their
recommendations and we are
continuing, um, to, we, we
worked off of a two-year plan.
We are in year one. so we are on
track implementing what was
recommended, excuse me, which
was some organizational, uh,
structural changes, some bureau,
uh, name changes and role
clarification within our
division. The, um,
implementation and standing up
of a brand new bureau that was
dedicated to the, um, uh, risk
management.
and abuse, neglect,
exploitation, prevention, um,
and we also are requesting
additional, um, those vacancies
that I talked about needing
less, we are asking to utilize,
uh, some vacancies in FY 26 to
be able to accommodate some of
the new work that these, um,
the, the recommendations, uh,
consisted of.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, so this was an
outside entity.
You are correct. So no
stakeholders were actually
actually considered in their
input when developing this
program.
Uh, just to clarify, Senator
Pinto, and correct me if I'm
misrepresenting what your
question is, um, the program
itself exists by way of our
waivers. We were looking at our
organizational structure and how
to, um, do better at implement
new strategies related to abuse,
neglect, and exploitation. The
work with the outside
contractors specifically, um,
was with Division and other
entities, not, I would not say
external stakeholders such as
our providers. Um, but we are
always open and encourage.
people to, um, work with us
around additional abuse,
neglect, and exploitation
prevention strategies, 100% open
to that.
And Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, one of the things I'm
concerned about too is about the
investment we actually have with
any information technology that
a lot of the data should already
be available to us a lot. I
think more than, um, because
you're just actually a break off
from this other department. So
some of that should have just
followed you.
I feel like, um, and if we're
still trying to
Do this and not have the data
already available, um, just as
far as what she, um, some of the
basic stuff, it seems like we're
not even um.
We actually did something that
we probably should not have done
if we were not ready to do it as
far as having a plan and really
knowing that this data would
really drive a lot of what we
needed to do up to this point,
and we probably wouldn't be in
this investigative.
Having these issues with these
allegations, um, if we were
really collecting what we really
needed to collect and really
showing relevance, um, and
seeing it as far as ethnicity,
discrimination, um, a lot of the
things that could bring on a
liability in which it seems like
we're on the border of.
And thank you, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee.
Representative Herndon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Mr.
Chair, I have only 3 quick
questions. And the first one
goes to Ms. Rodriguez. I think
it's impressive that you have
been with this disability the
disability waiver program for
quite a while. So your
historical knowledge is really
important.
My concern is with the recent
survey that was done, why only 5
of about 90 DD waiver providers
of residential, uh, community
supports and employment are in
compliance with the DD waiver
standards.
What has happened there?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair
and Representative Her Herndon,
am I saying that correctly? OK,
sorry, excuse me. Um, can you
clarify what survey you're
referring to. I'm looking at a
survey here that says compliance
with the quality standards
revised March 2022, and it has
all of these DB waiver providers
and it's on your website and
only 5 of them in compliance. It
says determination of compliance
partial, not compliance,
compliance.
And this is pretty disturbing.
That only 5.
And I thought through the years
you might have some indication
of why this is occurring.
So Representative Hernan, if, if
you would allow me the
opportunity to review that, um,
in greater detail, I would be
very happy to give you a
response. Um, I am not prepared
to respond to that without
looking at the total survey, um,
so I cannot, I cannot answer
your question. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. My second question goes
to one that was raised earlier
and taking a long term.
At the aging and long-term
services care, people who have
Alzheimer's other types of
diseases. They can stay home and
the, the people who are taking
care of them can be paid and uh
you, we talked today about some
level of care process that is in
place. So are we, uh, in this
state then also training people
if individuals are staying home
to have some level of care and
they are then being paid to take
care of their individuals who
are receiving that care.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
and Representative Herndon, um,
so, um, two different issues are
being combined in your your
questioning. So to, to just a
level of care is a is a process
to determine eligibility. So
it's not used generally in, you
know, I'm going to provide Dan
here a level of care. But we do,
uh, do what we do allow for what
you're asking. So we allow for
family members, relatives, um,
uh,
Some instances, uh, guardians
who are not corporate guardians,
so like family members who might
be guardians to be paid supports
for those people who would like
to age or receive supports from
loved ones in their home. We do
allow for that. There is
criteria attached to it, who can
do it under what circumstances
for what services, but yes, we
absolutely allow for that and
promote that because that too is
a strategy for
One, making sure people have
choice in who's providing their
support to them and if they want
it to be their family, we want
to be able to support them to do
that and have that support in
their home. And 2, it's also,
um, a strategy with the direct
support professional workforce
if we can pay families to be
home and care for their loved
ones. I mean, we know that
typically they do it best,
right? So we wanna, we wanna be
able to allow for that and, and
we are currently. So thank you
for your questions. All right,
and thank you Mr. Chair, the
very last question, this one
actually goes
To Mr. Lenari, and I'm looking
at your process for reviewing
cases and one of the things that
was presented to us yesterday
with a number of people who had
is brought to your attention. Do
you leave the person in the, in
the location where they were. I
guess I would be most concerned
about retaliation, and then are
they continuing to get bad care
and it doesn't say on your
strategy of processes, what
happens to the person while this
investigation is going on.
Mr. Chair, uh, representative
members of the committee, um,
How we respond to each of those
allegations is, is dependent
upon the, the severity or the
prioritization of that
allegation to begin with. Um, so
in the emergency situations
would be different than a
priority one or a priority 2.
And again, if there is an
emergent situations,
particularly, um, situations of,
of physical abuse, uh, that is
where, again, the, the law
enforcement agency would would
become made aware immediately
and then they would take over
that.
That situation from there
forward.
But what I'm hearing you saying,
Mr. Chair, if I'm correct, that
you leave the person there
during this investigation
process?
If I may, Representative, help
to clarify, um, when this type
of, um, suspected abuse occurs
an immediate action and safety
plan is implemented, um,
immediately as it, as it's
called, um, which does in fact
remove individuals from those
situations if there is, um, a
danger, um, or the person needs
to be removed. So if a
caregiver, for example, is being
accused of physically abusing
somebody, we make sure either
that caregiver is removed or the
individual is removed to a safe
place.
Away from the alleged
perpetrator. Um, so, and then
the investigation, uh, would
take place and the appropriate
course of action would happen
with the, um, staff person, for
example. Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Jones.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And, uh,
thank you presenters.
I have just a couple of things,
um, as you've heard from many of
us, we were horrified about the
allegations of neglect and abuse
that led to several people's
death who were
um under DD waiver care at the
time. So I haven't really gotten
a specific answer about whether
that's been addressed and is
there a plan to address that?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
and Representative Jones, we
would be happy to get the names
of the individuals that were
discussed during public comment
and, um, be able to follow up on
the investigatory process on
those names.
On those folks. I, I can't
answer that right here today. I
apologize. Very good. I can make
sure that you get those names.
Thank you. Um, I feel like I
have to have an answer on that.
I can't sit here and listen to
that just to follow up, one of
the things that was said is that
there were all these
investigations that were
substantiated abuse, but there
was no legal action taken on any
of them, and that's, that's what
I guess a lot of us were
concerned about that seemed like
we went through this whole
investigation thing you
substantiated, and then
just disappeared. And so that's,
did, did the DA's just say this
isn't important enough to do
anything about or what happened?
Why didn't anything get done?
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee,
would actually be then I guess
they're not OK. I was just gonna
say we would be happy to follow
up on the specific names that
were, were mentioned and be able
to, uh, speak clearly on what
actually happened as a result of
those investigations.
And when can we expect that
information? I don't know if we
have any names. Do we have any
names? We have names Robert
does, he's right here, those
kids that the people that died.
Going back with the Yeah,
see, they won't be able to talk
about cases where there's
suit
suing the agent. OK. There's
picture and uh.
Yeah, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, uh, my deputy
director can speak directly to,
um, some of those details real
quickly.
That's OK.
Yeah
Um, good afternoon.
Um, I
I can actually speak to both of
those cases. Law enforcement was
involved, um, and there is a
criminal investigation with
regards to Regina Suozzo that's
happening currently, um, and
there is, um,
I do believe, uh, law
enforcement was involved with
Pritchard, but they did not, um.
It did not produce any criminal
charges in that matter.
But that is the one that the
family is suing the provider
agency.
Yeah.
Thank you, thank you for that.
Um, the other thing I wanted to,
to talk about is in in your uh
presentation here. I think there
are several places where you
mentioned the $10.2 million for
a rate increases. And so going
back to HB one, there was
Uh, it was over $11 million that
was allocated in HP1 by the
house. And when LFC saw that
that, that there were probably
going to be these, uh, lawsuits,
federal lawsuits for, um, um,
using contract, contract staff
as providers. I'm not sure if
I'm saying that exactly
correctly, but when they saw
that there was that potential,
they added another $8 million
and so I haven't heard that
mentioned anywhere.
That $8 million being used?
Representative Jones, we have
the, uh, a sheet from the budget
and it was $200,482,500.
Correct, yes, and that's what
I'm referring to, I'm just
clarifying. OK, very good. So
I'm, I'm just curious. I hadn't
heard anything about how that
money was being spent.
Can you, and then you on page 19
or 15, you talked about you got
10 million, but we, we have data
that you got 200 million to
raise rates. So I'm not sure why
you're saying you only have 100
million to raise rates when
House Bill 2 included $200
million to raise rates.
Mr. Chairman, um, Representative
Jones, we'll have to get back
with you on that. I'm sorry, I,
I won't need to, uh, do a little
digging on that.
I would appreciate that. Thank
you, Mr. Chair, and for helping
me with that too, but, um, yes,
as I understand it, that would
have been, in effect, that money
should have been being used as
of July 1st. So I think we need
to look at that. Appreciate it.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And that 20 million incidentally
would have been matched with
federal money, so we're really
talking about $80 million that
was available to raise rates
starting on July 1st. Now I
understand if CMS had to be
Contacted first, but the concern
is that you're asking about a
$1000 increase in general fund
matched with federal money, and
we have in House Bill 2 a a
clear statement that, and I can
just read it, the general fund
appropriation to the
developmental disability support
program of the Healthcare
Authority department.
And the other financing uses
categories includes $200,482,500
to raise rates for developmental
disability providers.
And just, just to add on to
that, you haven't even requested
CMS to review it, so I mean it
obviously it's not going out
July 1st. It's probably, um, I
don't know.
May I respectfully ask for
clarification, Mr. Chair, on
that. Are you talking about the
FY 25 budget or the FY 26 budget
request
that you just, this is the 25,
this is, this is House Bill 2
from this year,
which is your money became
available July 1. So I'm the
$10.2 million for provider rate
increases came from the FY23
budget. It was received by us in
2024 calendar year.
For use. So this is not the
$10.2 million is not part of the
FY 25 budget. I mean, it was
built in because it's a
permanent rate increase, but the
10.2 was given to us
in last year last year, so, but
you actually then have
$300,000.10 million dollars from
last year, $20 million for the
year that just started two
months ago or a month ago I
guess, a month in almost 2
months ago. And, and so you've
got 30 million.
Match 3 to 1, you've got $120
million to raise rates for
providers, all of it to raise
rates for providers. And so, but
we're not seeing anything it's
like watching a machine just
grind and grind and grind and
nothing ever comes out the other
end.
I, I appreciate the, the, um,
desire for this to happen
faster. Um, you, you are correct
that money does exist and that
money is for these provider in
the rate increases that are
going to CMS this month. That's
what that money is intended to
cover.
The 10 million or the 200
The 10 million or the $200
million was from last year and
we exhausted that.
By giving the 5.32% on the 5
points the 5.32% cost of living
adjustment was. We were given
$10.2 million for provider rate
increases completely outside of
any rate study.
So we use that to give our
providers a 5.32% cost of living
adjustment. So are you saying
that the 200 million you got as
of July 1 is what you're asking
CMS for the increase for. That
is correct. OK. So that wasn't
clear from your presentation. It
looked like you were asking them
to approve a 10 a rate increase
based on 10, and then we started
getting House Bill 2 and it
said, no, it's 20 million. So
you're actually asking for an
$800 million.
the Medicaid money is kicked in,
and $80 million increase in
provider rates once CMS gives
the approval.
It is not exactly $80 million
but you are correct. We are
asking for an increase to
support increased rates when CMS
approves them, yes. We have that
for FY 25 already and FY 26
budget request also, um, it's
not additional money, but it's
recurring money to support those
rate increases that will go into
effect now in FY 25.
As soon as CMS gives the
approval. That is correct, Mr.
Chair.
You, but you've already
submitted it to CMS? No, no,
it's due to be submitted in the
month of September.
Oh
I'm sorry, uh, Representative, I
just, I, this $20 million thing,
I, I.
Representative Vincent. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
I, I guess you can tell we had a
pretty um.
Inspiring testimony on Monday,
and it really fired a lot of
people up and some of the
stories that were told were
horrific.
And I know that this committee,
normally 100% of the time they
want to help the directors and
they want to steer you in the
right direction.
And you know, a lot of my
questions were either answered
directly or indirectly. That's
the good thing about going last,
I guess, or one of the last
ones, but there are so many.
I would call experts in the
field with the representatives
as well as the senator that all
know about the DD waiver that's
been doing it for a long time
and I hope that you would invite
them to your table because I
think they can make your job
really easy and help you line a
lot of things out. Um, one of my
questions was for Dan and which
one of the law enforcement
agencies referencing on, uh,
page.
One of your report, there was a
in fiscal year 2024 included
1031 referrals to law
enforcement, law enforcement
agency investigates that.
Mr. Chair, I represented members
of the committee, uh, that is
going to be a mixture of, of all
types of law enforcement if you
wanted a detail of, of, uh, uh,
aggregate or or stratification
rather of that total number I
could get that for you.
If you could just give me an
example of what long would it be
local law enforcement? Could it
be BIA could be, it can be
multiple types. Yeah.
That's all I have, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Hickey, any questions?
Representative Chasy?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you and thank everybody
here for their attention. Um,
back when we used to, we were
beginning the
deinstitutionalization. I was in
the provider network. I was
director of an early childhood
program and then later
co-founder of Altamira
specialized family services,
and, um,
I
I think about this whole
Are we used to warehouse people.
And the waiver, and actually I
worked for a number of years
with, um, Julie Beckett, who was
the woman who followed the
surgeon general around in her
Volkswagen, trying to get the
the um GD waiver because her
daughter was, was um
born with medically fragile in a
medically fragile situation.
And, um, the, the, the
is
It was costing more to keep her
in the hospital all the time
than it would have been to have
her served at home. The trouble
is we have not really been able
to do.
Either of those things,
warehousing or serving in the
community and I, I guess, I
think it's probably a capacity
issue. And, uh,
And, and then I was around when
we started the waiver and then
never funded it properly in the
legislature. So, you know, I'm
not, I don't have any moral
authority here at all. Um, but
I, I do hope that you will look
at the data and the reports of
Mr. Robert Cagle, um,
Because we, we do want to do
better. And I,
To either one of the bad
extremes that uh we've had to
deal with. But, um, all the best
to you and I mean, I, I'm really
glad that we have had the
funding at least to try to
increase
our
fraction of the um of what it
costs to pay the providers. We
not only have to pay them, we
have to train them and have them
here and make sure they're
available everywhere. I do think
growing your own is a good idea
and I don't think it's beyond
our capacity to try to get
people.
Uh, from the area. One of my
colleagues when I was at UNM
Health Sciences Center, a speech
pathologist who was, um, special
language pathologist who was
very, very well known throughout
the country, uh, Carol Westby,
and, um, yeah, Carol wasn't
really appreciated that much in
her own department, but she was
involved with recruiting Navajo,
um,
Students to become speech
pathologists, and the University
of Arizona was doing everything
they could to recruit those
people and bring them in. And,
uh, UNM wasn't doing much of it
at the time. So, uh, we, we just
need to look at all of those
practices because I ended up
working with one of those um
speech pathologists on a
project, a federal project I
directed when I was at Health
Sciences Center and there's no,
there's no substitute for that.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman.
Senator Pope.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You
know, I'm looking on this
two-page sheet that was handed
out page 2 criminal
investigation responsibilities.
And I asked this question
because this might not actually
be your full responsibility and
role, but just looking at FY 24,
23 and 22, you know, we have
these total cases, and we have
substantiated cases, and we look
at that percentage of
substantiated cases, and then
the abuse cases from there in
that low percentage. I mean,
just looking
At that
I, I just
Find that very disturbing that.
We're not following through on
these cases, so could you
explain to me what, what could
possibly be going on? Is this
the role that's going through
your department? Why aren't
these cases being
Pursuit that are substantiated.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, thank you for the
question. Um,
I'm, I'm in my 2nd week as the
director of DHI and I'll tell
you, um, when I'm looking at
these numbers, you know, what,
what I want to make sure that
we're getting correct right off
the bat is, is how many are we
potentially missing? And are we
accurately identifying these
cases. And so, uh, to go back to
one of my previous answers,
that's related to making sure
that our intake process, um, is,
is standardized and streamlined
as possible, and those are
numbers that me as the director
are going to be monitoring.
Very closely. Um, so ensuring
that we have an accurate, uh,
intake and triage and
substantiation of these cases is
very important. After that, um,
yes, the, the follow up, uh, and
is, is the other aspect of that
in the closing the loop of that
case. I do want to go back to,
you know, there, that is where
there is some shared
responsibility as far as the
follow through, uh, particularly
in those more, uh, severe cases
where law enforcement has that
responsibility.
As it relates to to prosecuting,
etc. and us at DHI, um, we
actually, um, are removed from
that process and then brought
back in to ensure that those
individuals, um, involved in
that case are put on the
employee abuse registry
appropriately.
Uh, thank you for the response,
uh, Mr. Chair, I, I just look at
these and I don't know if this
is happening with other cases.
I, I just, you know, I think you
brought up a point. There's
cases that are probably not even
brought up in these numbers.
But I, I just really find this
disturbing that the
substantiated cases.
That
It's that low. I mean.
There's
Last parts of yeah, I mean,
In 22.
19 abuse cases, total cases,
1701,393 were substantiated.
So I, we, we just have to do
better as a state and if this is
happening here, I wonder what
else is happening in other areas
uh on these cases, but.
Um, we just have to do better.
I'm not putting it all on you. I
just want to understand where
the barriers are and, and really
what's going on here.
That's stopping them. So I don't
know if you have another
response on that. Um, if you
don't, I understand.
But that's all I have.
Mr. Chair, members of the
Academy, just real quick to
respond to that. Um, so,
A large majority of those
substantiated cases are not
those criminal investigation
processes, and that is where
it's outlined at the top piece
there as far as when there is
other substantiated cases,
DHI works with that provider to
ensure that they are putting
corrective actions in place, and
then that is when we work with
them to approve that plan and,
and then round back with DDSD on
a monthly review of those cases
to ensure that of that total of
substantiated
Cases that each of those are
being addressed.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative Thompson.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just a
couple of wrap up comments. Um,
it struck me when you said you
post for jobs. You post for a
job with poverty wages, you may
as well not post. I mean, no one
is going to come here for or or
take these jobs for these wages.
I mean, you can post all you
want. We need to pay people to
make it attractive enough for
people to get here. And then, I
mean, we are losing providers
right, left, I mean,
Representative Harmeo no longer
takes DD waiver.
Of friends no longer take Didi
waiver and, and the Cavalier
attitude of, well, if we don't
have enough money this year,
we'll go next year. We're losing
people. The house is on fire. We
can't say, well, you know, too
bad we missed this year. We'll
go for next year. That is not
gonna work, and I hope that you
got the sense from these
questions that we aren't gonna
take it anymore, that things are
going to change one way or
another, and it's just, it's not
a warning.
It's a promise that that this,
oh well, next year, no, our
people are losing out on
services that they need and the
state is required to give them
so again I'm just throwing out a
warning that, that we are going
to take this seriously. There's
no more next year, next year,
next year, next year. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
And, and with that we're going
to go ahead and, and thank you
for, for coming, spending an
extra hour with us.
Um
We, we understand that this is a
new administration by moving
over to the department and
having new, uh, new people in
charge, things would be, I hope
you can take from it the idea of
just how crucial this is to the
committee and just how important
we, we, we, how closely we'll be
watching the efforts at raising
those rates because it, it, it's
a scandal the way that that
we've allowed the system to kind
of just kind of wind down and,
and hopefully that
That'll go in the other
direction from here on out. So
thank you. Thanks for taking on
the responsibility of, of this,
you know, difficult, very
difficult job. We appreciate you
coming in reporting to us, and
possibly in October when we
again consider, uh,
developmental disability issues
that our meeting in Rio Rancho.
We have a 4 day meeting there in
in October. We can have you come
back and listen to the res to
the issues and then respond at
the end. So thank you very much
for for being here with us.
So members of the lunches here,
we have about 8 people who've
signed up for public comment and
so I'd urge you to get your
lunch. It's box lunches, I
believe. Is it boxed lunches?
And, and bring it back and, and
we'll get started with a public
comment and the first one up is
Jim Copeland.
And the lunch has been provided
by Marla Schultz, and I think
Marla is here. Yeah. Thank you,
Marla. Thanks for providing.
That's good.
Right.
I think
Of
I.
Oh.
OK
I
Yes.
And
Oh shit.
the state seat.
So if, if we could have the
members come back and, and
As we eat, we'll we'll listen to
public comment and we're going
to start with, uh, Jim Copeland
from the Association of
Developmental Disability
Community providers. Welcome,
Jim.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Members of
the committee. I am, good
afternoon. I'm Jim Copeland, the
executive director of the
Association of Developmental
Disabilities Community.
No problem. Thank you. Executive
director of the Association of
Developmental Disabilities
Community Providers. I'm here
this afternoon to provide
information on the state of the
provider network.
ADCAP represents 30 provider
agencies serving people with
intellectual and developmental
disabilities in their families
in all five regions of the
state.
12 of our member agencies also
provide family infant toddler
services.
ADCAP members serve on the
advisory council on quality
services for people with
intellectual and developmental
disabilities, commonly referred
to as the ACQ.
And the interagency coordinating
Council, the ICC, the, just,
just a second, it's members in
the audience are welcome to, to
have lunch along with us. It's
not just for legislators, so
help yourselves, go ahead, Jim.
The ACQ is an advisory board to
the Healthcare Authority on
systems guiding the provision of
developmental disability
services. The ICC is the board
to advise and assist the early
childhood education and Care
Department in addressing the
needs of New Mexico families of
infants and toddlers with or at
risk for developmental delay or
with developmental disabilities.
The membership of both of these
councils are appointed by the
governor and include family
members, self-advocates, service
providers and other stakeholder
representatives. In a previous
life,
I served as the chair of the ICC
and served on the ACQ and
currently I serve on the ACQ.
ECAP is working to continue our
collaboration with the
Healthcare Authority and the
Early Education, Childhood
Education and Care department.
Please follow me to a very short
detour from the DD waiver. I
know you've, you've received
information related to a rate
issue with a family infant
toddler program.
ADCAP has attended the office
hours at ECECD has held. We're
thankful for the opportunity to
work together. ADCAP is ready to
work with ECECD to find a
solution to the current issue
that will support fit providers
this fiscal year and also move
this important program forward
in FY 26.
The Didi waiver has seemingly
had constant funding issues.
Didi providers were thankful for
the 5.32 cost of living
adjustment they received last
year. The AARPA funding was
extremely helpful.
But the AARPA funding has been
eliminated with the unwinding of
the public health emergency. The
2023 DD waiver rate study was
completed and the FY 25
recommended rate increases have
been funded, but not yet
implemented.
The waiver amendment to CMS to
approve the increases was
scheduled to be submitted, I
think Friday, August 30th, and
this morning we found out it's
going to be submitted sometime
in September.
Uh, the 2023 rate study
concluded there were no rate
increases for supported living
levels 123, and a 1% increase
for supported living Level 4.
Level 4 serves the most
medically and behaviorally
involved participants on the
waiver.
Remember, this was the first
rate study since 2019.
COVID, 40 year high record
inflation, the great
resignation, a raise in the
state minimum wage, the healthy
New Mexico Workplace Act all
fell on providers since the last
rate study and there was no
recommended rate increase for
the most labor intensive
services in the waiver, the
Supported Living Service.
ADCAP thinks this was influenced
by the introduction of direct
support professionals being
classified as independent
contractors, as Ms. Leone
provided yesterday.
I contacted the rate study
vendor.
To inquire if they might
refigure the rates without the
independent contractor factor
included after the settlement of
the quality Life Services case.
I received no response to the
emails or phone calls to the
rate study vendor.
The results of the rate study
were based on information that
providers supplied. The use of
independent contractors was not
discussed until the rate study
was completed.
Edcamp feels that the use of
independent contractors as
direct support professionals,
arbitrarily reduce the rates for
the services that included a
factor for independent
contractors.
There are providers in the
waiver that certainly meet the
Federal Department of Labor
requirements for classification
as independent contractors.
Direct support professionals do
not meet the requirements.
And there are a few beds
available in the supported
living provider agencies
currently around the state. Most
providers are on self-imposed
moratorium.
This is a situation that needs
to be remedied. At least 2
providers have closed their
doors and been absorbed by
another provider.
As Ms. Leone stated yesterday,
there are possibly 6 or 7 more
providers that will be subject
to similar legal action
regarding the use of independent
contractors. This could have a
crippling effect on the
availability of supported living
service.
ADCAP is ready, willing and able
to continue to work with the
health care authority to provide
boots on the ground information
relative to the provision of DD
services in New Mexico. We are
strengthening our relationship
and collaboration with the
Healthcare Authority and the
developmental disability Support
Division. We look forward to a
continued collaborative and
positive relationship as we move
services for people with IDD and
their families forward. Thank
you for your time.
Thank you very much, Jim. Uh,
next is.
Peggy O'Neill.
And she'll be followed by Robert
Cagle.
Uh, good afternoon. I'm Peggy
O'Neill. I am the chief
executive officer of Ziatherapy
Center down in Alamogordo Otero
County. Um, so I'm one of the
providers of this state and I
came up today to talk to you all
about, um, well, everything
we've been talking about for the
last couple of hours. Um,
And, and all I can say is that,
you know, it's, it's all true,
um.
Zia therapy Center is one of the
oldest, uh, programs in the
state. We have been in existence
for 64 years longer than I've
been alive, um, and we've seen
it all.
Um, we've done it all and um
we're, we're still standing, but
it has been so rough, um.
We, uh, we provide, we provide
several services on the DD
waiver.
And we provide fit services,
um, we also provide, um,
childcare services that are
accredited and public
transportation services. Um,
The, the services for DD waiver
and the services for fit have
been underfunded ever since I've
been there.
And I've, I've been there for 28
years.
Um, I've been the, the chief
executive officer for 14 years.
I said in the beginning, um, as
the economy had just
Blown
I, I said if we survive this,
we're gonna everything is gonna
be so easy from then on, we're
gonna just be, we'll we'll know
what to do about anything and
everything, uh, once everything
returns to normal and it's never
returned to normal, there's just
no end in sight. I've, I've
really and truly I've given up
hope.
Um,
I came today because I was asked
to come.
Um, I haven't been, I haven't
been to see you, you all in
years because I've given up.
Um,
What else can I do?
Uh, all of those, all of those.
State minimum wage increases,
um, we've, we've kept up with,
uh, but, but the problem is, is
you cannot raise the floor and
never raise the ceiling. What
would become of our, of our
longtime employees and so, so
not only have we given increases
to those, those at the bottom
end of our pay scale, but we've
also had to give increases to
those at the top end of our pay
scale. They
One of them can can leave us and
go get a job anywhere, making
more money. Public schools pay
way more than we pay.
Um, in early intervention for
the same basic services, um,
just younger, a younger age
group is all,
um,
It is, um, terrible.
To tell your staff over and over
and over again that you're doing
all you can do. And, and that
the, the money just isn't there
to give them an increase, um.
I went without an increase um up
until just recently, I hadn't
had any increase at all the
whole time I've been chief
executive officer because I'm
not going to take an increase if
they're not getting an increase.
Uh, it's, it's.
Time and we as providers really
need some champions to help.
To help us, um, to restore our,
our faith in our and our hope.
It's um
It's been unbelievable.
Unbelievable and um.
We've lost so many, so many long
time staff people and work a
place where people come and they
stay because because it while we
can't pay well, we can be super
nice to work for, and that's
what we do. We're we're super
nice to work for, but, um,
that's time, ma'am. OK, thank
you. I appreciate you all.
Thanks.
Thank you, ma'am. Robert Cagle.
And after him we'll go to
several people online.
Well
I'll keep it short, um.
Yeah.
Mr. Chair, Senator, uh Cedillo
Lopez, thank you for the meeting
over there as it turns out they
had never read the criminal law,
had no idea it existed. Ms.
Carter had been there for years.
So they
We did it during the Martinez
administration, they did a
memorandum of agreement where
they moved it from adult
protective services would
actually turn it into the
criminal law and they gave it to
DHI, so they just haven't been
doing it.
So every one of these under the
law is a crime.
Whoever commits a neglect of a
person, even if it creates no
harm. It's a petty misdemeanor.
If it's minor harm, it's a
misdemeanor, and then if it's
harm, it's a felony. Same with
explosion exploitation, same
with neglect, abuse, all of
them, they're all crimes. Now
some of these may be a traffic
ticket, but it's up to the DA to
decide if he's going to
prosecute.
It's like a shoplifting deal. If
you got a caregiver that runs
around and he kind of neglects
this person and then he moves to
the next agency and pretty soon
5 agencies later, the DA looks
at that and goes, no we're
prosecuting this. We're not
doing that. So we have legalized
abusing, neglecting, and
exploiting people in the waiver.
Simple as that.
Uh, the rate situation and the
funding, my understanding was
the rate was done in 23, we're
going to put, we got the money
from the legislature to
implement the rate study in
January of 24, when I looked at
it and because I've been in
business for years and because
I've gone through this uh
contractor stuff and have the
negative effect. I knew it was
bad and I knew it wasn't gonna
work out. So we worked together,
uh, you worked with me, we all
went to the Senate and
We need an extra 8 million bucks
and that got put in the budget.
And that's my, that's for this
rate study and we're trying to
fix it. So the argument was,
well, PCG stuck with the
contractor thing and I said
fine, they did the 150%. They,
they put that in their rate
study if the legislature wanted
to do that. So that's the other
option, which you could just as
well say the legislature funded
the 150%. That's in the rate
study. And I think that we
should get rid of this
confusion.
Before we put the amendment in
and put that money in and make
sure these people are whole. My
kid's agency has been
advertising for a year and a
half for a staff person and
hasn't gotten one applicant at
the rate we're paying.
And this gets back to we're
paying more money in, in Los
Lunas. They, um,
You know, uh, vacancies have
gone from 55 and they're 30
group homes down to 34 because
they're paying, right? They're
paying substantially different.
There's no way in the world you
can sit here and say my
state-run group homes should be
paid substantially more, and we
can't, we, we can't justify the
same rate in the community. It
is absolutely as wrong as it can
be. So thanks.
Um,
Now we go to the people online.
And the first one is
Patsy Romero and Ruth Bruce
Bruce whether.
Good afternoon.
Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair, can
you please indicate that you can
hear me?
We hear you now.
Uh, thank you very much for the
verification. Um, I am starting
my 3 minutes, uh.
Uh, interesting, I was going to
speak on a different matter, but
interestingly enough, yesterday
I got a call
Risk and I reached out to
Our line for uh APS Adult
Protective Services. It was
after hours. I left a message. I
got a call back from um asking
me if it was a DH.
DHI case, I stated in beginning
with an APS report of A&E is
neglect and exploitation, they
immediately hung up and then I
called and left another message,
and then I have not heard back.
I am scheduled for an intake
call that I hope will occur at
1:30 and it is now 127 and I
very much hope that I can be
successful in helping support
the individuals by
Providing the awareness of the
concerns for potential abuse,
neglect, or exploitation, but
this is the scenario that
happens often, substantiated can
be substantiated by an actual uh
charges filed, but substantiated
can be needs to be interpreted a
little bit more broadly,
It's uh um I'm sorry, it is
difficult.
About doesn't substantiate the
potential for the
abuse, neglect, or exploitation
to recur, and often it recurs
because the individual is is
placed back with the
Uh, risky scenario, and that is
where we try to do the best that
we can. I understand we're doing
the best that we can, but I
think that we can do better by
coming together and I do
understand I'm preaching to the
choir, and I appreciate the
choir, and I hope that we can
make a difference so that we
don't get these calls and then
we kind of get rerouted and oh,
that's not our department,
that's your department. Now
that's not your department,
that's their department. No,
that's their department. No,
it's your department, and then
we're doing it again.
Thank you so much. I appreciate
everyone and everything that
you're doing. My name is Nat Dee
and I've, Mr. Chairman and Vice
Chair neglected to identify
myself. My name is Nat Dean. I'm
a person with multiple
disabilities, and it became an
advocate because I wanted to pay
it forward for the support that
I received when I needed someone
to intervene for my very complex
and difficult needs. Thank you.
Thank you, Ned. Uh, we'll go
next to
Patsy Romero to be followed by
Bruce Weatherby and then Karen
Kushner.
Is Patti?
asking
Mr. Chair, this is Nat Dean. I
think you need to take me out of
the queue in order for the next
person in the queue to be
brought in so that you can hear
their sound. My apologies for
interrupting, Mr. Chair, Madam
Vice.
Is that Patsy?
Yeah
Mm
Net, are you, we're finished
with you right now? You, you're
complete.
OK. Is Patsy Romero there?
Mr. Chair, the, they have to
take me out of the queue.
You're. They have to remove Net
from the queue.
Yeah. I think you just.
Yeah
Mr. Chair, Leo has to remove me
from the, so that the next
person can enter. Thank you,
Nat.
can get out.
Let's go to Bruce Weatherby and
see if he can come on now.
And then I'll come back to
Patsy.
Hello, can you hear me?
Yes, we can hear you, Bruce. Go
ahead.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. My name is Bruce
Weatherby. Uh, I am the editor
for The Candle. We've been
following issues involving the
DD waiver, uh, and the DDSD
department and obviously the
issues impacting members of the
developmentally disabled
community for the last 18 months
in a very uh
our research has gone very deep.
We've done.
Literally scores of IPA requests
for information, uh, we gathered
a lot. I'm, I'm not gonna bore
you with all of the details on
that, although I'm happy to
share the information that we've
been able to unearth for the
past 18 months with any and all
of you. Uh, what I wanted to
speak today about was briefly,
um,
In a role that I used to play is
The I formerly president of the
Northern New Mexico Central
Labor Council, and
When I heard the agency respond
that
They were, uh, they had to be
careful because of uh
Labor laws as it related to the
overtime lawsuit, um.
It
It is a bit, I don't put it on
those folks who were there. You
have a new director, and you
have a new uh new personnel, but
the agency has walked away from
addressing this issue for a long
time.
Uh, as you heard from testimony.
Of, uh, Mr. Copeland, and I
think for Mr. Cagle, um,
But they've actually literally
looked the other way while this
was going on and encouraged the
use of those folks.
Um, they knew about it, they
knew about it. It was brought to
their attention a year ago. I
think the chair of the committee
also brought it up about a not
quite a year ago with the uh
DOH Secretary and the former
DDSD director, um,
And they just kind of slept it
off like, well, we'll wait and
see what happens. Well, it's
happened and um and looking at
the way in which the state,
whether it's was during the
Martinez administration of the
Luhan Grisham administration has
essentially treated employees in
reality it's you can't help but
come to the conclusion that the
system is falling apart because
they don't address these rate
issues in a in a proper
Right. I don't see a solution
down the road, unless those
folks get organized.
Frankly, uh, they need a union,
and then you'd have to pay them
what they um what they should be
getting. Um, so I, I couldn't, I
couldn't sit back any longer
without
Understanding the work that
Folks have put in. I appreciate
that Jen Rodriguez is
New to the position. She
understands what has gone on in
the past and hopefully she'll
correct it. Um, everybody
deserves a chance to get, um,
things in line. She's inherited
a lot of problems that I think
the agency, whether regardless
of the administration has kicked
down the road, so hopefully, uh,
I wanna thank you, Mr. Chairman,
for this hearing. I think it's
one of the best hearings I've
heard anywhere in the
legislature in a long time. Uh,
I appreciate all the comments.
You're members have made and
hopefully you'll keep putting
the pressure on, because these
are, you know, we didn't want, I
don't think I heard Mary
Molero's name once, and one
thing that stuck out to me was
When Jen referenced it.
All of these
Home visits started taking place
in March of 2023.
They were a result.
Of the horrific
Abuse that Mary Molero.
Experienced and then allegedly
died from it.
Thank you, Bruce's, that's time.
Thank you very much, Bruce.
We'll go now to Karen Kushner
and then Patsy Romero.
Hello, can you hear me?
We can hear you very well.
Thank you very much. My name is
Karen Kushner and I am an an
adult living with spina bifida
here in the great state of New
Mexico. Um, I am here to um give
you a point of view from an
advocate and also someone who
lives with a daily disability.
I'd like to thank you, Mr.
Chair, Madam Vice Chair, members
of the committee, Madam Vice
Chair, I'd like to be in
solidarity with you to in that
the house is on fire, but I'm
afraid the house was on fire
about 4 years ago.
When providers started leaving
the state, and no one would
recognize that as for what it
was.
Um, 4 years ago, maybe a little
bit longer, I came to you about
the Carecliff, the Care Cliff is
for all of us with medical
fragile.
Um,
Issues that are aging out of the
systems and we're being kicked
out of the pediatric groups, the
pediatric clinics and then being
forced to find primary care
physicians. Many times they are
not available. They don't want
to take care of somebody with a
complex medical issue because we
take too much time.
Sometimes you just can't find
them because as time has gone on
in our state, there just aren't
enough primary care physicians.
I'm not talking about mid-level
providers. I'm talking about
physicians that need to see us
with these complex tissues. I
have asked repeatedly for a
comprehensive care clinic.
I've gotten a movement disorder
clinic, which I can't even gain
access to, um, because I don't
fit in the criteria that they
see, which is MS. I've gotten a
hospital-based dental clinic,
which I wouldn't go to unless I
absolutely had to, only because
I used to run Cleveland Clinic
Foundation's dental clinic, the
only profitable dental clinic in
the United States and I set up
and ran mental Health medical
and dental clinic many years
ago. So if you need any
Help with your dental clinics, I
can certainly help you there.
The other issue I wanted to
bring up was the referral of
individuals um that have
exhausted state, county, or
local services. I, a lot of
times get calls from the spina
bifida National Group for people
here in the state that have
spina bifida that have no care
coordination. They have no um
navigator was the term I heard
yesterday.
And these people truly need
help. Um,
The, the problem is they're,
they don't score below a 70, so
they don't qualify for a lot of
um services in that way, but yet
they really should have legal
guardianship, and they don't, so
they have um their own
autonomous decision making
skills.
Many of these people end up
living in unlicensed group
homes.
Um, or they end up living on the
street.
Uh, because they can do whatever
they want to do. Um, they don't
have somebody helping them make
those decisions. So to one of
the other representatives that
said they have a child that's
older with IDD.
I, I would really hope,
especially I have this one
person right now who's 36, he
has no family. His mother died,
his father's gone. There's
nowhere to put him.
Um, there's no family.
And if his family had just taken
time during his growing up years
to teach him a skill to
Teach him that he's valuable, to
teach him that he can
contribute, to teach him that he
can be a part of society, and
that he has wanted and he is
loved and he is capable.
We might not be in the position
with him that we're at and so I
would have time.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Karen. Um
Patsy Romero, you're the final.
Oh, OK.
Uh, before we, before we move
into our brainstorming session
then, um.
that
Robert Cagle just mentioned to
me Jennifer Rodriguez, uh
deserves some recognition for
something that she did after the
Waldrop suit was dropped uh she
put together an alternative
assessment for level of care
that Robert in Robert's opinion
and
take it for what it's worth,
Robert's opinion. Sometimes this
is very valuable. Other times
it's not as valuable, but this
time I think it is valuable,
um, in Robert's opinion should
be a model for the nation that
it's such a good assessment
tool. So wanted to mention that
to you um uh division Director
Rodriguez, thank you so much.
Um, with that, I think we've
concluded the agenda. We have
the, the uh an opportunity now
for the
Committee members to spend some
time identifying 4 the committee
leadership, the vice chairman
and myself and for the and for
the staff, items that you're
thinking we ought to
Begin pursuing in terms of
legislation for this coming
session.
So we wanted to save some time
for that, and we had a couple
come up today, earlier this
week. Thank you very much for
coming. Uh, so,
Let's say
Oh,
Senator Hickey
I don't have that list already,
but
I do, uh,
Can we make some suggestions
that will lead to that in terms
of coming meetings of things
that we hopefully will focus on
in those meetings.
Um,
First is, uh, a lot of people
have asked me, are we doing a
PBM bill, and I think there's
some things to be done this year
around that and the, uh, I met
with the primary care
association, some 3340B things
that we need to fix and so
forth. So those are kind of some
temporary bills, but there is a,
because of growing national.
Really at this point rage at the
3 PBMs that control the business
and the health plans that
control them. There is a
significant activity in the um.
Um, the FTC and also in Congress
to make some changes, but it
will proceed at the pace they
proceed. Um, there are, however,
other new uh companies coming
along who realize that there is
a significant rationale for
bringing significantly lower
pricing, which is very doable in
the role that PBMs play as an.
Mediary and I, I brought this up
before, but both, uh both new
entities, capital RX that
services Presbyterian and right
Way RX and and they're having
meetings with the healthcare
authority about particularly
using them and their approaches
in the IAC um, you know, it, it
sounds to have legislation? I
mean, are they gonna do? No, I
think it's really it's, it's.
Really up to them, uh, but I
think we as a committee need to
hear, um,
From those companies to see how
their approaches are different,
particularly addressing the
issue that's come up here and
that's the rural pharmacies and
how the current PBMs are just
completely messing them over.
And so, uh, in October, I, I, I
brought it up before, but I just
wanted to bring it up today. I'd
like each of them to present
probably an hour of uh
presentation, um, it's OK if
they present together.
Competition is good, um.
But there is, there is potential
savings of 15 to 25% by engaging
them through the healthcare
authority and into Medicaid, um.
Senator Spanics.
Yes, it's on that topic, um, I
was part of a nationwide.
Pharmacy, um.
Call about a bill that
Representative Thompson and
Herndon and I had done in the
past and, uh, come to find out
that another state had limited
uh their PBM 21 for their entire
system, and they had over $100
million worth of savings doing
that.
I did contact our healthcare
authority to see if they were
pursuing anything like that.
But I want to caution everybody
about this.
If you go to one PBM and one
formulary.
You have angered a lot of
patience.
Because the patients don't have
opportunities to shop around
then.
You know
they, they're stuck. I mean, if
the state decides we're going to
save $1000 that's good for the
budget, but it, it really puts
us in a chute. So there's pros
and cons for this. The other
thing I'd like to just comment
is, um,
The, uh, Doctor McEnany, along
with the executive are making
changes to the um bill I passed
a couple of years ago and again
I think it was with the Liz
caucus,
um, not so much on the 340, but
on the other part of it that
needs some tweaks per our
superintendent of insurance.
So we probably should bring in
the superintendent of insurance
to dialogue about this because
we've had we've had one meeting
with her and she now has a
pharmacist in her um.
Office for them to comment on
any pharmacy benefit change or
pharmacy statutory changes that
they need just to enact what we
passed.
I come in at the same time.
Yeah, and um there is, I mean,
the bill passed last year on uh
immunotherapy, no prior
authorization. Now there wasn't
a lot, it's given to the OSI but
no pharmacy is aware of the fact
that they, that there's no pri I
mean, it just, it hasn't been
taken and executed and so
that'll be a piece when when the
superintendent comes in. Um,
there's just one other thing
that I'd like to
Come before the committee. I
don't know that it, it's, uh,
might make me think about a
bill, but, um, the and, and, and
I do not want to.
Be involved in what are inside
of business, politics, whatever,
but yesterday, Doctor Doug
Zonnis was let go by the
president of the University of
New Mexico, yeah, and um.
You know, I, it's, it's not for
us to
And we can judge,
but it's an internal whatever,
but here's, here's why I bring
it up. Doctor Zonni was
completely different from his
predecessors in his focus on the
health of the state as being a
top mission for the health
Sciences Center as well as all
the missions and obligations to
the health Sciences Center, and
I guess I would like to hear, I
I believe Mike Richards is gonna
be the interim.
Um, but how are we going to
continue that focus on
healthcare issues in the state
that he was so good. Doctor Zone
is both bringing to our
attention, and yeah, he's an
addictionologist and helped a
lot with that. So I just, I
would like, I would like the
university to say how they are
going to assure.
That they're going to keep this
focus, um,
and, and that brings my
potential bill and a number of
states who have this internal,
oftentimes conflict between
traditional academic
universities and their
traditional core mission and the
much more highly budgeted, uh,
academic medical centers and so
these conflicts are not unusual,
and, but some states have
addressed it by
separating the academic.
Traditional uh baccalaureate,
um, arts and sciences,
university.
And putting that in one
university and governance system
and then taking the academic
medical center in putting that
in as a separate university. I
think the latest and most
interesting examples, Oregon
Health Sciences University.
Completely different set of
governance. They still work
together on things, but it's, I,
I don't know that a traditional
liberal arts can really
understand all the issues that
go on in an academic, and they
often get jealousies and.
You know, I, I maybe could
surmise that some people were
pushing to get our faculty in
the medical center up to the
50th percentile so we could help
eliminate the shortage as that
assists, but, you know, I, if,
if I were an arts and sciences,
I'd say, hey, what about me? So,
you know, that's pure
speculation on my part, but it
might be worthwhile and I, I
will dig into this to come back
and say, should we be looking at
separating those two entities
into separate governance
systems. Thank you, sir.
Representative,
thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I
wanted to, um, also get in on
the conversation about PBMs.
There's also been a study, um,
that we should, um.
Hear about in terms of
consortiums and some
recommendations that came out of
the study. Um, I'm a little wary
of new PBMs and I'm going to
disagree a little bit with the
senator, um, that pop up because
there's always a profit motive
behind anything that we, that we
do it, especially when it when
you're looking at healthcare. So
I think that we should look at
that study. I don't remember
what it's called right now, but
can certainly find out and and
get the information to you, and
I don't even remember who did
the study. It's not an old
study. It's a fairly new study
as I.
Um, the other piece in terms of
UNM, um, got a text message last
night about um Doctor Zedonus
being removed and I think one of
the other conversations that we
need to have in terms of
healthcare is really also
digging down deep in terms of um
healthcare in general, but more
specifically the kind of
healthcare and, and who's being
recruited to the university, not
just in terms of the upper
levels, but also um staff, um,
in, in terms of provision.
Of, um, you know, care to folks
who are not um English speaking.
I think that's one of the things
that that UNM and UNMH has not
done a real good job on, so we
need to dig down deep into that
one too. Um, and I, I have no
idea. I know that he's gonna be
on, he's gonna,
um
be on until the end of December.
No, OK, well, that's what.
No, no, no, I mean, he's he's
gonna be paid until the end of
December. Um, he's gonna finish
out his contract. His contract
ends in December is what I
understood.
Contract ends December 10th,
but he is removed from any
authority at the university.
He's, I would assume he is not
in his office. I mean, that's
how it works that's what I
understand as well. So, so he, I
mean, this is the usual academic
contract they give you, they
give you a notice, uh, time for
and what have you, but uh, he
has absolutely no authority or
influence there anymore. I
totally understand that piece,
but I also want to put I bring
it up because, again, here we
are removing people from being
able to do some productive work,
right, when their contract
hasn't completely ended. We
don't know what the situation
is. I don't, and I'm not gonna
even attempt to speculate, um.
And then, um, is it, is now a
good time to go into the other
legislative stuff? OK, so, uh,
you know, one of the pieces that
I've also been following is the
FQHCs, um, and I know that folks
know that, that I was very
involved with um.
With the first choice and got to
meet some wonderful staff there
and I think we really need to
look at, you know, how are we
going to resolve the issues, um,
the payment issues that they
have, um, not only the issues
with them getting paid and and
and in terms of the MCO's that's
also been an issue with some of
the other agencies like the
Truman foster care parents have
their payments have also been
delayed, um.
And it does create a burden, but
I think in terms of looking at,
um, you know, what do we, what
can we do as a state to really
fill all of those gaps, um,
because they really are the
front line and I, I was very
impressed in Portalo's to find
out that they now offer uh
optometry services, um, and not
not a lot of the other ones are,
um, you know, for whatever
reason, uh, Portalli is able to
do that. So really looking, um,
in terms of what can we do in
terms of increasing, you know,
You know, looking at the request
that they made today that that
Yvette Emmerman made today, but
then also looking at the other
services that they're not paid
for. And can we as a state, um,
figure out a way to reimburse
for those services.
Um, the other piece that I
wanted to address has to do with
the presentation that we heard,
um, I think it was yesterday,
um, on echo, the Echo report
and, and, and the, you know,
medical care that's being
offered at the jail.
And the question that I asked
around um nutritious food, you
know, how can we also figure out
a way to provide nutritious food
to those inmates, because that's
also part of healthcare, right?
Keeping them healthy, um, and I
don't, I, you know, I'm
wondering, you know, can
Medicaid pay pay a role in that
play a role in that, uh, would
be able to put some Medicaid
dollars into sort of, you know,
food, um, and then the counties
would make up the rest of it. I
don't know, you're shaking your
head. OK, so then we need to
figure out
Another way to do that. But I
think that's also something very
important. Um, and then.
Echo or of the of the um
the
No, Mr. Chair, that's sort of
separate. So the, so the
question that I had asked them
was, you know, how, how
important is nutrition when
we're trying to address some of
the health needs of the inmates
and basically, you know, to keep
them healthy, um, and you know,
that's also gonna go to, you
know, saving money when you look
at trying to manage disease,
right? So that's my question
when you're incarcerated, your
Medicaid is suspended, so
well.
OK, so then, you know, is there
another program that we can, uh,
so is Snap available?
Just, you know, pulling
something out of out of the air,
um, and maybe I misspoke. I
didn't mean Medicaid. I mean, I
meant snap, um, yeah, and so,
and so, yeah, just looking at
some creative ways to deal with
some of these issues that that
are brought up before us, right?
So those are the, for today, um,
those are some of the things
that that I was thinking about.
No.
On that point, um, you know, the
farm to table, uh, the farm to
food to table, um, is looking on
how they can expand services. So
perhaps, um.
I don't know, uh, one of us or
the staff could contact them. I
mean, some of it's all in the
state agencies now, you know,
Department of Ag coordinates all
of this, but if it's mostly um
money or initiatives, they, we
do have a state-run
Program on this that we could
ask them to include the prisons.
That's all. Thanks.
Well, you've got the mic. Could
you just.
Tell people what program I was
Oh, the senior food? OK, so, um,
the state did, uh, supplement
senior SNAP benefits, um, with
general fund and then they
raised it to 200% of poverty and
the general fund is paying $120
to seniors who are per month who
are under 200% of poverty, and
they will continue to put it in
the budget as a recurring
request.
The ISD director was here today
and I talked to her specifically
about this, just to get the
update.
Is that what you want, so
that's, that's a way in which
the state is actually putting
money into a program that's not
eligible for SNAP. These are
people who aren't eligible for
SNEP. They can get up to $120 or
they get $120 a month for food
direct.
But they're seniors have to be
seniors.
Um, so Representative Thompson,
you're next and I have
Representative Chasey. OK, thank
you, Mr. Chair. So,
Surprise, surprise. I think we
need to make a law about single
credentialing because we've been
asking and it never happened, so
I'm not that if it's a law, it
will happen, but at least we
will have done something. So,
um, so I think that's an
important one for across the
board healthcare. And then, um,
I'm interestingly, I'm working
with the president of the
Colorado Senate
on a healthcare price
transparency bill. They've done
it in Colorado. They've given
They said the best in the
country is Pennsylvania. So, um,
I'm, I'm gonna work with him and
with Claire from the majority
office, uh, or the speaker,
whatever. Um, so I'm working on
that and then this one, I'm, I
think I'm stealing maybe
Senators thunder, um, about
unconsented pelvic exams. It's
common practice for medical
schools to allow their students
to practice their pelvic exams
on women who are under
anesthesia without consent.
Um, there was a, there's a
filmmaker in New Mexico who made
a film about this and one of the
women she had talking was um,
was a survivor of sexual abuse,
and she woke up during this and
was totally traumatized again.
So, and you know, my
understanding is, now I'm not in
the medical world, um, is that
they, you know.
especially old school physicians
train that way. Well, bottom
line is doing a, a, a pelvic
exam on someone who's
unconscious is very different
than someone who will say ouch
or flinch or whatever, so um, so
I think we really need to do
that because it's continues to
happen and I think that's all I
have for right now.
Uh
Mr. Chairman, I, um, I believe
my chief of staff emailed the
two of you, the chair and vice
chair, um,
In the course of this past year
and looking at community safety,
and you always hear me say, if
we're going to talk about
community safety, we ought to be
looking at the prisons as well,
and how people are coming out.
Um, I,
I learned that goodwill has a
reintegration project. They fund
entirely.
With their own money, with
donations.
And uh we've been trying to
connect them to get them into
the system because they have
really good results, um, and
good recidivism rates.
So, um, if we could have them
come to our committee.
Sometime. It sort of, it fits in
with the um.
Project Echo yesterday and then
what Representative Chavez was
just bringing up. So, um, Alisa
would be glad to help you get
that started. We're trying to
get them known to, um,
corrections and then also to
the, the budget committee in the
House. Thanks.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and just
on the point that um leader
Chasey stated, I met with uh
Goodwill regarding a program
when people are coming out of,
uh, incarceration and but my
focus was on making sure that
they're working with the unions
and the unions are willing to
work with them on training
individuals who are coming out
uh into union trades. And so,
um, that will help prevent the
recidivism that that leader was
talking about. So it would be
really great to hear
About them and they just opened
up a new office on one and uh on
tramway in Albuquerque and new.
A district office. So my two
questions, my two issues, Mr.
Chair. Uh, one is, um, we've
been looking at age-appropriate
design code for children in
terms of those who are on the
Internet and whether or not
this, how this is affecting
their mental health and their
and their interaction with
people and themselves causing
harm to either themselves or to
others, and uh I give you the
example of the young man who was
who ate the, uh,
The peppers and then ended up
dying through a challenge that
was on the internet that was
brought to children, and so my
question to you in in us keeping
them safe and uh and protecting
them and their health, uh, when
they're online, is that
something that we could uh
please look at? That's one item.
Yes, I'm listening.
Do you have an idea rather than
just there's the problems we
talk about.
I do, uh, the solution is to
monitor the way in which people
are able to uh actually uh uh or
organizations and individuals
are able to address children and
that I know that that's a big
case that was brought in
California and uh part of it was
overruled and part of it was
not, and there is a large group
that's looking to do that work
here. I'm just asking you to
look at it.
It's a huge issue.
And then the second item I'm
asking to look at is something
called positioning mission uh
tomography, that's a PE test for
determining the early detection
of Alzheimer's and the amyloids
in the a person's body that test
is that
that test is not conducted in
New Mexico, and I would like to
see it unfortunately, um.
Doctor Zonnis is not there, and
I don't know that he would have
been the person to move this
forward, but it would be great
to, to get Eli Lilly and they
helped the sciences department
to explain why we can't have
that test here in this state.
But tell me what you're thinking
because I don't see you smiling.
Well
Patients with a bill.
To make it to to have it occur
at UNM. They have all of the
ability to carry out that test.
They don't have it. It's a
radioactive base test and it
would be good to, uh, but you
tell me, can we force them to do
something that's for the good of
the people in the state of New
Mexico considering the number of
Alzheimer's cases that we have
here.
This brings up, I mean, it is
one of those issues where this
sounds like a good thing, but is
it something that we should pass
a law to do, or do we just put
them in touch with you and them
and say, why aren't you doing
this? This would be something
really good. I don't know what.
On that point,
Representative Mr. Chair, and,
and, uh, representative
from what I understand, and
we've been spending a lot of
time at the hospital and I we're
both involved in some study and
what I understand is that they
are.
Already have purchased.
Uh, a number of these radio, I,
I don't know what they're
called, but it's the similarly
associated with the PET exam
functional MRI,
but they
are now pulling in a couple of
other, um,
Huge buys.
Concerning the relationship
between what you just mentioned.
Um, and, and this is part of the
research.
Area.
Uh, in the health sciences. So
it's, it's moving in that
direction. They've, um, I'm not
quite sure what the line item is
on the budget or where it is,
but it's certainly the order has
been placed.
So as far as that's concerned, I
would, I would be in
communication with the research.
Part of the university I mean
the health sciences, uh, because
they have a better idea, but it,
it's not from what I understand,
they're in, they're moving in
that direction. So that might be
a good presentation, Mr. Chair,
and, and representative to kind
of update us on that. All right,
thank you. I'll just go back to
the age-appropriate design code,
Mr. Chair, could you uh please
uh tell me your thoughts on
that? Yes, it would involve, it
would involve legislation.
And it wouldn't and it does
involve healthcare design codes.
That's right. With respect to
utilizing the internet. And I'm
working with um ACLU and with
the, uh,
Uh, Equality in New Mexico to
make sure that we are not see to
me that's, that's a bill that
you might want to have brought
before this committee at our
endorsement meeting in, in, in
November, the week before
Thanksgiving. OK, so and and
bring it for an endorsement, but
I, I don't know if, if it's one
that we want to make a
committee, you know, one that we
put a lot of committee effort
into drafting. But if you can
get it drafted.
It's just that it's not a topic
that we've heard about before,
so.
It.
Oh yeah, there I mean you could
go, she, she thinks there's a
link up with health. That's why
she brought it to us. I think it
may be, so that's good. I mean,
I think we could endorse it.
There's no reason for us not to
hear it and endorse it, but I,
what I was getting at today is
there's some out of the stuff
we've heard so far out of our
hearings so far, are there, are
there issues like for example,
the one that came up today, the,
the issue of the federally
qualified health centers. Is
there a, is there,
Is there any interest in the
committee in developing a bill
that would give the state some
role connected with the, with
the oversight of federally
qualified health centers
that's, that's kind of, that's
what, what you're bringing up is
a, is a new idea we hadn't heard
about it before. It would be
something we, we probably will
endorse in in November. I can't
imagine, although it is, I mean
there are First Amendment
issues, all sorts of issues with
it, how they go about
How you go about making sure
that it's only kids under 14
that are exposed to this, you
know, who, who can't be exposed
to it, uh, you know, civil
libertarians would probably
Hello
You're going to give up your
ACLU award if you, if you
Oh, I'm working with them hand
in hand. OK, well, if you're
working with that's good, uh.
Of senators topanix on that
point.
You
OK,
um
thank you, Mr. Chair. I actually
went to the, the,
Um
Water and Natural Resources
Committee when we had the
presentation of the Children's
Code only because we had the
presentations of the Children's
code in CCJ. And so I don't know
what the discussion was, but I
think it's really important,
especially the provision they
have about not removing children
from a home just based on
poverty.
Um, for the sole reason. Now, in
CCJ, the way they had it drafted
was a little, it needed work.
Um, but I, I think it's
important that we follow up on
that because in my experience,
children in New Mexico have been
removed from a home solely
because of an individual's
inability to care for them if
they're couch surfing or
whatever.
And not not offered resources.
And so that particular provision
of the Children's code, like I,
I don't know what the discussion
was here, but I would definitely
want to follow up on that and,
and make sure that the, the
committee stays on top of the
whole Children's code reform,
um, issue. And then the other,
um, thing that I should mention
is I agreed, um, with the, um,
DD waiver. Oh, God, I forgot his
name, the, the.
The was wasn't a quality
monitor, but the investigation
person, I agreed with, with to
meet with somebody from their
office and Robert to go over the
allegations that, um, Robert
made just to mediate and
moderate the meeting, um, so
that,
The information is taken by the
agency.
Appropriately and that, uh,
hopefully, because I I think
what's happened, I don't know
what's happening, but I think
that Robert has had a
communication issue with being
able to get some of his concerns
across.
To them and they have not
really, um, followed up on them.
So I agreed to do that and if
anything.
Comes out on that because I, I.
I think this is very
disappointing. The data that
they gave us is, um, very
disappointing to say that they
had 645 substantiated cases this
year in fiscal year 24, and only
69 of them resulted in being
abuse cases.
I maybe it's a poor explanation
of how it's done, but it, the
data doesn't look good, you
know, and I, I maybe the data is
not presented as he said, maybe
it's not presented well, um, but
I really would like to
understand better and see if
there's a need for legislation
to ensure that people within
this program have a very easy
way to make complaints and have
a, a good solid way to get.
Quick follow-ups and protection.
Um, and I don't know if it
requires legislation or not, but
I think it's something that grew
out of what I heard that I think
it's really important that we
Follow up on.
On that point, if you could turn
your mic off.
Of some things that can be um be
neglect are things like the, the
battery on the smoke detector is
dead.
So it's not all like abuse. It
could be, you know, that
And what's important stuff as
opposed to putting it all under
one umbrella. Well, and it's
disturbing that they do put it
under one umbrella for purposes
of this to us because then it
gives us a false view of what's
going on. So anyway, my, my only
point is that, um, I want to
follow up on that because there
needs to be a good process, um,
To ensure that the people within
that program are protected.
I, I, I think it's a good idea
for you to meet with Robert and
with the department to try to
figure out what's going on and
then to bring that back to us,
that would be really helpful. I,
I will, and then, um, what else?
And, and I'll talk with you
offline, uh, Madam Vice Chair,
about the whole need for consent
for, for examinations, there's a
lot to talk about. Thank you.
Minor topics and I'm gonna just
send a little email to Xander
and the two of you. Thanks.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I just
wanted to, um, go back to how we
need to be sure that, um, we,
uh, support the two-year pilot
for the navigators.
Program and to be able to, um,
continue that so that, you know,
we can save a lot of money and
yet get better, um, care for the
people
terrific.
I need to dig into this. I don't
know if they have a contract
with
Um,
HS or whatever, uh, Medicaid or
they have contracts with the
MCOs and, um, someone, I think
the contract they have right now
is with HA the Healthcare
Authority,
HCA contract with B.
For both.
That's their proposal, I think,
for, for what they want to do
next year. OK, yeah, just so
that we get it straight as we
look at advocating however we do
that.
Anything else represented?
Yes, thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
also, when we were presented by
DOH, the all-payer claims
database, um.
I've heard that it doesn't work
very well and also the
information that we want, when
they say how many claims, but we
need to know how many claims
were denied.
And that rate, um, of and, and
which providers are denying, you
know, percentage wise, so people
can make better decisions about
who they go to and then also
find out, I guess, Office of
Insurance could
Weigh in on.
That, you know, why, why they're
denying people instead of, you
know, people who are sick don't
need to be going through all of
this terrible stuff of paying
their bills and and having them
denied and have to go so many
times to try and get things paid
for.
Our whole purpose is to make it
so people don't go into
bankruptcy anymore.
So I would just suggest we try
and, um, encourage Department of
Health to actually do what we
want,
provide the information we need.
You know about all payer claims
databases, do they typically
include denials?
Um, well,
there, yes, you can, you can
pull that out because there will
be, I mean, any claim that is
sent in to be paid, and if it's
not paid because you record what
is paid because oftentimes it's,
it's not the same. So you can
build in programming to see the
discrepancy and see what the
denials are, and then you can
build in programming to see if
something happens later on, uh,
per se, I don't believe that is
because that's.
Going back and forth, but you
can't, you can pull that
information out. It, it's a
thing that's siftable and we
could focus on that. And on that
point, Mr. Chair, if I might
just, I want to be sure that,
and, and this may require
legislation and not good
intention. Um, right now, we
theoretically have good
intention and we have a
recording of this hearing with
the Secretary of Health said
they would share all the raw
data with the LFC.
But it's still not happening.
I've learned today, and
therefore we may just have to
pass a piece of legislation
doesn't require money that that
raw data has to also bifurcate
into the LFC as they build their
database.
And Xander said, you know, one
thing we might want to consider
for our Santa Fe meeting in
November is a presentation from
the health department with an
actual demonstration of the
all-payer claims database.
You know, on the screen with us
being able to see what's on
there, what they can do with it,
who has access to it, etc. That
might be something to schedule.
Yeah, good ideas, Andrew. All
those in favor of Xander being
recognized for a good idea.
Yeah
Let's.
Thank you. Um, I have two
things.
There was a bill that we, uh, we
had last, this last session, HB
299, it's updating the pharmacy
law to meet the needs of the
opioid epidemic by allowing, um,
custodial care facilities to
keep detox medications, stock
meds, so that they can actually
treat people when they come
during off hours, like in some
rural areas, uh, Lifehouse for
instance, in Carlsbad.
If, if someone comes and is
ready to detox, if it's not
before 5, they have to come back
the next day or if it's on
Friday, they have to come back
Monday, which is, you know,
unacceptable. And, and this
really should be simple back
when I was new at this last
summer, I thought it would be
really easy to get this passed,
but Liz, you're on it with me
and Eleanor is sponsoring that
as well, and Catherine Brown.
But yeah, it should, that should
be an easy, um.
Yeah, I think something to get
through. Yeah, that just seems
like a no-brainer, and it would,
it would just it would improve
rural care, um, so much and so
I'd like to try that again. And
it's, it's so amazing how things
that are no brainers we can't
get past.
Yes.
Right.
So, so the other, the other
thing that I'm concerned about
and you guys have heard me go on
and on about this is is how do
we address the CARA plan, which
is not a plan at all. And I
guess the only way to really do
that is to study it.
We, we need somebody to go from
the time a woman's pregnant, if
possible, and study how do we
support that person? How do we,
how do we maybe prevent.
I wasn't.
I wasn't, I was and that's
exactly what they do.
Doctor,
oh, where is he and Doctor
Inguos and
and that community-based
coordination solutions, uh,
yesterday morning.
That's and and they're proposing
to do that.
For the, for the CARA program as
well as others as well.
Yeah
That's excellent. I think there
are so many places where those
women can fall through the
cracks and right now it's
nothing but one big, you know,
hole that you can fall through
because most people don't even
know they're on a Cra plan when
they leave the hospital.
They were given 350 cases where
nobody had been able to contact
the women after they left the
hospital with their babies.
They've made physical contact
with a couple 100 of them and
Rolled 140 of them in care. A
lot of the others were the
babies. This is another thing,
this is something we could
address.
That one year break cutoff
point, apparently they stopped
being eligible for car services
after one year after the baby's.
That doesn't make a lot of
sense. So we could eliminate
that. That's another thing to
think of, yeah, right. Well, I,
I need to go back and read that
and see, you know, how that, how
that looks you can watch him.
OK, yeah, and I got, I have all
the handouts as well. So, OK,
thank you.
Yeah I just wanted to say
something. I think
umpresentative Jones brings up a
good point. And, and in terms,
you know, when I was sitting
here listening to the
presentation by the folks that
you just mentioned. I forget the
name of the program, but it's
almost like a no-brainer.
Nobody's looking for these
babies. Nobody's looking for
these families, and it really
angers me that the MCO.
are supposed to be doing that
and they're not. So I just
wanted to say that.
Hickey, you're next, do you have
another thing you want to bring
up?
Yes, thank you. Um, and I, uh,
perhaps people here can answer
this, but, uh, courts and
criminal justice has been
meeting all summer to try and
pull together legislation, as I
understand it, for, uh, you
know, competency in the courts.
yeah, and but the other thing
that I think this committee has
at least some oversight purview
on is, are there resources if
people are, are going to get
committed.
Where are they going to get
committed and I'm not hearing
any planning. I'm not hearing
anything out of the governor's
office or what I read that
creates the funding for the
resources both the the programs
don't work if they don't live
somewhere else. I mean, and
that's a 24 hour a day and for
an extended period, and then
you've got to have the case
management type people who are
there living with them as well
as the people who are teaching
them, uh.
About
Moving to sobriety eventually.
And I, you know, I, I, I know
time is running short, but I
just don't know who's doing any
research or digging into that,
and we can't really do this
other law if we don't have some
resources to do it with. I mean,
there, there's some logic.
Overall, but the details are
very important and I think it's
incumbent upon us in this
committee. This is health, this
is addiction, um, that we weigh
in either with the that
committee or whoever it is, but
that we at least do the initial
work. So I'm not sure when that
can get set up, but to my
knowledge, there's nothing
proposed.
Ruben mentioned that there is a
line item in the corrections
department budget for post
relief services, 100% general
fund, but they should be able to
provide some assistance to
people coming up, whether they
do or not is another issue
that's only for prisoners coming
out that, yeah, that's prisoner,
but I mean for people who are, I
mean just to even get competent
where, where are they going to
be, and there's got to be a
place and it's got to be a
program that starts.
Introducing him to concepts of
sobriety, and so it's just, it's
a missing page in a book that
without that page, the book
falls apart.
It's a missing. Anybody else,
any other issues, have we, have
we thoroughly,
oh, good one last thing, Mr.
Chair. Go ahead, uh, so
yesterday, one of the things
that I brought up was the high
rate of maternal mortality and
infant mortality in the state.
And I was correlating why are we
having these high rates of death
when we do have an ECECD program
where
There is supposed to be um
Visitation and looking out for
the health and welfare of
mothers and children. So why is
it we don't care about that? I
mean, why aren't we looking at
that closer? Tell me.
So, Mr. Chair and, uh,
Representative Herndon, there is
the mortality,
almost all of, well, I think all
of the ECECD programs are
voluntary.
So if the family doesn't choose
to sign up.
Then then they're not in a
program.
And there also is the, the, um,
maternal and infant mortality
board or something that reviews
those things you might check in
with them and see, but the ECECD
programs are all voluntary. So
if the family doesn't sign up,
Uh
And
we could invite the, the
Department of Health to come
make, they've done that several
times. We've had presentations
on infant mortality, what's
going on? Then there's the
perinatal, what's it called, the
perinatal coalition or
That it comes and talks about
what they're doing and trying
to, but, but particularly with
minority.
Mothers, especially African
American mothers.
The mortality rates are like
twice what the, what the
national figures are. It's just,
it's just really.
There's no reason, no obvious
reason for that to be going on.
We should be figuring it out,
dealing with it. Any other
things that people suddenly
realized they wanted to, because
this is not your only chance,
obviously, we have,
but just to kind of keep the
juices flowing and, and, and so
the next meeting is in Silver
City. If you're not getting all
your prenatal and um that's a
three-day meeting. It starts on
a Monday,
so you just didn't need to have
HCA enforce the contracts for
the Medicaid MCA.
But then that squeezes us at the
end. I don't know,
of course, almost 80% of beach.
Uh, it's like the 25th, and just
a reminder that if you didn't
get your idea out, you can
always send the chair and Xander
and I, a list of things that
you're interested in, so don't
feel like, oh my God, I missed
it cause we're continually.
I know there's more. I have more
meeting in Silver City is on the
23rd, Monday the 20.
3rd Tuesday the 24th, and
Wednesday the 25th.
September September.
So a little less than a month
from now and, and, um, I, you
know, if you haven't been to
Silver City, it's a great place
to go for meetings, but it is.
4 hours from Albuquerque, 5
hours from, from Santa Fe and,
uh, it's only 4, so you'll
commute.
You get on the plane, yeah.
Very good.
All right. With that, we will
call this meeting adjourned.
Thank you all for putting in
extra hours on this meeting and
asking great questions. And
being so well and remember what
Bruce Weatherby said, he was so
impressed with the questions you
all were asking, uh, during that
presentation. Bruce Weatherby.
