All right
good afternoon everyone we are
going to go ahead and get
started
this is the sub committee for
child welfare and early
childhood education early
childhood so if you were
planning to take the tour you're
in the wrong place
I think that bus already left
we've got a couple members that
that are not here yet but
I want to start
by sort of giving everyone and
overview of our subcommittee
today so first off the purpose
of our sub committee I
demonstrates the high priority
that lfc places i'm child
welfare and early childhood
issues we are highlighting the
work that are subcommittee did
last year which resulted in
several critical outcomes one of
which is an additional one
hundred and eleven million
dollars to the departments you
wifty department as well as the
lfc endorsed legislation with
key reforms to lfc which i'm
pleased was rolled into
senate bill forty two which was
carried by senator linda true
health and senator michael video
so I think that that shows how
important this subcommittee
takes its work because what we
discussed in our sub committee
was able to become tangible
action
so honor agenda today for the
sub committee we have three
items the first is a legislation
on child welfare
the second is a progress report
on pre k and the third is an
update on the fit provider rates
which will get from the
secretary of easy easy
for our sub committee members
I want to talk about how
legislates work.
Some of your new to the lfc
legislate process so
what's going to happen is our
let's see analysts are going to
provide a brief overview of the
legislat document the secretary
will then follow with brief
remarks the legislat document
this is an ongoing process so we
are revisiting the same issues
so that we can have these
conversations with the
department and follow progress
so the legislat is broken into
three performance challenges
that we as a committee have been
following the first is
preventing child now treatment
and repeat male treatment the
second is work force needs and
the third is appropriate
placements so what this means is
i'm going to request that
members ask questions as they
relate to the performance
challenge that we're discussing
i'd like for us to focus on each
performance challenge as we got
so if you have a work for his
question save it we're talking
about the work force performance
charge we will come back to
members so we'll make sure that
everybody gets to ask questions
with that in mind
members and presenters please be
brief to the point and direct
with your questions there is a
lot of information and to get
through and I know people feel
very passionately about this
subject and have a lot of
questions but brief and to the
point
presenters and community members
so what I hope is that at the
end of the day the sub committee
is going to leave with a couple
takeaways first what's been done
to address these challenges what
are the outcomes and what are
the action items that the agency
will be taking
and so with that i'm gonna ask
our lfc team to kick us off.
And thank you
madame chair thank you for
setting the table for me I was
going to do a little bit of
contact setting you already did
it thank you many misrational
garcia right now i'm wearing the
hat of the c I f d budget
analyst and with me at the table
is amazing hella she is our lfc
analyst for it and do it
and
in your binders there are two
lfc staff prepared documents
they're behind tab
but they're actually behind the
pre k reports that the first one
is legislat on it right at the
top i'm in a primarily work from
this document
and then only is going to have a
very brief overview on c with
which is a major child welfare t
system d in a brief that looks
like this and says it in depth
and as you requested
very brief in my remarks so if
you're looking at this legislat
document it is organized around
the key performance challenges
that the chair mentioned we have
been tracking kind of how do we
address and reduce
maltreatment and repeat my
treatment how are you addressing
work for speed that's too ID and
the third being and how do we
instar appropriate placement
about includes both faster care
placements as well as a hebrew
health services for children in
faster care so that spend our
focus now for three years in
your brief at the very top leave
summarized for you key take ways
i'm in a summarized but those
are and then i'll point to a few
day points within the brief so
key takeaways pretty well in
terms of where we had these
issues and the mexico continues
to be one of only a few states
that does not have an approved
family first prevention service
is act also known as title for
you preventing plan in.
Place what that means is we're
missing out i'm federal revenue
that would allow us as the state
to draw down federal dollars to
implement evidence based
prevention programs about and it
keep point we've been tracking
over time number one number two
has made some hiring progress
over the last year you'll see it
in the briefing you'll see it
from the secretary turn over
remains high at protective
services and not really inhibit
our ability as a state
potentially to make meaningful
progress at the system level
third keypoint and out the
bullets for you and see if he
has devoted some resources to
recruiting faster families and
we also called a resource homes
and the number has increased
over the last year however we
continue to experience
insufficient numbers of both
foxter homes and community based
behavioral health services for
children and care both of those
things contribute to things like
office days and then the fourth
is we have been tracking some
key appropriations that you all
have made i'm generally not
recurring either through the
grow or special appropriations
that were really intended to
address the three root causes
that I mentioned so they keep
point there is an in looking at
the share expenditure data it
appears to see why if d will end
apply twenty five without fully
spending all of the grow
appropriations that were
available this year on the
second key challenge we have
flagged multiple times during
the interim last year in the
year before you all made an
appropriation of twenty million
dollars it was essentially
intended to be start up costs
for behavioral help services for
children
are dressing the room because if
we don't have enough to hear or
health providers in this state
and two years ago you heard lfc
staff talking a lot about how
better properties had gone and
spent.
It now has been spent but the
majority of it was not spent on
connect the intended purpose in
the legislative language so most
of that spending occurred for
things that will not be at
revolut first of all by
medicators had a horrible and
don't result in additional
behavioral whole services for
kids so that was were sort of
the key take with a lock you
through to some key data points
that are in this brief that
first section is tracking
maltreatment and repeat
treatment for children in new
mexico i'm on page one you'll
see there are a rate of mel
treatment remains higher in the
national average that the rate
per thousand and receipts rate
of repeat mount treatment also
remains considerably higher than
the national rate at the end of
apply twenty four was around
fifteen percent and in the third
quarter of way twenty five it
was about fourteen percent so
that is the number of children
who have substantiated abuse
from neglect and then have
another case within a year so
that is our kind of some key
data points there
if you look on the next page we
have some summary data about
work force and protective
services in that first chart
you'll see the data behind what
I mentioned the idea has done
some hiring we have seen some
growth and the number of staff
particularly working in
protective services and but if
you look at the chart right
below that you'll see and turn
over remains high and actually
appears to have increased over
the last year so at the end of
that by twenty four the turn
over read within protective
services was around thirty nine
percent cfds at monthly desktop
reporting april suggested it was
about fifty four percent of
helpful that benchmark from any
easy founding around what is
optimal
is actually below twelve percent
though it's common for channel
for agencies to have rates
around twenty percent and then
not last chart is tracking the
number of resource families also
news foster care providers.
Again there you will see that we
have had some growth over the
last year
april twenty twenty five c r d
reported one thousand sixty two
active resource homes reducing
some charge so we not that
bullet point below it if you
look over the last year on
average see where do you report
it about fifty six new faster
families in any given but an
average of forty three
faster families no longer active
some of that is likely the
result of the fact that we have
a high rate of kinship
placements and so it may be that
a child like that so that those
are kind of the key data points
i'm not going to go into a lot
of detail and the rest of the
brief but each of the sections
and kind of maps out key actions
the agency has taken to date
and what they have talked
through in prior legislaturing
when I turned it over to the
secretary she will likely
address kind of what are the
actions that they are currently
taking so i'm not going to go
much detail there but when I
will point you to
him at the back of your brief
are some additional resources
for this hearing so you turn to
page nine outlines hearing
question potential hearing
questions for you all the kind
of aligned to the different
topic areas that you may also
certainly have questions of your
own
and then i'll point out to a
little bit of information we've
included the back about finding
so on page ten this is a report
pulled from the steep spine done
that looks at special
appropriations for africa twenty
five and the current expenditure
levels you'll see I missed her
what I mentioned there are some
grow appropriations in
particular where as of me june
we didn't see a lot of spending
and so it is likely that some of
that funding will revert
and then i'm the very last item
in your packets and we've
included what you typically feed
during the session this is the
high level for c ID.
And that maps all of the
appropriations you are made in
the general appropriation act
this legislative setting
and the key thing that I would
put you to is i'm very back is
much of the finding per c so as
representative dicks then
mentioned you all put it about
over a hundred million dollars
an additional funding to see
where to through the general
appropriations still not that is
multi here so not necessarily
available in that way twenty
five some of that is for things
like it and you can go down the
list and see what all of those
individual founding items were
because you all the legislative
body held see if these operating
budget relatively flat but need
targeted investment in either of
the growth which is the multi
pile of funding or other
specials and that allows you to
track spending and outcome so
that is sort of an overview of
what you are having your packets
and i'm trying to employee who's
going to give you just a brief
overview on the c which is an at
system i'm related to child
welfare
thank you hide members of the
committee this should be in your
package it might be separated by
a purple page it has eighteen
independent after the
legislature was just walking you
want through I just want to give
you a brief sort of status
absolutely and the importance of
this system so was the if d as
an it system it's called the
comprehensive child welfare
information system this comes
after federal mandates for
states to update their systems
to be complaint with federal
reporting requirements see why
if these started this it system
in november of twenty seventeen
with an initial estimate it cost
up thirty six million in an end
date of october twenty twenty
two however we are looking at a
close outdate now of november
twenty twenty seven with a total
estimate of costs of ninety
point four million that does
mean though
that these state will be able to
use the system and early twenty
twenty sixth but won't fully
close out the project.
Until roughly a year leader am
in this does include around a
blended rate of sixty six and a
half of a federal match but the
importance of this system it
replaces these twenty five year
old legacy system facts out
which may not be up to part with
certain federal and state
requirements this is anticipated
to better truck quarterly
performance data for you all
including times that in the
referral process wristed if it's
a respering christ read it youth
time to permanency and
percentage of children available
for federal assistance so a lot
of what will be talking about
today with you all throughout
the letter start i'm can be
remedied by implementing a new c
wis system that not only needs
federal requirements but state
requirements as well
so with that all being said if
you have any questions about
what's inside of this very brief
eighteen depth please let me
know but with that we will turn
it over to secretary cash.
Should be green around can you
hear me okay great thank you
thank you very much members of
the committee i'm pleased to be
here this afternoon with you on
behalf of the way of de
german dixon I understood your
message to keep it brief so I
will kind of go over and
highlight some of the things
that we're doing in each of
those areas and end really stand
for questions to give the
members an opportunity to ask
the questions that they have
so I just want to start off with
the workforce section I think
that is really the most
important area that we can work
on at CYFD because without a
solid well trained well
developed work force on the rest
of the work is really impossible
for us to do and as rachel
mentioned our
rates at see why although we
continue to hire we still really
struggle with retention and so
that is been kind of a focus
over the last six months to
really look at how did we retain
the employees that we have
because we all know it's an
incredibly difficult job every
day that they're out there you
know they are seen horrendous
things in child welfare it's not
the typical job that you go to
eight to five monday through
friday and then go home to your
family they're out there at
night they're out there on
weekends they get called out in
the middle of the night and it
does take a toll on workers and
it's been something that we
really need to focus on so a
couple of things that I want to
highlight that we've done just
to really insure that we can
better support our workers
we've done some contracts with
previous funding that you guys
have allocated through growth so
I just want to see thank you to
the legislative body for really
recognizing the need for funding
and although money doesn't
always fix problems it really
does help us to target some of
those areas where we struggle
and so we've been able to bring
any contractor using some of
those funds um it's changed
innovation to really look at
that process and how to those
investigations come in and how
are we screening them and
looking to ensure that we're
looking at the right.
Trigger points to really
identify risk and safety of
children and so change
innovation has been on board for
I believe about three or four
months I don't know the exact
date of that contract but
they're working with our
investigators to really define a
different way to look at
investigations to be able to
identify those that are not
necessarily in need of another
investigation and really being
able to help us determine which
of those screen down could have
been diverted
through multi level rather than
coming into an investigation so
we're gathering that data and
setting up that system with them
but there are also helping us in
investigations to be able to
look at cases and make
determinations quicker whether
or not they need additional
weather those kids need to be in
our custody remaining our
custody or if they need to just
be supported through see why if
you through family services or
seen a huge increase in the time
frame of case start to closure
with that assistance from them
so it gives them an opportunity
to really look at those and make
those decisions quicker so that
the cases that are investigators
are caring our cases that really
need to be looked at and be
worked through the system with
in investigators
eyes and so that's one contract
that we've done or were seen
some positive outcomes and hope
to have some data that leads to
that we also implemented with on
one time funding that the
legislature gave us a referral
incentive of system at sea way
of that idea of that was too
fault it was really to help
increase our work force and the
referral that we got from people
who might know somebody who
would be great doing the work
that they do in CYFD and so it
allows them to refer an employee
and if that employee stays and
makes it through you know
they're training their net
training at six months the
employee receives.
Personal payment of that
incentive and then at the end of
their
probationary period at one year
they received the remainder of
that and the total of it is a
thousand dollars and I hope is
that it works as an incentive
for employees to remain at the
department and help to build the
work for us that works with them
and also helps us to serve to a
higher individuals for release
struggling to do that um and so
that has been an opportunity for
us and a don't have any
information on that it's fairly
new after legislative session we
started that in really charles
that was really based on
testimony that you gave during
the arbitration about bonuses
for employees and we really went
back to figure out how exactly
channel we do that and can we
can select his employees to
thank you for that
we've also incentivised our
social workers and you know i'm
excited to see that we've
actually increased our social
workers not by huge numbers but
my son were up to two hundred
and seventy license social
workers at cyfd we implemented
through one time funding in
another grow appropriation that
was targeted specifically for
master level license social
workers a ten percent temporary
salary increase to incentive
buys them and really it has
helped with retention of social
workers we have not seen the
turn over there we've actually
seen growth in that area and we
have also seen some employees
that did not have their license
go and work towards getting
their license we also use the
month the growth funding to
higher I couldn't fault it to
come in and help with license to
individuals in the department
that are social workers i'm have
two opportunities we're using
some of the growth funding to
assist them to go back and
obtain their master levels
degree and we have a contract
you comes in and works with them
specifically on obtaining their
license insurer and so funding
has been used there as well and
I know that.
These said that there's not a
lot of funding that has been
expensive I believe some of
those allocations are still
pending and they will be journal
entried and it at the end of
this fiscal year will have a
clear indication of how all of
that money was spent and would
be happy to provide a report
being on that.
Sorry lots of words
in addition to really building
that work force as they said we
really strategized on how do we
retain that work force and I
think one of the things that we
were able to do again through
one time funding that was
provided to the department was
we put on
a conference for employees with
new mexico leadership
that really was aimed at
allowing them to come together
as a department you know a lot
of the things that we do was
very fragmented at sport
juvenile justice words for
protective services but we are
one department one message in
the mission of our department is
to keep kids safe and there's no
reason that we should operate in
silos and have you know
behavioral health to eat one
thing and juvenile justice doing
something and so the idea behind
this was to really build that
team work and there's nobody
better in doing that than new
mexico leadership I think they
have a great program and we
started with the leadership team
to really identify you know what
are our goals and what do we
want to see through the
department and then bringing
staff together and we've done it
in groups of three hundred
because we have a lot of staff
and we're trying to
insure that all of them have an
opportunity to do that so new
mexico leadership put together a
program for us to really re
imagine and regnite the why why
do you do this work and how is
the work of each person in the
department really important to
help you with that mission in
that goal and it wasn't
necessarily targeted at child
welfare they know what their job
is they just really need to be
reignited on why why are you
doing this and why do you
continue every day and you know
honestly the morale I believe
continues to death and we can
blame so many different things
on why but it doesn't matter the
fact that it is it's low and.
And how we going to increase
that and some of the
testimonials that we had from
staff at this retreat were
amazing you know I could can't
tell you how many staff came up
and think that we had one
individual who do the
testimonial and said he had
scheduled to retire october
first but after attending this
conference he felt he had more
to give he was excited about the
opportunity and he's continuing
with the department so that
funding I think is being used in
that manner to really help
inspire employees and we want to
be able to continue and really
help them to build on self
awareness and really teach them
how to take care of themselves
while they are doing this work
so that was one of the area of
growth funding that we used
I talked about our social
workers and what that has done
we launched a new campaign and
this is I don't know if you want
to watch the video to they have
this available to them today
okay so this is a video that
shows a bit our campaign for
social workers I won't play it
now because I know that you know
the time is limited but you all
have access to it it is
launching in various states
around us on a recruitment
efforts have been expanded we
also participated in eleven out
of state of bands at colleges in
universities and I will read off
the list there's eleven so we
attempted job fears at
university of nevada indovino
the museum of state university
you see davis wall of all
university university of
washington zone state university
st cloud university portland
state university west texas a
and m you see l LA and sandy a
good state university the
purpose of those visits were to
visit their schools of social
work
to really recruit two new mexico
and so we had a lot of interest
there were still following up
with interest in those states
were looking at incentives for.
Work we location expenses for
social workers and really
widening the net of where we're
recruiting not to say that we're
not still working with the
university is under statement
program we have entered into one
online university m o u with
them to be able to offer stipend
programs to online universities
for kids that live in new mexico
in our ending online schools and
so we're still working with that
type it and still really working
to recruit social workers um.
Sorry i'm gonna just jump ahead
the last thing I think that is
really poor important and again
using funding that we received
through the legislature we have
built out our training academy
and were continuing to ensure
that we have better training to
approach provides you are staff
whether those be in juvenile
justice protective services in a
really making sure that they
have the tools that they need to
do that the last suggestion
which will be used in next
year's brother funding is to buy
virtual reality headsets which
has been something that other
states are using for training of
I think it's a great tool for
new employees who have not been
out on a home visit who don't
know what it's like to go out in
the middle of the night and it
gives difference then arios for
them it provides really good
coaching time for their
supervisor for them to ask
questions in a very real like
situation but not putting them
in danger i'm out in a home all
they are doing those training
sessions and so that is
something that we were hoping to
buy with this year's funding
they did not come in in time and
so we will be rolling that
purchase over and using some of
the funding through next year's
appropriation
and I believe that the
appropriation I know that well
so you mentioned it was over a
hundred million but again I just
want to point out that that is
over several years and not just
a one time allocation I believe
it is more like I believe that
what we're budgeting is about
twenty six million dollars over
the next fiscal year i'm in
broad funding that we're looking
at because as you said it's
broken out over three years on
and we are looking at about
twenty six million dollars.
I think.
As we work on behaving that work
force and making better
decisions about kids coming into
foster care we really need to
look at do we have the
appropriate placements for those
kids and you know I think as
rachel indicated we've had seen
some growth in faster families
with increase the number of beds
that we have available to us
we've had several leaves some of
those I think we're going to
start tracking that data
separately on where the ones
leaving are they resourced
parents or is it because they
were a family and that situation
is a bit resolved or be taken
arty and ship or that child has
had some sort of um permanency
plan that has been worked out so
we'll start to track that
differently so we can give it
clear indication of are we just
losing more regular foster
parents that would be able to
take in kids that are coming
that are not family but we have
seen an increase we currently
have done two thousand one
hundred and nine kids in care
and those individuals we have
right now placed in faster homes
with the exception of about four
hundred and thirty kids which
are either in an out of state
rtc residing in the tfc and
state of our home on the trial
home visit or not in foster care
for other reasons whether
they're hospitalized and parcel
read it or
i'm right away status and so we
have then about eleven hundred
for sixteen hundred kids that
would require being in foster
homes
we still have a money and hope
house which has been used as you
all know for a reduction of
office days and those two
facilities are still operating.
Yeah.
Questions I won't touch on
carers and that's not one of the
subjects but if you have
questions and prepared to
discuss
and then I think the last is
just repeat maltreatment and as
richell said those numbers have
declined ever so slightly but
had declined I think one of the
efforts that were really looking
at is how do we partner with
community providers
they are in those communities
and they know those individuals
and I think the services that we
need to provide to individuals
and families it is really what
is going to help us in addition
to the work that we do with
family services to identify
those but we have our four
family resource centers we've
expanded that based on need of
cases where we have a high look
at
mel treatment or repeat male
treatment and so we're focusing
now on opening a family resource
that are in sun one county and
we're looking to open one in
hobs to really address and we've
had huge success with our family
resource center in chavis county
and incredible job there to
really be available to families
to provide services and you know
partnering with community and
recognizing that with our
limited number of staff we can't
meet the deeds of every family
and every child in every
community and having those
relationships though strong
relationship with community
partners I think can really make
a difference for families and
give them resources immediately
and I think a prime example for
us not that it's mel treatment
with during the flooding in ross
will recently and you just all
the need in the desperation with
families and the chavers county
staff were there they provided
resources they worked incredibly
close with our families reached
out to foster families and it
would just you know really
showed what a partnership could
do.
And how you could really meet
the needs of community right
then in there and it's something
that we're exploring right now
to rfp out to see how can we
help them help us to serve
families and provide them
funding to be able to do so as
we really still work to build
our work force and I think that
as we do that we can see
hopefully that we will have a
difference in our mel treatment
and those numbers can really
start to steadily decline I gave
the two year comparison because
it's hard to look and say that
it's gone up for down since it
varies so much depending on the
number of reports that we get
and the kids that come in
security and so although it
looks like it's really grown in
some areas when you really look
at the number of cases coming in
that has declined significantly
and so just wanted to make sure
that you guys had side by side
comparison to really be able to
see what that looks like do they
have.
So I believe those are the three
areas that rachel touched on I
can stop there for questions or
we can talk about see where and
then go back to questions
manager your preference
thank you madame secretary thank
you lf for
you that the start I think we're
gonna go into questions and
based on sort of the structure I
laid out earlier
we have the three performance
challenges that we're talking
about today the first it is
preventing child mail treatment
then we'll go to work force and
then we'll go to
placements for children and
custody case would just reminder
for committee members
yesterday's we're gonna we're
gonna start off with preventing
bell treatment so it's a senator
pidea and representative little
and senator tricky up so on this
subject
thank you madam chair so so
we're going to go swim line by
swimming or a piece bapy okay
when I hope I did the right then
so on on the
where we were we were there so I
carried a lot of the i'm trying
to stay within your directions
of how you want to do this so so
I carried a lot of your agenda
this last time like a lot of it
and I was
almost all of it I think and it
was extremely painful so thank
you for you and your stab
everybody that worked on this
with me to give it was just it
was really hard work and it
really appreciate you guys for
all the work that you get thank
you and I know you would have a
lot of if it's alright if I
mention you know my mom was was
having a hard time and you just
made yourself available to the
children of new mexico this
entire time so thank you just
want to say thank you in public
how wonderful it was for you to
make yourself as available as
you did I think people knew what
was going on in your life so
thank you that should not be
lost in the kind of work we do
so on senate bill forty two is
alright I guess it's alright if
I ask about this when it in this
swim lane.
Where is implementation that we
begun the the framework to get
this thing moving in the
direction of where we need it to
go
to yes and thank you for
carrying all of our legislation
it was a lot it was a very busy
legislative session and things
for commenting on my mom she's
doing much better so thank you
she's my dance partners
thank you it's a hard subject
for me
yes implementation is going as
planned there are some things
that the implementation date
doesn't start till january are
unspecifically with a lot of the
data we're working to figure out
what that looks like how we can
make sure that we have storage
capacity work working closely
with a department of information
technology on some of the areas
that they're covering and some
of their responsibility areas to
be able to maintain that
our legal department is working
on the proper documentation to
send out to staff to really get
them direction on you know where
we're going to have stuff stored
how that's going to work i'm
working through how that works
with employees who leave the
department and how we maintain
and their devices once the
transition from see why fd but I
believe that we're on track to
have that implemented and
working through that
I believe on the confidentiality
aspect of that you know we've
worked through that I believe
our legal team still had some
questions I think you all know
during the legislative session
there was a concerns about
whether or not that violated
captain so those conversations
are happening still is we're
still trying to wait our week
through that because there's
difference opinions at this
point but I believe we're ready
to implement what we are ready
to turn over what required to
turn over and so i'm still
working through that issue and
with respect to terror we had
started working on
implementation and transferred
of that even since early january
as we knew that we were going to
be introducing legislation for
that.
But understanding that we could
move some of those pieces even
with out legislation and so that
work started early on we're in
the process many of the cases
were transferred over to
department of health beginning
february one with their
navigators some of the
navigators that we had at c way
of d transferred to the
department of health to continue
that work some of them chose to
stay at the department and work
in family services and in home
services
but we are still in
communication with them we're
doing a review of all cases
after january one to ensure that
department of health has all the
pertinent information that they
need we've set up a position
with ncy update that just works
with them to get background
information any information that
they need before going out on a
family
we have a system set up for
reporting any time that there
has not been a touch point with
that family if they are not able
to engage with them if for any
reason they immediately philip
baby is in danger they have a
direct person in our scam
central intake to be able to
take those calls and work
through that with see why and so
at the table has been
presbyterian as the provider
health care authority ecd
us and department of health all
to try to sit down and ensure
that we have clear guidance for
staff so they know who is
responsible and what the touch
point into our would they need
to be referred to another
department and so I feel very
confident and the work that's
been done to transfer care of so
many chair and member secretary
team so that was discussion
about utility utilization of
more use on on where some of the
work would be done at the
navigator level of netbear there
was another role that I are
educated on exact and reported
there was a care coordinator
excuse me so how are those two
roles going to be managed by the
various agencies can just give
us a little more as that was one
of the.
This thing turned into like a
nightmare for me personally and
I know for you to and a
christmas tree almost with all
sorts of stuff going into it
being taken out we finally got
it all across the finish line
and bipartisan by the way we got
this thing done by partisan
which was a beautiful thing for
mexico but but those two rolls
there was a lot of contention
what wound up what do you end up
doing with both of those rules
because they they go hand in
hand
so the chair coordinators are
employees of the mcos and they
are still the ones that are in
the hospital that are working
with the patient as they come in
the immediately when a plan of
safe care is being or of child
is more substance exposed even
prior to the plan being
developed they reach out to the
department of health navigator
and together they work with that
individual so that they can
insure that we have eyes on that
individual that we know that's
baby exists and that the plan of
safe care is then completed
together and that planned is
being changed significantly and
so on the department of health
took one of the drafts that we
had been working on and they
have tweaked at one of the
things that we wanted to make
sure that we were doing was that
a plan of safe care did not just
include the request for services
from the state agencies such as
weak or snap or those type of
benefits that did not constitute
a plan of safe care that is
still something that involved we
still operate information on
safe sleep we offer that's if
they're needed but battle loan
can not constitute a plan of
safe care and so on the mco.
Sorry it's senator secretary I
just wanted to clarify it
quickly senate bill forty two if
i'm not mistaken directed caft
to work with the health care
authority
on carrot at rachel is that
correct
madam chair that's correct if
you look at page for where
you're brief we get a very brief
summary about what was incentive
forty two it was a very
expensive bill that were a
variety of components a point of
few key things that the bill did
related to care previously
responsibility to sort of
divided among any of the
agencies the bill
can lead responsibility to the
health care authority for the
care of program it required that
the health care thirty provide
an intensive evidence based form
of care coordination for
children born with plans of seat
care it required certain types
of referrals for all cases
with plants of safe care and it
specified some specific action
direction you had to take in
cases of not complaint so that
was kind of a current piece if
you look below that in your
brief I get i'm just a couple of
other points about what the
building and we talked about
that the company changed to the
company and reality clients are
changed to records retention i'm
in addition to the required to
develop programs eligible for
the family first prevention
services act implement those in
and provide updates it also
required to have the implement
more towards or differential
response state wide by twenty
twenty seven so i'm kind of
pages for invited give you a
little bit of summary about what
was in that bill which did go
through many iterations
thank you okay yes sector so
madam chair yes it does put the
primary responsibility on
healthcare authority they are at
the table with us working
through all of the changes they
do not do direct service so they
don't have navigators on site.
At health care authority to be
able to go out and provide
services to families and so they
are contracting with the mco's
it's part of their contract and
care coordination and they are
contracting with the department
of health with their navigators
to be able to go out and do the
direct services and so I think
that is where those two entities
come in and so i'm as regional
alluded there are very specific
things in the bill that requires
see why fd's
I don't see intervention but it
worked with those two entities
to ensure the safety of cats and
all of that is being worked
through in the
plan that has been put together
and so chaired in secretary
that's why I asked the questions
because I just want to make sure
we're being as transparent this
is we absolutely have to be I
think we should put all of this
completely in the light of day
to make sure that everybody
understands who's on first who
was doing what role or would
have you so appreciate you given
this at that lane and thank you
regelant and thank you chair may
I ask a question on work force
are you going to come to that at
some other point thank you
senator I will return and have a
whole new list for work force
out of the other call and them
to another section because I do
want to follow up on twenty six
legislation that you are already
thinking about because I think
that we should sort of lies that
as much as possible at every one
of these meetings where they
present so that that we're not
hitting everybody up in december
or early january by the way
here's a legislative act so can
we talk about that maybe at the
end of absolutely on your list
for work well and we will
definitely and this is not our
only bad at our sub committee
apple so thank you okay next
representative little
thank you match a very much
battle chair thank you for the
presentation
I am going to ask to really
for some basic information
didn't do to this subgroup I am
really happy.
I'm pleased to be able to be
helpful and I want to be helpful
and ask questions
my for my question has to do
with the chart there that that's
shown there I think I know what
this means I believe I can
may have understood it but I
don't want to presume may I ask
please that this be what through
and if you would use early
accounties and information to
to do that with I think
understanding what this is this
report specifically is would
help me to formulate better
questions and understand that
the the issue at hand please
i'm sure
representative little of course
so if you take the information
from bertaleo
and you look at let's we'll
start with
we're going to do apple to apple
so we have quarter three
information from twenty twenty
four
and so up through the third
quarter and twenty twenty four
there had been one thousand six
hundred and ninety six reports
in to the department
and of those reports three
hundred and thirteen of them
were repeat offences
and so when they say you look at
the percentage and it's you know
eighteen point five percent
and then if you go to this year
you can see that the number of
reports into the department has
increased were at nineteen
hundred and thirteen and we're
about at the same new merger
with three hundred and fourteen
of those being repeat offences.
Thank you and would you explain
the last column
please thank you better chair
okay so the goal of it this is
for us to mean team I believe
it's nine percent is what the
federal number is rate it's not
on here I think it's nine
percent or ten percent
that is how many of those cases
we need to eliminate so a
hundred and twenty eight
it's under twenty eight hundred
twenty children okay is the
child not a case yeah okay a
hundred and twenty eight of
those children
we need to reduce the male
treatment of those that many
children and order to be meeting
the federal standards
thank you very much at very
helpful for me thank you madame
chair
thank you representative so next
week that
senators through heo and to buy
a sin and then representative
down if I miss someone flag it
for me otherwise we'll complete
our list and continue on thank
you thank you madame chair thank
you
for being here today
I have three four general
questions and i'm going to stay
within the prevention
as directed
so on your see what if you work
for us
here I note that there's
currently four hundred and three
positions posted does that mean
that you have four hundred three
vacancies.
It does sorry madam sure senator
under it does not mean we have
that many vacancies that is what
we currently have posted and
what we are anticipating that we
have funding for so there could
be additional positions within
the tool that are currently
created at
that we do not have adequate
funding to fill thank you madam
chair and madame secretary so
how many additional positions
are they're not funding for that
you have on your list madam
chair center issue
that's a tricky question we have
five hundred and eighty six
vacant fte's at the department
four hundred and eighty that are
posted but as we mentioned
before in our protective
services division last year and
again this year the department
is running in a deficit um
because of the federal fund
issue or the drawdowns for
federal funds and so we're
continuing to fill some of those
positions based on budget
availability
but not one hundred percent sure
that we will recognize that
revenue
and senator and secretary I want
to make sure that we come back
to that issue about deficit
spending and dry down the
federal funds with regard to
work force when we are in that
that area thank you madame chair
I I agree with the secretary
that work for really makes a
difference on prevention and
that's still my reason I brought
that up i'll save the rest of my
work first questions for later
so second question in regards to
prevention
knowing that current has been
moved to
healthcare authority
which I will just say I didn't
agree with I believe it needs to
be the department of health but
nonetheless it happened.
And now we are where we are but
who's going to do the rules for
that is that the health care
authority that's doing the rules
for that and if it is and i'm
sorry
secretary that i'm asking you
that question and we had health
care authority here earlier but
if you know that answer I would
love to know yes but i'm sure
sunday yes it will be the health
care authority that probably
says rules we will have a team
working together to determine
what those are and madam chair
secretary have they been drafted
are the out for public comment
what's the timeline of madam
chair senator to you I do not
believe that they have been
drafted
madam sure that's that's a
that's a real concern because
the care has already been moved
to the helped your authority and
regardless of whether they have
and will use with department of
health and
to provide services you have to
have the rules you just have to
have the rules in place to make
that happen I just want to point
that out
so let's go over to the
repeat
why did you have I heard you say
something and they don't think
you really meant it but I I just
want to
you said that we can't serve
every child
and I don't remember exactly
what the words were I tried to
write it down really quickly I
is it is that a work forces to
or is it a funding issue
madam chair senator to heal
it is a work force issue we have
you know limited number of
employees who are in each of
those county some of them you
know are more fully stopped and
others but it's really just a
capacity issue where if we have
partners who and i'm going to
just use you know chabes classes
are as an example because they
have set up so many programs we
have funded a lot of different
programs for them and they have
done an incredible job of
working within their community.
To help address some of the
issues that cyfi would typically
address and so it's not
necessarily that we can't or
won't start those kids but there
should not be a duplication of
effort for services and if we
have providers in our family
resource centers who can take
the role of providing those
services then it freeze up our
staff to concentrate in other
areas where maybe we don't have
a provider that can beat that
need there and so I think better
collaboration with our community
partners will really allow us to
opportunity to better serve
families and children in the
community thank you madame chair
secretary III thank you for that
explanation I I know in in
public education we say we don't
know which of the students that
are failing right now could have
in the student finds the the the
cure for cancer or fine secure
for anything or does something
spectacular and we don't know
which kids are the ones that
have that kind of potential we
have to treat every single one
of them as having that putting
actual and and I feel that same
way for these numbers here and I
understand that the national
standard is the nine percent but
the rest of those kids
you know we we know we know from
from
research that kids who have
experienced significant trauma
in their lives and to these kids
they're in that list are much
more likely to commit crimes as
adults and to be
challenging and then have
children that are challenged so
it's a cycle that repeats itself
and so every one of these kidded
so I would just ask like what
can we do as legislators and our
own communities
to to.
Like do we built with doing
breach out to our schools and
say hey I need you to work with
see why
to get trains that you have
these family resources I know
that we have some of those
services in our schools but how
do we have that kind of service
so that we know where to send
families if they're in trauma or
or or these
hundred and seventy seven kilos
in my community that.
Need to have that kind of
service
madam chair senator to hear I
just want to clarify I know we
wanted to indicate that we were
okay with nine percent of kids
in every community being repeat
about treatment I think I was
just answering her question
about what does it take to get
to the green and that's what
we're basing that on is that's
the national average and that is
something that we're striving
for but I believe like you that
every child should have that
opportunity to live in an
environment free of abuse or
neglect I think one of the
things that we need to do is
really just a better job of
educating our community and as I
said partnering with them we
have is in ears and the schools
this summer we brought on
thirty three teachers across the
state we opened it up to school
districts across the state to
see you know teachers we want
you for the summer come and help
be eyes in yours with kids when
they're not in school and you
know we got great response we
had a lot of response in some
areas but we have limited number
of positions but you know I
think it's something that we
want to expand on because when
kids aren't in environment where
people are seen i'm in their
interacting you know are you'll
see from data art rates in back
to school time go up really high
and they go up hide again in me
when teachers are fearing that
kids are going to be at home
without those is in years and so
really just a better job of
educating our community and
working with communities and
schools and working with or
isn't gross club who have those
kids after school or you know
after school providers to really
have people able to recognize
and no you know if you see it
report
because point in investigating
it and i'd rather go investigate
and it be nothing that not gets
a call and it be something
thank you madame
and I just we haven't gotten to
the IT and I know we discussed
it I don't see that it fits in
any of these.
But I am very concerned about
the I
start out at thirty six million
dollars and now be up to ninety
million and to know that another
state and I think it was
louisiana
as already said that they cut
their ties and said we're done
and now they're doing something
else I I we had been told during
the session that this was going
to be up and ready to go in the
fall of twenty twenty five do
you remember saying that
secretary
yes I do yeah and so manimar
secretary in that we're looking
at you know the winter early
winter early winter I guess of
twenty twenty six and then
twenty twenty seven
well that's what the certain
here when it is going to
actuall.
The the project will be
discharged
here so original the original
date for implementation was
november of twenty five
that was what we had negotiated
and so although it looks as if
it's been a really long time
line into when the money was
allocated in twenty seventeen
there hadn't been the start of
the project so when I came on
board in twenty twenty three we
signed the the rfp had been done
and the scoring had been done
we didn't immediately sign a
contract because I had some
questions and I wanted to see it
and it didn't include juvenile
justice so we amended to include
juvenile justice which is part
of the increase because they are
part of our department and we
have priced over kids and that
data should be readily available
regardless of where the child is
that you're serving they should
be in our system on and so we
had to revise the scope of work
to include that which delay the
start time and so we signed the
contract in november of twenty
three
weekend working after the period
or you know any protest or that
they began working in january of
twenty four
on building out the system so
the start date was already
compromised and so the execution
date I have that fully
implemented needed to be pushed
we then pushed it to april of
twenty five
twenty three twenty five april
of twenty six so that was about
a four month five month bush
and then we've renegotiated and
we have a go live date of
february twenty second and so
mid february is the goal live
date for the app we're supposed
to start testing a couple of
months prior to that and then
the date that you're seeing that
goes into twenty.
Seven is the time period for
adjustments and any concerns
after the go live date that
still we're there under contract
with us to still continue to
work on fixing the system up to
that date thank you madame chair
and and madame secretary you
know that I know what it's like
to have to take responsib.
Ninety project
and it's not pleasant but it
happens nonetheless I am
wondering last question madam
chair secretary what is the
ongoing like annual cost of
maintenance for the system after
it's built and up and running
because there's always an annual
maintenance cost
on metal insurers that are true
he'll I don't have that exact
cost in front of me but i'm
happy to get to that information
for ongoing thank you madame
chair amount of secretary I
think we need to make sure we
have that for this upcoming
legislative session to start
building it into the budget
thank you
thank you
representative doubt
thank you madame chair secretary
I just want to make a statement
before I ask a couple questions
which is you've had a lot of
first time knowledge on this it
project but would it came
through your own short here of
data about children and mount
treatment
you didn't even understand your
own chart and that seems to be a
pattern of when you come to
committee you're not really
familiar with your own numbers
of the dials it should be on
your dashboard and this is very
meaningful information and if my
mouth is correct since april
you're on a trajectory of one
point two five deaths per month
with children that are under
your protection and so it's
important to me and I take it as
an afraid because you're you're
at the top you're you're leading
the charge for an agency that
everyone is concerned about we
understand that all of you are
under
stress i'm sure every single day
but this is important and it's
important to every new mexican
so I would request that when you
come if you're going to prove
present us data and a chart that
you actually really understand
what it saying and what it you
know what each column is because
we have those questions that you
couldn't answer.
Valerie had to answer those for
you just a statement I want to
throw it out there but I would
like to back up for a moment
I need some clarification on
carra because is deal h involved
here or is it hca which one is
because it seems like there's a
little discrepancy there and I I
need some clarification madam
chair center to buy a set both
departments are involved
thank you manager secretary is
deohise supposed to be involved
in this are they supposed to be
taking action of some sort maybe
i'm confused here
madam chair senator biason as I
indicated the legislation puts
the responsibility of her
program on the health care
authority on the work closely
they have
gone into contract with the mco
which then puts the card
navigator in the hospitals
helping with that plan of care
but hca does not provide direct
services they don't happen to
bitter that go out and provide
services to families and so in
order for them to manage this
program they have to contract
i'm out for people to do the
direct services and so they have
agreed to contract with the
department of health and the
navigators within that
department to be able to provide
direct service okay thank you
for that explanation i'm in
monetary secretary you mentioned
I think it's changed innovation
as a contractor right now that's
helping you find those trigger
points to better identify
policemen of short ran and
different steps in appropriate
actions rate was a change
innovation madam chairs under to
buy a sen
they are working with us on
investigations on helping
identify or close out
investigations okay so then
madame share secretary with that
with the four month old or the
ten men though that recently pa.
Asked with the involved in with
their cases be involved in
what's being looked at with this
contractor where they involved
in the safety plan are they
looking at the steps or the
possible preventative steps that
could have prevented their
deaths and what's the role in
those specific cases madam chair
senator to buyers and they do
not have a role in those cases
okay thank you and mountains
here I think what concerns me is
what i'm reading even in the
criminal reports with the
foreman ballot and the ten
mental specifically there were
red flags and both of those
cases different red flags and
something that i've heard from
you and your team and even in
the media is that at all costs
were replacing these children
back with their families and if
we're looking at really moving
the needle on mouth treatment
and repeat mount treatment why
would a drug addicted infent
born drug addicted a fat be
placed back into a family that
is known to be drug addicted but
how how were we making those
kind of decisions
madam chairs the bison I don't
have knowledge that the infinite
was driven and I believe they
may have been drug exposed I
don't know if there was an
addiction in the child or the
infants but I believe that when
those decisions are made it is
looking at all the information
that the investigator had
available to them at the time
that is something that we're
looking at to ensure that they
have adequate information to
make those decisions I believe I
said earlier that we have
identified eposition at CYFD to
work with the health care
authority so that when a case
comes in whether it's referred
to see why update for an
investigation or if the decision
has been made for safety that
they have that information so
are individual at c f d will be
able to go into our system look
at back.
Round see if they're any prior
chases whether substantiated or
unsubstantiated we've also had
conversation you know with law
enforcement to ensure that when
they're going out and looking at
users that we have you know
background information and that
we are able to make the most
informed decision that we
possibly can be for placing a
child in an environment that
would cause them to be unsafe
and
I can see my you know I don't
believe that at all costs a
child should be placed back in
the home I think it really
depends on the situation and the
safety and the risk okay
share and secretary
I don't know how I would have
more information about this
family in this child in the
conditions of which it was born
under
the new so I will just say i'm
not sure that we're on the same
page I don't think I have
incorrect information I I know I
don't have incorrect information
about the ten ten months old
either and what i'm concerned
about is the safety plan and the
state of new mexico pink you
swear or is there a structure to
a safety plan is there a real
information for how many eyes
are on that safety plan and
what's the follow up in a
countability because when I hear
that I think it was february
twenty eighth and tell I think
it was june sixth that the four
month month old infant passed
away in the care of the direct
addicted parents that no contact
was made and the grandmother was
supposed to be checking on that
four mental three times the day
which
I I can only been conceived why
that is a safety plan but if
that's a safety plan as the
safety plan actually is safe and
who was following up because
from february to june they're
how do they red flag or two or
ten going off somewhere so that
we know that that anything is
being cared for.
Where is grandma if she's
supposed to check on this baby
three times the day who is she
reporting back to because that's
an awful long time and now we
have a dead and
advent
madam chair to binson I agree
with you and so as I mentioned
earlier one of the things that
we have changed and that has
already happened is the safety
plan
you know before it was a plan
that
allowed for the parents to
create a plan that allowed just
you know we are going to get
services and not necessarily
something that was strictly
enforceable so that has already
changed and we have very
specific touch points so if
you're a navigator and you call
the family and you don't get a
response and then you call them
the next day and you don't get a
response then that is now
referred through central and
tape for an investigation to say
I cannot make contact with this
family and somebody needs to go
out and initiate an
investigation and you know it
may be that's why if you go to
the out in the family was just
gone for a couple days and
there's reason and they do it
investigation and child is safe
and remains there but we have
very specific touch points now
we have the system with the
healthcare providers so that if
the child misses well child
visit or misses vaccination that
that alerts the system and so
there are
items that were putting in place
so that we have better touch
points in a better process for
reporting when those are not
thank you man insurance
secretary so when did that go
into a fact what day that has
been gone into a fact just well
the new plan has gone into a
fact recently with health care I
mean with department of health
taking that over there is
training that is going to be
happening with the hospitals of
but the touch points isn't a
fact right now the individual
that we're going to be
identifying at c I f d is in
effect for the health care
authority so
let me back at manager and
secretary.
What date did those touch points
go into effect
to buy and I don't have the
exact date but it's been very
reset and light of the cases
that you're referencing in what
were the expectations and
touched points before this very
minor relevant day changed
balance that it was a bias and
we had very similar touch points
previously they were not
documented we are now
documenting those to ensure as I
said that everybody knows their
responsibility in some of these
cases there were touched points
see why a d was out trying to
contact the family health care
authority was out through their
mcos trying to meet contact with
the family department of health
was out trying to contact the
family but the entities were not
communicating with each other to
say all of these people are out
trying to do this and nobody's
able to reach them and so the
escalation
was not properly documented and
did not happen
so madam chair secretary we can
all agree then that that was a
failure on the agencies his part
madam chair standard device and
I believe it was the failure on
this system
for practice
there were three insurance that
were all involved in secretary
here's a way I look at it I I
meant horrible grow leaders for
a living and there comes a point
in a leaders career where they
pause and they look themselves
in the mirror instead of
pointing fingers in i've heard
you point fingers so often but
i've never heard you actually
take accountability and that's
maybe a growth area for you as
the leader of this organization
because you have children's
lives on the line and again
we're still on introductor
trajectory we have to death now
in june of its averaging outside
zero one point two five just a
month and i'm not okay with
that.
I don't know about anybody else
here I am not okay with there
and I would like just wants to
hear you take accountability for
a failure in the agency that you
are responsible for and the two
plus thousand lives that are
under your car
metal share center to buy so I
agree and I will take all the
responsibility for the errors
that see why me I think I was
just trying to point out that
there are several agencies that
were involved in these cases all
at the same time it was
healthcare it was deouge it was
one enforcement it was the mco
and cyfd everybody was involved
with these families at the same
time
I respond every day when I you
respond to the bill and you just
got negated by the big but and
all the other fingers you just
you just pointed all these other
agencies and actually hear you
blame burner county sheriff
department is infuriating to
hear you blame this legislature
for not funding you properly is
absolutely insulting so when the
share of has been called a
hundred and eighty times for the
two young boys that had the guns
on that and they can do these
children and within twenty four
hours you put them right back
and not home right back in that
position they've been out to
that home well over fifty six
times again at some point it's
no one else's fault they're so
frustrated that sheriff medina
are I mean i'm sorry sheriff
allen has been on tv saying he's
so frustrated he doesn't know
what else to do because the
children just keep getting taken
back taking back taken back it's
like almost like why why does
anyone bother to call the
sheriff's office because the
protocol is to hear these
children into your care and
they're taken right back to the
family so I will end the
conversation with you right now
but again i've yet to hear you
take accountability and
responsibility it's always blame
and quite frankly i.
Think denial and i'm super
concerned about the direction of
the welfare of the children in
the state of new mexico thank
you matcher thank you I do want
to sort of try to bring us back
to the point of legislative to
focus on some of the action
items what has been done
wet steps we're supposed to be
taken and we're removing from
here
we're gonna go to representative
dow and then representative
travels I have a couple of
questions but just a reminder to
the extent that you can be brief
and to the point on your
question and respond to
appreciate that
that'll be helpful because we do
want to make sure that we get to
all of our topics today thanks
thank you very much and they
sectory and valery and kathy
everybody for what you're doing
we all have a shared goal of
saving lives i'll be brief and
leave it at that
I
can you explain to me the
difference because i'm getting
really confused between a
resource family foster family
and i'm i'm asking this because
I believe it's part of
prevention resource family
faster family and kinship care
share
yes so a resource family in the
foster family are the same thing
those they at some point change
the name some prefer to be
called a poster family some
prefer resource so we call them
a resource foster family
can ship placement is a family
that is related to or light can
to a family that has an existing
relationship with a child and
can take on the responsibility
of having that child in their
house and providing care for
them thank you madame sharing
thank you for that secretary
when you said you have two
thousand one hundred and nine
children and custody does that
include kinds of care
yes it does.
Madam chair and secretary are
their children and substantial
abuse babies for an expose that
replacement care of a relative
who are never recorded and
registered and see why is abuse
they were just sent straight to
a family member
and they were never registered
are exposed
headed off to a grandparent
who's not registered as a
resource family or a kinship
care
I believe that it is situation
where a child could be handed
not necessarily handed to a
ground current but if they were
a plan where that individual
service as a safety monitor so
if the child remains in the
custody of the parents and
grandma has agreed as a in the
case you indicated earlier to
serve as a safety monitor and
perform certain
judies with that child then that
child would not come into the
care of the department madam
chair and secretary so then that
child has a safety plan
always yes
madame chair and secretary is
their background born substance
experts until is that what we're
talking about I know
maybe was more exposed removed
from the biological parents
because they were seeking
treatment
the baby is my experts and they
were handed to the parents there
was no career plan there is no
safety plan the parents are not
the grip the bite the
grandparents are not
changed of care
and the babies there's no
substantiated abuse there's not
there's no document that says
child had this incident and and
it it's not a isolated incident
I just don't think it's isolated
okay so if the family is given
to a family member that that I
don't know how you weren't into
knows and has a relationship
with this care this kinds of
care but this cif found a family
that they believe is safe did
you determine they received by
a.
Home check and a background
check
yes if we are going to place a
child in the custody of that
family there would be a home
study and a background check
done
madam chair and secretary that's
just not happening it's not
happening I know what the
incidents of both of these
things maybe you believe it is I
guess i'm asking this because
this this wists I think is what
it's called is this going to
track these type of things that
we can verify whether it's true
or not or whether we're just
getting here nearatives
hypothetical narratives that i'm
sure representative it will
track the information that we're
putting in to the sister by any
system is only as good as the
information that you put it if
there are chases and i'm really
trying to figure out how that
could happen because if there is
a planet care done and that gets
entered by the hospital or the
career coordinator into a portal
and then that's how see why if
he gets notified right to see
why employees are not at the
hospital to do that so i'm just
trying to understand how the
case would get entered into a
portal for CYFD to become
involved
without us then doing a safety
chat or monitoring so i'd like
to talk about those
figure out if we have a lapse
that's that thank you so another
thing that you said will see
something save something and
you'd rather have something
reported at check be done and it
be nothing then not to check it
off with the current call center
and when things are reported
what person into those it is
sound like you're saying that
everyone gets a check but think
what percentage calls are
springed out and do not receive
a well check
representative down I know that
there are some calls that you
know when they get all of the
information that those are
screen out of those are then
being diverted to family
services just to get that family
needs additional support I don't
have the exact number of.
How many are screened out
without investigation but I will
get back to you with that
information
madame manager of allergy
rachel
mr chair representative down on
peach for your brief this is
others that visual it's
primarily focused and more table
response but it does the
breakdown of data about what
happens to screen denvers the
screen out cases this comments
from the twenty twenty three
mile treatment report so it is
about the year old and but that
that's from the national
reporting thank you madame chair
and thank you for that rate and
this that says that forty six
percent are screened out and
just almost half forty six for
center screen out
so thank you for that rachel at
the recent I asking is because I
was reading the article on the
four month old died
not only were to children
previously removed
then a hospital called and
reported concern so that would
be a see something say something
from the hospital that's the
whole point of carer
and they were sent home they
were set home with a safety plan
with a caregiver a relative who
had no background check in also
a history and then when see what
when the law enforcement went
this the care planet fired how
does the career plan expire
played expire
chair representative down so the
safety plan is supposed to be
reviewed
after a certain number of days
so this one should have been
reviewed in february
the grandmother was under the
impression that if it didn't get
reviewed that it was no longer
in place it's still in place as
that moves forward but there was
not follow up from somebody to
go out and ensure that they
reviewed it and that they were
moving forward in a place in a
matter that was safe for that
thank you matter chair and thank
you secretary so cyfd do not
follow up I said.
It was a safety plan I care
planner both cause maybe left
the hospital exposed
there is a carrier navigator
there's a care coordinator
to see fd
person received no response
madam should represent there was
a care porting or involved there
was a DOH navigator and there
was a cyfd navigator or in home
services involved in this matter
and the plan expired and the
plan was not reviewed under
policy the safety plan was not
reviewed.
Madame chair and secretary you
have a policy that when people
ignore the plan that say it
could have say the life of this
child that after twenty one days
it expires do you think that
policy should be changed
better to them is not a policy
it's just it's part of the
procedure of that plan this is a
procedure you have to go out of
the number of days and check on
this and make sure that things
are going as according to the
plan and ensure ongoing safety
of that child
madam chair manager and
secretary will see with fix this
is these indicators going to be
loaded into this ninety million
dollars offer system
share representative the dates
the indicators for reminders
will be in that system yes
absolutely
we'll see this fix not following
policy or procedure I wish that
it would but assist them can't
fix an individuals actions in
not following procedure and
chair representative is that
individual store employee of
cifd
medical share it is an ongoing
personal investigation at this
point in time okay man turn
representative so alba courtesy
police swap in a month and just
going off
article
and comments from the judge that
are posting the article when aps
showed up to do the well check
they were not allowed to remove
the child because the plan is
expired is what policy is that
that representative there is not
a way of depolicing law
enforcement who has the
authority to remove a child see
what he does not have the
authority to remove a child but
if law enforcement determines
that a child needs to be removed
then they give she like the hold
on that child and we picked that
child
okay
so the manager and secretary
tell us what bills did you need
pass what did you need pass.
That we did not past during
session
manager representative I don't I
mean I believe that we did
a lot of work on the career
there were many many generations
of bills to fix carra I think we
got a bill that can be enforced
that can really look at the
safety of cance look at the risk
look at the backgrounds on and
allow us to make different
decisions moving forward for the
safety of children and it's
something that we're working on
right now with the department of
health to ensure that as I said
we have to have the right touch
points and we have to insure
that the people who are
responsible for doing the work
at that point in time when that
call comes in or that report
gets done that action is taken
immediately
thank you very much I I could go
on forever but there is a
personal commitment that several
of you on this panel made to me
and it was regarding a rule
change that was made on june
eighteenth of twenty twenty
after the passing of cara
through rules and under
substantiated abuse and neglect
a child born exposed or effected
due to the legal or a listed
drugs were strack
from the definition of abuse and
neglect it was explained to me
during the session that that
could be that strike could be
removed through the rules
process when it is that rule
making happening
madame share representatives
they're working on drafts of
those rules right now and I
don't be happy to get back from
do h when those drafts will be
prepared on and will make sure
that you have comments and
conversation thank you thank you
madame chair
thank you representative
representative job as thank you
madame chair I think i'll put
all my questions down to maybe
two at this point
um
chair amount of secretary.
I have a question around carry
described a situation that's
very confusing to me in terms of
who has a ultimate
responsibility for kids who have
been identified as period kids
so a child is been identified as
carer they're in c y d custody
who is the decision maker on
their case
madam chair representative which
have so if there is CYFD custody
then it would be fd but not all
intense for the substance
exposed to come into the custody
of see why fd so the way that it
works is that the navigator
which is a DOH employee is
engaged with that family from
the very beginning and if they
determine that there is concern
for the safety of that child
then they do a referral to cy
feeds your sky okay thank you so
then my question is around the
baby that died who is sent home
to the parents who were actively
using see why if he was
responsible for that babies care
that baby safety is that correct
that is correct so did the
worker
make home visits for that baby
on a regular basis.
Madam chair representative start
I was trying to get the
supercases
in that case there were no there
was not visits on a regular
basis there were attempts to
visit
why
there had not been
they had not made contact
share secretary why didn't the
worker do something after the
first
contact was impossible
madam chair representative
choppers that is being written
into current policy so that
those touch points are followed
and they know that that has to
have where was the supervisor
representative shoppers that is
part of our ongoing
investigation.
Madam chair secretary of good
ask the same question in terms
of that the baby that died in
plastic care
visits me to that baby to that
foster
medicare representative of
chapters at this point I believe
the answer is yes but again
we're investigating in that case
as well
manager secretary with the
answer is now
that baby was not visited on a
regular basis
I think that
see why it is in a crisis crisis
has gotten worse and it goes
back to the issue of work for so
not have additional questions
for that but
we can keep doing this we cannot
keep doing this and you are
responsible
thank you manager
thank you representative I have
a couple of questions and that
i'd like to to ask and then I do
have request from three members
who would like to ask one
additional specific question but
i'm gonna go through these and
then we'll
go back to to you guys really
quickly so
secretary thank you for being
here and
the presentation it's really
nice to see some of the
initiatives and programs that
the agencies working on to
address some of the ongoing
challenges that we've been we've
been talking about first
question that I have is about
the status of the states title
four e
prevention plan my understanding
is that it was
not accepted
just recently so what are the
next steps and
yeah
yes madam sure that is correct
we submitted that last december
and just recently in mid may I
believe we got correspondence
from
the federal government
indicating that their worst i'm
concerned with.
Issues that we put in
we then engaged in conversation
with them in mid june to really
talk about what they needed to
see and i'm gonna let catherine
phoenix daughter will address
that she's been working directly
with them on that plan as she
was the one to put that together
and so she can answer the
questions about exactly where
they are what they are hoping
that we can remove and what it
is that they're looking to
achieve through changes.
Random chair yes the provision
plan I had an opportunity to
talk with their children's
bureau person and
the first thing they said is we
have to make sure that we remove
all our diversity equity and
inclusion from the plan
but we can leave our tribal so
that's good the other thing is
they have high concern about our
community pathway which is not
something we knew was a concern
they are concerned that if we
have our foster car candidates
in the community pathway I
didn't have foster care can it
is a child that is near removal
that needs that support to
remain in their home if they
have that severe case they are
concerned about who's doing in
the safety who's doing those
jacks who's doing
the scoring to make sure the
risk is and so we had thought we
had remedied a little bit of
that by seeing our prevention
people are going to keep the
case management part of it well
eccb or whomever the other
community providers doing the
curriculum component of it so we
could still be drawing down fine
in they were like just just
don't so we're striking all that
out as well and we will be the
only people who are doing in the
foster care candidates it does
not mean what had a community
pathway it's just it's going to
look different so it would be
for secondary prevention
services will be our community
pathway and then we're going to
take more of the foster care
can it eligibility and then
we're providing that does it we
already knew because of the
changes with forty two but
carrier would look different in
the plan so
they expected us to have to
change that.
And it's a dozen the big things
that we're having to do that
they're not huge but it is a
change and how it works
so that's what
thank you and
just the plan now include
a program that is evidence based
and approved by the federal
government because in the past
we've been trying to
utilise a program that is not
approved by the federal
government for for funds for dry
down materials always have
motivation on interviewing in
there which is evidence based
and is approved to draw down
title forty we can't even at the
family received moderational
interviewing and let's say home
builders if we were doing that
we can only draw down the one
time we do use family
connections which is not in the
title forty as our curriculum
we're using with families but
we're using the motivational
interviewing approach and we're
doing it with all of our
programs and we knew that that
was a way that we would be able
to draw down title forty thank
you and so are you expecting
them that
you will be able to dry down all
available title for you funds
we can draw down for those
children who are foster care
candidates they have to meet
that eligibility not every tile
we'll meet that eligibility
so are we leaving does the plan
as it's currently written leave
federal funding on the table
manager no it would not
it will be
does children who are foster
care candidates first and we
utilize motivational
interviewing
could you explain how
you define foster care candidate
that would be helpful
yes better chair apological
candidate it would be.
A child who can not remain
safely in the home without an
intervigent that's occurring to
the department
thank you
so one of the things if
when
the state's plan is approved by
the federal government and we
can start drying down some of
those funds that'll be nice
because we won't have as big a
whole a deficiency
in this in the budget if we can
do that
I want to ask about the nine
million dollars in grow
appropriations
for evidence based prevention
programs and what the plan is
for a value waiting the
outcomes.
And medicare all introductory
note it's a million over three
years three million year
and
rachel how much has been spent
as far this year and madame
chair if you look at
ten in the chart that looks like
this is this the data polled
from share
mid june for that specific line
to pilot evidence based
prevention programs are the
appropriation that's three
billion
balance as of mid west two point
seven million.
Manager part of that was as a
mentioned earlier the family
resource centered and so using
those to help with evidence
based prevention and
intervention services within
their community as something
that we were targeting that
money for
the expansion of that through
the three million dollars worse
for the pilot to expand to
don't yeah no son one county and
hobs and we issued an artif for
those providers using that
funding and got no response to
the rfp so we reassured an RFP
and the spring following the
session to expand that to any
family resource centers state
why and then we did get response
to that second art p for a
provider in son one and one in
hobs that are interested and so
that is right now under contract
and those are freshes will be
opened in this next physical
year utilizing road funding but
we didn't get them opened on the
last fifth school year through
the rfp process thank you so
quickly then are there a family
resource centers in our most
populous counties that have uhm
high levels of repeat
maltreatment do there's already
exists we have family resource
centers right now in donald
county in charges county and
valencia county and in real
river
thank you is there a plan to
have one in bernalio county as
well there is plan for expansion
we were planning the expansion
with the three million dollars
for these two as for the school
year and then looking to expand
again next for school you're
using funding thank you and then
in terms of the measurement of
the outcomes have has the agency
identified how you're going to
evaluate outcomes
yes then I won't let the top
madam chair we actually because
of all the project programming
that we have while all of our
contracts and.
Or internal programs do have
performance measures and
outcomes that were looking at we
also have identified that we
need a special person desert
dedicated to prevention to do
that evaluation in our office of
performance and accountability
and so that is how we're we're
gonna do it instead of were
peace of we're actually going to
have one person who is there to
support all the different
programming that comes down to
see how are they all tracking
thank you and so
will that person then also be
looking at
the outcomes for
differential response
madame chair yes and I because
multi level response has we've
been working with evident change
to do a lot of our reporting
there this will be added with
our family outreached because we
see multi level as phase one and
this is going to be face to
so what have outside and will
have working with their inside
thank you
and just you know put a little
context the reason that i'm
asking about the users you know
obviously there were large
funding allocations i'm
appropriate to the agency and
the legislature has been using
grow funds as a way to sort of
track these pilot projects make
sure that they're meeting their
objectives before these funds
are sort of rolled into an
agency as recurring budget where
we have no
oversight and accountability so
rachel and everything if you
guys could just make sure that
committee members know
what the outcomes are that will
be attract I think that would be
very helpful
i'm gonna go ahead and I know
senators true here to buy it and
then representative little you
charge one short thing that they
wanted to.
Add on this particular aspect
and then we're going to go ahead
and move on to sort of work
force and the placements I think
will get both of those out.
Fabulous okay senator device and
thank you manager secretary i'm
are law enforcement officers in
the state do not have qualified
immunity do you see yfd case
workers department of health and
the health care authority
workers have qualified immunity
managers to buy a son I don't
believe that when they passed
the legislation on qualifying to
be that it included any of those
workers
so bad i'm sure i'm
understanding that you do not
have qualified immunity is up to
saying
I do not believe that we do now
but I am not okay thank you so
much
a representative a little thank
you very much
this morning
madame secretary we had a
secretary of me who
is presentation and one of the
questions I had was on
in their oversight and there
presentation on oversight of the
mcdonald network and performance
one of the fire one of the
several bullets that were noted
for us were referred to children
and state custody specifically
there was a correct corrective
action plan was issued to
presbyterian to address
deficiencies and data compliance
network according with deep for
children and stick custody the
responses do at the end of the
month ago june thirtieth and my
question madam chair and
secretary
is what what rule see what fd
will have in assessing the
response that a prespritary and
provides
manager representative little so
that response is part of the
cabinet litigation and that is
due to the country tools the end
of the month as we're still
working through the arbitration
order we're working with them
and so the mco's as of last year
became.
A single entity mco for children
and state custody i'm and so we
work with them on an ongoing
basis on their requirements and
the information and the data and
so that something that when that
is drafted she way of do you
will have input on that letter
and we respond to all of that
correspondence jointly through
cyft and the health care
authority
and my question to secretary
this morning on
that report is completed or when
the response is received and and
is made available
I asked whether this committee
and other relevant committees
would be aware be made aware of
the response that was provided
she indicated madam chair I
think we don't remember that
that she indicated that they had
to check with their legal to see
what was the bill what might be
released but in light of the
discussion this afternoon what
i'm hearing this afternoon and
in my understanding it would
seem to me this would be I will
speak for myself would be
extremely helpful to know what
what the efficiencies were
they responded to it and the
action that's planned to be
taken to remedy this situation
and maybe it already has but
that's the thing that i'd like
to know
so I think you madam chair
finally a follow up question
again in my attempt to learn
more can you please tell me
during the discussion with
previously you are describing
in the discussions around the
children then it's that past
can you I was confused by a few
things and one of them was a
terminology
that's used
so my question is madam chair
would see why fd's definition of
an attempt to visit.
Having trouble getting my head
around that please
for me thank you yes better
should representative little so
d case worker assigned to a keys
whether it's you know our
permanency worker and
investigator or a navigator
there are requirements for
visitation face to face
visitation with a child
sometimes they'll go to a home
some visits are
preranged some of them are not
and so when they go to that home
to do that face to fixed visit
if the family is not at home
where they can't engage with
that it is then in our system as
an unsuccessful busi.
And so that is what you're
describing is being described as
the attempt to visit
representative little yes
okay thank you very much madam
chair
thank you representative little
we are going to move to
discussing I think both work
force and adequate placements we
actually right now is the time
that we should be ending but I
think we all knew going into
this that time folks had a lot
of questions so it's not a
surprise that we're running a
little bit behind but we will
continue with our best efforts
to be brief and to the point but
go ahead with work force or
replacement we're gonna start
with representative chat field
thank you
madame chair heavy on my mind
today
we start into this is the loss
of life of four kids since april
i'll stay to midnight I don't
care i'm tired of
the continuation of a failed
system
and microfirst question is this
I see plastered all over my tv
screen
drug addicted parents that took
on a baby and that may be losses
life
I hear that there was a suicide
and facility and albuquerque I
don't know the details of any of
those too much
but my question is have any of
these
resulted in a change of
personnel process or procedure
or policy have they resulted in
a final change in the way thank
you.
Dealt with
medical checker representative
chatfield yes they have and
there are still continued
changes as we continue with the
investigation that are being
made what are those changes
manager representative chapter
with respect of facilities our
licensing bureau went in and did
a full investigation of a
facility there's been a
corrective action plan for that
facility which were working
closely with them to ensure that
they're following that it is
really ensuring that they too
are following their policies and
procedures when we license and
entity to do work in the state
of new mexico that deals with
children see where these
licensing bureau is responsible
for you know working with them
and investigating any situations
where there is concerned or
wrong doing so be have put them
on a corrective action plan
their monitoring that i'm in
addition to that both see why
and the health care authority
through the mcl had been unsight
to monitor to provide training
into ensure that their staff has
the adequate training installs
to be able to do their job but
there's been more enforcement of
insuring that that are following
the policies and procedures that
they indicated i'm during their
licensing so we're doing more
frequent checks there were to be
unannounced checks and we have
more individuals on site
manager on a normal day is there
middle health
personnel on side if these were
still these police kids
that i'm sure representative
chat filled so the two
facilities that operate for you
know reduction of office stays
in albuquerque both am I kids
for males and hope house for
females have different policies
I believe hope house has.
There is that is on site I don't
know that it's on a daily basis
but they do provide their apis
they are locally I believe am I
has
virtual therapists that work
with the individuals there I
know since this incident that we
have worked closely with
prospecturian health and some of
the emergency response teams and
album to have more of therapists
available on site with those
youth we have to balance that
also with them some of those
youth who are over the age of
fourteen have declined services
throughout their repairs
so
hundred million dollars increase
in budget last year it seems
like we would be able to provide
middle health care for the kids
that are in two for still.
Madam chair representative
chapter so there is requirements
for them to provide if we
contract with somebody for them
to provide mental health
services on we do offer that you
know kids that are in state
custody to faster care services
are available we also have
arbitral health unit internal to
see why d that is staffing with
art investigators and case
workers to identify individuals
who need services and then
working with the providers to
find in the established provider
in that community to ensure that
we're getting those services
that up
share apparently they missed one
chair representative chap filled
we're working to ensure that
they haven't missed more than
one.
Chair what is the current
treatment foster
rate
madame chair representative
chapter those rates vary so
there's a chart of that did
provide information depending on
the level of care so it's based
on the daily rate in last
legislative session we had asked
to increase that rates we
received funding to do a study
which were working to get the
study done we also received one
time grow funding to increase
those rates and the amount that
we are able to do with the
funding received is an
additional hundred and twenty
five dollars per month per child
so that was a gone up from the
lowest rate of
forty twenty eight forty one a
day I believe this what it is
so daily rate of twenty ninety
one which is a monthly rate if
it's a thirty one day month of
the sixth forty eight would be
increasing that by one hundred
and twenty five effective july
one
manager it has not been
increased this year yeah
share representative chapter
though the funding goes that we
receive from the legislature
goes into a fact july one and
manager that's a stipend for the
child correct that i'm sure
representative chapter that is
paid to the foster family for
the care of that child
per children per family per
child
and it is how much to right now
today
if it's a level one if it's an
individual let's you know aged
zero to five at six forty eight
a month and then it goes up
depending on the age of the
child and then it goes up again
depending on the needs of the
child if it's a very high needs
than that could go up to you
know anywhere between.
Eight hundred and forty to nine
hundred dollars a month.
Do you plan to increase those
next year
madame cherry representative
chat build I hope to we are
conducting the study that we
were asked to do and provided
funding to the legislature to
study rates and other states to
see if new mexico is competitive
or where we are on that and
depending on the results of that
study I will be requesting
additional funding during the
legislative session to increase
those rates
madam chair what is the pay
scale on their post
madam chair representative
chapter do you mean with n CYFD
yes so arthur appears range I
think on the low end we bring
them in at about thirty eight
dollars and I think that he
skilled depending on their level
of education or where they are
can range up to sixty dollars
and now.
Four hundred and eighty dollars
or do they do they charge on an
eight hour day do they work in
our student work as many hours
as they want to get over time
you talk about madam cher
representative chaptered our
internal behavioral health
therapists
work within the department but
don't provide direct services
so they work on identifying
services they work to help our
workers on assessments to
determine the needs of those
individuals on the work if we're
working on treatment foster care
they're involved at those
staffings to make sure that the
placement is appropriate that
they're receiving the right
level of care but they don't
provide serapie services cheap
kids and state customers who
does those are external
providers representative chop
build that are contracted either
through the mco
healthcare authority they
contract with providers that we
then use the providers for
services for kids instead
medicare what do they make
which I didn't hear you
question I didn't hear it
what do you pay these outside
contractors that are providing
services for the children madam
chair representative chapter see
why doesn't directly pay those
providers they are usually a
covered expense through the mco
that gets paid out just as if
you took your child to the
doctor or a therapist i'm in the
insurance cover as that
so matter
secretary I think you know why
i'm asking these questions and
that's because the last time I
saw you we talked about the fact
that some of these people make
eight hundred dollars a day when
a lot of the foster parents make
six hundred dollars a month or
seven hundred dollars a month in
the foster families or the ones
that.
Have that child in their care
constantly they are the ones it
cannot have a job because
they're dealing with a child
that has
a lot of needs in it and they're
the person that stands between
that child in
the end of their life you know
they are the protective covering
of that child so
it's important to me to know
what these providers make right
down to the system I asked last
year i'm going to ask again I
would like to see
the pace scale for the people
that work at see why fd and for
the contractors that come in
from the mcose
that's what we do here build a
budget and
carto what this agency answers
to
is that budget and that various
to keep children healthy happy
in the live a lot of they get
this happening all the time
right now
one point five million dollars
was giving to recruit and retain
foster parents in fiscal you are
twenty five
how did you speak and what were
the results.
One
fifty five minutes for any more
class.
Madame chair a representative
whilst she finds it it's one
point two five million in fy
twenty five but I know where
you're going representative
i'm sorry I thought I said one
point two five but in much time
when I said
I found it okay
that i'm sure representative
chat build so one point two
million dollars was used for a
recruitment across your families
we increased our media ads we
increased our media buyers on we
revised the training that was
done for foster families we
contracted with new mexico state
university to provide foster
family retention events and pure
support for unable to do that we
also increase the contract with
all fees to provide support for
poster families across the state
we contracted with pressley
bridge to come in and do more
training for our foster care
plus to provide more support for
foster families and build out
that support it included more
trauma training and other
training for foster families we
then did the oklahoma model
which was foster care plus we
brought the contractor on who
had been the director in
oklahoma that stuff that program
up and they are uncontract with
the still to build out our
foster care plus program in the
supports for foster your
families
and then we in addition to that
we didn't use any of the one
point two million dollars to
supplement the faster care rate
we did however ask for
additional money during the
legislature to increase those
rates at a minimum of four five
four hundred and twenty eight
dollars so our request was to
double foster care payments to
the foster parents.
And that request was reduced and
that's resulting in the hundred
and twenty five dollars that
were able to increase them by
this year
so many
secretary do you do you think
this will it was accessible to
do increase the number of waste
of families
should representative chat field
the media by was running from
january to april it has
increased the number of
inquiries by a significant
number on we are looking right
now with new money in july two
contracts some of those services
out so it would be from lead to
license to have an entity that
will be able to license as fast
your families do the home study
and really process those leads
that are coming in for the
department and have our staff
really focusing on supporting
the foster families that we have
but yes I believe that the media
buys that we did have been
successful I believe that the
events that we have done in the
first half of the year did not
yield the number of foster
families that
were equal to the time and
resources that were put into
those events which is why we've
shipped it and really focused on
the media campaign to try to
drive them to our website and
then use those clicks and those
hits to really go and and look
at those plus your families but
you believe that's been why
would we farm it out to someone
outside the agency to bring in
foster families to the agency
that i'm sure representative
chaptered it wouldn't be to
bring them and we would still do
that recruitment peace we would
do the media we would do all the
advertising in the recruitment
but once a foster family
indicates that they are
interested in becoming a foster
family then we're looking to
work with an institute we do
that right now in albuquerque
with all face.
And they take that once there's
been identified family that is
interested in that all face then
takes them worse with that
family does the home studies and
get them all the way through to
license which then we licensed
down and then we placed
individuals with them
so many more questions
secretary what are you doing to
increase behavioral health
services to the kids
madam share representative chop
filled um some of the funding
that we used through the growth
funding was appropriate to the
university of new mexico to do a
gap analysis to determine where
we have behavioral health
deserts for children there was a
study done that was done for
adult behavioral health services
it did not include children
services
so we contracted with unm
speaking unit to do that study
which is due to us the end of
june but the growth of
behavioral health services is
something that we're working in
collaboration with a health care
authority and the mco to grow
out the services so
she waiting doesn't ourselves we
don't bring in the providers
that is typically the mco who
contracts with them who brings
it a new providers a were
working closely with them we've
had several meetings with the
provider and you and them at the
table to really determine you
know how can we solicit out a
state providers or the instinct
providers some of that was done
through the twenty million
allocation that was done you're
before last
to be able to
increase providers in new mexico
so
many traffic think that takes me
ready in my last question why
did this come from the legislat
why did seoxy way of the choose
to spend the twenty million
intended for start up costs for
evidence based behavior.
Health programs that would be
able for federal reimbursement
on experiences the conflict with
the appropriation language
madam chair representative chat
filled
so we have brought in some
providers especially in our wrap
around services that come in we
use some of the funding that was
appropriate I don't believe it
was just twenty million we used
funding to bring in new
providers and then they were
able to shift off of that
funding and be able to build
medicaid for that so there's
been some growth there I can get
you those entities specifically
with respect to the twenty
million when that language was
first appropriate for twenty
million the language or the
burbage of that was not as
restrictive as when it got
really heated so when the
initial twenty million dollars
allocation was made and I
believe twenty three I it was
available in twenty three
that was when we started the
discussion with am I kids to be
able to end office days and in
looking at that what it looks
like for that appropriation we
were really focusing at that
point on the development and
implementation of a community
specific program for you so we
wanted to be able to have an
entity that would not continue
to have kids in the office that
could provide them services in
house that would help with some
of the behavioral health needs
or some of the trauma is that
they were exposed to we're
dealing with so that we could
make sure that we could regulate
those behaviors in that
environment and then the hope is
to then move them to a foster
family outside of emi or hope
house and we believe that the
initial language allowed for us
to do that and that was what we
had planned to do.
Then the language got reality
that during the next legislative
session and it was
more narrow that really required
it to be for new behavioral
health services and I believe
that we did you expansion
services of that twenty million
there were about fourteen
providers that received some of
that funding to either expand
services there were a few new
providers that were coming into
the state to provide behavioral
health services and we provided
them some start up costs
representative I would like to
ask rachel if you have access to
the appropriations language if
you could share that with
members please
matter the chair so the
secretary is correct there were
some original language and then
it was re off the rise the
original language was
appropriate in the ga of twenty
twenty two it appropriated
twenty million dollars to the
human that human services
department and a read the
appropriation language and leave
out the vetoes the words
evidence based on so without
with the vetoes the language red
to develop providers including
start up costs to implement
behavioral health services and
community child welfare services
that would be eligible for
medicaid or federal title forty
of the social security act human
services department shall work
with the children and families
department to develop children's
behavioral health and community
childhood for services that are
eligible for medicaid funding or
federal title for the social
security act families first
reimbursement what happened in
that first year and twenty
twenty two so you'll know that
the appropriation language
originally gave the money to the
human service department at
twenty million further the
purpose I just described and
noted they should work with with
you right back then
then human services department
sort of said well a lot of cy d
to take a lead on the planning
and so that was that.
First round and when we saw very
little activity then in twenty
twenty four
the secretary is correct the
Enter the children and families
department to provide grants to
behavior help providers for
start up costs for new evidence
based children's but gave a
health services eligible for
medicaid billing or federal
title
not we know that happened and
can even in the states financial
system ht sort of transferred
the money over to see why fd
there's about three million and
spending that occurred at the
health care authority but about
seventeen million with
transferred over to c ID the
secretary of scratch they did
issue an r p last year I believe
it was for a roughly five
million dollars for start up
costs where behavioral health
services the rest of the
spending promotion can tell in
our seats financial systems or
for things that maybe while
intention but are not eligible
for medicaid so some direct
services were covered through
this appropriation we saw the
agency used some of this funding
for family restaurants centers
again not about they're just not
he run health services eligible
for medicator title for each and
then this is the part of my name
it agency has used find the
group
about three million of that I
will know that we have pointed
this out a few times over the
last year the group homes are
explicitly ineligible for
To reduce the use of congregate
cater and so the federal
government has stopped
reimbursing her congregant care
either through medicaid or title
for each and so the department
used this part of money to pay
for those group homes because
they are not eligible for
federal finding so there is a
little bit of iteration when it
comes to this appropriation
so many
objective is that correct
did you use this money to pay
for that
that insurer representative chat
filled some of that is great we
did use funding in that first
year one point five million
dollars for my kids
we did not use it after that
first allocation
we did use some of that money to
fund the resource center for
charlie's county costs but they
do provide behavioral health
services there we did all soon
build out typicality wrap around
programs transitioning to
medicaid funding through desert
view
I mean there's a list of that we
expanded high fidelity wrap
services and some motor counties
so I think there was refunded
the gallop community health to
create new piece of outpatient
programming including place
therapy so I believe that there
was expansion of services that
relate to behavioral health I
think that initially and I think
there are still conversation
about whether or not in my kids
was an allowable expense we did
not use this funding after that
initial we did not fund hope
house out of this that was the
second one that we opened in
albert cooking but I do have a
list of those if it would be
helpful for you to see what we
use the twenty million four
specifically
I would love that must
and
so what i'm hearing is it.
All but one point three million
was better after reauthorization
is that true.
Madam chair representative chat
build I believe it was one point
three million
healthcare authority and a small
amount from cfd and the rest I
think it was seventeen point
four that was reauthorized all
that
so manager represented it the
language reatherates the entire
twenty million it didn't kind of
back out the seventeen the
reauthorization did the split
ten million to the health care
authority ten million to see why
at the health care thirty and
transferred most of their
portion over to see my fd
medicare the entire twenty
million came under the
requirements to the authorized
reathorized money
venture representative of chat
build as you see the entire
twenty million was reother rise
but some of that had already
been spent type of lead there
was about seventeen million that
had not been spent prior to the
authorization
so I would love that yes then I
would also
love to just see a pay scale of
the agency including the
contractors
thank you manager.
Thank you representative next
we're gonna go to
sorry senator
all right thank you and chair
and thank you secretary and all
the presenters again thanks for
answering all my questions
earlier at quite a few for you
and it was again i'll say it
again I was happy to work with
your team this year to sponsor
your your package i'm happy to
help next year okay but instead
of going through questions man
the charm is going to make mine
as statements that I would like
the department to consider to
bring maybe the next time you're
before this at this committee
please
first off
and it goes along the lines of
what representative chat that
was sort of with the direction
he was going in I I would really
like to see ratios for each of
the key roles within see why and
i'm not quite sure if this is
you or the seller see here were
others to come to state it comes
together but you know a case
workers you have x number of
kids under case worker care how
many case workers then you give
us a ratio and then we measure
that over time to see what
direction you go in because it's
it's one thing to tell us that
you know you've hired two
hundred additional workers to be
a part of this team but but what
direction are we really going in
in terms of and and I like those
madam chair to be measured on
and they are still standards if
that's an acceptable thing to
kind of bounce them up against
in two thousand and fourteen I
requested the previous
administration about twenty
seven data points that it would
have sent it drive it more and I
think we wonder getting fourteen
or sixteen of the data points
delivered to the legislature and
and there were eight things that
we just but we didn't know we
didn't know because they
couldn't pull the data together
one of the things that came out
of that was a significantly
overage in terms of
children to to case worker and
it was about I don't know six or
eight children hired then a sw
standards some of the incident
run gone with that I really
would like to see top to bottom
on the roles that affect
directly with children what
ratios are they and then let's
look at that need to quarterly
to see over time what direction
would go in the other one is and
again this is also along the
lines of what reps and a chapter
talked about.
A little bit and we've mentioned
it several times interviewed
before us I really do also want
to see a market analysis of each
of the roles and and what is
what are other roles in the
community that do the similar
type of work and where we as a
state government in terms of you
know where are we able to are we
just a training ground to
prepare somebody to get into the
field and then go off somewhere
else and get a significantly
higher rate of pay so maybe that
data is is something that
already exists somewhere but
let's have it as a part of this
discussion so we're looking at
the same thing all at one time
and then earlier a camera broke
which one of my colleagues up
here ask the question what what
legislation what legislation
didn't get accomplished this
year and i'll just mention of
all this we got a lot done this
year but there's so much so much
more work to do with their three
four significant ones it didn't
that I hope land in your in your
legislative package for twenty
six which i'm more than happy to
help with that but again one of
them I said it was penalties for
the use of a CYFD protected
services worker I think that's
very important that we we get
our hands around that because
this is difficult work to begin
with my one of my sons works in
this field directly and he's
been the subject of a lot of
danger for himself because of
the time worth any does and I
think that that that's
unfortunate now the one is the
foster parent and guardian tax
credit made it all the way but
then we didn't quite get that
across the finished line I want
to make sure that we get that
done because if we're paying
that the worker that the foster
family six hundred dollars or
eight hundred dollars whatever
it is it would be so much more
meaningful they don't have to
pay tax on that so it's all
let's make sure we get that
another one is the safe happen
for infants boy that was so just
a complete nightmare that when
you might remember that hearing
that in secretary that we both
walked out of the steering at
each time at what the act is
happened that we're going to hit
on collision there and then the
last one is just something that
really I tried to get done
several years now
we passed the frustrating
connections built eighteen to
twenty one year old support but
we still have the kids that are
waiting clarified stuff out of
it excuse me it's it's an
executive order right now but I
want to clarify it.
Which is
the kids where the cases are in
the judiciated of everything
faster than another state
they're not eligible for
fostering connections so I want
to make sure that we've
attempted this a couple of times
all to make sure we get better
so those are the four items made
in truth that i'd be very brief
somebody want to keep woman but
the ratios over time on terms of
uhm number of professionals to
number children and and the
market analysis and then those
four pieces of legislation and I
see our early education crew up
there can be the weight here I
want to make sure we keep money
thank you
thank you senator we're gonna go
next to senator true hero and
then representative
thank you madame chair i'll try
to be brief to
manager secretary I mentioned to
the health care thirty secretary
earlier today that there's
eleven states that have
eliminated the national social
work exam and we have a very
dismal rate of passing and I
believe that we're losing
anywhere from
forty seven out of the hundred
two twenty five out of hundred
at the national level I would
like to see on the governor's
call legislation to eliminate
that exam for the actually
social work I hope that you
would be a willing to support
that to increase other states
have seen III said new hampshire
to the secretary went back and
corrected it later it's actually
road island in this two years
ago and they saw hundred and
sixty four percent increase in
social workers in their state so
i'm hoping that we can do that
of the
looking at the coffee work
forced and keep myself on track
here the fifty four employees
that are currently attending the
new employee training how many
have how many of participated in
that and is it a requirement of
employment
program.
So sorry I keep turning this off
a mediterranean senator to yes
any employee working in
protective services is required
to participate in that training
okay thank you madame chair
member secretary and the manager
secretary what about the ninety
one employees who have completed
the inspired pilot is that a
condition of employment
share centers you heal that is
not that is a pilot program that
we started up with highlands
university they received a grant
from the federal government and
so this was a voluntary for
employees to participate in that
training we really tried to
target those that had some
experience with CYFD that were
not necessarily social workers
to gauge whether this program
could grow into a
child welfare certification
program if somebody is not a
social worker that then gives
them more on skills and better
ability to deal with the
challenges of the job thank you
madame chair secretary so what
has been the outcome of that and
successful madam share senator
which we just finished with the
last coverage about a week ago
and so there's an evaluation
process going on now we want to
look back at those that took it
we also want to look at
retention rates to see if people
that took it are they still with
the department and how has that
really affected their belief to
do their job and given them
better schools to do that thank
you manager secretary look
forward to seeing that
information and then the last
question you mentioned that you
have given ten percent increase
of salary is is that going to
become permanent and and is
there funding to make that
happen
better share set or two kill and
so we gave a ten percent
increase to licensed social
workers within cyfd on the
funding that we have.
For next year through grow
funding is very specific to
license master level social
workers with protective services
and so we're looking at that
funding to determine how we
continue that for right now
we've removed it as of july
first i'm and then we're looking
how we can more naturally
support those master level
social workers with in
protective services without
causing other master level
social workers in other areas of
the department
to
I don't want it to be you have
the opposite of fact on some of
our workers madam chair
secretary actually heard from
department of health master
social workers who felt
concerned that they weren't
getting the same increase in
that they were losing employees
so I know that can have a
negative impact so did I hear
you right then that the l s w
are going to lose their ten
percent increase on july one
chair to heal yes
manager secretary don't you
think they're going to leave
him to heal I am very concerned
about that yes
madam chair secretary there's no
way to find the money to
chair center to help
and I think we're gonna talk
about this later you know we
continue to work in a deficit in
protective services and so
giving a ten percent increase
you know for individuals I think
is concerning when we continue
to be at that deficit and I
really have to wait against the
entire agency and as I said the
language that we happen is very
very specific madam chair
secretary last question how many
people is that
madam chairs you hear I don't
remember the exact number of
people but I wouldn't get that
information to you thank you.
Thank you senator representative
charges and i'm chair i'm sorry
my bad
matter secretary I just wanted
to say congratulations on an
eighty one percent graduation
rate for years youngsters who
are in the juvenile just a
system that's a big increase and
I I just want to shout out for
them to send it a child thank
you very much I have a whole
presentation on juvenile justice
but in the light of time I don't
want to do that but thanks for
recognizing that
representative tables and then
representative doubt thank you
madame chair I just wanted to
follow up on one of the
questions that senator to you
just asked and that was with
regard to the social workers who
receiving that increase but are
going to lose july first I think
somewhere in your report it says
it's seventeen there's a total
number of seventeen social
workers that are receiving that
madam chair representative
chavis
I was given a number one hundred
and thirty six are currently
receiving that additional ten
percent paper
so are those mostly those are
statewide
history of county
better representative I was the
other state white i'm sorry I
met stick government okay
madame chair secretary are those
all and investigations are any
of them and purposely planning
madam chair representative chab
is those are those hundred and
thirty six or throughout the
department so include some of
our master level social workers
in behavior health who work with
families and and our other are
pretective services workers it
includes master level
license social workers in our
family services who work with
families and so it is across the
agency
i'm and that's the concert is
that the language that we have
for next year is very specific
to just protective service.
Manager secretary of protective
services in terms of
investigations permanently
planning
those with the only two
you're saying
everybody in protect disturbs so
it could be a supervisor
okay so I I think i'm gonna make
a room request to get a
breakdown on that.
I'm sorry I was having a
conversation with the question
also
on your work force
presentation and you've got that
the
see where to two hundred and
forty new employees since
january first
do you have a breakdown of how
many year investigations are
promising planning and how many
years
still here working for the
department
better reps which have as I
don't have the breakdown between
those areas but I would happy to
get that to you I will get your
breakdown of the new employees
and where they weren't okay
I am told of chairs secretary
that brittle county there is a
forty percent they can see rate
improvising planning
that it was seventeen workers to
cover eight hundred kids and
custody
there are
I believe seventeen supervisor
positions not twelve several
rights of positions and fiber
actually filled so what's the
plan to deal with that
representative chapters yes you
county is one of the ones where
we have seen significant
turnover we also have in berlio
county areas where we do have
you know some individuals who
are out on administrative leave
which then just increases that
number of chases that have to be
redistributed as a mentioned
earlier we did a call for
teachers to come and help us not
that they can go out and do that
every day work but they can
alleviate some of the paperwork
we're calling collaterals work
transporting kids to
appointments to free up some of
those workers that have those
enormous case loads we've also
contracted with on text systems
on the war responsible for
bringing in about a thousand
workers to health care authority
when they did the medicaid on
winding.
And so we're bringing some of
those contractors in again to
help service cheese aids to work
with the workers so that they
can help with chase notes and
anything that we can do totally
being some of the the work that
they're doing to freed them up
for cases we've also done job
fairs we participated recently
when job core was considering
closing to see if any of those
workers could be recruited to
help but see way of deal with
their experience and expertise
and so we're just continuing the
recruiting efforts but for right
now we have some teachers on
board we have the assistance of
texas terms on and we are
utilizing surrounding counties
to see if they have the ability
to help with some of that case
though cause we have seen signa.
Manager secretary have you
thought about pulling an actual
social workers from other parts
of
the state in terms of government
or their other state departments
have you thought about maybe
doing a call for social workers
who are retired I mean that the
institute mentioned here fine I
mean but teachers can't go out
and make an assessment goal I
mean teachers don't have that
kind of skill level and I think
that one of the things that were
really lacking here is a focus
on hiring
licensed social workers be there
at the bsw level or the msw
level so what's the plan for
that
rental crisis madam chair
representative chavis I agree
with you in bertaleo county well
in a lot of areas but
specifically and berlin county
of one of the things we are
looking at is a contractor who
does provide medical health
providers and has social workers
and to see if they can bring
some in we have done a call out
for retired social workers we
looked at lists of people who
left the way of death we've had
people calling to see if they
would be interested in coming
back we know what the
legislative request that we had
this last year was to allow
social workers to return to work
and still be able to draw down
on their pre we were hopeful
that even if that was just for a
few years in its son said it
would have an effect to allow us
some time to bring them back
from retirement with that
disrupting their pre of while we
build that work force but we run
successful and that's probably
one that we will be re
addressing this next legislative
session
I would you know welcome the
opportunity if you have other
ideas on how we can be created
also workers to set up some time
independently for us to just
have that conversation of course
madam chair secretary what about
the santa fe office promised the
planning I understand that there
are very few workers in
promising planning there.
Madame share representative
challenge it's my understanding
that we've hired and some of the
workers in that are from that
office but I will get you
accurate numbers of staffing and
being there
thank you manager secretary I
want to talk about off states
I understand that
there may not be any more
children in the britio county
officers that correct madam
chair representative to him
choppers that is correct so
madam chair secretary is that
because all those kids are being
sent to the glasses county
instead of britain
madam chair representative of
chavens I don't believe that I
think there was one child that
was being housed in valencia
company overnight but mostly
it's because we have
you know utilize the contract
with emi and hope house
previously we had most of the
kids at emi we were still
housing females in albuquerque
and hope house opened up I
believe in april and so those
individuals have been placed
there on which alleviated
um us and bernaldio county but I
do believe that there was one
male who had been transferred to
valencia county for overnight
so madam chair
secretary so there are no
children from the county in
valencia county or in any other
county
madam chair representative chap
as I don't have the list of the
kids right now in volunteer
county i'm happy to get that
information or any other it's
they've gone to any other
account
but there are no so you're
saying that there are no kids
right now in britain account
yeah with regard to office
states.
Medicine representative have is
yes there's nobody staying in
our albuquerque.
How many kids are at am I
wife tickets
share representative of the
chavis I believe I write now is
housing seven meals
and hope house
representative chapters I
believe hope house has three.
Man chair secretary so then that
means that all of the kids who
were in the office separate
audio county have found a foster
complacement is that correct
madam show representative chavis
or have gone to a mir hope
my next question is about foster
care do you know how many foster
homes are overplaced
basically meaning that they are
beyond the number of children
that they're actually licensed
madam share representative of
chavers I do not
that information.
And in terms of the new foster
parents
what kind of support do they get
on an ongoing basis and what
workers responsible for writing
that support with them state why
workers
madam show representative chat
as that would be a replacement
workers they're responsible for
the family the foster parents
the permit he worker is a sign
to the child
and as they said early we've
done some contracting with new
mexico state university and all
face to improve the supports of
the foster families get on the
are doing more tradings they're
doing a bench for them where
there's just more supports
we will work that into the work
that are
pleased but workers do when we
increase the number of placement
workers that we have we've also
been working with boston
alliance who is new to new
mexico they had been operating
in arizona and there are support
for foster families on the new
to new mexico I believe we
announce their rival april early
april
and so we're working with them
on supports for foster families
as well
and then I wanted to go back to
change innovation madam chair
are those I think that you said
that they were working on are
looking at cases that might need
to be closed that i'm sure
representative chavis they're
working with our investigative
team they've set up a group of
supervisors that can help
investigators to review chasers
that they have some questions on
where they don't feel like
there's high risk to the child
but they still have questions
about you know the risk in the
safety and they don't we are
taking that from the staffing
within that office of that
supervisor so they.
Can really focus on the
investigation since those are
such high key floats of those
where they do feel like the
child is in danger and they need
to bring them into custody the
supervisors within the office
and that worker are working on
those cases and individual cases
where they just felt like maybe
they need support or the child
could be seen set back home with
certain um requirements this
team of supervisors is looking
closely at those case to help
make determinations
without it going to the
supervisor who's working
internally on other cases are
they making home visits are they
making home business madam chair
representative job as they are
not who is that would be the
worker that's a signed as the
investigator so the workers are
making the whole visit anyway
yes and then they're staffing
with this group so they're not
having to wait for their
supervisor to be available to
staff they can stop with this
group of bikes supervisors
that's on a rotating base is
that because there's not enough
supervisors manager
madam chair representative chat
as it is not because it's not
enough supervisors although
there may not be it is because
the number of cases assigned to
the workers because of the
shortage of staff is so high
that they would have to wait to
staff some of these cases were
they
don't have is high of a risk and
so they're able to staff them
and then be able to make a
determination on whether or not
they need further
work or if in fact they believe
that it can be closed and then
the case can be closed out so
how much is that contract for
and when does it end
up
made sure representative travels
the contract is goes through
part of next for school year I
don't have the exact contract
amount in front of me and I will
get that information to you
next for school year twenty
second continues on through part
of the year yes.
How many cases need to be looked
at
manager
madam chair representative
chapters it is new cases that
are coming in it's not back
cases that haven't been closed
it's as they get new cases
if it meets that criteria of you
know they don't believe the
child does that higher risk but
they do believe that something
needs to to happen for them to
remain safely then they're
stopping those cases with them.
So what about the backlog
manager manager representative
chavers the case workers have
been working on back long I
don't have the exact number of
what that is I note that it's
been reduced significantly of
this also will help with back
load because we're not keeping
cases open
and up you know if you're
interested in new york
background that I can understand
if you're interested in talking
with change innovation or some
of the employees are using it to
get a better understanding
because I know i'm not probably
describing it I would love
details as possible
I have a ten more questions
manager but I think that I will
submit them in a written format
and that everybody else have a
chance thank you so much for
representative I was about to
say we are for down and forty
and it is four o'clock
so
I know this is a really
important topic and so
you know I want to make sure
that everyone on the list gets
an opportunity to ask questions
maybe we can try to be a little
bit more concise
nzippy with our questions I
think folks are going to be
really happy with our next
presentation so I want to look
forward to that
and with that in mind we have
representative down then little
and then send it to buyers them
thank you
thank you madame chair and thank
you for the presentation before
you go representative chavers I
heard her ask having children
sleeping in offices this we're
not experts and see why
bureaucracy i'm gonna try to
refer to this how many children
are sleeping in receiving
centers.
Madame share representative down
I believe that we have a love
kids is that eleven kids.
Art any children sleeping
overnight anywhere else and all
thirty three counties yes
representative out yes I think
the question was specific to
burn a lio so i'm sorry I didn't
mean to mislead but yes we have
kids sleeping in other offices I
believe there are six counties
that have kids still in office
and thank you madame chair and
thank you secretary art those
children of all ages
madam chair representatives have
doubt yes those children could
be all ages we try to locate
kids under the age of twelve at
the receiving center and have
specific
space there for them and then
those over the eight of twelve
are we hope to bring them to
either hope house or am I
assuming that they have
availability and if not then
they do remain in the office
thank you thank you mature and
thank you secretary and that's
why
we're seeing a minor on minor
sexual months last station in
these offices that when children
are in custody and these
officers
where sixteen year old less a
fourteen year old or fourteen
year old list five year old
representative that could be a
concern within the office state
we try to keep it sufficiently
stopped so that we have
sufficient staff there to
monitor that matter that i'm
chair and secretary these
children who are in these homes
thing I don't know summer
receiving center
and officers throughout the
state are they hard to place
medical chair representative
down and yes there have been
some issues with placement a lot
of disruptions or inability to
get them placed initially and
manager and secretary the reason
i'm asking this is because the
data the four year old that was
reported last week are them
sorry that wandered away
they didn't know they wandered
away and the staff were dealing
with a different incident with
teenagers and so.
The four year old that's what
this is what the aps officers
reported that when they arrived
at the receiving center or this
place where children of very
diversations were they were
expecting the police on a
different incident and somehow
this non verbal four year old
who appeared to be artistic had
wandered out of the facility and
was found by a citizen you know
someone in the streets
this and this is about work
forces about turnover what
training are you providing to
these employees that are dealing
with a non verbal four year old
and aggressive teams who are in
fight mode I don't know how long
they've been in the system and
how they ended up there but what
sort of specialized training are
these staff receiving
manager representative down so
there's first one to shouldn't
be teenagers at the receiving
center because that's only up to
each fault we have recently
changed the remark of chair and
secretary should there be a four
year old where those teenagers
were I don't okay all right so
so the four year old shouldn't
have been with the teenagers in
the teenager should about the
four year old.
That is correct and I don't know
that I I have not heard that
they're returning but so let me
just in response to that what we
have done is we will and put in
like you know balls are alarmed
on the doors we can't walk those
doors or barricade them because
of fire safety but we have alarm
on a door so that if somebody
runs and we do sometimes have
runners even though the young
gauge that it staff is
immediately alerted and they
should be in the same road with
those which increase the number
of staff or were recruiting to
increase the number of staff I
won't say we've increased it got
because we have had some
turnover there quite a bit on
and we have changed the
requirements for those positions
so previously they were lower
level case positions that were
in the receiving center we
re done those and have higher
requirements for the staff that
were bringing in to care with
those children's with more
severe knees
managers actually so you're up
to seven percent of the staff
having a social work
are those the staff they're at
their earlier are these admin
stuff right well previously they
were key seeds or
what's in the tide appliance
service agents so those were the
level of that that we're working
in the receiving center on the
receiving center initially is
not for a long term stays it's
work it's come when they first
come into the processing usually
the common and they're out of
the receiving center within
less than twenty four hours of
all the process but there are
some harder to place under the
eight of twelve who have read
there for a longer period of
time and so we want to ensure
that we're increasing the level
of our stop to be able to
better deal with some of the
traumas or experience of those
kids are having that manshere
and secretary I just
either you don't know what's
going on at the centers.
Or else
you're being faking your answers
to not quite answered the
question i'm sorry I can okay
you do have teenagers before
your old
you do you do have children
leaving centers they're walking
away okay
a non verbal assisting four year
old child was left unattended
and no one knew they were gone
that those workers
what are the specific trainings
when the ones I know for non
verbal ecd would require would
be like I mean there's lots
there's lots of name some
curriculums name some trainings
that are being provided for
these workers who are dealing
with children with the most the
hardest place with probably the
most security better difficult
to place and has been intro
little staff now they're not
injury little staff anymore
what types of trainings do they
have
to represent out those employees
act the receiving center goes
through all of the new employee
training so they received the
same training and an
investigator or permits you work
for a place that worked or
received they don't go through
specific training that would be
quieter like that our behavioral
health stop go through they are
not behavioural help I can get
the names of the specific
training that they're provided
but we are requiring
we read to all those positions
about two weeks ago and posted
them that they have a higher
level hopefully maybe work
really hoping to target maybe
teachers are retired teachers
who have experience in working
with children with watches or
different behaviors that was
really what we were looking
towards when we reach for those
positions and reposted them
thank you thank you very much
and thank you secretary I would
think that it was very very
least like a conscious
disapplied or adaptive
environment
you know so it's I mean
that was training all right
thank you
so
this four year old non verbal
artistic child let's say someone
called an experience.
Faster home or buster treatment
home and they said I will take
this child but you're going to
have to pay me the higher rate
because i'm looking at their
needs the time it's going to
take the care that they require
where they're at academically
they probably have an ip and
they said I would like that
higher rate would it be given to
them this is a trusted
experienced truman for
foster resource parent and that
you're trying to place and
somewhere trusted would they get
that we have to ask where they
automatically get it for not for
four year old number blatistic
child better should represent
doubt that assessment would be
done when that child comes in to
if they require all of these
other things they would be they
would be placed at a different
level so we have different
levels of care for kids and it's
based on medical need or
appointment need so if they're
higher level they would fall
into a higher level of that omen
it's not just automatically
about faster parent calls and
like being there a higher need
it's based on the assessment and
then absolutely if they're
assessed at a level to they
would get a higher payment
madam chair baller is is is that
is it the case that when they
faster parent is asked to take a
child who is high needs who's
had like this four year old nine
verbal attitude tile and they
said I will but it's going to
take a higher reimbursement rate
that that i've heard that even
when they asked for it they're
told now
it's not an automatic thing
manager representative out it
does depend on the level of the
the level of care assessment
that is done that determines the
rate p now we can
re assess the assessment and
determine if that child then
meets another higher level and
then they would get that rate
manager and this is referred to
I mean i'm i'm looking at this
because in your document you're
saying you're bringing in around
fifty fifty five foster parents
month but you're losing.
Forty five faster parents a
month that's that's
good and we're looking at the
turnover rate that's a in the
height thirty percent higher so
I think it's safe to say the
training needs to change
i've also think the mandatory
over time shows
that we need more staff
obviously and so many over time
probably contributes to that
I know faster parents that are
experienced that have been in
the system that you know when
you trust being asked to take a
sixteen year old that already if
they're already trouble they've
been in the system for a while
they have an ip they have
secondary things who say yes I
will but i'm going to need more
funding
are not doing that when they ask
and it really
I don't know how many times I
want to hear the word we hired a
contractor we had a contractor
because there is a point I was
out for two years but there was
going to be a contract go out to
support foster families and I
would so it's discounted called
by I was so excited that these
first repairers because I knew
that they were supporting each
other that had they had
organically put out a calculator
of their own and people could
college other and support each
other in this faster system this
is like we believe your support
we believe in community support
workers so faster parents
supporting foster parents and
they were watching for that rfp
and it never came out because a
contract was issued to a
provider I mean this was four
years ago this isn't under you
secretary but i'm just saying
and now we're hearing that a
contract went out and I I like
all these I protect all the work
to people are doing but a
contract right now and it sounds
like a foster parent can choose
to voluntarily go to a training
that's being offered or
voluntarily go to its support
event delivered thirty three
counties they're carrying for
medically practical children
they're taking in four year old
non verbal attached artistic
children with secondary factors
and they're going to drive to
albuquerque to voluntarily go to
a.
They just need to get paid what
it cost to care for the child
and I mean I I don't I on these
exit interviews are exit
interviews always given are they
voluntary is there a place on
these exit interviews for a
nearative response or is it just
these categories that we see
here as of the year you know
they break up the spring or
something
manager represented outcome it
exit interviews are not always
done in the art
but there is place at the end
for a narrative
and representative one of the
things that I think the
subcommittee could request of
staff is to do a little bit
about deep dive into
the reimbursement rates and and
that process
you know so thank you think
about her think secretary yeah
and i'd like to see the
narrative answers
I just I see on the budget that
instead of putting funding into
direct services we're asking for
increase the liability insurance
I know and other sections of the
budget
nod in the cfd budget we're
going to be looking at the
payouts on last suits
I know that in some cases in
many cases it's a whistle lower
boring employee leaves that we
find this out
I just hope that this ninety
million dollar software system
is going to capture some of the
stuff in a systematic effective
way so that we won't be back
here next year and it's going to
get blamed on somebody where
something felt through the
cracks and another child is left
unattended in the other title
diets and it's going to be a
human error and that person
we're gonna find out got a
promotion thank you thank you
representative
alright representative little
and then senator biason and then
will be almost a thank you thank
you chair
earlier today in relation to
building
work force
your indicated madame secretary
on page three of the way after
work force.
That and and forgive me had to
stop away a moment and if I
missed this question being asked
before I appreciated the quick
answer but
uh please fare with me I hope
i'm not repeating one that's
been asked before so on
on page three um
it's you after you currently has
the children
imposed with the degree and so
forth so what is the target what
do you have a target as
identified for the number of
social workers that are needed
share representative little we
always prioritise degrees of
social work in all of the
positions that we are hiring I
mean that is the old we would
love to have more social workers
at cifg but there's not as
specific target to save it for
filling this position and we
don't have a social worker who's
applying that we would then re
post it if we have a qualified
candidate we would go ahead and
fill it with that person
entering them up for that but
the more social workers that we
can get we would prioritize
those in the department
okay thank you madam chair
I think I can chuck with you
outline about what i'm
interested in is there's at some
point there are positions that
don't require a social work
degree so
that you could talk about him I
mean i'm hearing you want it
that there's a total number
you'd like to have a mother to
social workers but i'm
interested in what are those
positions how many positions are
there that you would like
to sort of masters and social
work
i'm madam chair representative
little it would be our positions
that we have in our permanent so
pillar so working on a regular
basis with the children that we
would like to have social
workers in those positions on
both the positions that we have
for investigators that are going
out into the house.
I'm and working with families
thank you thank you madame chair
referred into a conversation or
presentation this morning that
we had that was uh in which the
the leadership from cnm unm t
and u presented today
and provided some information on
the types of
work they're doing that's being
done with communities in
different areas to help in this
case it was every day economic
development getting people into
the word force in in
in the utilizing uh
the programs that they have
available in the colleges in
universities and working with
these am working with these
communities and if I could call
correctly madam share what I was
to identify working with them to
identify potential pipelines by
which
students entering this program
broke programs may already be
coming in with some skills and
want to enhance him or looking
to start up completely and
they're recruiting them each of
these three believe each of
these three
entities.
Discussed for example in
multiple turking about the
numbers of social workers that
they were turning out
in you had forty three students
that entered the program
for a bachelors and there were
forty that finished the report
went onto indicate that twenty
one had found employment
in the masters level there were
sixteen
nine of them were finishing the
finishing the program and for
word and effect
completed the program and that
was the case with CNN and with
unempty house so my question is
and we were curious that the
time because we saw the
potential for creating these
pipelines and these working
relationships with them so my
question is what programs do you
have what relationships do you
see where we have with these
colleges and universities in a
mexico I I heard and i'm very
aware of las vegas I do but I am
aware of that one but that is
not the only
i'm learning more that there are
more of these
institutes of higher learning
that can and are willing and
want to be able to contribute to
fill these the needs so that's
where my question is coming from
that matter and i'd appreciate a
you're in lightning on those
relationships thank you course
but i'm sure representative
little so we have relationships
with the schools of so short
within this day all of those are
offered or stipend program but
i'm curious to say you and m t s
was upwards of graduating social
workers
maybe I misunderstood maybe mean
I understand again travel
would exactly the presentation
was this morning in referring to
my notes.
So I do remember that they were
talking about nursing and
medical program so perhaps i'm
getting that confused with the
others
but there were also discussing
this institutions for also
discussing madame chared the
statements and internships was
the other one that cut my
attention so yes representative
little we use both the stipends
and the interest internships at
arm to recruit social workers
and so on you know I will reach
out and see if both can emin you
and now mark doing something
with social work i'd be
interested in would like to move
forward with
thank you so much
secretary being correct and
reflecting the other two pieces
but that would be
you answered my question thank
you very much that's my question
thank you representative senator
device please
secretary what is summer house
madam chair constantly buyers in
summer house is one of the
houses that house that
you can stay out if they don't
have a placement
so many insurance congregate
care home like the two that you
mentioned in bernalio
summer house is not congregate
care
it's a shelter
and so you can elect to not be
in
a congregate car studying and
sometimes they elect to go to
summer house okay and and what
about family shelter
madam chairs and device and
family shelter is not when i'm
familiar with
okay interesting manager so how
many children are at summer
house or
insurance and I need to buy a
citi don't have those numbers
but I look at them and get back
to you so many i'm sure this
would just be one of my major
concerns once again and we've
heard mult.
All times your staff giving you
answers you think you're not
aware of something not
understanding charts there
should be I think major dials on
your dashboard at this point in
time and understanding that any
child in congregate care is in a
facility that the federal
government has made very clear
they will not reimburse for that
the standards of care in in a
congregate care facility are not
up to current standards again
looking at evidence based
programs and outcomes and
congregate care now we're
talking about four different
shelters you failed to mention
that children are staying in
receiving centers I consider
that like an office it's not a
faster family are children are
traumatized
they're traumatized repeatedly
in our car
and they're traumatised because
they are not placed in
appropriate homes
just shaden garcia comes to mind
traumatised and madame share
it's it's story after story this
is kind of like my personal
least favorite movie and life
which is ground hockey where the
same thing happens over and over
and over again and there's never
a result
and I I don't mean to do mean it
by giving that analogy it's just
frustrating very frustrating and
I don't know who the contractors
are that are helping you with
different triggers and red flags
and and protocols but I think it
it deserves a strong discussion
of what are the dials so
additionally i'd like to ask
what is the procall when there's
a major incident what what
happens in your agency let's say
the four year old autistic.
Child non verbal wondering on
the road what is the protocol
immediately that is flagged in
your agency today
madam chose a little to buy some
when there's a critical incident
there's a critical incident
review that takes place with
people reviewing that case i'm
determining if there was
anything that was
anyone doing or anything that
needs to change policy your
procedure any display action is
then referred to our heart
apartment for reviewing and
action in the critical review is
sent up to my for me from my
review
so managed share of secretary
how long does it take for you to
get the information
madam chair center to bias and
it it just depends on the
incident and how long it takes
them to do an investigation it
could be anywhere from twenty
four hours to
forty eight hours for an initial
review and maybe suddenly two
hours for follow up.
I have I am trying to keep my
question short madam chair and
i'm trying to just know i'm
really trained so let let's go
back then to
at least an hour or so ago we
spoke about faster care plus
i'm how many foster parents have
gone through that training of
madam chose device and to date
we've had five complete the
training
okay so five have gone through
the spots to care plus training
that that you louded about and
there was a quote that you are
currently building out the
program so when I hear that and
my mind it says that the program
actually doesn't exist and is
not implemented as that correct
medium share center to buy
instant a no it has been we
worked as I mentioned earlier
with oklahoma who runs a very
similar program of the two
individuals that set that
program up in areas in oklahoma
on contract with us to provide
implementation and so they
worked throughout to design the
program i'm now there on the
site for implementation so
pressly ridge is the contractor
who's doing that training so
they did one training of our
staff and then they did an
initial training of the five
foster families they're taking
that feedback and they will be
determining if there's any
changes that need to be made to
that program and now they're
coming out and doing a train the
trainer for our staff so our
stuff will be trained as
trainers in poster care plus as
well i'm and they will be doing
the next cohort of families next
month I believe okay and madam
share if a foster family has
their license revolt by your
agency what's the what's the
protocol it's the system for
them to get their license
reinstated or to get their
license again madam chester
device and there is an
opportunity for them to appeal
to the decision for replication.
And they would go through that
process or if it's revoked and
then leader and time they wanted
it to become a foster parent
again it would apply through
that process and go through the
licensing process again okay and
madam chair secretary that my
understanding is the family with
the ten month old i'm have their
license revoked that the husband
are a partner of of this woman
was now back in the house and he
has a history of violence and
domestic abuse and that baby was
placed in that home was that
something that you were aware of
better shows centered to buy as
that is still an ongoing police
investigation I don't for like
in public and something that I
can comment about i'm happy to
talk with my legal council and
determine what facts I can give
out and have a separate
conversation thank you I do
think that some of these
specific cases are really hard
to address in hearings like this
because there are issues with
ongoing stuff so just as a
reminder to to members that
it's probably better to keep
things
you know maybe a ten thousand
four level
thank you madam chair and it
never hurts to ask so
what percentage of the time is
your staff spending and meetings
madam chairs editor to buy us
and I don't have the actual
percentage of time but I can
tell you it is a high amount of
time okay and manager secretary
I i'm on the understanding that
your order has changed and you
now have I think three deputy
directors at least a coach
shares the follow
why all of a sudden is the
agency more top heavy when your
struggling with just entry level
case workers
madam sure device and actually
have two w secretaries these are
them.
I don't have a c f o I have an
ast director which is typical
and state government but I
haven't added a see a folk
position so i'm not sure i'd be
happy to share of the office of
the secretary or chart with you
and manage your has your agency
change the order
of metal insurance incentive to
buy a single yes so when we came
in we did a re organization and
the argumentational chart
shifted significantly at that
time
and let me make sure i've hit
most of these
yeah okay so i'm really actually
concerned madam chair secretary
that i'm not sure if I heard the
date but is it out of july one
that you have about two hundred
and seventy workers that will
see a ten percent decrease in
pay
madame chair center to buy a sin
yesterday will be a decrease for
those although i'm going to meet
with rachel two identify whether
or not i'm interpreting that
language correctly because if I
am not that i'm happy to keep
that in place but the grow
funding to that I understood was
very specific about how that
language that when it could be
used okay and manager secretary
depending on your conversation
with rachel I think all of us
here and today would be
interested to know if you intend
to ask the legislature for
emergency funding because we all
understand that this is very
important that you keep these
the south that you have and I
can't imagine going to work in
hearing that i'm getting a ten
percent decrease for a job
that's already really stressful
so would that be on your list of
things to consider madam chairs
in order to buy us an absolutely
thank you very much I appreciate
you answering some really tough
and pointed questions thank you
manager
than in case editor
just to go ahead and wrap up
this legislat
very complicated and in that
subject.
Couple of comments i'm not gonna
ask questions but I just want to
flag that
you know if it's the ten percent
rate is would certainly be
easier to fund if we collect it
all of the federal funds that
were available to us
and also that I think it's
important that and this goes
directly to some of the points
in the legislat
that it's really important that
we do things that are and apply
with proposals for things that
are federally approved and we
know we're going to get matches
for because
we just we need the money those
are evidence based programs that
the federal government has
agreed to and so personally I
just think that's critical and
then also making sure that we
are implementing these programs
with fidelity
so I just want to and with there
is some follow up both from the
staff and the agency I think in
getting documents and additional
information to
members this is not the only sub
committee meeting that will have
this interest so we will be able
to
spend time david into more
specific issues potentially with
the more narrow focus
rachel i'm gonna ask that I
think there's a document that
i'd like for you to pass out to
subcommittee members and i'd
like to come back to it at the
end of our sub committee meeting
tonight
so with that I think we can move
on to you are prepared
really promise i'll be really
put I just want to update you a
little bit on the federal funds
I know that's been a huge she
and so we did agree to go into a
look back for the eight quarters
that we were eligible to.
The only expense that we have
seen that we are eligible to
recruit three c that we didn't
ask for was overtime expenses
and so we've done a look back
runner third order look back
we've done two of which resulted
in about two point seven million
dollars that will be able to
draw back down we're looking at
the third quarter were
estimating maybe another million
dollars for that quarter so
we'll be able to bring that in
we're hoping very soon about
nearly four million dollars we
didn't identify any other
expenses that were eligible but
we did use the funding that you
gave we've entered into a
contract and I know somebody
said they didn't want to hear
any more about contracts at cyft
but we entered into a contract
with maximus to come in and
actually do a review of the
federal draw downs to determine
if in fact we're leaving money
on the table thank you very much
I appreciate that all right
I think that next we have our
program evaluation team
coming up
and so members
we are going to
move on to the progress report
on pre kindergarten quality that
we have sarah robinghouse are
program the valuator and will
have secretary or against you
both to provide us with this
progress report and then just as
reminder rachel i'm if you can
make sure subcommittee members
i'm get the document to review
so that are at the end of the
meeting we can come back to it
thank you.
And committee members if you
turn and your binder to tab j as
in juliet are you will find the
progress report.
Members of the committee go my
name is doctors and i'm a
program evaluator with the lfc
my colleague doctor ryan and
told them and I will be
presenting the committee with a
progress update on new mexico
state funded pre kindergarten
program and I know we're running
short on time so we'll try to
keep it snappy but before we
begin I would like to think
secretary lives with gregonsky
and the staff of the early
childhood education and care
department for their close
collaboration on this report as
well as the pre kind of garden
teachers administrators and
coaches who welcome up to us
into their classrooms and
contributed their insights to
this report
mr chair members of the
committee are sorry madam chair
if you'll turn with me now to
page one you'll find the
executive summary of this report
which outlines the major
fightings this update builds on
a twenty twenty lsc program
valuation which found the
participation in the mexico pre
k was associated with improves
student outcomes across numerous
social and academic outcomes
since that time the state has
significantly expanded access to
prekate for three and four year
olds and established a new state
agency to oversee early
childhood programming
we are very pleased to share
with you today the findings of
this progress report which
reaffirmed that pre k continues
to deliver strong academic
results especially for low
income students these results
have bounced back from an even
surpassed what lfc observed
prepandemic not only have
statewide beginning of your kind
of garden test scores recover
but pre kind of guard students
are getting a bigger boost and
ever
additionally thanks in part to
ec cd's investment and
invalidated system for class
measuring classroom quality.
We can show for the first time
that high quality new mexico pre
kindergarten classrooms produce
better outcomes for students
using these same tools we can
also better understand how
quality differs across free kind
of growth and classrooms and how
to potentially address those
variations the twenty twenty
evaluation found disparities and
the standards and outcomes
i've pre kindergarten programs
across the state and recommended
that easy easy to work to
standardized program
requirements holiday
measurements and data tracking
to date is easily has made
significant progress and
implementing many of the twenty
twenty reports recommendations
however challenges remain
especially when it comes to
collecting and using student
data equalizing teacher
qualifications encouraging the
use of evidence based teaching
tools and helping providers
leverage their current pre k
grant funding
madame chair members of the
committee if you'll turn with me
now to page three of your report
the background section provides
a brief history of new mexico's
precare program
launched in two thousand five
new mexico's kindergarten
program was designed to improve
kindergarten readiness and close
achievement gaps by expanding
access to high quality early
education since that time of c
has repeatedly found that
precape works and leads to
improve student outcomes in
twenty twenty lfc found the
participation in pre cannot
garden was associated with
higher scores on early literacy
and map assessments better
attendance and a higher
likelihood of exiting special
especial education services
left see researchers also use
launched tuna analysis to show
that pre kind of garden students
eventually graduated high school
at higher rates than they're
demographically similar peers
turning to page four.
And looking at chart to
your read that the expansion of
new mexico's pre kindergarten
program brings quality and
access challenges even as the
program continues to serve a
high need educate
me high new population when the
program first launch it targeted
students with one or more risk
factors today even though the
most recent cohort of pre kind
of gardeners was ten more than
ten times larger the first then
the first one two decades ago
new mexico pre case still serves
a population more likely to be
low income and english learners
compared to state why
demographic averages
on page six still seemed charged
three and four that under you
ccd programs have largely
shifted from half day to full
day and that slots for three
year olds have also grown
rapidly
rapid pre k expansion has
benefits but also rests we've
seen in other states
if you'll turn with me now to
page seven figure one shows that
the vast variety of programs
that can apply for new mexico
pretty cake grants in our state
you'll find pre kind of garden
classrooms operating at your
local public school with
nonprofit providers such as
daycares and child care centers
and recently within february
funded headstart programs
although is easily has
consistent standards for all
classrooms this means that
everything from a single
classroom operated out of the
license toll to the ninety nine
pre k classrooms across the
albuquerque public school
district used the same new
mexico pre k label
as shown on page eight and
turned five most students today
are enrolled either with small
or with a very large providers
on page nine to read the program
funding has nearly quint hubbled
since fiscal year twenty eight
team
that investment previously
focused on program expansion but
new mexico precate is now at a
cute moment in its growth.
If you'll turn to page ten chart
seven shows and romant versus
slot since fiscal year nineteen
even a few years ago if you look
at the left hand side of the
chart you'll see that some of
the new mexico's pre k programs
were pretty wildly over enrolled
in the most recent school year
enrollment has settled out
around eighty five percent
suggesting that the program
state why it is reaching scale
as supply catches up with demand
having made major strides and
state white access ecd is now
turning to the related problems
of quality and outcomes tracking
considered in this report I will
now hand things over to my
colleague doctor toleman to
introduce the first two major
findings
thank you droving madam chair
members of the committee a few
please follow with me on page
eleven I will discuss her first
finding the new mexican
continues to improve reading
proficiency in kindergarten
especially for low income
students as we have sweep
discussed one of the primary
goals of pre cases to build a
strong academic foundation for
students before entering the
capital system
as you'll recall when the mexico
pre kid watched nearly twenty
years ago the primary goal was
to serve children from low and
confirmations to help close
educational opportunity gaps
so how has pre key interstate
been doing if you will turn with
me over to h twelve I would like
to direct your attention to
charts each and nine
even in the immediate aftermath
of the pandemic on average all
free kindergarten students were
still more likely to score
proficient on its station
assessments at the beginning of
kindergarten compared to their
peers.
Which was particularly true
among lower income students who
qualified for free or reduced
price meals
given that we are particularly
concerned with the pandemics
effect on young children and
this was a period of wrapped
expansion for pre key in the
state we find the precare is
effectively boosting reading
levels in kindergarten
so precasing the presence to
provide students with a bump at
the beginning of kindergarten
but what is precades effect long
term over on page thirteen
but it's charts in highlights
these academic benefits are not
just short term gains utilizing
launched final data analysis we
found that the pre key bump last
longer for low income students
compared to their non for all
peers into keeping that the
program is helping the students
more for whom it was originally
decided
if you will now turn with me to
page fourteen
note for the purposes of this
evaluation we have used a
student scores on the beginning
of your ice station to measure
the effects of prepaid or
kindergarten readiness the state
however continues to operate
without a set of state weapons
parks for kindergarten readiness
which makes it difficult to
monitor progress comprehensive
comprehensively despite
recommendations from the
overseas twenty twenty pre k
evaluation report
over on page fifteen figures
three and figure for highlights
the various other assessments
implemented in pre k in
kindergarten that seems to
measure various domains in pre
kindergarten most of these
assessments the ec cds selected
emphasis social emotional growth
and executive function however
starting in ten assessments like
ice station are set up to
measure academic proficiency as
a result precade teachers may be
aiming for one set of gold swap
tender garden teachers are
measuring something entirely
different
however if you will turn it me
to page seventy
we find that these assessments
are silo.
And the states fragmented doubt
infrastructure continues to
hamper accountability the states
ability to leverage and learn
from tools like the new early
development instrument depends
on its ability to suggest just
analyzing use the status however
neither the early childhood
integrated data system or
nor the new mexico larger to no
data system is fully operational
not track individual students as
they progress from pre que
insicated twelve.
I will discuss why quality of
instruction of pre came batters
and then I like two weeks to
improve quality primarily
teacher training and evidence
based instructional tools
when else who last the value in
mexico's precase system and
early twenty twenty the early
childhood education care
department had only just been
established until that point
school based pre converted
programs for administered by the
public education department and
community based programs are
ever seen by the children used
in failed with department
that quite for kid structure
let's major differences of
program expectations out of
tracking and access to supports
since its creation ec has meant
significant progress and
standardizing practice practices
in a lining expectations across
provider types of meaningful
differences remain particularly
quality of instruction and in
the resources available to
support and monitor that quality
over i'm teach twenty one one of
the most important findings from
the chapters that quality
matters students have programs
with higher instructional
quality tends to score better on
kind regarding assessments this
finding reinforces what national
research is long show that
investing in quality precade
improves stood in outcomes so
how can we measure pre key
quality beginning in a sweet
twenty three ec city began using
the classical the classroom
assessment scoring system across
both school in community based
providers which was one of our
recommendations from our twenty
twenty evaluation
so how is the quality of precake
class from sin mexico if you
will turn with me over the page
twenty two
and look at chart fifteen
you'll see that on the average
on the mesco classrooms are
doing quite well and score high
and measures of emotional
support in classroom
organization however school
based pre k classrooms tend to
on average scored nearly a full
point harder and instructional
support.
Then their community provider
counterparts so why does quality
even structure the pre k
classroom matter
over on page twenty three chart
sixteen shows that instructional
support appears to be linked to
student outcomes for the first
time ls evaluation staff are
able to match class quality
scores with kindergarten ice
station data and found that
higher instructional support
scores are associated with
better kindergarten reading
outcomes
if you will turn with me to page
twenty four and look at chart
nineteen
it's worth emphasizing that the
overall the open student
proficiency between school based
in community providers is not
instrumentable you can see that
the students from school based
pre k programs were an average
more likely to score proficient
on istation and kind of burden
no loss significant there's
still a lot of overlap between
community and school this
providers in fact we calculated
that it would take just a
hundred and fifty more students
from community based providers
scoring proficient or nice
station to close that gap
completely
with targeted quality
improvements that goes well
within reach
so again what can we do to help
improve pre k quality over and
page twenty five i'll discuss
one of the first weeks we can
improve quality instructions in
the classroom which is teacher
preparation
as you can see in chart twenty
as the state is rapidly expanded
it's pretty kindergarten work
force differences and teacher
credentials have widened the
share of school based pre kid
teachers with the bachelors
degree is remaining stable while
the sharehold community
providers has declined
priority research has shown that
the batch lose level preparation
is correlated with improve stood
in outcomes
if you will turn with me to page
twenty six
chart twenty three highlights
for analysis which finds that
teachers with the ba are more
likely to remain in the
community provider work force
for four or more years offering
additional return on the state's
investment of professional
development and stability.
On the bottom of page twenty six
this makes the state's new
professional development
information system especially
important once fully implemented
the system will allow the
state's monitor the impact of
investments like wage
supplements and scholarship
programs in evaluate whether
incentives such as paid party
are achieving their intended
results
over on page twenty seven the
second way one can improve
quality of instruction precase
the use of the evidence based
talks
scorbies pre key programs are
more likely to use curriculum
aligned subject specific tools
that have demonstrated empart
and student outcomes for example
many school based precape
programs use the digital
learning tool called water for
over the space strong evidence
that it can improve early
literacy waterford is not
currently used by the community
providers
if you please turn with me over
the page thirty
regularly coaching also go hand
inherent
do you see a sedious is taking
important steps to expand job in
that approaching and provide
supports to both school
community based providers
however the structure in
intensity of coaching models
still different significantly
across settings as you can see
and table three
more over data tracking systems
for coaching remains
inconsistent limiting the
state's building ability to
lying practices between public
school and community providers
thank you all and I will now
then the presentation back over
to doctor robing for a next
finding
thank you doctor tomorrow
mr chair members of the
committee if you'll turn with me
now to page thirty one of the
report the final major finding
is technical assistance and
improved coordination can help
providers leverage funding new
mexico has made a generational
investment in early childhood
and the state currently writes
number four in the nation for
per child pre kindergarten
spending the national institute
for early education research or
nearer.
Found in twenty twenty four that
new mexico meets nine out of ten
of the institutes quality
benchmarks near estimated the
new mexico would need to spend
only twenty five million dollars
to meet that final benchmark as
you can observe on page thirty
two and chart twenty seven in
fiscal year twenty six new
mexico pre cable received fifty
five million dollars in
recurring revenue from the early
childhood education and care
fund or more than twice that
estimate that I just quoted from
near the challenge now is not
raising new revenue but ensuring
that existing funds are directed
for the strategies that will
yield the greatest return for
students
on page thirty three you'll read
the ecd should encourage best
practices to help community
providers navigate a complex
financial landscape what
budgeting looks like and how new
mexico pre k grants are spent
can look quite different across
provider types public school
programs in general tend to have
more financial wiggle room
stemming from larger economies
of scale and the ability to draw
on operational dollars
curricular funding in other
district resources and is
discussed further down on page
thirty three not all new mexico
prepaid grants for schools are
being fully spent
for a community providers by
contrast financial viability
depends on hitting the right
student enrollments and staffing
ratios and keeping operating
costs within the narrow band as
shown in the cost model on page
thirty five even with adequate
per child funding finding the
right balance can prove a
technical challenge especially
for smaller providers one third
of community based programs
operate only a single new mexico
pre kit classroom and an
additional third operate only to
precake classrooms
these smaller providers may
struggle with administrative
overhead facilities maintenance.
And grant management in ways
that larger programs do not to
address these challenges the
report points to several
strategies starting on page
thirty four and continuing on
page thirty six I won't
articulate all of them because
they know we're short untime but
one is encouraging greater
consolidation of grants and the
formation of shared services
online which can help small
providers pool resources share
staff and improve purchasing
power
the report also puttings to the
importance of uniform attendance
tracking and clarified
enrollment policies to ensure
that funding is going to the
programs where children show up
regularly and stay in rolled
continuing our page thirty six
you'll see and table eight that
new mexico ranks tenth in the
nation for average pre
kindergarten teacher pay and
achieve met worth celebrating
focusing on teacher pay and
retention has been a
recommendation of passed a
little reports and ecc has
created several programs
designed to encourage teachers
to pursue higher degrees and
remain with community providers
is easy to get skinny has also
implemented new indirect cost
policies that place reasonable
limits on administrative
overhead but continued attention
to this issue won't be important
to ensure that funding remains
focused on the classroom and
without going into it i'll call
your attention to the pact that
on page thirty seven the report
also addresses capital and
facilities funding and make
several suggestions for how we
might address that on the
community provider side and then
a final suggestion of the report
they would like to highlight
is the creation of a universal
application portal a centralized
system implemented by ecstasy
would make it easier for
families to navigate available
options reduce administrative
burden for providers and ensure
that children are placed in open
seats as a.
Efficiently as possible such a
portal would also support better
data collection funding
forecasting and equity and
program access state wide
this progress report can turn
tane several key recommendations
which can be found at the end of
each chapter we're just going to
highlight here a few of them and
closing the first that the
legislature should consider
creating a statutory definition
of kindergarten readiness based
on a future recommendation for
me ccd
and support of that
recommendation that eccd after
refreshing the state's early
learning guidelines which
they're working on now recommend
a definition of kindergarten
reading to the legislature for
consideration the report also
recommends that the agency
develop and present a plan to
lfc for the use of the increased
early childhood trust fund
distribution with focus on
quality improvements by december
twenty twenty five
and then re iterating a
recommendation from the twenty
twenty valuation this report
recommends that ecd use precame
garden and kindergarten
assessments to track students
short and long term success and
inform quality improvement and
support for educators and
administrators and finally the
report recommends the agency
used the new professional
development information system
that doctored home and mentioned
to track the effort to see of
the department's various
professional development
initiatives starting in the
upcoming school year
thank you so much for your
attention especially so late in
the day after a very long day
and we all now hand things off
to secretary
to deliver the agency response
thank you mister chair and
members of the committee it's
wonderful to be up here and one
of the big big thanks to sarah
and ryan and the team at the lfc
for their collaboration and the
support and coming ba.
Act together and seeing the
progress it's always great to
see progress and to see where
we've done well where we have
room for improvement we are a
continuous quality improvement
agency and so you know something
like this is really valuable to
us and we appreciate everything
that you've given us I do want
to introduce sandy to heal who's
our division director for early
care education and nutrition
hails here from towers so she's
in her home town and shannon
runk who is our deputy who
overseas preschool and preschool
special education now that we
have the six nineteen
coordination so they met for
many hours will it sarah and
ryan along with their team about
fifteen people on the precade
team what I wanted to just I
don't want to take a lot of time
to just want to show some
highlights and and they've
already highlighted a lot of the
great success we agree very much
with the recommendations
we apple to plan to definitely
on the plan for the quality by
december of twenty five we're
very interested in working with
the legislature on this
definition of kindergarten
readiness and whether that's a
regulatorial statutory but I
think there's a lot of
opportunity here for us to
collectively work together on
that and just did a selebrate
this team has again with the
amazing investments from the
legislature we had another
thirty five million dollars for
precade to roll out they did it
very well we have an incredible
community out there that
responded and so you'll see on
the first slide or maybe it's
like three is the recognition of
you know where we're starting in
school year twenty five twenty
six with over on the next slide
this gives you the breakdown so
when people apply they apply I
want to run a three year old
classroom I want around the
class from just with four year
olds or I want to have a
classroom that has mixed age
which means they can have you
know three to five year olds and
so we're seeing more above a
move towards the mixed age
because it gets flexibility and
schools and a community based
providers.
And so that's the break down
there but the next page will
show you over all where we
landed here in terms of twenty
over twenty thousand children
are going to be getting a high
quality pre key experience in
the coming school year in over
twelve hundred classrooms so we
know we have a big job and as as
they are a point it out so well
some of those are a couple
classrooms in a community based
child care center or a few
family child care homes or they
are multi site huge school
district or multi site community
based programs have up to six
centers all you know in it in
different parts of the city so
we also want to recognize that
we have over four thousand five
hundred head start children also
being served in addition to
these children and we've taken
out the ones that are noted here
that are duly enrolled in twenty
four we introduce the concept
that had start programs could
apply for the supplemental
amount so whatever they get from
the office of head start to
provide that had stored
experience they could apply to
us for up to our rate for our
children hope that makes sense
so not supplanting but
supplementing so that they can
pay those higher wages we also
have welcomed head start but a
teachers into the pre capacity
and that has been a real i'm
strength of the program as well
the other I just wanted to
because there was a note in the
report about these professional
development development
requirements and even I was
taking it back when I had them
put it all on papers to keep
checking are you sure this is
one we're asking but this is for
all educators in their first
year they're expected to have
you know thirty four hours of
you know
training up and you can see it
it's in literacy to the
structured literacy is in the
social emotional but in year to
its fifty two hours so we have
rigorous professional
development requirements and we
are holding our community based
programs to having batched our
level teachers and associate
level assistant teachers in
their classrooms we give them a
one year waiver and that the
team works on th.
But we are seeing great growth
in that area and with free
college and removing those
barriers we say you need to take
six college credits you can get
the opportunity scholarship
really working to leverage that
but also providing the support
and as serious rate both noted
the classroom assessment scoring
system we introduced three years
ago at this last year you'll see
up hundreds and hundreds of
observations are being done in
all of these amazing classrooms
and you see it in the report
compared to head start data from
twenty twenty but this is the
recent day that coming out of
our classrooms and it's a lot to
celebrate because we are seeing
amazing quality I mean at two
point eight seven that's inching
up there to three we do see that
yes there is a different child
between the school based on the
community based but overall
there is high quality
instruction happening across all
of our classrooms which means we
know then that children are
benefiting in that their
outcomes are going to be strong
going into precake into
kindergarten I won't go through
all these slides because I
charles did give me the like
keep it down to keep it but we
do want you to know we are in
the process there is a request
for a proposal we have been
struggling we've got gsd helping
us and that's going to be issued
here any day here in the summer
of twenty five we are going to
have advisers from school and
community based programs
advising us as we as the rfp
committee looks at what we
receive all the new early
childhood assessments are
aligned with early learning
standards they also connect to
the common core which we know it
is how are cake twelve system so
we're excited about how this pre
k assessment we're gonna procure
will also help us with our six
nineteen or prescript children
with special needs but also that
transition to kindergarten and
so you'll see there's some key
things about that assessment and
we're very excited about
executive function of any the
members here have heard about it
or talked about it but.
The the window of three to five
is where we as human beings
really begin developing that
executive function which allows
us that ability to control our
thoughts are actions to process
to do problems solving and so we
have pilot at this in I just see
well that minister executive
function scale it is the only
assessment of its kind and
children get to do it through
playing games um five minutes
five minutes couple times a year
and you're able to see I get
these personalized interventions
and so that we can see this
executive function really grow
in our end to the skill it has
to be taught it has to be
learned we don't we're not born
with it but it is happens and it
happens through these
interactions and these
opportunities for
that different types of
activities and the the teachers
are going to have access to high
quality professional development
but we did this pilot just
because we you know we
introduced it and people like we
don't know about the so it said
let's pilot it lots of great
response from school districts
as well as community based so
you see that we had a fifty
class rooms across an eighteen
programs and six hundred and
seventeen children participated
at least one assessment we see
that the average executive
function score for our
preschoolers was around forty
the forty fifth percent tile the
the national average is about
fifty we thought anywhere ranges
from thirty three to fifty three
so where it were excited to see
this across you know twenty
thousand students on being able
to play games and we as a state
can help support an intervene
through their educators and
their pre cadministrators in
actual activities how is it was
it to implement eight point
eight out of ten said super easy
how beneficial were that
classroom activities aid out of
ten teachers responded and how
enjoyable where the classroom
activities for the children
eight point five out of ten so
we're feeling good about the
results from the pilot and the
team has been working on the
whole role out in and getting
everybody.
Up to speed you'll see on that
last slide and how we're
thinking about the rollout
knowing that you know we're
going to be learning and working
with the community and
partnership and these are
exciting times so along with
this and the next time fall we
will roll out the full
development assessment and then
we do that have the classroom
assessment so we have these
measures we do we totally agree
that need to connect this data
to make it make sense for people
in the classroom for
administrators for us at the
department and very importantly
for you as policy makers to
understand how is this data
really driving the change that
we all want to see with improve
school readiness
that concludes a three k part I
we can take questions on this
and then I know there was a we
also had some interest in the
fit the fit rate so
questions thank you mister chair
members of the committee
think your secretary to and I go
ahead and hit on fit really
quick
yes
terror members of the committee
yes and I do want to recognize
all the head right years our
division director for family
support early intervention and
the amazingly a davidson who is
our bureau chief for fifty eight
year national treasure when it
comes to early intervention so
yes
we are very excited and
incredibly appreciated and
thankful to the legislature for
both your supplemental funding
to help us close the gap in
twenty five and for the very
generous appropriation for
twenty six the first slide it
was just because I know some
members are new i'll just get
passed out if you will know what
it is hopefully everybody knows
what it is this gives you a
glance the next slide of our
service numbers for twenty five
and how it breaks down what
which how what children are
medicaid eligible and which
children are not and so where
the payment comes from eccd
versus.
Coming directly to our providers
from medicaid
so here is the snapshot of fit
starting in twenty two just to
remind everybody here that first
time we got early child to trust
fund money and we put it towards
closing the gap in the two
thousand and seventeen fit study
so it was a ten percent increase
of where we were
from twenty one at twenty three
we did not have an increase but
we started a new cost study
since the seventeenth study was
fairly old and we use that to
inform our rate increase in
twenty four which was a fifteen
percent increase and then we
also initiated the cost model
like we've done for child care
and we've done for home visiting
and so in twenty five thanks to
again your supplemental and the
rate that I had to resident due
to the budget concerns that we
were able to get that back in
place that is on track that'll
be we paid out of the our funds
for the first month and a half
and then from february to june
we are working with medicaid we
had we had had the state plan
submitted a lear and her team
and a christie gwin and the team
at ha worked very diligently
that is all in place and then we
have now set a seven percent
increase for twenty six are with
a new funds that we have and
will continue to update the cost
model as we learn and work with
the community this was a very
involved process we have I had a
lot of studies in here yesterday
at the kind of giving of the
detail of how we worked with the
community but happy to do that
at another time and we just know
that it's
just very precedent and it is an
incredible program we do know we
just finished our rfp process we
had about thirty applications
that we received a through our
art of p process we were able to
did not award six of those about
six two were new providers and
they just did not meet the rigor
of the.
We did a set of higher we're
very clear about what the system
needs in terms of delivery for
families and children with our
focus on family guided routine
space intervention so we did a
deny for applications of current
providers are but there are
those one and they all submitted
an appeal and of those one we
did accept their appeal and so
we now have twenty five high
quality early intervention
providers operating across the
state and we have seen
incredible growth in the
existing providers now moving to
other counties we have more
service providers now in real
riba and in touch county we have
more robust service provider
agencies in lincoln and eddie
county and increased options for
families now and bernalio santa
fe and sand of all counties so
we're excited about the growth
and i'll just stand for any
questions that you may have
thank you
great thank you this is very
exciting i'm looking around to
see who has questions
to okay craig but first if I
could ask our LFC both of you to
answer this question in twenty
five words or less what is the
one take away that you would
like our members to take away
thank you mister jere members of
the committee
I think I will try to do it and
even fewer than twenty five
prepaid works for academic
outcomes especially for low
income students quality matters
we can cover those quality
improvements that we need to
make with current revenue
do you have anything right I
might twenty five chair members
of the committee I think she
covered it pretty well I mean we
find that precious working kids
do come in with
higher reading profession see
rates that does seem to be
sustained.
For to some degree were
graduating at higher rates but
pretty quality does matter and
there is some suggestions of
recommendations to help increase
that quality further
thank you thanks so you know
just everyone for an excellent
report thank you secretary of
your leadership representative
thank you madam sure and thank
you for the presentation I think
my comments are for the folks
from lfc
I I do have a degree in early
childhood and over two decades
of experience and
brain developments you know the
the studies on brain development
came out when I in my early
years and I would I want us to
remember is development
appropriate practices
developmentally appropriate
practices based on what we know
about child growth and
developments and how the brain
functions and how children until
third grade learning a different
way and so at this legislative
session and all across the
nation we are looking at time
with the tablet and time on this
phone and what it does to put a
child in front of a device and
it that gap III am through
really how near that gap is
between kids who are sitting on
computers and teacher directed
classrooms
and children who are in
community based centers that are
play based montessori and and
experiencial that their goals
are based on critical thinking
and problem solving skills that
leaves naturally to literacy
benefits that leads to
success and math and release to
success and science I hold by
works not hearing that we want
to standardize these programs
and put tablets in all
classrooms delight here that
mr chair representatives out
thank you for the question.
The recommendation is not to put
tablets in all classrooms but to
adopt evidence based tools at
the research that is coming out
in the last year or two is
clearly shown that compared to
the sort of comprehensive
curricular that many
providers tend to use bringing
in subject specific tools that
are evidence based into the
classroom in addition to all of
that wonderful plate based on
activity that you've mentioned
as being developmentally
appropriate and I think you know
to speak to the class scores for
the state of new mexico classes
a tool that measures teacher
student interactions and those
high emotional support skills
earth that high emotional
support score in the high
classroom organization score
points to the fact that the vast
majority of our providers are
using exactly those tools that
you have point to representative
down
and
we are merely pointing in this
report to additional evidence
based tools that can be layered
on as another element things
that take maybe fifteen or
twenty minutes a day but do not
in any way to take away from or
replace that critical time that
teachers spent interacting with
their students and students
spent interacting with each
other thank you thank you madam
chair and thank you for that
there
the cost and quality of child
care and the prek outcomes and
the portfolio pot process and
the observations the longer
today's studies that lead to the
evidence that demand that we
invest in high quality early
childhood we don't have this
longest tudiol study is fine
three and four year olds using
tablets and phones and computers
and those sorts of things we do
have longer to do studies on
what it looks like to go to
walter school what it looks like
to go to modestory school what
it looks like to go to a playbay
school and we also know that if
they go into a failing school
system those those benefits are
lost by third grade.
Those that the litter cities but
not the critical thinking and
problem something not the
ability to interact with your
peers and have the social
competency in complex sayings or
to comfort one another and so
everything comes out of cost I
say that from experience because
when you add fifteen minutes on
a tablet you take fifteen
minutes away somewhere else and
so even just taking okay so I
want to take a lot of time I
know running over but it really
concerns me that we would
experiment it it concerned me
because like there can't be
market to rural studies on this
there just can't be but so
I do want to say that adding
these coaching in these things
that you want to see in the
convey centers these are full
day around centers they don't
have professional development
time at this level they don't
have summers off these folks are
traditionally getting their
degree while they're in school
so I mean they are showing that
targeted training is producing
near equitable outcomes for the
lowest and most disadvantaged
kids in our state I just have to
point this out and I see the
secretary of seaks chatting her
head and
we could get further by doing
things like shared services
there's other things that other
states have done that abroad
parity with all putting more
time more training more
intensity on the staff in these
community centers that are
traditionally full time arms
lowest income most at risk women
who are also going to school for
time who do their job forty
hours a week full day around
thank you think you
representative senator true heal
thank you madame chair and thank
you secretary
and your team and thank you
analysts representing the
information I just want to just
point out and I know secretary
we've talked about this before
but requirement to take some.
Classes and early childhood is
what got me into community
college and literally change my
life I had to get twelve
predicts to expand my child care
center and I realize that at
twenty seven years old that I
could learn and that wasn't
something that I thought I could
do I ended up with a jd so it
really does change lives when we
kind of push the envelope and
say because we don't know where
people will end up and you know
I was working my homeful time
and reason kids and all of that
but it literally changed my life
so I just want to point that out
ped what these thought about
this kind of garden readiness I
mean they're the ones who can
adopt those standards aren't
they
matter mister chair senator to
heal thank you and it's a great
story thank you for sharing that
I saw that too and I worked in
head start when they made the
requirement to just
people's lives changed because
they had to go they didn't think
they could and then everything
changed for them and their
family in a very positively so
ped public education apartment
did help us administer you know
that early development
instrument and so they would
they would definitely be
involved in the conversation
around any kind of definition
and you know they
similarly so we may take the
lead with them but what you
agree I mean it would be a joint
effort I think we actually made
that recommendation that it
would be between the two
agencies with the legislature
and madam chair secretary do you
think that this is something
that we need to legislate so
that it carries on because it
doesn't need legislation to
happen.
That was for chair senator to
heal I don't think it does not
require it I think the
recommendation in the report is
that that would be a good idea
but I think it could also be
something in statue that allows
it to be more fleshed out in
regulation but the notion that
are state has a definition and
statutory we are putting kind of
a stake on school readiness so
but yes I think thank you
madame chair secretary what's
the percentage of blended head
start in our state is at a
hundred percent where head start
and pre k kids are are or are in
class together but it's not just
heads dark kids but it's a
blended program madam chair
senator so we have eight hundred
and seventy that of our free
school or headstore children
that are in a blended option
i'm sorry do well
and there's a hundred and thirty
two that are in a what you call
blended which means that they're
not had start eligible but
they're being served in a head
start classroom but they're new
mexico great thank you madame
chair secretary night as a
former heads are teacher the
only thing that I can say that I
I disagree with had start is
that we we put low income
students altogether and that we
don't blame students because
they have much to provide each
other they learn from each other
and various ways so i'm i'm
happy to hear that and then for
the fit program III am a little
concerned that we did not
and I just wonder out of those
four that were denied
that we're
i'm not is worried about the six
but i'll talk about that too but
of the four that were denied how
many of them prior to that and I
think it's some cases that was
rfy to say rfp but I think there
were some arafis how many of
those have gotten a letter.
Evaluation that showed that they
were in full compliance and men
because they didn't answer the
questions fully
ended up being denied
a letter of compliance and then
denial
okay madam chair senator to
health ask a day but send it
come up but so let me just be
clear what had six that we
denied two of those were new
providers and so there were four
existing providers all four were
given the appealed process and
then those we accepted one so
they're only three and that were
denied and so your question is
everybody received the notice of
the request for proposal all
current providers received that
there were office hours there
were information shared in all
the you know we have a list
serve for all providers with a
lister for icc and so I think
your other question was how many
of them had received a letter of
compliance just months before
filling out the rfp.
I think I think
mister chair center to hear
thank you for the question
one I noted received a letter of
compliance a couple months
before
any other two were in a slightly
different situation and just
just to I think it's important
to note that compliance for the
past year because that's only
for year right
was one component of the
application process like we did
ask that was a question in the
application is you know what is
your compliance been looking
like over time but it was only
one component there were more
there's much more to the
application process and just
that thank you madam chairs
secretary I just want to point
out I don't think we have I
don't think we're flesh in other
words I don't think we've meet
me our max month capacity I do
believe in quality but I also
know that there are there are
providers and there are
individuals in our community
that have very little skill and
responding to.
And I get that you probably had
support for that it seems to me
like it might not have been
enough and so I I just I just
encourage us to make sure that
we're not checking boxes in
order to make sure that quality
is being that that we're
actually taking the time to help
grow these programs maybe in
five ten years when we have too
many and there's a competition
then we might look at at getting
people denied.
But I am concerned about that
and then the last thing I just
want to say on positive note is
I have the opportunity to
participate on august third at
harvard at the
the brain that to to learn about
the new science for brain
education so i'm really excited
for that
it is the center for the
developing child at harvard
university so you're just spend
a whole day
and i'm actually was able to get
one more of our legislators into
the programs and there's only
really eighteen of us across the
country but they were gracious
and have to open it up so
representative for already will
be joining me on that day so
that two of us are pretty
excited about it but thank you
for being here
all right I just have a few
quick questions and then
so first off
lfc team am I correct that the
initial report on which this is
based was published in twenty
twenty
mad i'm sure that it's correct
and then whether also published
international journal.
Madam chair the reserve a follow
up publication that used very
similar
analytical tools right if you
want to speak to that since your
part of it
madam chair yes we did publishes
based on the same data with a
different we look at different
way but basically same data and
we found the scene the same
results thank you may just want
to highlight the impact will
qualifications and rigor with
which are program evaluators do
their work
next question on page twenty two
I was wondering how do we bench
merck
the instructional support levels
of versus national so what we
are rating and then are there
national levels
is think you manage her
and happiness take a stability
if if the agency wants to jump
and that's great
teach stone which is the
developer of the class tool does
not provide a national bench
mark they recommend that if you
are going to use the national
benchmark you use head start
scores head start scores are
several years out of date
the office of head start
publishes them only several
years after the fact so the most
recent ones we have are from
twenty twenty but a I can tell
you i'm having a look at other
states class scores that are
community providers are very
much on par with where other
states are
and our public school programs
for instructional support are
quite ahead of the curve
thinking that's wonderful to her
other next question how do we
get more community based
providers they're educators to
have that degrees
that that's a great question I
mean eight a could whether.
I'll give it a shot at the
safety of shona wants to add
anything but what we have done
is of course through the
legislators legislative support
has removed a key barrier which
has cost we have also provided
mentors at we provide the
coaches I think that wage scale
and career lattice work that
we're wrapping up here in the
next month has been a phenomenal
process with the community and
we're now hearing the community
say what we need bachelors I was
just done there the call coming
up here today and there's that
well they need a babserve degree
in that person needs a battery
degree so I I think it's getting
it in the ethos that this is
important to in order for us to
achieve the outcomes and we've
done a good job in our state
removing many of those barriers
but to know representative
dallas point these are people
have full time jobs and are
working have their own families
and the team at I think there's
a good job in the shot I don't
know if you want to add anything
but I I think that's all talking
about it and making pathways
that allow for that completion
is important.
Thank you for the question madam
chair the only thing I would add
is we want to recognize our
educators as as they're making
progress right to you know are
that degree takes some time
especially if you're attending
part time working full time and
so we do partner with cm to
provide which supplement as well
as the paperity so as as they
are
achieving an earning those
credits there there are steps
that are
assisting in there at their wage
to
say reward but really recognize
their hard work thank you
thank you thank you so much for
the wonderful presentation and
what a high test sort of and the
day on
so thank you for the
presentation and then for the
remaining sub committee members
thank you for sticking it out we
do have one item I want to go
back to though for the sub
committee which is to discuss
the letter the draft letter that
I was distributed to you by
staff a little bit earlier
so i'll give a minute for you
guys to
head out and then and for folks
to find the draft letter
rachel I don't know if you want
to head to the front just in
case anyone has questions about
it
so do you.
All right
so
rachel do you want to just give
a a quick synopsis of what we
would like to do sure madam
chair i'm happy to and know that
but we share it is a draft we
wrote up for you it could be
amended it could be changed but
you heard during the hearing and
policy staff have highlighted
now for over eight year we are
concerned particularly about the
spending for this twenty million
appropriation
the language of which you have
in front of you and has not been
spent for the appropriation
purpose
so I think there is a question
if you are would like to direct
or make a request of another
entity to do an independent
review and certainly there could
be options you could make a
request to the auditor but if
they were to find for example
they might then refer it to the
attorney general it turned in
general is currently initiating
a review into you all could make
a request to look at this issue
in particular independently
senator to buy a cent a senator
here
thank you manager and reach hole
I don't know what the pro call
is but I would like to move that
we actually do
visit this letter and ask for it
to be forwarded to the age
office wonderful so I think
we'll see if there are other
questions and then I think that
would be a great motion of for
our sub committee senator thank
you madame chair I wonder if um
that is something that we should
be sending off to the state
auditor I am not certain that
the attorney general is the
right entity to do that maybe
they are because state agency
but I feel like the state
auditor is the one who would do
the investigation that's the
spend my experience they do the
investigation and whatever they
get from that investigation.
Because they'll uh if they
believe that there's an issue
they will commission a special
audit and then the information
that they get from that special
added they pass onto the
attorney general and the
attorney general is the one that
then takes action so i'm
thinking for that other ask a
rachel to highlight that I think
what we'd actually like to do is
send the letter to both entities
with the auditor asking for it
to be looked at in the annual
audit
message I saw directorsly I
thought you might want to see
money to speak okay I think
certainly those are options and
given the attorney general I
think they're in a unique place
where they are also initiating
this office of the child
advocate work
and so that could be a potential
there I think another that we
have seen
in your correct center to heal
you know sometimes the auditor
me then make a finding and then
it just goes directly to the e g
but certainly that is that a
choice you all could have in
front of you
thank you
I don't see any other questions
so I think senator to bison
thank you madame chair i'd
actually like to move that the
letter be sent to both the state
auditor in the attorney general
surface thank you do we need a
second
okay second advice and the true
health is there any objection to
this motion
I don't see any so with that I
think we can say the
subcommittee is requesting that
the committee send the letter to
both the attorney general and
the state auditor
and thank you everyone for a
wonderful wonderful long
afternoon and going to a dinner
