All right, thank you. Cool. So
we'll go ahead and get started.
So ERB updates.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, please allow me to
introduce Mr. David Archuleta,
executive director for ERB
Education Retirement Board. He's
going to walk us through a few
items, uh, board updates, and
investment performance, uh, and
other agency highlights and some
other items as well, but without
any further ado, let me hand it
over to Mr. Archuleta.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee as, uh,
as Mark mentioned, my name is uh
David Archuleta. I'm the
executive director of the
Education and Retirement Board.
I've been with this organization
now for 2 years and almost 10
months,
uh, very proud to be part of
this, uh, this organization. We
do a lot of good things, um, and
I'll try to provide you with a
few updates that hopefully
you'll find to be helpful as we
move forward in this, uh, this
next upcoming session. If you
turn to page 2 of this
presentation. I got to move it?
Do you want me to?
How do we do it?
A couple of items that some of
the some of the 12 items that
I'll be talking to you a little
bit about that I hope will help
you provide you with some, some
background. Actually, before I
get started, if you wouldn't
mind, I'm gonna go to introduce
uh my deputy director who's
sitting in the audience here,
uh, Mr. Lawrence Eskeville. He's
been with the organization for,
uh, about 8 years. She was
previously our IT director
before being promoted to our,
our deputy.
If you turn to page 3, we, we,
what were you referred to or
what I refer to as in uh
non-executive executive agency,
so I don't answer directly to
the governor, although we do
have governor appointees who
serve on our board, um, but
basically I answered to a 9
member board of directors. We
had two additional board members
added a number of years ago as
part of some of the legislation
that passed.
But I would like to make mention
of our executive committee, Mr.
Russell Goff, the chairman of
this organization who represents
the New Mexico Association of
Educational Retirees, uh, Ms.
Mary Lou Cameron, who represents
NEA, New Mexico and Mr. Maggot,
who is a governor appointee and
serves on our board, and you can
see the rest of the group of
individuals who come highly
credentialed, uh, to represent
the various organizations that
we represent, uh, and that we
serve. If you turn to page 4
just briefly, uh, basically I,
I.
the board authority here, and
there's 5 different bolts that
you can see here. Basically it's
to implement the Education and
Retirement Act or the ERA.
The second thing that they're
responsible for doing is the
functions of the board, uh,
promulgating rules, uh,
basically coming up with the
guidelines, strategic plan,
everything else, everything else
that's required to, to run the
agency. Um, sorry, I'll try to
remember to use the clicker as
we move forward. I'm good. Um,
one of the more important things
that they do is the employment
of staff, specifically the
selection of an executive
director uh for implementing
their strategic direction as
they move forward, approving an
organizational chart is.
Specifically identified in the
education Retirement Act and
exercise that we go through once
a year. Uh, it wouldn't surprise
you to find out there aren't a
lot of changes associated with
that were organized into a
couple different groups
including investments, legal
member services, uh, information
technology, and administrative
services. So 91 employees or 91
FTE authorized by the
organization, but they're
responsible for making sure that
those, um, that it is designed
to meet the objectives of the
organization. We're required to
make an actuary report to the
every odd numbered year,
basically, we present one of
those updates to the interim
committees as soon as one is
available. The next update to
our actuarial report will be now
in October. It's likely that
we'll make a presentation to the
interim investments, pensions
oversight in November. If not,
it'll certainly be presented to
the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee and Senate
Finance Committee whenever we're
called before, uh, this upcoming
session. And then there's a
handful of other items that
they're also responsible for.
But again, one of the more
important items outside of
hiring staff is
The rules and regulations
pursuant to the Educational
Retirement Act.
To provide you with a couple of
quick updates. Uh, I would like
to thank the members of this
committee, uh, the folks that
have helped us over the years to
secure funding for the
development and construction of
a new office complex. Uh, over
the years, the agency has grown
uh during COVID, I think we grew
by about 12 positions. We were
already sort of bursting at the
seams at that point in time, we
had folks that were sitting in a
closet office space we get
converted some of our closets
into office space, sitting out
in hallways and so forth. Um,
After more than a decade of
trying, there was finally some
consideration given a piece of
property had been purchased. Uh,
not going to surprise you to
find out that, you know, since
2020 the cost of construction
went up substantially. I think
when this building was first
programmed before I joined the
organization, we were looking at
an estimated cost for some
reason sticks out of my head of
about $263 per square foot.
Today, by the time we're finally
complete, it's going to be
closer to about $600 per square
foot. Um, happy to say this
19,000 square foot facility is
going
Up on the south end of Santa Fe,
right across from the Super
Walmart, closer to the public
Employees Retirement Association
office. So those folks that are
there to go fill out their
paperwork for the retiree
Healthcare Authority will have
easy access, uh, to our
facility. It's on, uh, the south
end of town again, easy access
off the freeway, um,
construction is underway. It
started in January in
substantial completion is
expected sometime in January and
will be expected to move in
sometime in March. We're running
into a slight hiccup with the
city of Santa Fe and the water
hookups, uh,
Some
dispute over the authority over
who is able to approve the
the building, you know, right
now we're going through the
construction industries division
of the regulation and licensing
department, the City of Santa Fe
feels as though, uh, perhaps,
uh, there's some approval needed
from their end as well.
Nonetheless, we're expected to
be substantially complete by, by
January.
Yeah.
As important, if not more
important, is we're in the
process right now of
implementing, developing and
implementing a new pension and
administration system, uh, sort
of the heart and soul of the
organization. This, uh, computer
system will be responsible for
the intake of all members'
information. So when they're
making contributions over the
course of their careers. It will
account for the service credit
that they are earning, um, and
basically generate the benefit.
I guess a good equivalent for us
would be, uh, thinking about
this like
is to the state. It's our
accounting system, the nuts and
bolts of everything that we do.
Uh, this has been in the process
for many years, actually, about
2 years before I joined the
organization back in 2022, we'd
undertaken a series of steps to
assess and identify whether or
not the system that we had in
place, uh, if we could continue
with that forward, should we
simply upgrade it, subscribe to
a relatively new version of it.
After all was said and done and
with the help of our
consultants, it was determined
that we'd go out to bid for a
new system. Uh, fortunately,
there was enough support in the
legisl
for giving us about $30 million
for the implementation of this
new system. It was expected to
initially take about 4 years for
that implementation, but we're
looking at substantial
completion of this by October of
next year. So we're slightly
ahead of schedule. I don't want
to jinx it, um, but I made
reference to this because a lot
of our energy and efforts is
going into the development of
this new system. We have several
partners, basically we're
purchasing the system from Teles
Health.
NTT data is another partner
who's responsible for cleansing
a lot of the records that we
have moving into this new
system. We have more than
450,000 records. Uh, a lot of
that information and some of
those records don't include
complete information of a
member. So incorrect socials,
dates of birth, missing address
information. So we're trying to
weed through all that before we
put it into this new system.
Siegel is a consultant who is
helping us in the development
and the project management
portion of it and MBS, I'm
sorry, I'm NTT data.
is doing the independent
verification MBS is actually the
one doing the, the data
cleansing for, uh, for ERB.
If you turn to the next page,
this is something I suspect most
educators are primarily, uh,
probably hear a lot about our
most concerned with. We offer 3
different return to work
programs and we'll talk a little
bit about that on the next page.
But we recently updated our
rules based upon some feedback
that we'd received for a number
of years we've had return to
work programs in place that were
eligible for members to
participate in. It wasn't until
recently that we experienced an
uptick in the number of
violations that were occurring.
Basically people going back to
work
receiving the appropriate
permissions to do so in our
statute, and that statute is
largely driven by IRS
guidelines. There are certain
guidelines in that need to be
met in order for a member to
return to the classroom. Uh, I
think the IRS wants to make sure
that we're not using our pension
as one just giant, uh, tax-free
piggy bank savings account,
right? So as a result, we're
required to have these rules
around when and how people are
eligible to go back to work. We
found that a lot of people, you
know, they
They adhered to the call, you
know, and the need for teachers
in the classroom and then they
simply return to work and then
they were found to be in
violation and we went through
this whole messy thing of having
to suspend their pension and
recoup the dollars that were
paid to them during that period
of ineligibility. It was
unfortunate for them, it was
unfortunate for us certainly it
wasn't a fun conversation to
have with them. And in order to
address some of the concerns
around it, the board adopted
certain rule changes around that
and basically what those rule
changes and uh.
What occurred with those is if
you were found to be in
violation, basically, you forgot
to submit an application. You
didn't do it, your employer
allowed you to return to work as
soon as we're able to detect
that a violation occurred rather
than immediately suspend you and
then recoup those payments that
were made to you during the
period of ineligibility, meaning
you weren't eligible to, to
participate. What we're gonna do
is we're gonna basically beg you
to come into compliance. We're
going to send you a notice.
We're going to give you a grace
period with which to come into
compliance will basically
Backdate your approval to return
to work unless of course you
were never eligible to return to
work.
Meaning that you didn't wait out
the period as specified in
statute with the 90 days, let's
say you quit on July you quit on
June 30, you immediately signed
a contract, you returned to
school in the fall, but your
contract ran through July,
you're immediately being paid.
You didn't wait out that 90 day
period at that point in time, we
would suspend you and recruit
any recoup any of those payments
that were made to you during
that period of time. So we
created basically a safe harbor
for those individuals. Uh, we
removed any references, uh, that
related back to that 12 months
later
O period and basically those
people, a lot of them have been
grandfathered into the program.
We made the appropriate
corrections to that language
there. Uh, we also require that
the local administrative units,
the school districts, implement
and publicize their own internal
work policies to make sure that
they're complying with our rules
and statutes, because that was
another thing that uh we found
to be problematic because they
weren't being accurately
reported to us and, you know,
sort of garbage in, garbage out.
It wasn't until later that we're
being notified of this
information. So we
We've adopted our rules around
that.
If you turn to the next page,
um, we have referenced here the
return to work program
participation, some of the
numbers looked a little wonky
through the beginning of this
fiscal year. So I didn't report
them, but I would tell you that
there there isn't a substantial
change between those that
reported over fiscal year 24 to
what you're seeing right here.
We had 671 members that were
under the 0.25 capacity, 390 in
that program, earning $15,000 or
less, 308 under the 36 month
program as of this last
Month, we have about 415 that
are approved to return to work
under that 36 month program, a
90 day layout up to 36 months.
The one-year layout, we had 1600
members that hit that last year,
but we have more than 3000
people approved, but only 1600
actually hit payroll. And then
those folks that are retired and
receiving a pension from Perra,
uh, we have almost 1000 of those
members participating in the
education retirement program. I
would say that although, you
know, the 12 month
Uh, if you laid out for one year
and returned to work with no
earnings limit or time period,
those folks were all
grandfathered under the program.
So unless they withdraw from the
program, they're eligible to
continue working, uh, as long as
they would like. You know, in
terms of the number of
retirements that we've
experienced over the last couple
of years, uh, the only year that
we saw a real substantial spike
was in 2021. It moved up to
almost 1300 people to retired
that year. But other than that,
going back to 2020 and 2019, you
have anywhere between 900 and
980.
They retire on average in any
given year out of 52,000 active
members or so.
If you turn to the next page
just briefly a little bit of
information about, uh, some of
our investment performance, and
I'm sorry because I'm seeing a
glare here. Our one-year rate of
return was 8.64%, slightly less
than our policy index of 9.56%,
uh, but as you can see over the
35, 10, and 30 year period.
That's the first time it's
underperformed the policy index.
Part of it is related to uh less
exposure to public equities,
which really did well this last
year and more exposure to some
of the private equities.
Uh, not a substantial difference
over the one year period, but I
think it's important to note
that our investment returns are
achieving those long term
targets of over 7% as you can
see referenced here.
If you turn to the next page,
um, to provide you with a little
bit more, uh, or a better
picture over what's happened,
but basically over the course of
the last decade going back to
June 30th of 2010, you know, the
trust fund has grown from just
over $8 billion to hitting a
high this last year of June of
$17.1 billion and obviously the
goal is to get it up to the 27+
billion that we need to be, uh,
fully funded, which we expect to
occur over the course of the
next 2.5 decades.
If you turn to page 11.
Here's just a quick snapshot,
some key valuation results that
came about as a result of our
last actuarial study. Now, I
didn't include the 2024, 2024
numbers here, um, the period
number there because there are
certain adjustments that needed
to be made, uh, to retiree
payroll. We go through the whole
accounting process. Some of the
information as far as uh
employer contributions need to
be tweezed out. What's uh fiscal
year or the previous fiscal year
in this fiscal year, uh, so we
don't have those numbers, uh,
fully furnished right here.
They won't be available until
October, but just to give you
some reference, we have over
61,000 active members in the
system paying into the program
today, right? So we have less
than 1000 people to retire in
any given year, so in terms of a
percentage, you can see that
it's probably in the
neighborhood of about 4% of the
eligible population that retires
in any given year, and I tell
you that a lot of those folks,
when we see those retirement
documents, a lot of them serve
30, 40, sometimes even 50 years.
Uh, we have a number of retirees
and beneficiaries, those people
that are receiving a benefit
from us every month.
Of just under 55,000 and our
retiree payroll, how much we
produced or put out to those
people this last year was about
$1.3 billion. The average annual
benefit is just over $2100 a
month or just under $26,000 per
year.
But we collected more than $1
billion dollars in employer and
employer contributions. Those,
uh, monies that are deducted
from an employee's paycheck
along with those contributions
made on behalf of their
employer, uh, totaled over $1
billion a year and I think we're
approaching about 1.2 billion
member contribution refunds,
those people that come into the
program and uh either drop out
or refund the dollars that they
do at the end of the year, uh,
translates to about $55 million
per year. Um, we active payroll
this last year was about 3.5
billion.
dollars as of the period ending
in June, it was closer to about
$4 billion about 220
participating employers, all
school districts, uh, public
universities, uh, charter
schools that make up that 220.
And again, the actual value of
our assets last year was 16.2
billion. The number that we're
going to use this next year, uh,
in June as of June 30th, is
going to be closer to $17.2
billion. And then our funding
period, the period in time in
which we expect to be fully
funded or have dollar.
$1 for every liability that we
have is 26 years and I'll give
you a quick update on that based
off of the experience study that
we had this last year.
If you turn to the next page,
just to give you sort of
Some background on the direction
that the board, um, basically
the direction that the board
follows as far as how they
develop guidelines for the
benefits that we provide.
You know, the policy is
ultimately up to the legislature
and to the governor, uh, and
said in statute, but a lot of
the rules around how we apply
those rules and statute is
basically the authority of the
board. And I think that it's
just important to remember the
key takeaway if you take
anything away from any of the
slides that we have here is that
the contributions, what's being
paid into the program along with
our investment returns has to be
either equal to or greater than
the benefits that we provide
along with the administrative
costs associated with the
operational expenses of the
organization.
Not only the salaries of the 91
employees we have, not only the
cost of the building that we
have, um, but what we pay our
money managers, will we pay our
actuaries, will we pay our
attorneys and so forth, uh, the
equation has to work out so that
those contributions and earnings
are greater than what we're
actually paying out in order for
us to meet those long-term
funding objectives.
If you turn to page 13, um, I
think one of the things you may
hear about often from some of
your employees is the cost of
living adjustment that we
provide are not from your
employees, from the retirees, is
the cost of living adjustment
that is provided to those
members. Uh, so as of this last
year,
It's based upon a formula that's
set in statute. Fortunately for
us, it's not a political
decision that's made on an
annual basis. It would be easy
for people to, to plead with the
board and to convince them that,
hey, we're in a bad spot.
Inflation is at 6 or 7% if the
board was had the authority to
say, OK, let's dole out a 6%
increase in the benefit, it
would be difficult to come back
to legislature and say, OK, we
need this, this additional
funding in order to support that
because it creates huge
Long-term liabilities. Every
single incremental increase that
occurs as far as the cost of
living adjustment is concerned
has a significant impact on our
funding trajectory and our
long-term obligations. And if
the board had the authority to
grow it at a greater rate than
the board than the legislature
and executive could support. You
could see how things could end
up a little wonky for us. Long
story short, um, there is,
there's something set in place
now in statute that allows us to
provide a percentage of the cost
of living adjustment that we
would.
Otherwise provide unless we were
fully funded. And you can see
here, uh, you know, was the
majority of our retirees
received a 1.6% adjustment this
last year. Substantially less
than overall inflation, but
greater than.
They could otherwise expect to
receive if we were one of those
states or pension organizations
that didn't authorize any sort
of cost of living adjustment. So
again, the bulk 42,000 members
receive 1.68%, 2.1% of those
folks that were disabled and
1.89% of those folks whose
pension fell below the median
of, uh, just over $1700.
Per month.
If you turn to page 14,
service credit accruals over the
years in order to address some
of the long term funding
obligations that we've had.
There's been a number of
challenges and a lot of uh uh a
lot of, um,
Proposals that have been
Implemented in and that have
been trying to be the
legislatures pushed over the
course of the last decade,
primarily an increase in funding
and thank you to Senator Stewart
for for getting it done for this
organization for a number of
years, uh, but it had been a
long time discussion and, and
certainly part of the discussion
was how do we write size this
benefit because it was just 3
years ago, 4 years ago, I'm
sorry, that this program was
never expected to be fully
funded. We had one of those
infinite funding periods, uh,
with 60% or 60 cents on the
doll.
for every $1 that we owe, we
were never expected to have
dollar for dollar, which is
basically the standard that our
actuaries hold us to that most
organizations similar to us, uh,
apply to organizations like us.
So since 2019, we've created a
number of tiers. So everyone
sort of shared in the pain of
the changes that needed to occur
in terms of how to improve the
solvency of the program. Uh,
basically increases in employee
contribution, what the member is
having to do, what the employer
is having to contribute, what
the state is putting in on their
behalf.
The benefit reductions in terms
of the cost of living
adjustments that is applied to
retired members. Um, the
increases in service
requirements, basically, the
longer someone is required to
work, the less time we're paying
him a benefit, those are all
some of the ingredients that
have gone into baking the pie
that we have today. Uh, it's
important to recognize that
tiers 12, and 3 earn 2.35% of
their final average salary over
their average career, you can
see as an example there, what
the benefit would be for someone
that had earned an average of
$65,000.
Over a 30 year period, uh, their
benefit would be somewhere in
the neighborhood of about $3800
per month. For those members,
depending upon the number of
years that they have contributed
into the program, they earn a
tiered level of service. And
this was designed to to
encourage folks to work longer
careers. So the 1st 10 years
that they're that they're part
of the program, they're earning
1.35% for every year of service,
then that bumps up to 2.35% for
years 11 through 20. Those folks
that go above 20, they're
earning at 3%.
35% and then it drops down after
years 30 to 2.4%. Again, this
change change uh was designed to
encourage folks to have longer
careers.
On page 15 here just a couple,
uh, we referenced a couple of
the major changes that occurred
since 2013, basically increasing
the employee contribution from
7.9% to 10.7%, they're paying in
a larger portion of their salary
for the benefit that they'll
ultimately receive. Then in
2019, they increased the
employer portion from 13.9% to
14.15% and then in 2021 Senate
Bill 42 increased that from
14.15% to
16.15 that started getting us
back. I think we went from a
finite period to about 43 years,
and then in 2022, when it went
from 16.15% to 18.15%. We ran
under the 30 years. I think it
brought us down to 29, which was
meeting the board's funding
objective and certainly it could
have been done without the help
and support of the legislature,
as well as the governor to make
that happen and I'm happy to say
that we are now on a sustainable
path, uh, it's probably not as
quickly as some people would
like us to get there.
Um, it's probably, you know,
when you explain it to retiree
about how soon they're going to
get a full cost of living
adjustment. It's never an
adequate justification to them,
uh, but I, I think in terms of
where other pension plans lie in
the direction that we're heading
in, uh, you can see that we're,
we're, we're well on our way to
becoming fully funded. On page
16, this last year, we went
through an experience study.
That experience study basically
looked at all the various inputs
that go into this actuarial
report that the actuarial report
is a thick document that goes
into the demographics of our
organization, our investment
earnings, they look at
retirement patterns, they look
at uh the makeup of male to
female, uh, how often, you know,
the average service credit, what
people are earning, what we
expect to pay in the future, and
based off of that, if we took
last year's data, what we
reported for 2023 in that
actuary report and we fast
forwarded with a handful of
modest ads.
to that. We reduced our unfunded
actuaryly accrue liability to
$9.2 billion still a huge sum of
money. The normal cost rate, uh,
what we should be the normal
cost rate to pay off those
long-term liabilities is 14.71%.
It bumped up our funding ratio
to 16.7%. Uh, the contribution,
the funding policy, ultimately
if we're collecting 17.4% pay
versus the 18.15% that's set in
statute, we will meet our
funding objectives over that
30-year period.
Not to say that we want to give
money back or reduce it to 17.4%
because these numbers change
every actuarial study that uh
that we go through, but
basically this is just to
support that we're on our path
toward a full funding period,
which you can see down below it
being 25 years and 2.5 decades,
seems like a long time away, but
ultimately, uh, we're on a
sustainable path. And then the
last slide that I have here for
you and something you guys may
hear about, certainly, I think
some of the discussion around
Gatsby requirements.
has sort of died down, but there
are two very important reports
that reproduce each year, uh,
Gatsby, according to Gasby's
statement number 67 and the
other one, that applies to the
education retirement Board and
then 68, which applies to our
employer groups.
References here based upon our
assumed in uh investment return
of 7% or net pension liabilities
are $8.6 billion. And the
difference between the net
pension liabilities of $8.6
billion versus the uh the
reference on the previous page
here that we have regarding the
unfunded accrued actuary
liabilities as one uses the
market value of our investments,
the net pension liabilities
versus the unfunded accrued
actuarial liabilities which uses
a five-year smoothing method
for.
cul ating those, those, those
differences. Um, you can see
under Gatsby 68, the information
that we produce to give to those
220 employer groups that they
then use and turn around and put
it in their financial statements
uh during the audit period every
year, just as an example, APS
represents about $1.4 billion of
the $9 billion unfunded
liability CNM just under $200
million. Las Cruces Public
Schools $437 million and you and
him about 1.3 billion.
And uh with that, uh, Mr.
Chairman and members of the
committee, I'd be happy to
answer any questions. The last
thing that I would make mention
of is this year we will be
having some legislation that we
bring forward, um, nothing sexy
in any way. A lot of technical
adjustments in terms of some of
the language that needs to be
included in the Education and
Retirement Act, uh, some
clarifying language to match up
with our business practices and
eliminate any sort of, um,
conflict that we'd have either
with rule or with uh federal
requirements.
And that's basically uh all we
bring be bringing forward. I
know it'll go through the
committee process and through
the floor. Hopefully you'll find
yourselves in support of what
we're proposing to do. None of
it requires any sort of fiscal
impact to our organization or to
the state, but a lot of it is
just necessary technical cleanup
language that needs to occur and
back to being uh.
Answer any questions you may
have.
All right, thank you.
Questions committee.
We're ready now, Senator
Maestas, go for it. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. Thank you so much
and thank you, uh.
Director Arurli for your work
and your staff is tremendously
responsive and really appreciate
what you do for all, all of, all
the former employees, my mom, I
think a retiree in this system.
But, um,
Couple of things. I don't have a
a form in front of me, but you
call it a 100% like to get to
100%, does that mean that?
Or or let me just back up. So
the liability is if you were to
pay out everything today,
correct? And so 100% would mean
that there would be no
liabilities today. So, Mr.
Chairman and uh Senator Maestas,
basically for 100% funded we'd
have dollar for dollar for every
obligation we have into the
future. So not only for the
retirees receiving a benefit
today, but those folks that have
earned a benefit up until this
point. Those active members that
are paying to the program. OK,
thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Director Archilta so.
It's a, I just try to trying to
get the term, but I, um, this is
a policy choice we made several
years ago, um, it's a policy
choice that swept the nation.
And so, uh, I just want to make
the point that I think it's bad
public policy. I think it's bad
public policy for a couple of
reasons. One is the government's
not going to go belly up.
Yeah, if you're a private
corporation, you know, you, it
may be in your interest or maybe
in the society's interest to to
be at a 100% but the government
doesn't have to be because the
government's gonna be around
1020, 30 years down the road. At
number 2 is that, uh, I think,
you know, 60% is bad. I think
90% is probably not necessary, I
think.
I think somewhere around 74% is
prudent in terms of uh in terms
of the, you know, what would be
the payout today.
Uh, all future liabilities, um,
so I think that's a good goal
if, if, if we were go, if we did
have a policy in the state to,
to hover around 75-80%.
I don't think we need to
increase retirement benefits,
but I think we need to lower
contributions. If we were to go
100%.
That 20% or so essentially.
Goes into the pot and gets and
gets invested in international
stocks and and bonds if we did
not go 100% and we kept it at
80, that 20% of the funds, so to
speak, would be in people's
pockets spent in our local
community, so I think it's, I
think what our current public
policy does is take money from
Main Street.
And give it to Wall Street. I
truly do. But, um, but anyway,
that that debate already
occurred and and uh my.
position did not win the day.
But lastly, there's the folks, I
don't recall the particulars,
Mr. Chairman, but what happens
when somebody, a coach, a
teacher retires and then they go
back to coaching or, or, or, for
example, and they're in that
window where they would then
lose their retirement benefit.
Did you guys fix that by rule or
do we need to if in fact we want
to fix that, did you guys fix it
by rule or do we need to make a
statutory fix.
For that group of to incentivize
folks returning to work part
time. So, Mr. Chairman and
Senator Maestas, I'll I'll, I'll
work backwards uh based on the
comments and questions that you
had as far as the 100% funding
and status. There are, there are
a lot of things that we are
trying to plan for today that
we, you know, obviously the
makeup of the people we
represent is going to evolve
into the future, right? So we're
part of what, uh, a group called
the National Association of
State Retirement Administrators,
um, basically.
Planship plans across the
nation. We just attended the
conference, their annual
conference that they had there.
One of the things that they're
talking about and one of the
reasons that we have a standard
of 100% is, you know, there are
a lot of things into the future,
particularly in New Mexico, uh,
we spoke to the to the
demographer at UNM the I I'm
skipping the name now
responsible for conducting a lot
of studies that I think are used
in some of the policy work that
you guys perform, you know,
there isn't expected to be any
growth in the population here in
New Mexico for the next 30
years, basically flat and in the
conversations we had
about, you know, younger
families, you know, staying here
and the need for, you know,
educators, there's going to come
a point in time where they're
more retirees drawing upon the
pool of funds that we have, then
there are people contributing to
it. Uh, when those lines cross,
it's difficult to tell, but
that's one thing that we have to
plan for. The other significant
thing, and this is good news
basically under any scenario,
financially not so much. But one
of the things that they brought
up, and this is already becoming
true is cancer is more of a
chronic.
Condition. I have family members
that have, uh, been affected by
cancer, have passed away from
cancer, but a cure is sort of on
the horizon. And with that, life
expectancy is expected to go up
substantially, and that's great
news. I think most people would
agree that.
What that means that our
long-term liabilities are
expected to grow into the future
as well. So longer people live,
we're going to have people that
are working 30 years into the
system and drawing a pension for
40 or longer and there's a
fundamental imbalance between
those contributions that they
paid in during that time in the
amount of money that we would
need to earn in terms of
investments to make up the
difference and that's hence the,
the, the need for the 100%
standard, not defending it. Uh,
I'm just saying that's the, the,
the reason why we have that sort
of standard.
And as far as, um, the return to
work policy for people who
retire and would like to either
work part-time, go back to
coaching as an example that you
gave. There are a couple
different programs that we have
in place today. The first of
which is you can go back any
0.25 capacity or 0.5% capacity.
There's no waiting period.
Basically, after you retire and
you're officially retired, you
can sign some paperwork. I mean,
theoretically, there's a waiting
period because you have to
retire on a Friday and you can't
go back on Monday. You actually
had to be retired. You can come
back to work
And in that 0.25 capacity, 10
hours per week per 10 hours per
week or less or however your
employer defines it, you can,
you can go back to work for an
indefinite period of time. The
other program that we have in
place is $15,000 or less. So if
you're gonna earn less than
$15,000 after 90 days, you can
return to work and make that
less than 15,000. Or now if you
wait out uh 90 days, you can go
back and you can work for 36
consecutive or non-consecutive
months. So those are the return
to work programs that we have in
place.
Today, I think the problem that
you're referencing is when
someone didn't fill out the
paperwork and didn't receive
permission. So right now, what
happens under that scenario,
unless they were not truly
eligible to participate. So if I
didn't weed out any period and I
went back, OK, then we have to
suspend you and recoup those
payments made to you during that
period of ineligibility.
We jeopardize that tax exempt
status with the IRS if we don't
have those rules in place, OK?
But if you were otherwise
eligible, you waited out the 90
days.
Or you were only working part
time or that 0.25% capacity and
we finally, we, we pick it up
and remember, payroll is
reported to us.
A month later, by the time it's
reconciled and we detect that
you're hitting payroll, we're,
we're about 2 months down the
road, you're into monthly of
earning another paycheck. Um,
that's, that's part of the
problem, but basically at, at
that point in time we're going
to send you a notice saying,
hey, you forgot to turn out your
paperwork. Come on into the
office, fill it out. If you say,
go fly a kite, I don't need to
submit anything. We're gonna
give you that grace period if
you fail to come into
compliance, we'll suspend your
pension at that time, but we're
not going to go back to recoup
the payments that were made to
you during the period of
ineligibility.
So, thank you for the, for that.
I recall now, Mr. Chairman, it's
written in statute that the
employer shall.
The onus is on the employer, the
person who retires, so someone
who retires, they don't fill out
the paperwork, they go back to
work, coaching, whatever they,
they owe the.
They owe the ERB like 3000 or
whatever. So I'm really happy
that you allow them to sign the
paperwork after the fact, um, if
that statute ever comes across
our desk, Mr. Chairman, we
should probably put the onus on
the school district as opposed
to the employee. Uh, but I'm
glad that those persons have a
way to rectify that situation
after the fact. And then, um,
And then I'm aware of the of the
arguments uh regarding 100%
liability. The, the demographer
I'm actually going to meet with
that demographer who was part of
the Doomsday report we got an
LFC two days ago where they're
taking data from the Great
Recession and the and the
pandemic and applying it for the
next 30 years. And so I think
that demographer is in huge,
huge error considering every
single state around us grew in
the last 2 years, we just have
to, if in fact that's what we
want to do, we just do what they
do. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Others with questions,
questions.
All right, seeing no other
questions, I don't have any
either. Thank you all. Thank you
very much.
All right, so we're a little bit
ahead of schedule and we're
waiting on a couple of our
presenters, so, oh, let's take a
little bit of a break. Let me
check.
Oh, I got a good amount of time.
Well, we'll see where we're at
at 1:30 and if not, we'll wait a
little bit longer, but we'll see
where we're at at 1:30.
