Um, with me is Tommy Hernandez,
who's our director of public
policy and uh between the two of
us, we are going to give you a,
a brief overview of some
activities that we've had
underway and working with the
legislature and the
administration, um, and, uh,
talk a little bit about content
about elder affairs, um, and
then hand it over to the aging
department who has some comments
as well. Uh, we work very
closely with them and so we
wanted to present.
ourselves as we are unified, a
unified force.
Uh
You have a, you have a series of
PowerPoints and I'm not going to
read everything that's on every
page, but I am gonna reference
every page and uh just so you
are aware, we do have a, a, a
very robust and challenging
vision at the Alzheimer's
Association, and that is to end
it.
kill the killer. There's no cure
for Alzheimer's disease at this
point in time, and I'm gonna
talk about some things that
we're doing, uh, to chase that
cure, um, um, but among them is.
Deep commitment to research and
in fact our research is global,
um, through fundraising private
donations, and some government
grants, uh, we fund grants and
research around the world, um,
uh, primarily in the United
States but around the world, um,
to find treatments, um, and, um,
and diagnostics and fund about a
half a billion dollars a year
through private donations and a
handful of government.
Grants from the NIH and the CDC,
um, uh, in, in order to pursue
this chase for a cure for
Alzheimer's. I suspect one of
you here today.
In some fashion.
Has been touched by dementia.
Either within your family.
Uh, direct family, friends,
loved ones. Uh, we find that
almost everywhere we go that
there is a connection to this
disease by people, um,
everywhere.
Um, I would also note that um
through the work of the
Alzheimer's Association, there
are two treatments on the
market.
And they are designed to work
with people who have what are
called early onset. People who
develop Alzheimer's symptoms,
um, or dementia symptoms.
In their late 40s or early 50s,
and believe me, there, that is a
population that has always been
there, but through improved
diagnostics we're recognizing
them, and the two treatments
that are on the market right now
are designed to slow the
progression of the disease.
There is not yet a cure to stop
it, but there is a lot of
activity going on in that
regard, including here in our
home state at UNM, uh, who
through their brain and memory
center have a major NIH grant,
um, uh, that is focused on
coming up with uh through
clinical trials, um, solutions
to potentially vaccine
development, um, and, uh, and
other ways to
slow the progression of the
disease.
Um, dementia is a term at it's,
it's very common. Dementia is a
term that is actually an
umbrella that is considered a
syndrome and under dementia are
various forms of uh dementia
diseases. Alzheimer's disease
makes up roughly 60 to 80% of
dementia cases, but you will
hear about, for example, uh, the
unfortunate passing of Gene
Hackman.
Uh, in, in Santa Fe, where the
family didn't know he had had
Alzheimer's disease. They knew
he had cardiovascular problems.
He died, uh, and it was, and,
and it was not a surprise from a
clinical point of view that he
had these what are called
comorbidities, both, uh,
Alzheimer's disease and heart
disease. You often find people
with dementia of various forms,
uh, also have heart problems,
also have diabetes.
Diabetes and there are a few
other uh comorbidities that are,
are common and um and, and we
take that into account with our
research. Here in New Mexico.
Um, just a, just a few facts and
figures that are relatively
current, uh, 12% of the people
in our state, 65 and older, my
age and older.
Um, um, have, have, are
diagnosed with Alzheimer's. That
does not include a huge
population that has gone
undiagnosed. There's so many
people, as many of you know, uh,
who work, who represent.
Both urban and rural areas that
access to care can be difficult
and access to care by providers
who understand the dementia
cycle is even harder to find in
our state. We are so very short
in the number of neurologists
and geriatricians who are the
kinds of doctors to work with
patients with, with Alzheimer's
and other forms of dementia.
Let's never forget that in
addition to that 12%.
that we have identified that
live with Alzheimer's who were
65 and older, there are another
67,000 people who are taking
care of these people, and I'm
not talking about caregivers
that are working for
institutions or working for
assisted living facilities. I'm
talking about caregivers in the
home, um, that typically our
loved ones, uh, often are a
spouse.
And when you think about
somebody with Alzheimer's who's
a senior and their spouse is
their primary caretaker. You can
just imagine that that spouse
may be vulnerable to disease,
him or herself as well, and
often have their own chronic
health problems.
If you were to
Attach a dollar amount to the
amount of caregiving that is
given to Alzheimer's patients in
our state alone.
The economics would show it's
$120 million per year in unpaid
value for, for loved ones caring
for uh uh people with
Alzheimer's.
Now, there's a Medicaid spend as
well. Yes, ma'am.
clarify something. So.
The numbers that you're talking
about are diagnosed cases or, or
expected cases, diagnosed cases,
ma'am, thank you. Yes, thank
you, Madam Chair, for clarifying
that.
There is a Medicaid spend
associated with Alzheimer's in
our state, uh, it's just a, uh,
a little bit north of $300
million. When you hear, uh, more
in our presentation, we're gonna
talk about ways that we think
that the Medicaid dollar can be
reduced by certain interventions
that require a small outlay of
funding, um, and, uh, uh.
You know, for those of you, I'm
a retired hospital executive.
I've been CEO of large uh
academic medical centers like
UNMH but not there in other
parts of the country, and I know
you've listened to Troy Clark
from the New Mexico Hospital
Association, who also sits on
our board, by the way, talk
about key indicators in
hospitals, and I used to pay
attention to this all the time
that one of those is the
readmission rate. How often are
people coming?
back to the hospital after
they've been discharged.
Well, for the typical
readmission rate for
non-Azheimer's, non-dementia
patients.
That readmission rate is under
5%.
Which is actually unacceptable.
That's high in New Mexico.
But for Alzheimer's and dementia
patients, the readmission rate
for an overnight stay or
multiple overnight stays is over
20.5%.
Uh, so that tells you that these
are patients, these are people
with many, many needs, and
again, we have ideas on how we
might be able to trim that back.
Also in New Mexico,
I frame our state from, from a
demographic point of view as a
petri dish.
For Alzheimer's and dementia.
And what I mean by that is that
this wicked disease state.
Through, through research, we
have found, um,
Shows that Hispanics and Latinos
are about 1.5 times more likely
as older whites to develop
Alzheimer's disease and older
Native Americans and African
Americans haven't even higher
vulnerability likelihood to have
uh Alzheimer's disease. It can
be um genetic, it can be
inherited, but it can also
develop of its own accord
organically.
So when you think about New
Mexico's population, you
compared to almost any other
state in the nation.
We are populated with a very
high percentage of Native
Americans.
Hispanics, Latinos.
African Americans, people who
are the most vulnerable to uh
Alzheimer's and other forms of
dementia.
Lastly, and I'm sorry to the,
to, to the women on the
committee to tell you this about
women are also 5 times more
regardless of race, 5 times more
likely to have, uh, uh, dementia
or Alzheimer's after age 65. If
you live to be 80, there is a
better than 50% chance that you
have
Uh, Alzheimer's, it may be
early, it may be advanced, uh,
but those are the facts that the
research shows.
Mm.
I'll go and introduce the next
slide, uh, Madam Chair, Madam
Vice Chair, members of the
committee.
So you've heard from our
executive director talk, uh,
very, uh, descriptively about
why Alzheimer's disease is
ringing the alarm bells here in
our state for many reasons. We
included gender, we included
ethnicity, we included the cost
burdens on some of our systems,
but what I wanna talk about is
that while that news is very
unfortunate and it certainly is
very alarming. Uh, we're very
pleased to share that the
Alzheimer's Association has a
public policy response.
Our public policy response is
guided by core principles of how
we begin to address this
disease. So I'd like to
respectfully call the
committee's attention, Madam
Chair, to state level policy
priorities title page.
Now, what we're looking at here
is we're looking at 4 bullet
points at the top, and these are
in particular order. Advanced
risk reduction and care
planning.
provide an example of what that
looks like, that could look like
a public awareness campaign,
which we are very proud to talk
about in some future slides in
our partnership with the Aging
and Long Term Services
Department. Moving to the second
bullet point, Madam Chair,
members Committee, enhanced care
and support in the community.
This could look like a respite
care program, which again, we're
very proud to see that the state
has invested and continues to
make investments and moving down
ensure access to diagnostics and
treatment subbulleted by AD,
which is acronym for Alzheimer's
disease, drugs and blood test
coverage in state.
Employee group benefits plan and
Medicaid. To drill down a little
bit further on that, Madam
Chair, members, we're very
pleased to see that we are now
in the era of treatment. This is
a phrase that the Alzheimer's
Association is broadcasting and
very, very pleased to be
embracing. We now feel that with
two FDA approved drugs and most
recently an FDA approved, uh,
blood test, we know that this
arrow treatment is going to
deliver a lot of promise and
save a lot of lives as well as
save a lot of dollars on state
resources. So we're very excited
about bullet point number.
3 and where that is going to go.
Lastly, support quality of care,
this is a very broad statement.
It's intended to be because when
we talk about the quality of
care, we need to take a look at
a wide lens of where care is
delivered. Care may be delivered
in the home by unpaid
caregivers, perhaps some of you.
Care may be delivered in
long-term care facilities, which
we're very proud to see that
this legislature has enacted
legislation that does require
training in long-term care
facilities for those direct care
workers. So when we talk and
examine the final bullet point
of the state level policy
priorities. That is a very broad
approach because caregiving and
care is a very broad lens that
needs to be examined.
So moving to the next page,
Madam Chair, members, we're
looking at federal level policy
priorities. Before I begin to go
into this, I want to talk a
little bit more about the robust
comprehensive approach, the
Alzheimer's Association takes.
You heard me just cover our
state level policy priorities,
which colleagues of mine in
every state are advancing one of
those 4 bullet points. When we
talk about federal level policy
priorities. I want to talk a
little bit about, uh, an
activity we engaged in last
month on Capitol Hill where
myself, Dawn.
Members of our board and
volunteer advocates, some of
whom belong to your, uh, our
constituents of yours, Madam
Chair members. We engaged in a
robust advocacy campaign on
Capitol Hill.
We're very proud to say that New
Mexico's congressional
delegation warmly embraced and
received us as we got to cover
our federal level priorities. So
I'm gonna go and go in the order
again, these are in a particular
order of what level each
priority is. Starting from the
top, research will always be our
foremost priority.
That speaks to what Don
mentioned earlier in his
presentation and his, and his
remarks rather, that our
ultimate goal is a world without
Alzheimer's. We know that the
only pathway to a world without
Alzheimer's is through research,
which will lead to development
of new treatments and hopefully
optimistically, a cure or
prevention. So to put a figure
of what that first bullet looks
like, we're asking for $113
million additional dollars that
would go from congressional
appropriation to the National
Institutes of Health for
research.
If passed and approved by
Congress, that would put it to
nearly $4 billion annually in
recurring appropriation for that
research. So we're very, very
optimistic. Congress will meet a
level with us on that dollar
amount. You also see the bold
act, and we know that acronyms
are loved not only in state
legislatures, but obviously on
Capitol Hill as well. Um, that
bold act is building our largest
dementia infrastructure. We are
seeking $35 million in
congressional appropriations to
continue to grow that program
that was.
several years ago.
Moving down to bullet point
number 2. This is another fun
one I like to say, ASAP,
Alzheimer's screening and
Prevention Act.
I'm not gonna go through each
one, Madam Chair, but I will
gladly take questions later. We
move down to bullet point number
3, accelerating access dementia
and Alzheimer's Provider
Training Act, and lastly, the
credit for Caring Act, which I
feel would have a particularly
positive impact here in New
Mexico, given how many unpaid
caregivers and the unpaid uh
value of caregiving Don had
mentioned earlier in his
remarks.
and passed back to Don Manger.
So one of the here back home.
And as Tommy said, we work not
only with the legislature and
the administration here at home.
Uh, we have an entire, um,
lobbying and political
apparatus, uh, that, uh, works
very hard with the Congress,
professional committee staff to
advance our cause and um
Uh, 15 years ago, uh, there was
Less than $100 million in the
National Institutes of Health to
fund it and support research
around Alzheimer's today,
there's $3.6 billion. We are now
in the same conversation as
cancer and HIV.
As you also know.
With the appointment of a new
director of the National
Institutes of Health and a, and
a, I will call it a proclamation
from the federal administration
that they're going to cut the
NIH by 40%, that may be
rhetoric, uh, maybe hyperbole,
it may be reality, but I, I
attended, uh, a hearing where uh
I heard that uh
Discussed and cussed, um, by
both sides of the aisle with the
new director of the NAIH and we
saw, um, lawmakers from all
over, from, from that's why we
wear purple from both sides of
the aisle supporting initiatives
to maintain funding for
Alzheimer's and dementia
research at the National
Institutes of Health and the
Centers for Disease Control,
both of which are very, very
important partners with us.
Here in the state, we also value
very much our collaboration with
state aging department, and the
solutions to
mitigating
The, the risks that Alzheimer's
and dementia bring to our people
and our state can only be done
in collaboration with state
government.
And so one of the things that
we've done together last fiscal
year, um, was a public awareness
campaign that uh the Alzheimer's
Association and the Aging
department collaborated on
significant dollar investment in
this public awareness campaign
using outdoor advertising, the
picture on the slide that that
shows uh um.
Uh, kind of a, a, a street sign
that says, honey, you've been
confused, actually is, uh, been,
uh, uh, evolved into billboards
in every part of the state, big
purple billboards. For those of
you in Berne County and you
drive around the big eye, you'll
see at least 2 of those
billboards just outside of, of
Las Vegas on I-25 on your way to
Clayton, you'll see several
signs. You go down to Lordsburg
on your way, you're going to
see.
sides, you're gonna see them in
Rosville and Hobbs, you're gonna
see them in Ratton. They're all
over the state, uh, plus is
extensive investment in other
media outlets, including
digital, um, and, uh, and radio
and traditional newspapers and,
and, and, and hard copy.
Moreover,
Through our partnership with the
state aging department. They've
invested in our what we call
walk to end Alzheimer's. We
sponsor and put on walks that
are volunteer driven in 7
different markets across the
state. And um and we raise a lot
of, we try to raise a lot of
private donations that
ultimately go into the research
bucket and the aging department
has made a robust.
Um, um, sponsorship support for
the walk to end Alzheimer's in
every one of those 7 markets
across the state and for that we
are deeply appreciative.
Yes. Thank you, Don. Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
I'd like to call your attention
to the slide, uh, that is named
House Memorial 53 2025
legislation, and we'd like to
call attention and also give uh
very much appreciation to a
member of this committee,
Representative Herndon, for her
leadership on House Memorial 53.
This was something that we put
to the top of our priority list
along with a couple other things
with the aging department, uh,
out of the last legislative
session. So from House Memorial
53, it's gonna
a couple things, um, and we're
gonna talk a little bit about
where we hope that ultimate
direction is going to go in some
slights to come. But in simple
summary, Madam Chair, members,
House Memorial 53 requests
collaboration among ALTSD,
meaning the aging department,
Department of Health, and of
course the Alzheimer's
Association to do many things,
but to highlight a few of some
of those things, grow public
awareness and understanding, as
we mentioned, the take action
talk campaign did such, uh,
work. Awareness of Alzheimer's
disease and other dementias
focusing on risk reduction,
early detection.
An early detection really want
to underscore that as we look
forward to this era of treatment
and what will come from that.
And the relationship between
chronic disease and cognitive
decline. I think it goes without
saying, but still needs to be
said that we know that certain
chronic diseases that exist in
high prevalence numbers here in
New Mexico are associated with
cognitive decline.
For example, diabetes. So when
we talk about that, the, the
relationship between those two
health conditions, and then we
also look back to some of Don's
earlier comments about race,
ethnicity, gender, um,
underserved communities that
have access or uh less access to
healthcare facilities and
healthcare professionals, again,
back to that word of it being a
petri dish. So we are very
pleased to see that House
Memorial 53 really sets the
stage and serves as a vehicle
for policy solutions.
That we look forward to engaging
in discussion and arriving at
with those state agencies
mentioned above. The work group
will have its first planning
committee on July 30th and
expects to have several meetings
to develop and submit policy
recommendations and report on
agency-led initiatives relating
to the requests of HM 53.
So what's the verb? Where's the
beef? What's the plan?
And uh so on the next slide, we,
we attempt to describe to you,
um, a solution, at least a
starting point for a solution to
mitigate the risk and of people.
Uh, developing Alzheimer's,
delaying it.
And we call that the dementia
care specialist program. This
isn't new.
This was, was first presented
again through the good works of
Representative Herndon in 2023,
uh, in the form of legislation.
And this is an evidence-based
policy solution that has worked
in a number of other states. But
let me tell you very quickly
what it is. What the dementia
care specialist program is, is a
model wherein
In our case, what we're
proposing a $1 million outlay to
allow a state agency, aging
department, for example, through
the area agent agencies on aging
or whatever other appropriate
bureau with within the
department to hire
professionally trained dementia
care specialist to go out into
the state and in rural areas
areas, frontier areas, tribal
areas, and urban areas to work
with providers, physicians,
advanced practice nurses to help
them learn about the key
indicators and help them learn
how to diagnose, assess,
diagnose, and screen for
dementia. They would also work
with the caregiver community and
give them tips, training on how
to care for.
their loved one who may be
suffering from, from this
terrible disease state.
So, some of you may wonder, uh,
what a million bucks, that's a
lot of money or a million bucks
isn't a lot of money, but let me
tell you this, um, we're a poor
state, you know, you deal with
that, you struggle with that,
um, but there are other poor
states in the United States that
have recently adopted this very
program.
It all started in what we call
the Wisconsin model, um.
It is a model that has actually
been adopted in a number of
other states and just when you
were in session earlier this
year, the state of Louisiana,
which is second only to us in
New Mexico in percentage of
Medicaid recipients.
Not a number to brag about, uh,
the state of Louisiana passed
this very program at this very
dollar amount, very close to it,
to implement and again that is a
state that is second only to us
in, in poverty if you use
Medicaid recipient percentage as
an indicator of poverty in a
state.
And other states like Georgia,
Indiana, North Dakota, which is
also a poor state, um, and in
particular, Wisconsin, they've
been rolling with this program,
start with a pilot and then
expand, um, and as I say all
over the state and to try to
improve access to care by
providing these trained dementia
care specialist workers. Um, and
we, as I said earlier, we see
this being managed.
by the state, but we would, as
the Alzheimer's Association
provide training content and
technical support to make it
work, and again, it is working
in Wisconsin, it started with 5
dementia care specialists. Today
they have 59, uh, dementia care
specialists and, and, and with
worker's place in every
sovereign, um, uh, native
community as well as
Almost every uh township and,
and, and community across that
state and again I'd like to
recognize Representative Herndon
is the first to draft
legislation calling for this
program 2 years ago.
Madam Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
members of the committee, I'm
gonna go ahead and take us a
little bit further into the what
and the why of a dementia care
specialist model program. Well,
the what is laid out and what we
hope are some very simple
phrases there you may see on the
slide.
It could be run in partnership
between the aging and long-term
Services Department and the
Triple A's. Now, where we
borrowed this language from is
that we see at this partnership,
this type of formation in other
states delivers the greatest
outcomes for success and
measurable performance. So while
we present this as a model
simply from being used and
utilized in other states. Now,
examining New Mexico, the AAAs
here have an existing strategic
community presence and a
statewide footprint.
It would strengthen the AAA
network and better support
family caregivers, which is a
core function of the Triple A's
here in our state. And lastly,
it would advance local efforts
to build dementia friendly
communities across New Mexico.
So to talk a little bit now on
the other side of it is what is
the scope of work of a typical
dementia care specialist. Again,
borrowing from other states and
how they are utilizing these key
staff, caregiver education and
support, community-wide
education and awareness,
facilitation of relationships
with local health care providers
and related.
stakeholders. I find this
particularly uh highly potential
for out for positive outcomes in
New Mexico's we, we know there
are many resources out there,
but we also sadly know is that
there is a fracture, a
disconnect of those resources.
So I in particular have my
attention drawn to that 3rd 1 on
the list. Basic direct care
worker education opportunities
as well.
Moving along, Madam Chair, Madam
Vice Chair, members.
We are looking at the slide, the
page rather that is titled
Dementia Care Specialist
Program. Now what we have here
is a sample model of how this
program could be implemented.
Again, I just want to really
underscore that this is only a
proposed model. Again, borrowing
from our examination of other
states.
Most appropriately, Madam Chair,
uh, Madam Vice Chair members,
LHHS Committee, we see as having
a very, very strong and
prominent role in this
establishment of this policy
proposal down to an
appropriation, state agency and
shooting off to the left of the
state agency block, we see AA
for Alzheimer's Association, as
you heard from Don just a few
moments ago. We stand very much
ready to deliver on our
expertise, our experience, our
resources to assist the agency
or any agencies for that matter.
Who may be interested in
adopting this policy proposal to
make sure that they are able to
deliver and deploy this program,
which is the last block on the
page.
So, in a moment I'm gonna do
another handoff, but if there's
one thing you take away from
this presentation today.
If you didn't hear anything we
said, there's one or, or maybe
you, you forget it because you
have more work to do that is
also pressing.
I would like you to remember
that there is a, a, a magnet
that can go on every
refrigerator of every elder in
the state that has a hotline.
And it is staff 24 by 7 by over
200 people.
And, uh, and it's available in
over 211 languages and we are
distributing these to anyone
that will take them, but that's
the one take home message if any
of you
are connected to somebody with
dementia. This free 24/7
helpline which is staffed by
masters level trained, often
social workers or or or
clinicians in this arena that
provide support to the
caregiver.
Uh, as well as to the patient.
Um, and, and with that, uh, we
will be happy to take Q and A,
but I'd like to, to hand the mic
over to Deputy Secretary of the
Aging department, who also has a
few comments.
Adam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you for the
opportunity and uh the
invitation to speak today with
the Alzheimer's Association.
Uh, first, I do want to
introduce myself. My name is
Angelina Flores Montoya. I'm
deputy secretary with Aging and
Long-term Services. I am new to
the agency, um.
But I'm not new to aging. I
actually am a nurse and I have a
long background in caring for
older adults in long term care
spaces, so I just wanted to
share some information there on
that. I also do want to start
with a thank you for your
support and uh uh relaunching
the long-term care division, uh,
where the Office of Alzheimer's
and Dementia Care will live. And
so in the final slide, uh,
you'll see that there are a few
updates for the Office of
Alzheimer's and dementia, um,
and so I'll start with our life
span res.
Grant, if uh you are not
familiar, it is a federal grant
to support um caregivers uh
through re respite services, uh,
and there's a number of
opportunities for us to be able
to do that here in New Mexico.
So the focus here uh for the
lifespan repent is uh through
education, training, providing
respite services and adult
daycare services and supporting
those family caregivers as well
as those professional
caregivers. So, uh, uh, Don and
Tommy here mentioned the uh.
amount of education, awareness
and training that is needed both
for those family caregivers as
well as for those professional
caregivers who are providing
care in those, uh, long term
care spaces and assisted living
facilities.
In addition, we are, uh, uh,
going to be supporting some
dementia care specialist
training. Uh, we're still
working through the details and
what that's going to look like,
but the lifespan respite grant
will support the opportunity for
that and you heard a lot about
what that model and that program
uh could look like in the
benefits of that.
Second, we are going to be
starting to work on our Office
of Alzheimer's and dementia
state plan, which will go
through from 2026 through 2031
and the focus here uh are these
5 goals, which is education and
awareness, the focus on the
workforce, both those family
caregivers as well as the
professional caregivers,
caregiving supports, resources
and education, uh, service, what
types of services that uh that
our caregivers need and then the
policy and data component.
And then finally, as the
Alzheimer's Association shared,
we are working on our dementia
task force, our first meeting is
next week, uh, thanks to
Representative Herndon here uh
for House Memorial 53, so.
short updates there, Madam
Chair.
Happy day, Madam Chair, Madam
Vice Chair, we're happy to
answer any or do our best to
answer any questions or clarify
any remarks.
OK, thank you. We will um start
with Representative Roel
Caballero.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I lost
track of the direction you were
going. So I'll thank you it's
random
unpredictable.
OK, so be on your toes and be
ready. OK, I am. So I have a few
questions, um,
And it, it's a hard topic for
our family because um.
We had to care for my
mother-in-law who is stage 4
Alzheimer's and uh
When we were faced with their
care.
We had a terrible time, um,
seeking Spanish speaking
caregivers.
Consequently, my husband, uh,
went and got trained.
And, um, became a certified.
Home health, whatever they're
called, associated in
Alzheimer's.
Care and then my son and I, um,
Where the
The caregivers as well.
So it was very difficult. So I
have one question right now.
The first question is, how large
is your pool of Spanish speaking
caregiving support right now,
and
Um, who's responsible for
recruiting.
And training and retaining.
That pool and when I say Madam
Chair, Spanish speaking, I don't
mean the translation. I mean the
everyday uh ability to converse.
With someone whose primary
language is Spanish.
Representative Caballero, uh,
uh, appreciate that question. It
is very relevant and it's
something that we are focused
on. Um, I can't give you an
answer on the number of uh
Spanish speaking uh program, uh,
and awareness educators that we
have on staff have available to
us, we are in the process of
training more and more
volunteers to be certified as
you described your husband was
certified, uh, moreover, um,
We are developing our collateral
material, uh, in a bilingual
format, um, um, coming from a
healthcare background myself,
like the deputy secretary, um,
uh, it's important for those who
are speaking a language that is
not English, around this, uh,
uh, any clinical area also be
proficient in clinical.
Spanish
Uh, dialogue, not, not just
conversational, um, and, and so
when, when we trained
volunteers, that's the direction
we go. Spanish is not the only
language. There are other needs,
but yes, ma'am.
So
Thank you for that. We're
pressed for time, so I want us
to move along. I understand
that.
Excuse me, and that is a
critical component. The other
part of my question has to do,
and it's unfortunately you don't
have the, the answer and it's
because your research, your page
on New Mexicans among most at
risk indicate that uh Hispanic
Latinos are 1.5 times as likely,
and I would say more, or more
likely than others too.
Fall in the spectrum. So the
other aspect of my question and
for you to think about and for
us to follow up on is also the
need for um the respite care. So
between the three of us, it was
difficult. We needed time off.
We could never have time off
because there was no no one
clinically or caregiving wise,
able to
kick in for us, and that's
critically important for the
care, for giving a good care
because the caregiver, primary
caregivers must have time off,
respite care, especially when
you're 24/7. So I have more
questions, but we can visit
later and I also wanna know what
the role of the state agency on
aging is in all of this because
I see they, you have to answer
right now. I see they as being
um at the top of your chart.
versus where you put LHHS
committee.
I see it the other way around.
It needs to be distributed in my
view, quite differently. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative Herndon, and hero
of the presentation, sit up
straight and tall.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you presenters for
bringing this presentation
forward and to the secretary on
Aging and Long-term Services.
Thank you. And it's really
important to highlight the fact,
uh, how important this is with
the diversity in our state and a
state where women
exceed the number of men, so the
likelihood of, of Alzheimer's is
very high, so Madam Secretary,
you talked about the dementia
care specialist program and that
you were working on that. Do you
have a date when that's gonna be
launched and what else would you
like the legislature to do to
help you with that.
Uh,
Madam Chair, Representative
Hardin, thank you for the
question. Uh, we just received
notice that we were approved for
the grant on July 1st, so we are
working through our timeline and
the project management in terms
of the implementation are one
staff member who works in the
office of Alzheimer's currently
is uh working on her application
to get her certification in
August, is my understanding if
all the paperwork goes through
smoothly and then we're working
on our plan and how we can
expand that certification to
others in the community.
Thank you very much, Madam
Secretary, and then it's really
important that we share this
information with our state and I
hope we have a really good
advertising and uh
communications program set and
also I just wanted to remind
everybody that it's Saturday,
August to October 25th is the
date for the, the walk to uh
stop Alzheimer's in New Mexico.
So I hope everybody's putting
that date on that calendar and
they'll all be there. So, uh,
thank you, Madam Secretary,
Madam.
Madam, Madam Chairwoman.
It was very good.
Thank you. I'm sorry, we're,
we're strategizing about the
future, um, for this committee.
So Representative Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you so much for great
presentation. I only have one
question for you. I won't grill
you this time.
But regarding the dementia care
specialist program. I'm just
wondering, you said a million
dollars, I think that was the
figure you guys gave. How did we
get to that? And then what does
it look like in other states
when it comes to funding,
because I know you've said that
they have grown in places like
Louisiana and other places. So
can you just go into how you got
that figure in New Mexico, since
we have such a high need.
Uh, very, very relevant
question, Representative Block.
Thank you for that. Um, so, uh,
a million dollars, um, uh, is
drawn from experience from other
states, and it would fund 5
dementia care specialists, we
would insist on bilingualism,
uh, among some of them, uh, in
Spanish, uh, and some native
languages, Tewa and and Navajo,
uh, in particular, uh, and, and,
and
And, and, and English, um, and
so 5 dementia care specialists
that includes their all of their
salary and benefits as well as
the training and um and they're
operating costs on a regular
basis. Um, so that's the
starting point, Representative
Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for the answer.
Representative Cates, thank you,
Madam Chair. um, I thank you
very much and welcome, uh, Madam
Secretary. um, we're all happy
that uh we have brought back the
long-term aging and care.
Um, what did these dementia care
specialists actually do when you
get 5 of them.
Uh, thank you for the question,
Representative Cates. So a
dementia care specialist is
typically gonna be somebody
whose masters prepared, um, who
has had clinical training. It
could be from the nursing side.
It could be from the social work
side.
And uh they would work with
providers in rural communities
and then underserved urban areas
as well to um train, um,
providers, uh, be they
physicians, uh, uh, uh, a
physician assistants, nurse
practitioners, I'm so sorry
she's gonna cut me off and so I
have to cut out so they're
providing education for
providers. And so, um, uh, I, I
very much appreciate the
The education, um, of our
general public and also I'm a
big uh supporter of being able
to support our direct care
providers. What I don't see in
this presentation, Madam
Secretary, and I'd like you to
seriously consider it with your
task force is we have an
enormous amount of fraud that is
being targeted towards our
elderly, especially individuals
with dementia, our guardianship
program.
Making sure that people are
diagnosed in the courts level,
making sure that they are
protected either with fiscal
guardianship or full
guardianship, they are extremely
vulnerable. I've had many cases,
um, that have been brought to my
attention and I understand that
that is not the role of the
Alzheimer's Association, but it
is the role of our state agency
and so I would respectfully ask
you to consider to put this as
part of the criteria. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senators, uh, Senator
Shannon Pinto.
Thank you, Madam Chair. When you
spoke about the um um the
hotline. How is that funded?
Senator Pinto, it's funded
through private donations, uh,
uh, at the Alzheimer's
Association.
Thank you. And the second part
is just more of a comment or
maybe so right now the way
Alzheimer's treated, there's no
segregation of male to female.
I
There's no segregation. I'm not
quite sure, Senator Pinto, so
unlike our health care system
which says, well, women, you
know, we can't just get
healthcare for anything that our
needs are versus males who get
whatever they need all met, um,
that Alzheimer's, there's no
differentiation between male and
females as far as um services
are saying, well, we're not
gonna provide this because
they're females or anything like
that.
Absolutely not. No. In fact, I
would, I would say, and I know
we're limited on time, the
Alzheimer's Association has a
very, very strong commitment to
DE and I. We are an association
and organization globally that
really values inclusivity and
absolutely no segregation
whatsoever.
Thank you. um.
Senator Stephanics, thank you
very much, Madam Chair. Thank
you for the presentation, all of
you. First of all, um,
For the department aging and
long-term Services Department,
Madam Secretary, um, has there
not been some efforts in the
past to deal with Alzheimer's
and Alzheimer's services.
Thank you for the question,
Senator Stefanis.
I'm not familiar what has been
done in the past. I'm starting
to learn a little bit about that
reading some of our past state
plans that have been available
and some of the um hurdles that
have been, you know, uh, faced
with implementation, but I'm
starting to learn about that and
thinking through those
strategies and how we'll uh
think through that for our, our
current state plan.
So, Madam Chair, I know that the
Alzheimer's Association has
provided grants to some of the
adult day services around the
state.
And I'm wondering if there is
support for that service
anymore.
From the Alzheimer's
Association.
Manager
Madam Chair, Senator Stephonics,
a great question. We really very
much appreciate that. Uh, what
we hope to see out of this, uh,
just recently unveiled plan to
establish an Alzheimer's disease
task force that will carry, I
believe, work until 2031 if I'm
recalling that number correctly.
Uh, we feel that a lot of those
discussions are going to produce
opportunities and ideas to
deliver, uh, respite care grants
and other grants that can
deliver education and resources
to, uh, to direct care workers
to uh paid family unpaid family.
caregivers rather, and anybody
else in between involved with uh
caring for someone with the
disease. So we're very much
looking forward to the work to
come through that task force. We
feel like that's going to
present a lot of opportunity to
prepare the state and mitigate
also state resources being
deployed that are not
necessarily delivering and
yielding the best outcomes,
Madam Chair, senator.
So Madam Chair, I'm asking
though, there have been grants,
and so where I'm going with this
is, has the money come from
Grants to the Alzheimer's
Association has it come from,
where I know that the
Alzheimer's Association, maybe
not this year or last year, but
in the past.
Gabe grants to adult day
services programs around the
state.
And I'm just wondering where did
that money come from?
Madam Chair, Senator, I believe
I have a better understanding of
your question now, and I feel
I'm better prepared to answer
it. So thank you so much for
clarifying for many years, the
Alzheimer's Association was a
recipient of state funds that
were provided by the Aging and
Long-term Services department.
Um, some of the funds were used
for various programs, one of
which was a respite care program
that provided direct payments to
family caregivers. Um, I recall
the amount was up to $500
annually, um, and there was no
criteria as far as income.
Uh, so we were very, very
pleased to deliver on behalf of
the state, the respite care
program, um, as well as it
provided some awareness and
outreach activities as well.
I arrived at the Alzheimer's
Association in 2018, when I
arrived the, the, uh.
That
Partnership existed, I believe
it came to an end in 20, fiscal
year 2023, um, Madam Chair,
Senator, uh, I cannot speak to
the state as to, you know, where
that money is being used for
today, um, but perhaps the
deputy secretary can fill that
gap. Thank you, thank you,
madam, um, chair, I'll carry
this on, on offline because it
was grants to not to caregivers,
so we'll talk about this. Thank
you.
Thank you, Representative.
Chavis is a past senator Pope.
OK. Senator Saia Lopez.
Madam Chair, um,
On page
On the page where we talk about
uh who's more likely to get it,
um.
So, number, no. The New Mexicans
among most risk, um, he's talked
about older Latinos and um.
Native Americans and African
Americans were these um studies
was that shown by a brain
autopsy?
Or were they um clinical
diagnosis.
So there are multiple
surveillance channels uh to come
up with that information. Some
of it is through direct
research, uh, that the
Alzheimer's Association would
conduct to
Essentially do census-oriented
surveillance. The Centers for
Disease Control also does so,
uh, autopsy information, uh,
feeds into some of those
channels. I couldn't break it
down for you right now in, in,
in great detail, but there are
various surveillance channels.
Has research gone beyond this to
find the explanations for the
differences, like for example
with women, is it the decreasing
estrogen level with Hispanics so
is it ACEs with, you know what.
it could possibly explain these
differences. Yes, so that is an
excellent question and uh um
The answer is no.
why do certain uh cohorts.
of the population have a higher
propensity to develop it or be
genetically disposed, we don't
know the answer to that. We do
know a lot about how Alzheimer's
develops in the, or dementia
develops in the brain at the
microcellular level, um, but to
this point, we don't know why it
picks on certain cohorts of the
population. And how is
Alzheimer's different from other
dementias.
So age-related dementias, so
they all are common in that they
lead to cognitive impairment and
then ultimately at the later
stages, um, um, requiring
complete care, all personal care
to the point where the patient
regrettably can't even swallow.
Um, and so there are other forms
that are that have a heavier
cardiac impact.
Um, um, Parkinson's patients,
uh, have some of the same
attributes as well. And so there
are some there are some
commonalities and the most
common one being cognitive
impairment.
The reason I ask is I'm also
worried about the distinctions
and appropriate treatment for
the different, uh, because my
understanding is you can't
diagnose Alzheimer's
definitively, uh, without a
brain autopsy.
Um, and so my concern is
treating someone who maybe has a
dementia stemming from
Parkinson's or or a dementia
stemming from medication, um,
just, uh.
Pain medication or, you know
what I mean? um and so how do
you, how does in
How does the medical profession
guard against that. So
news,
there's a news flash, Senator
Lopez, um, there is now an FDA
approved drug test. I mean, a
blood test, and it has been in
the works for a number of years
and there is a bill before the
Congress giving instructions to
Medicare to cover this blood
test and we expect it will be
commercially available within 18
months. This blood test has a
Very, very high efficacy, in
other words, very high accuracy
rate of determining whether
someone has Alzheimer's disease.
That is, um, that is really is
an important news flash because
I am concerned about the
overdiagnosis of Alzheimer's or
I shouldn't say over, just
misdiagnosis diagnosis of these
various dementias, um, and
whether there's, you know,
because Alzheimer's, when you,
you
knows that there's a sense of
hopelessness, but when you say,
oh, you know, there's dementia
related to the pain medication.
That doesn't give the same sense
of hopelessness to the family.
Um, and so I think it's really
important to really understand
what is really going on with the
body and whether there's
something that can be done about
it, um, and so I'm very happy to
hear about that news flash. I
hope it proceeds quickly so
people can have the accurate
information. I really appreciate
all the work you do. This is a
very, um,
Upsetting, uh, disease for the
families and for the individual
going through it and it's just
a, a very uh tough, tough
disease. And so I really
appreciate the work that all of
you do, including, including the
agency, um, and thank you very
much for the presentation.
Thank you, Senator, uh,
Representative Gonzalez.
Thank you, Madam Vice Chair. um,
I think my, my question got
taken by uh Representative
Block. I just had some, some
questions on the funding
specifics, um, but beyond that,
just, just I'm interested to see
the recommendations of the study
as someone who myself was a
caretaker for two of my alien
grandparents, both of who
suffered from dementia at some
point in their later years, this
is something that's probably
affected many of us up here
personally and so just
interested to see the results of
the study and whenever those
results are concluded, be
interested in seeing the.
specifics of that funding,
whatever you're requested where
they would go for, um, and where
the specific differentiations
occur for a DCS worker you're
saying up to 5 throughout the
state, um, what that would, what
that would get us in addition to
current work being done by
departments, you know, or, or
where the differentials will lie
specifically regarded to
dementia care, um, I think would
be helpful as a recommendations
come out specifically for such a
large ask, you know, of a
million dollars just to see, um,
you know what the diff what what
would we expect from those
specific five DCS workers and
to, you know, any other general
staff that might be providing
service, that would be helpful
in pushing the promotion of this
project when the recommendations
do come. Thank you, thank you,
Madam Vice Chair.
Thank you. Um, I'd like to say
thank you very much for your
presentation today and um I
always
There's always an opportunity
for improvement as we help and
work with our families and
especially those who um,
Our suffering through dementia.
Um, we are, everybody's family,
I think, has one person at least
that we know of, so, um, I
appreciate and thank you very
much.
So next we'll move on to
Uh, I think Jerry Harrison.
Nice to see you, Jerry. Welcome.
And you're here to present to us
today some information on
recruiting healthcare
professionals.
You'll need to press your
button, the red the wrong one.
I'm sorry. And then if you could
also make sure that you put your
mic close enough.
Because the acoustics in the
room is um not good.
Madam Chair, uh, well first it's
nice to see you again.
It's been a few years. Um,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh joining me today
is Melissa Candelaria who's the
chief operating officer at New
Mexico Health Resources, and
she'll correct any lies that I
that I say.
Ah, in sitting here for the last
few minutes, I was contacted by
a physician and a nurse
practitioner looking for work.
And ordinarily I wouldn't bring
that up. Other than to say that
a lot of money is being expended
on programs and activities, and
unless there's someone.
Who can respond to a health
professional looking for work.
That person will not find
employment in New Mexico.
And we have some hurdles. What
I'd like to do today is take a
few minutes to talk about uh New
Mexico health resources, uh, get
into some of our processes, uh,
what we see going on in the
state and also make some
recommendations, uh, if you
will, in terms of funding, um,
and those recommendations are a
little bit outside of my, uh,
arena in the sense that we're
not lobbyists.
We work in recruitment and
retention of health care
professionals and we observe
what is happening uh.
Every day.
So, who is the best recruit?
It's somebody who's already
employed in an organization.
We have a very severe retention
problem in New Mexico. And uh as
you all know, wages are
relatively low, benefits may not
exist in some organizations. So
it's important for us to place a
focus upon um those people who
are already working here.
Another category of the best
recruit is someone with a rural
background.
Albuquerque has a rural flavor
to it.
Uh, Bernaleo County has a rural
flavor to it and uh we've found
both in looking at the folks
that we work with in terms of
recruitment, but also both of us
have worked on the national
level in terms of recruiting.
Another
Thing to keep in mind.
is to not get invested in one
way of doing health professional
recruitment.
They all work
They all fail when a focus is
only on one thing.
That will fail.
And I've seen over the last 30
years, a lot of investment in
New Mexico on one things,
expecting those things to
generate large numbers. No, we
need to do as many things as we
can possibly do.
We do have recruitment programs.
Funding is very limited, and
I'll have to say, yeah, I'm a
little bit of a contrarian. I, I
don't think that since about
1994, there has been a lot of
emphasis in state, in the state
in terms of recruitment proper.
There was really kind of a, for
me, an exciting time back in
1994, 1995, when a number of the
programs that I'm going to uh
address a little bit later on.
Um,
Um
We created and are still
functional but are underfunded.
Uh, we're a not for profit
agency. I we're here in uh Las
Vegas. Our board president is
Doctor Frank Crushin, who is a
native, uh, and to, um,
Two folks on our board whom you
all probably know, uh, Elaine
Luna and Raymond Sanchez are on
our board of directors looking
at the placards in um
In front of each one of you, I'm
always taking that we have
recruited people who are working
in every type of agency,
hospital, uh, practice type, um,
and all of those counties. Uh,
we do what is called centralized
uh recruitment, our, our
particular funding, uh, comes
from the Department of Health.
We receive uh specifically for
recruitment, about 300.
$72,000 to do what we call uh
active recruitment. We're under
our contract with the state, uh,
we're to focus on the uh primary
health care, uh, rural primary
Health Care Act contractors,
critical access hospitals and
those organizing uh
organizations employing National
Health Service Corps loan
repairs and, and what have you.
Um,
Who's doing the recruiting?
On, on page 4, I, I gave a list
of whom we see.
doing the recruiting.
And that oftentimes depends upon
the size of the organization.
But we do see busy people who
don't have the opportunity to
necessarily, uh,
pick up the phone call or return
the email or the text, uh, as
quickly as we do. Where do we
sit in this?
We, uh, mostly Melissa these
days, um.
traveled the country.
Doing trade care shows.
We go to schools in and outside
of the state of
Week before last we made a
presentation to the PA
graduating PA students at UNM.
We meet with the various uh
disciplines if, if you will.
I think sometimes we try to
measure the wrong thing in
recruitment.
How much money is being invested
to
Count the number of people who
have licenses.
That's not
That's not what we should be
looking at. I don't know about
you, but I received phone calls
from folks saying, I can't get a
primary care, uh, physician. I
can't uh get an appointment with
a specialist. We should be
looking at how long does it take
to get the first appointment and
how long it takes to get on to
the next one and develop those
programs that are just not
Counting the number of people
who have licenses. Again, if
we're just doing that counting,
we don't have people who are
responding to those people who
just got in touch with me.
Almost to the day a year ago.
We had 6071 known vacancies to
us.
And today, I checked this
morning before we left
Albuquerque. There are 8089. So
I'm going to ask, uh, Melissa to
uh address how we get that
number. And I want to say,
That
Boost of over 200 means that
there's some organization almost
daily in New Mexico,
contact, contacting us to find
providers.
Thank you, Madam Chair and Madam
Vice Chair and members of the
committee, um, as Jerry stated
earlier, my name is Melissa
Candelaria, and I grew up in a
very rural area in Lincoln
County, the southwestern
southeastern part of the state,
excuse me, San Patricio, um,
it's right in between Redoso and
Roswell, either way, it's either
30 miles or 64 miles, so I know
the struggles that folks out in
the rural areas have trying to
get to either the dentist or the
eye doctor or just your family
physician. So,
One of the crucial components of
recruitment is knowing where the
vacancies are. And one of my
main roles at New Mexico Health
Resources is to try to identify
those vacancies throughout New
Mexico.
One of the easiest things we
have at New Mexico Health
Resources is an online survey.
It's right on our website
NMHR.org. Anybody can click on
it and submit their health
professional vacancies to us. We
work with all health
professionals, um, physicians,
dentists, nurses, behavioral
health uh professionals of all
levels, physical therapy on and
on. And so that's probably our
easiest way of getting in touch
with me and telling me.
who and what the vacancies are,
um, as Jerry stated, I travel
the state and I traveled the
country. Next week, I'm going to
Kansas City as part of the
American Academy of Family
Physicians annual conference
where I will be in contact with
very thousands of medical
students who are looking for
residency spots, so I will have
an exhibit table there. I can
visit with them as well as the
residency directors from New
Mexico.
and all over the country. And
while I'm there because our
funding is limited, I try to do
many things. So the day before
the conference starts, I'm gonna
go to UMKC dental school, do a
lunch and learn for the dental
students there, try to get the
New Mexico dentists or students,
excuse me, dental students that
are there to come back to New
Mexico or and to encourage
others to come to our beautiful
state. Um, and then one of the
evenings I'm also gonna attend a
practice match.
Career fair, where hopefully
I'll meet many other health
professionals that might be
interested in coming here.
So we traveled the state and
then every quarter I do old
school. I send out a formal
email to all of the
organizations throughout the
state that want to hear from me,
and I said, I attach a copy of
our vacancy survey to that. It's
very simple, very user friendly.
I don't make it very lengthy so
that they won't be discouraged
to complete it. Um, and then I
have really good relationships
with some of the community
health centers where we have
standing monthly.
meetings, um, just Zoom calls,
and they tell me what's going on
in all of their communities as
far as vacancies and, and
workforce issues. So that's
basically how I get this number
of the vacancies, uh, I can tell
you we don't claim to know all
of the vacancies throughout the
state, but I work very hard
trying to identify as many as I
can.
Thank you.
We do focus on the upper levels
of education in terms of, of
recruitment and also uh because
of our state contract, we do
focus on primary care, the
various primary care
disciplines.
We never say no to an
organization that uh is looking
for a provider.
And uh
We and our board, uh,
can't do that.
Um
We get pressured upon occasion
financially to say, why don't
you charge? Well, we've tried
that and New Mexico
organizations tend not to be
able to pay for recruitment.
Very oftentimes we function as
the front end human resources
office in terms of um
Substituting for what, uh, say a
small not for profit cannot
afford to do, uh, we invest a
lot of money in terms of
outreach and uh we try to
Me as well as we can, the
demands that come from us, come
to us, including specialists.
We, uh, of those, um,
over almost 900. There are
specialists included.
There is not an overwhelming
number of nurses, and nurses can
typically find, uh,
Jobs relatively easily with uh
without using organizations such
as ours. And by the way, there
are identical organizations in
every state, uh, funded through
partially funded through the uh
Um
The the various states
themselves and a small amount of
money, uh, from the federal
office of Royal Health Policy,
which funds an organization
called the T3R Net.org and uh
through that uh collaborative
effort.
Uh, roughly about 3000
Providers find jobs uh
throughout, uh.
Now rural and urban.
Uh, United States.
Um
Last year I noticed something
coming out of this committee.
That I thought I would make a
suggestion to you.
Um
There were good bills and they
were bad bills.
But one of the things that I did
notice that a lot of the bills
were directed
true
Either workforce solutions. I
have no problem with Workforce
Solutions.
Or
to the healthcare authority.
Neither of those state
departments are engaged in
health workforce activity in
terms of being able to produce
people looking for work.
So I would ask
Perhaps as you craft legislation
and I've, I've helped write
legislation in the past. Take a
look at where you're directing
it and whether or not that
particular entity has the
capability of doing it or even
having the interest in doing it.
So what I would like to do is
take a moment and speak about
where in state government and
elsewhere, are there
professionals that are working
to increase the supply and
actually some of them are
engaged in recruitment.
So, number one,
In New Mexico Department of
Health Public Health division,
Office of Primary Care and Rural
Health.
It receives both federal and
state dollars that are devoted
to increasing and keeping uh
health professionals in New
Mexico.
The other is the New Mexico
Higher Education department, uh,
particularly financial aid and,
and also,
Relatively recently, the
creation of a social work
consortium to particularly
increase the number of licensed
social workers in the state. We,
we have a tremendous
deficit of licensed social
workers, not case workers, but
licensed social workers at every
level.
And I would also say that the
the New Mexico, um, healthcare
workforce Committee, which is
housed at the university is also
a place not only of university
professionals, but members of
almost every component of the um
Uh, healthcare environment
today.
So what's going on at, at the
New Mexico uh Department of
Health.
There's something called the
rural Primary Health Care Act
that, that funds a couple of
things.
Recruitment of primary care, uh,
folks, but it also offers
do
to come on a competitive basis
to about 20, um, not for profit
organizations to supplement
salary and benefits.
Uh
As you know,
Uh, our salaries, are relatively
low in terms of comparisons not
only to our neighboring states,
but also nationally.
This particular device which was
created by the way, in 1981 was
designed to
support the salaries and
benefits of direct care
providers in primary care.
Um, maybe someone could give a,
a message to representative
Garcia. I was hoping to see him
here, the tax credit program,
um,
is housed within this unit.
There were roughly 6000
applicants after you all pass
that bill, all of which over
5000 were approved for the tax
credit. It, it goes through this
particular unit of state
government. There's also a
program, the New Mexico Health
Service Corps, which is a
stipend program
they're very, they're
A different needs that folks in
training have some, some can get
um
Uh, help through a loan for
service program. Some people,
um,
Go into masters or even medical
training, having to give up
their jobs. This particular
program was created, I think, in
1995, uh, to, to allow for
stipends so that people could
afford to buy food.
To pay rent.
Those types of things. And then
uh I did address the social work
consortium already. And one
other thing that the um
Uh, that you all have relied
upon over the years is the
background work on
health professional shortage
area, uh, designation. The uh
state supplies numbers, does not
make the decision about, uh,
areas, um.
And uh their professionals there
in these various programs.
Really make a huge impact. Now I
skipped over the Conrad J1 visa
program.
Back around 2000 we pressured
the then uh Secretary of Health
to get on board with the J-1
visa program. This is for
international physicians to be
able to come to work in each of
the states. Each state, um,
under the basic program can um
authorized.
30.
International medical graduates
to go to work in the state.
This year
These folks were able to produce
43.
Because they figured out how to
work the state program and get
30 and then on those employers
applications to the HHS federal
program, which allowed this our
state for the first time to get
more than the 30, uh slots that
are filled that we had, uh,
before.
Uh, I've given you a website to
look at the, at, at the, um,
Um
Office of Primary Care and Rural
Health. I've also given you a
couple websites for the higher
education, uh, department, um.
I serve on the advisory
committee.
to the loan repayment program
and to the loan for service
program. The strides that were
made, uh, 3 years ago and
putting additional dollars into
the loan repayment program.
Really are paying off, uh, there
are
They're the staff there are
contracting uh right now with
the new awardees, but when, when
those, the contracts are all
signed, we'll probably have just
short of 2000 New Mexico.
Providers
Getting state loan repayment.
Historically we've relied upon
the National Health Service
Corps, um,
I I couldn't access the Coors
website, uh, today, but I
believe they're only about 300
National Health Service Corps
folks that are uh serving
obligations in the state today.
Uh, just as a reminder, loan
repayment is for those people
who are already practicing. They
have jobs. They are working in
New Mexico
organizations, uh, they are
Required to work.
I state law full time. These
are, these are not part-time
people and they are required to
work at one site, if you will.
Loan for service is for those in
training.
These are people that are
getting degrees and uh have
financial need. Uh, that is
usually administered through the
college and university, um,
Um, financial aid offices and
then the applications are sent
on to the higher education
department.
So, um,
I have some proposals.
In the past I've always
Post small things.
So this time I thought I would
do something a little bit
different. Maybe get someone's
attention.
In 1981,
The rural primary Health Care
Act was funded.
I believe at $2.5 million.
Again, this is salary support,
uh, benefit support.
For organizations to be
competitive.
Today there are about $6
million.
In that fund spread among about
20 organizations.
All of them are going to be hit
hard.
Under
The new act that was just passed
and signed in Washington.
Many of them are federally
qualified health centers. That
does not mean that they're fully
supported by federal dollars.
They are supported by Medicaid.
They are supported by
In this case, some Ria dollars.
They are supported by a small
amount by patient revenue.
These organizations just as the
hospitals are going to suffer.
Probably best guess, maybe a 40%
hit.
On, on total revenue?
So the rural primary Health Care
Act is one way for the state
government to be able to at
least supply dollars if an
appropriation were made.
Another is
The New Mexico Health Service
Corps.
It had its funding has been
eroded down to, I think, about
$300,000. So I propose that you
entertain putting $5 million in
that so that we can support
More people who have living
needs while they're in, in
training.
I'd also propose that that um
$100,000 be allocated for the
social work workforce consortium
just as an aside, we function as
a fiscal intermediary for this
group. It's a group of
volunteers that has come
together to, to increase the
supply of licensed healthcare
professionals in the state.
Also, I would propose that more
dollars be uh placed into the
loan uh health professional loan
repayment program, given its
tremendous, um,
Ability to attract uh
applications we were not able to
fund everyone who helped apply,
uh, and in fact, I, I would
Well, I, I hesitate to guess the
numbers because when you look at
the entire state, um, with the
exception of, of Los Alamos.
The, the need for health
professionals. This is a way.
To again, hit our lack of
ability to pay health
professionals. If you have
an example, we see dentists
coming out, dental
school graduates.
From New Mexico.
Who have an excess of $500,000
of debt.
We see physicians.
Coming up with over $200,000 of
debt.
We see nurse practitioners
coming up with $150,000 of debt.
So this is another way.
To support those health
professionals, uh, in practice.
And then,
It
Just as something that's very
dear to me. And that's the uh
stateide workforce, uh,
committee. And uh I think I've
brought it to your attention
previously that there's no state
money going into that
particular uh entity and I think
that we need to have a workforce
center.
That is well funded. And I also
know, you know, being on the
committee, I know that there has
been some dissatisfaction with
reports and those kinds of
things. They have one person.
Working on this, uh, and what
has not been able to be done is
the analysis that goes beyond
just counting licenses.
Uh, for that, um,
Madam Chair, uh, any questions
or comments, uh, happy to, uh,
Answer them.
OK, thank you. So on the, on
your last bullet, Jerry, who is
the one person? Is it, do you
know who that is?
His name is Nick Salazar. OK.
Thank you. So we will um we will
start with Senator Stephanic,
uh, 3 minutes as usual.
Madam Chair, would you come back
to me? I already forgot my
question.
Makes me feel good. I'm not
alone.
Representative Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for the presentation.
Um, I have a question about the
um health professional loan
repayment. So are there, like,
so what's the criteria for
somebody to be able to uh
qualify for that.
For new, let's start with new
applicants, uh, they have to
have a uh full-time job starting
on July 1st of the year one mic.
Oh
You have to have a full-time job
starting on July 1st.
They have to accept a contract
from the state that they commit
to work for the state, uh, their
obligation is for 3 years, and
they can have up to $100,000 of
uh loan debt paid off over that
3 years, it is renewable if
funds are available. Um,
In terms of the criteria, um,
There's emphasis placed upon
health professional shortage
areas, uh, scores, uh,
Not for profit, although
In the last two years, we were
pretty much able to fund uh
qualifying people, uh, also in
the for-profit uh arena. So it's
very broad and um
The focus is on a large number
of health professionals. It's
not restricted to the primary
care professions. That was one
of the, uh, items that, um,
was changed 3 years ago. Um, we
sent an, seen an increase in
social workers. I think there
were
55 that uh received awards this
year.
And, and Madam Chair, um, Jerry,
that was kind of gonna lead into
to my other question. So do you
have kind of a breakdown in
terms of which health um
professions or uh receiving.
The loan repayment.
I, I, I'm a little deaf, so
like, for example, our um
primary care physicians, the
greatest bulk of those who are
receiving the loan repayment or
just sort of like who, who else
is receiving? I know you, you
mentioned social workers and,
and, um, but who's the biggest
bulk and maybe what areas of the
state are receiving um
It's it.
It used to be that the program
was restricted to rural. That is
no longer the case in terms of
the latest round of awards.
Uh, I believe that there were
about 400 nursing applications
and there were about 100 that
were um
Uh, awards were made again
throughout the state. Uh, I
don't recall the number of
physicians, um,
Perhaps 75 to 100. The folks
over at higher education, or I
can get actual numbers for you.
Um,
There were about a total of 500
awards that were made, uh, this
time.
That's time representative.
Oh, I know, Jerry is um Jerry
would be happy to talk to folks
when uh afterwards, maybe not
today, but in general.
It's been my experience that
Jerry loves to talk about this
stuff. So just a reminder,
Jerry, that in the, the best
way, um, if you're not speaking,
if you could turn your mic off.
Senator Pope.
Senator Cedil Lopez. Thank you.
This is a follow up on the, on
the question of who, who's
getting it.
Physician's assistants are also
eligible, right? So, OK, I just
wanted to confirm that because
it was uh it wasn't clear, and
that's why I think the question
I would look forward to to a
report about who's getting it
from where, you know, what's,
what's their occupation and
where are they from. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Um,
Madam Chair, yes, physician
assistants to receive awards.
Representative Gonzalez.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
no, everything in here was
really great to hear, um, a lot
of my focus self admittedly has
been on the grow your own
recruitment incentives, um, but
it is nice to hear. Um, I did
have just a couple of questions,
um, and maybe one is a loaded
question, um, you know, in all
your work, you, you were right.
There was a lot of legislation
passed around the session.
Actually, there was a lot of
healthcare legislation,
specifically aimed at
recruitment, retention, anywhere
from, you know, full payment of
medical school to
Um, ho, you know, there, there
was a ton of recruitment
opportunities there, compacts,
and so, uh, maybe in your
opinion, I know you mentioned
some of the entities where
funding should go to make the
most sense, um, but maybe some
thoughts on policies like when
you're traveling, you know,
around the country. What are
some things that you're hearing
or what are maybe some things
that have worked, you know,
beyond what is working here, the
list of the monetary programs
that we have in existence, um,
just thinking of future policies
for recruitment, you know.
how do we do something maybe a
little bit different than what
we have been doing that could
work. Um, and then secondly,
maybe just kind of added on to
that is, um, you mentioned that
once they come in here, they
have a 3 year commitment to stay
in New Mexico. Is there any data
to to show that they're staying
or are they maybe working for 3
years and then disappearing, or
are you, is it um more so that
they're coming in, what we're
doing is working. They're loving
New Mexico, um, and they're
staying here and contributing to
our workforce. Thanks. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative,
I'll, I'll take on the last one
first, maybe Melissa can address
the first one.
We've been involved in a
longitudinal retention study
with the University of North
Carolina since 2011.
At a two-year
Award on loan repayment. What
happens?
The person receiving that award
typically does not have a
guarantee that
The, there will be a follow-up
award.
We have found that those
awardees start looking for work
within 6 months of the time that
they
came to their first job.
Uh, the answer in terms of the 3
year commitment in terms of our
larger study, we're just getting
into it. There are a handful of
National Health Service Corps
programs that have been in
existence that are 3 years long,
but we haven't analyzed them and
it has not been long enough, uh,
for, um, the three-year program
here to be uh evaluated.
The higher education department
is submitting data to the, the
national study.
Madam Chair, Madam Vice Chair
Representative Gonzalez, when
I'm out traveling, um, the
things that Jerry mentioned here
are definitely on the top. Some
of the things that I'm finding
that they're mainly more
institutional art is what is the
call schedule. Um, how much
vacation time do I get? Is there
CME uh time offered, things like
that, and definitely pay. They
want to know what the pay is,
and once in a while, what, what
is the workforce for
their spouse, depending on what
they might be, but I can tell
you that the things that Jerry
highlighted here are on the top.
Is their loan repayment, um,
things like that.
Thank you, Representative Anaya.
I, I'm guessing you have no
questions. I really.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
thank you. Jerry, I have been
following you for quite some
time through this committee, um,
but also I just want to say,
Jerry, you were kind of the
inspiration for House Bill 15,
which was the strategic
recruitment bill, um, that I
carried this session. Um, you
know, I watched you present to
this committee over the course
of these years. I've watched you
present kind of the same thing
over and over saying, I'm
telling you what gets people
here and it's literally what you
all just said, right? Um.
Which was part of the
inspiration for House Bill 15,
which was both the headhunter
program and the concierge
program, right? So us being able
to say call up directly, right?
Do some direct recruitment of
our own healthcare providers,
um, who have graduated from our
institutions here in New Mexico
may not be here anymore.
And be able to say, hey, here
are all the incentives we have
for you, right? Whether it's
loan payments, down payment
assistance, even childcare,
right? Us having free college,
like there are a ton of
incentives that all kind of need
to be in one place to say, Hey,
we have a package for you, but
then the concierge part was what
you had just mentioned, um, and
it's the, we'll help your spouse
find a job. We'll help you with,
um, where you wanna live, um,
and it's kind of the hand
holding and so I have
a couple of questions. I guess
the first and most pressing one
that I would like some um.
Uh, some
thought about is, I know you
said on page 7, these are folks
who are already kind of doing
some addressing the workforce.
Um, my bill itself was in, was
housed within the Department of
Workforce Solutions for a couple
of reasons. One was that they
already have like a case file
system, and they already can
enter into MOUs with the
Department of Higher Education
to get our alumni data to make
sure that we're calling our
actual alumni. So to me it was a
little bit of ease of access to
make.
sure that that information could
flow quickly and we could get a
program up and running
immediately. Um, the other
thing, the other reason for that
was also to expand other
shortage positions if this went
well with healthcare
recruitment, right? And so I was
wondering like, in your opinion.
Do you believe there would be a
better place for this to be
housed and a, a better place
that would have all of these
foundational elements to get
this up and running quicker,
quicker.
Madam Chair, uh, representative
Anaya.
There are so many things
dispersed among
State Departments.
And state
Educational institutions.
Which are hampered.
I
State requirements.
In terms of how to interact with
people who are looking for work.
So for example,
Ms. Candelaria is flying.
to
Kansas City.
Putting on 3 different
Recruitment activities.
In a two-day period.
She doesn't have to go through
the cumbersome requirements that
are placed upon state employees
to do things.
And when
Those state employees, for
example, want to travel.
They, they may.
Not
Receive approval.
To meet a deadline in terms of
registration.
Can, can they?
Take a
All of the New Mexico attendees
at the family practice meeting
out.
Ms. Candela is going to do that
for all of the residents that
are going to Kansas City. So I,
I think it's hard to put it all
together in one spot. I don't
want to cut you off, Jury. Also,
know we're also under a timer,
but it would still have like the
program would still have the
ability to subcontract, so I
mean, I don't.
See it would be like a
restriction. It would
essentially be a
A place in which it would be
easier to move MOUs across and
to be sure that it's housed
within a department.
I have preferences to the
Department of Health, clearly,
uh, and I also think that
anything that works should be
tried.
Thank you, Madam Jerry, I'll get
with you after this as well.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Representative
Cates. I thank you, Madam Chair,
and thank you, Jerry, and and
and and Jerry, could you turn
your mic off, please?
And Miss Candela, for your
presentation, um, I, I, uh, do
agree with uh rep Anaya that you
have shown us that um the, that
there, it needs to be um
More recruitment programs, but
you have inspired us that still
needs that individual hand to
hand, face to face touch, which
is what you're providing that,
that, that, and so I do hear
that. Um, are you, are you
funded through UNMH or you
funded through the state, how
are you funded?
Our our funding comes through
the Department of Health, the,
uh, the bureau that I mentioned
and uh there are
Oh
A little over 370,000 of state
dollars and then there's some
flow through, uh,
County uh Medicaid, uh, and some
federal dollars. OK, thank you.
So, uh, what I'm asking is I'm
asking if you would consider
putting together a proposal for
increased budget to update your
website. I feel like your
website needs to be easier to
use and you just say, I want to
open a clinic. Oh, look at, I
can get money from uh in a uh FA
I can uh get this
Grant, I can get that grant.
This is what I'm hearing from
medical providers and you have
more data than I do, but I think
that we um are coming to the
same conclusion that somebody in
this field, that is their
mission driven, that medical
arts, it doesn't necessarily
mean that they're a business
person. So what do they tend to
do? They tend to end up cause
it's the easiest thing to go
work for private equity hospital
because they will take care of
the license transfer and all
the, all the business
And they'll have a spot in their
staff and, and, and your
insurance, everything that's
being taken care of, but then
they're at the mercy of what
their environment and their work
schedule is and there has to be
a balance between work and, and
business life. So being able to
show on a website, how, how do I
click this on and find out what
the population is of Artesia.
How many medical providers are
in there. Who's the top 5
realtors.
Where, uh, can I get a, uh, uh,
a loan from the state on medical
equipment and then another one,
no, I just wanna go, I wanna
work in a hospital. We're the
hospitals. If we could set this
up as a website, a very robust,
easy to to perform website. It
is not, I was just talking to my
friend here, Representative
Block. This is not a, we can't
have one answer to resolve this
problem, right? We need 100
answers for this problem.
But I do think that you need a
combination between technology
and your personal touch. And
you've got the personal touch
better than anyone in the state.
Let's robust and organize your
technology so that that we can
work those together and, and
thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, thank you both for your
presentation. Just a couple
questions. I'll loop them into
one to make it easy for
everyone. So I'm just wondering,
have we done surveys of current
physicians to see or even just
all medical providers, I guess,
to see what the reason is that
they're leaving because I'd like
to just go really deep into
specifically why these people
are leaving and then also I, I
know that according to
think New Mexico and a few other
different groups, they found
that New Mexico had the highest
medical malpractice, uh, rate of
being sued in the entire
country, and I'm just wondering
specifically with physicians,
have we seen that as a driving
force in any research that
you've made, you may have seen
regarding people just leaving
the state because I know that
there are a lot of people who
are retiring as well. They're
aging out, they're, they just
want to retire. So how many of
those retirement?
are directly tied to that and
then what other research have we
done, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, Representative
Block, um,
That's the reason why I
suggested that the uh workforce
center be funded to ask, answer
those questions. Uh, no one can
answer that right now. Uh, you
may not be aware that uh RLD,
the medical board, other boards
were hacked 2.5 years ago. And
so,
I'm leery of saying that we know
how many people have left, how
many, we kind of know how many
people have uh received new
licenses in the last 2 years,
but it'll be another year or
longer before uh
The, uh
Medical board's database is
reconstructed.
And um we're, we're working kind
of blindly with uh with that.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for that. I'm just wondering
if there's, if we could even
contract a survey.
Through the state, not even
worrying about whatever horrible
data problems we have and just
this point in time, why are
people leaving the state and
then just get information from
them, even just some kind of
Even localized because I know
every every different community
is different. Albuquerque is
different than Alamogordo, and I
would just like to see what the
strains are for those individual
practitioners in each specific
area of the state. So I just
don't know if we could maybe in
the future, do a couple million
dollars, uh, survey of
something. I know that's, that's
a hard ask to get even a dollar
out of some people, but, you
know, I don't sit on the finance
committee, so I can cry about
it. So, uh, thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you both for your
time and I just think that's
something we could
We could think about. Thank you.
And just a reminder that we do
not have data that supports that
malpractice is the reason people
are living that we are higher
than our states actually.
Last, last interim, we had a
presentation from Allegra, um.
Hernandez from LFC that said
that um their data showed that
medical malpractice insurance
costs had been fairly flat, so,
so I'm not, I don't want us to
throw out things that
That are not in evidence and
that may be uh in opposition to
what little what little bit of
data that we do have. Thank you,
Representative.
Representative, I'm sorry, I got
squirrel Representative Herndon.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
thank you presenters. So one of
the things that I've been
looking at is, is some data on
what's happening in our rural
areas, and that is that for
example, the number of, of
people who are given birth, for
example, are down, so they don't
really support having a
obstetrician there on a regular
basis, uh, nor someone to uh
fill in for that obstetrician if
they go on a vacation because
the numbers aren't there, so my
to you is based upon your
research, what has been
happening in other places that
have rural areas like ours where
this is a, this may be occurring
because what we end up with is
sometimes disastrous incidents
where people are going someplace
else to give birth to a child
because there's no birthing
center there and but how do we
fix that? Because the numbers
are not um showing that there is
sufficient evidence to main
maintained the doctor that we
need to have in the area.
Madam Chair, uh, rep
representative.
You can't you you can't have.
Just one OB.
You have to have
At least 3.
Moreover,
You can't have deliveries
without
Nurses, you need to have a labor
and delivery team of about 5
nurses available 24 hours a day.
7 days a week.
My simple-minded.
Answer is the other states are
in exactly the same.
dilemma that we are in and how
to figure out how to provide
women's health services, not
just spurs, but women's health
services, uh, throughout the
state without those lengthy uh
travels or to have the
happenstance with a young woman
from this city who lost her life
on I-25.
Um, making, making that.
travel. Uh, I don't know what
the answer is at this point.
Thank you for that. One other
thing I was thinking about, you
know, 90% of the residents in
this, uh, that graduate from
them that are here in New Mexico
are people who actually are from
New Mexico. So I'm just
wondering, I'm looking at all of
these offer letters that are
going out. What if we gave them
a signing bonus, so they all
stayed here for, with the
maximum of, I don't know, 3
years, which is what is usually
on a, on a signing bonus.
They're already here, 90% of
them.
Live here so that they stay
here. Had you thought about that
as a concept for keeping um med
doctors here.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Hardin and I'm all for it, and
I, I, I think that
With particularly physicians,
they typically have contracts.
And um various institutions
offer contracts of varying
lengths, um, typically 3 years.
There's nothing wrong with uh
adding a couple more years with
uh bonuses that are attached to
that. There are creative
organizations in the state that
do that. There are others that
um
You know, I'm old. I'm old
hospital administrator.
And
Those of us who were running
organizations in the past tended
to look at providers. I can get
another one.
There's going to be another one
graduating. There's another one
when someone leaves, I can just
replace them. That's no longer
the case in all of our
disciplines in, in the state. So
there has to be a lot of
creativity. I would support
anything you propose. Thank you
very much. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you. And just a
reminder for the committee, just
like Red Lobster is not gonna
build a restaurant in Wagon
Mound because it doesn't have
the population. That's what
we're.
fighting against, um, you know,
you would hope that Las Vegas
has enough of a population to
have OBGYN and so, um, reality
is people in rural areas are
going to have to travel. There's
not enough of a need for
electrophysio logical
cariologist in Roswell. They may
need them, but there, but we
have to look at what the
population is and unfortunately,
that's uh medicine is a business
and you have to be able to pay
your expenses, including very
expensive.
providers. Representative Rebel
Caballero.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you very much for your
presentation. So I often engage
and um ask uh my healthcare
providers and others that I come
in contact with, uh, several
questions. One, how, uh, did you
end up here?
That's an important question.
Um, then the other question is,
um, they, they will, they will
answer and I appreciate
Representative Kate's line of
questions about the website
because more often than not,
we've been told that the
websites are not effective in
recruitment and then they will
touch the website, but then they
end up having to make several
inquiries, uh, in order to
respond to recruitment efforts
in the area, so that's really
important. The other um
consideration is housing,
housing costs, uh, longevity of
a contract, um, spousal
profession, schools, um, quality
of life and they see quality of
life. I noticed that on your
issues, you didn't have those
necessarily identified, but um,
so one question is, are you,
have you found that those are
issues, housing, longevity of a
contract, spousal professions,
quality of life.
um type.
Questions. That's number one.
The other has, um, Madam Chair,
have, I mean, I, I appreciate
the Madam Chair's comment,
because that really is the
reality that we're dealing with.
So we have to find innovative,
creative ways in which to um
handle a lot of things. One of
the areas also that was uh an
issue is what's the point of a
professional provider, a doctor
or specialized care, if they're
gonna be faced with other types
of staffing shortages, right?
in inequalities, inequities in
distribution of staffing ratios,
for example, other types of
things because it's, you know,
one thing is to be the main
provider, the others to have the
support and if that support's
not in place, then it becomes an
issue. So I bring that up as, as
a potential issue as well, but
one of the areas that um I've
been seeing around the nation is
especially in rural areas as
they've been relying more and
more on mobile health delivery.
Not just telehealth, but actual
Mobile health delivery and
The form of primary care,
obviously not to deliver babies,
but
primary care and other types of,
of preventative measures. Has
this come up in any of your uh
feedback that you're getting so
that there were 2 questions
there. Thank you.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Roy Caballero, uh, in reference
to the first question about
quality of life that comes up
routinely and um
Those who are looking for work
and, and by the way, I would say
pretty much everybody in
healthcare today is looking at
websites and looking for
opportunities, old, young, you
name it. Um, but quality of life
is something that is expressed
in terms of flexible work
schedule, um,
Um, job opportunities for
significant other, um, the list
is long, uh, as you, uh,
would expect
And, and again, the second
question that you had.
In addressing um innovative
creative ways of health
delivery, for example,
preventative care using mobile
health delivery systems. Has
that come up and how have you
addressed that?
There have been mobile clinics
in New Mexico for decades, uh,
probably right now, the most
significant use that we've seen
it. By the way, we go all over
the state and visit clinics and
hospitals and those kinds of
things. Probably the
school-based uh centers are
using a mobile model more than
uh than other entities.
Thank you. That, that's fine.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you if only baby
deliveries could be scheduled.
We could have a baby mobile like
the bookmobile
lots of people would want to
work on the baby mobile
vice chair Lopez.
Um, Madam Chair, that would
truly be an innovation.
darn babies cooperate. No, they,
they don't, they come at their
own leisure.
Um,
Jerry, thank you, Mr. Harrison.
Thank you so much for being
here. Um.
You're
the work that you
Do the service that you provide
for the state of New Mexico is
appreciated over all these
years, you have
made in front of this committee,
um, and during with us during
legislative session, advocating.
Um, for more funding, of course,
that would help to, I think
extend the work that you were
doing when you recruit for
health professionals to come to
our state.
Um, I think
Madam Chair, with the more that
we learn about the nuances of
recruiting people to come and
work here.
Um, you know, society is
changing demographics, of
course, in our state, but even
for those um
Who you may be trying to entice
to come to New Mexico, have a
different work ethic.
I think they're looking for
different.
scenarios of what they can find
here in the state.
And, you know, it's, it's, I
think something madam, Madam
Chair that we're looking at just
not particularly within the
health field, but in other.
Um, places of work, different,
um,
It's just how do we meet?
What their needs are.
And sometimes it's not gonna be
something um
As has been traditional.
Uh, for what we look at, I think
it's just stuff that I've been
reading, Madam Chair. It's just
a different generation of health
professionals that were
Um, have to figure out how to
best entice them.
Um, and sometimes it is money,
but I think there are other.
Uh
Ways that maybe not at this
point in time, but I think in
the next decade.
That I think we're gonna see a
whole different um,
A group of young, younger health
professionals as to what their
needs are.
And it's just a matter of of
what we do to change and to
entice and to bring them here,
or even for those that come out
of the medical school because
Madam Cherry is, you know, UNM 8
the health sciences center has
this beautiful plan.
Uh, with the new medical
facility training.
And all the other um and in
conversations, you know, it,
it's uh
It's, it's a different
generation that is coming that
are gonna be taking care of us,
some of us are growing older. So
I think it, it's, it's part of
that, that change.
Element that we're in.
Um, so I, I just want to say
that, Madam Chair, cause I think
the work that you and your team
provided is, is, is spot on, but
it's also where we invest to
work with you, um, but also what
the new vision is of healthcare
delivery in this country.
Thank you.
Thank you. And I just wanna echo
the vice chair, Jerry, I, I met
you when I was just a baby
legislator, um, although I came
in old, so, um.
So, and
It's much appreciated and we, I
think I can say we as a
committee are always ready to
help you and to think outside
the box. Now,
The money people is where we
have an issue.
We have great ideas here. We um
have great solutions, but
getting them funded is a whole
different ballgame, um, and, and
just thinking about um
healthcare providers, young
people are, it seems, are um
much more um cognizant of a
work-life balance, um, then
perhaps some older generation
and the fact that they have to
work so much to make a living
and also the corporate practice
of medicine is.
Causing moral injuries to all of
our providers. I'm, uh, the last
time I saw my primary care
provider, um, she had on written
on the whiteboard, no more than
15 minutes, no more than one
topic.
I, it, it took me 9 months to
get that appointment, so
needless to say, so my point is
that there's a lot more to it
than pay and and it's not gonna
be easily fixed. It may not be
fixable, but we have to keep all
of those factors in mind, um,
and I, I have understood that
the, the residents at UNM get
and it may be different that at
one point they were getting much
less um.
Vacation time and we're being
paid less, I hope that that's
not the situation. If you know
anything about that, but, but I
guess my point is.
We got a lot of work to do and,
and uh Jerry, you've been doing
it for a long time. It's much
appreciated and I want the, the
powers that be to understand
that it's not a, you know,
there's no magic wand.
Um, Madam Chair, um,
Both, uh, your comments and
Senator Lopez.
Uh, comments, uh, are much, much
Appreciated, but they also bring
into mind some things.
In respect
to the residents at UNM. Yes,
they are paid less than
Other residents in other states
as, as well as we have other
residencies outside of UNM.
One of the things that was done.
With um,
a loan repayment money.
We funded 30 residents.
At UNM.
To extend their time out after
they complete their residency.
And they have to work 3 years in
New Mexico.
Little creative.
2 senator Lopez's comment, as
she was speaking.
The change in generations.
is paralleled.
For physicians in a very
Big
Change
If you look at
Family medicine
Internal medicine.
And pediatrics.
Physicians.
Graduating
want to become
Hospitalist.
And that means that they work.
7 days on.
And 7 days off, essentially
working a half-time job.
At
Relatively high pay, but it
gives them 7 days off every
other week so that they can work
in those
Uh, lifestyle, um,
needs that they feel that they
need to be met.
And so we see a diminution of
those who are wanting to
Do the 1 15 minute.
clinical
Visit
It doesn't pay as well.
The orthopedic surgeon whom I
see on clinic day sees 40 people
a day.
He has a assistance, but how
can, how can you see 40 people a
day.
And so we are burning out those
that are working right now.
Thank you so much, dear, and,
and Ms. Kendalleria thank you so
much.
Uh, please know this committee
is with you and if when if, when
you have great ideas, bring them
to us and.
We'll, we'll get on board with
you with no promises that will
get anywhere with them, but we
will give it our best shot.
Thank you. So our final, um,
presenter for presenters for the
day are from Luna Community
College Behavioral Health
programs, Carol Linder and
Raymond Sanchez.
And whenever you're ready and
just a reminder, only one mic on
at a time where we get feedback.
Only one mic on at a time.
Do you guys need a minute or
you're good? I'm Carol Linder.
I'm the president of Luna
Community College, and I have
with me today, um, our director
of Allied Health and Public
Service Eric Wright, and, um,
some of you may know that, uh, I
actually when I started at Luna
Community College, I was hired
into the position of Allied
Health and public service. And
so I spent quite a bit of time,
um, addressing that and, um, and
so Eric started in this role
last fall.
But um I'm gonna sort of take
the lead on this presentation
and then he's also available to
answer any questions that you
may have. And I don't know if we
want to try to put that on so
that it's just on the slide
view.
And I know you have the
PowerPoint presentations, I
think, right? So I, I think it's
OK.
Yes, thank you. All right, who's
the, the laptop, but, but, um,
if they can, they'll get it to
just the size, it'll be OK. All
right, thank you. Thank you so
much. And am I just saying next
slide, is that what I'm saying?
Who's doing it? Oh, some on OK,
Andrea, thank you so much. Sorry
about that.
Anyway, we just have a few
slides and I, we appreciate the
opportunity to address, um,
This committee today, um, I
think one of the things that we
know um about living in rural
New Mexico and I've been in this
community since 1997 and I spent
most of my career as a biology
professor really trying to
convince students to go into
healthcare fields or to go into
research and really try to come
back and serve this community
and so I appreciated the topic
that we just got out of and
trying to recruit people to our
area is something that we all
struggle with, and so I
appreciate all the work that the
committee is doing and the work
that um
That all of us at universities
and colleges are trying to do as
well. And so what I wanna do
today is, is that we don't have
a lot of behavioral health
programs at Luna. We are looking
to try to expand the number of
programs that we do have. What I
really want to focus on today is
really our sort of new licensed
substance abuse associate LSAA,
and I think that goes really
well with the new residents, um.
Uh, residential center that we
have for substance abuse, it's
opening up in our community and
so this is something that I
worked with with um local um
community healthcare providers
to really try to get this going
at Luna so that our students can
get out and get a job right away
and so I know that was a topic,
um, um, last year, so I'm gonna
spend most of my time just kind
of giving you an overview of the
LSAA and sort of what that looks
like at Luna and then just
really talk about what are some
of the other options that our
students.
Have and that are related to
sort of behavioral health
programs, and then Eric and I
are happy to answer any
questions that the committee may
have. So you can go to the next
slide. Thank you.
Um
And so the LSAA licensed
Substance abuse associate, we
did, um, it is something that if
you have an associate's degree,
it is something that you need an
associate's degree for, um, and
so you can, no matter what
associate's degree you have, you
can become an LSAA if you
actually get an associate's
degree in an approved a degree
program, then what that means is
that you don't have to do as
many clinical hours.
and you are more set to go right
in that. And so with the AAS and
Allied Health, and if you take
two substance abuse classes and
Luna currently offers two of
these classes, just the intro to
substance abuse and the
psychology of drug and alcohol
abuse with that and your degree,
you can actually go out and
become an LSAA and get hired as
an LSAA and but if you have a
AAS and any other field, you
just need to do 90 hours of
related coursework and then CE
do trainings and then you go
into a substance abuse counselor
and training program. So having
this approved LSAA is actually
really um accelerates the
opportunity for people to get in
and get in the workforce. You
can go ahead and go to the next
slide.
So, um,
When you're thinking about what
uh uh LSAA can do an LSAA
actually is considered a
counseling license and by the
New Mexico council and therapy
Practice board and so our, our
program was approved by that
board and you can provide one on
one counseling and group um
process services to clients
without a supervisor in the
room. And so a lot of the small
clinics in the rural areas.
might have an LSAA on their
staff, and they are able to
provide those one on one
counseling services or to do
group or um group processes
there. It does, it is though a
restricted license and so you
must have a clinical supervisor
who directs that individual's
work and ensures the quality of
the services to those clients
and so that could be by direct
observation. It could be that
the um that the LSAA records the
sessions and then there's feed.
back afterwards. It could be
that the LSA writes up the notes
and those are reviewed. It
really is a process that is
handled at the level of the the
the clinic or the facility to
really do that, but you have to
have that clinical supervision
that is there because they
really are coming out with not a
whole lot of training compared
to a lot of the other programs
that that do life insurance
certificates in, in healthcare.
So you can just go to the next
slide.
And so some of the opportunities
that you can do, I just
mentioned you can be a
counselor, you can do one on
one, or you can treat an
alcohol, um, and alcohol use and
substance abuse, um, counseling,
you can um work for group
counseling services. Again, I
mentioned the residential
treatment center. This was kind
of our impetus for starting
this, um, getting this certified
at Luna Community College is
because of the residential
treatment center, and then
again, you can also do
outpatient at El Centro.
almost silia, Rio Grande, a lot
of different areas in, in the
area and um it is, you know,
what I don't know, um, is I'm
not, what I'm not sure about is
I don't think that your licensed
outside of New Mexico. I think
that that licensing is in New
Mexico, so say you wanted to go
to Colorado or you wanted to go
to Texas. I'm pretty sure you
would have to get recertified in
that area.
And then the next slide.
So then a couple of the other
things that that community
colleges are really good, um,
good, um, and we could always be
better at Luna is really making
sure that we have a good pathway
to go on to get your 4-year
degree or to go ahead and get a
graduate degree. And so we've
had a lot of conversations with
Highland University and then
other programs of really looking
and saying what can we do with
the grease from Luna and what
are options and so social work
is actually something, and
again, I spent most of my time
at Highlands University
and so I know probably more
about Highlands University than
other four-year institutions,
but definitely associate's
degrees in allied health or
criminal justice or liberal arts
or general science students with
any degree can get into a social
work program and then they can
complete as long as they've
completed their general
education requirements, they can
actually finish their bachelor's
in social work in 2 years and
then get into an MSW program or
not, and a lot of the social
work, um, Highland University
has a substance.
abuse, and I think you might
have already heard from them,
um, and they have a counseling,
so if you want to go into
counseling, I think the programs
that LuNA offers are good, um.
Um, preparation for going into
those kind of programs, um, I
haven't worked on that as much
in the last year as I probably
would have liked to. And if I
would have stayed in my role, I
probably would still um be doing
that, um, go ahead and go to the
next slide.
We also just have a couple other
things that we offer in training
that I think is related to
providing support for behavioral
health programs and just
thinking about it. We do have
certified nursing assistant, um,
when I started at Luna in 2021.
It used to be that before you
became a nurse, you actually had
to become a certified nursing
assistant. That was sort of a
thought that, OK, you got to see
what it's like and then or then
you would go into nursing and so
previous to the, the common um
curriculum that, that the
nursing
schools are using now, you
always had to be a CNA first and
it's a lot advice, but it's not
required anymore. And so we
haven't really had a whole lot
of interest in our CNA um
program, but I think that there
is definitely a need, and I
think that nursing assistants
are also something that in
residential treatments and
different care like that is
something you can do. The
advantage of, um, a CNA program
and it is again, you are
licensed in that, you are
allowed to do certain
Things and you can do that
training in anywhere from 3 to 4
weeks.
Um, and so go ahead and go and
do the next slide. Um, this, oh,
this just says what the, what
you need to do. You've got about
75 hours of training, you need
to, um, you actually have to do
16 hours of practical training
and it's supervised and then you
do a, and a national exam in
that. So you can go ahead and go
to the next slide.
Um
OK, this skip that.
Um, you have to work under a
registered nurse. We also do
have an emergency medical um
technician basic program that
was started um with some funding
um from the state back and I
think that um Doctor Royal
started that back in 2015, 2016,
and then it sort of had stopped
and hadn't been very active and
that's something that I
restarted when I was at Luna
and, and that, um, Coach Wright,
I didn't say that Coach Wright
is also a baseball coach, and so
if you have any
questions about baseball, you
could also ask him questions
about that. Anyway, and so
what's nice about the EMT
program is that there aren't any
prerequisites in that program
and you can complete it in a, in
a semester and um and so we have
that we work with UNM EMS
Academy for that certification.
We don't have our own licensing
with that and the other thing
that's really nice about our EMT
basic program is that we're
working with the workforce
integration network and we're
doing integrated education.
Training and so it's really
designed, it's a really rigorous
program, and we actually pair
that with an instructor that
helps out with getting the sort
of getting students up to speed
to be college ready to, to
handle that material. And so we
have offered that here in, in
the local area. We did offer it
one semester out in Santa Rosa,
um, we are trying to work on
getting it back in Santa Rosa,
there's a huge need for that,
um, and again, trying to find
instructors is definitely a
challenge for all of the
programs that we offer and um
we're looking at that. So the
next slide, I think, is my um my
neck is just my final um slide.
So, um, I wanna just mention
when we talked about the mobile,
uh, medical lab that, that my
first year that I was at Luna, I
actually wrote a proposal to do
a medical mobile lab, and the
idea was to go out and do
training at our in Santa Rosa in
Springer, and more.
and Roy and all of our different
areas and actually take the CNA
training, take the dental
assisting training, take our,
um,
Take these trainings out to
these rural communities, and I
had a purchase order in May of
2022, and I thought I was really
good, but with the pandemic, we
could never get the chassis for
the truck. We had a whole, we
had everything completely set
and we were using part of money
that was given by the state. We
actually received money $225,000
from the state, but we were also
trying to use her CARES Act
money, and it was just, they
just kept giving us a delay and
delay they couldn't get it. They
did.
couldn't get it and then last
spring when I went up as the VP
of finance at Luna Community
College, they had told me that
it was gonna be done by
February, and when I, in
February, they said, OK, it's
not gonna be, we're not gonna
get that chassis until November
and we had to spend that CARESA
money and I was not, Eric wasn't
hired in that role. I was just
like, OK, but I had this vision
and I've just that vision of
what you're talking about. We
just and when I was entering
viewing people and it was, it
didn't require a CDL.
license, which we do have CDL
training at LuNA, but it didn't
require a CDL. You could just go
out and drive it and when I was
first interviewing my CNA
instructors, I would go, OK, are
you willing to go drive this? I
would show him a photo of it and
I was so excited about it, but,
um, that's one of the things
that I was not happy about and
we did get that money
reauthorized thanks to Senator
Seanics and so we're using that
money, but we're happy to answer
any other questions.
OK, thank you. We will start
with Representative Royval
Caballero.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I do
not have any questions other
than thank you for sharing that
experience and that would have
been heartbreaking for me and
hard to handle, but thank you so
much for all you do.
Representative Herndon, and just
if you could turn your mic off
when another mic is on. Thank
you. Uh, thank you, Madam Chair,
and thank you presenters. So as
I listen to your presentation
about being a CNA and you're
saying it takes only 3 to 4
weeks. What would happen if we
offered that to seniors in high
school and they could do that on
a regular basis and then it was
only one semester for your EMT.
I, I, I mean, it seems like we
could grow our health
professions a lot, like
Has Luna thought about offering
that in that way?
Thank you, um, Chair Thompson,
and, uh, Representative Herndon,
that's actually one of the
things that we have looked at,
and I think what we need to do,
and I think it's good that
we're, we're hearing this, is
this, this is a perfect thing
for students really to explore
um.
I think that being a, uh, we
have had high school students
that have done that right out of
high school. We don't right now,
we didn't have a schedule that
really worked with the high
school. So we used to offer it
in the summer and there were a
lot of students that would come
in in the summer and you could
get your CNA course in 2 weeks
when I first started and you can
do that. The other thing that um
a lot of people talk to me about
was getting the community health
worker as a high school student,
and then you can actually get a
job that is a meaningful
job, you know, when you're going
to college or if you're looking
at that as a sort of a stepping
stone there. The challenge that
we have and we developed and we
developed a program that we do
have community health worker.
You can get credit for it. It's
a credit bearing class, it, it
applies to our degree programs,
but both CNA and CHW, you don't
have to have a, you don't, the
colleges don't have to be
involved and so like our vita
buena, our local nursing
assistant that behavioral health
Institute.
they actually do the training
themselves, and so even with CHW
you can just go online and do
the, the training for free and
asynchronous with that. Now, I
don't think it's as good as what
we're offering at Luna, but
everybody told me that I really
needed to do CHW and I spent a
lot of time and effort getting
that up and going, and we have
certified actually several
students from that and that are
employed in that and our, our um
person that is running our Luna
Strong program that is doing our
um food
security and dealing with food
security and our tenddita and
and handling our mental health
and telehealth services that we
offer at Luna. She actually went
through our program and she's
certified as a CHW and she did
her practical training at El
Centro. So I think that's a
great option for doing that, and
that was the plan to try to get
students to do that, but um it
really hasn't panned out despite
a lot of effort, but maybe Eric
has more energy than I do, so
maybe he can, that he can go for
that.
So I think that's a good idea.
Thank you. And I have this one
major question for Eric. I've
always wondered, does it, do you
all practice how you slide into
a base so that you can always be
safe because your body's longer
than trying to run there. Can I
ask that?
No, yeah, that's, I'd love to
hear the answer myself.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative Herman. Yes, you
do practice sliding, and we do
the beauty of it is we have an
altar field, and so you do
practice sliding whenever we're
working, you work on uh the
distance from the base you work
on how you go down, which leg if
you go head first, you're
working on what part of your
body hits, you know,
impact-wise, so your head
doesn't go down and hit the
ground and pop back up. So you
do work on sliding. We do it
every single day, uh, in
practice, when we're doing our
base running drills and
everything like that. Because if
not, uh, you
You can't get hurt. You can't
hit the base wrong, hurt your
knee, sprain your ankle, tear,
ligaments in your knee, break
your thumb, sprain your thumb,
do all that. So we do practice
it, yes, every day. Thank you,
thank you very much and see,
Madam Chair, that was a health
question
Andresentative Herndon, I don't
think we'll be having a sliding
clinic at our next meeting if
you would like to join the coach
in the practice, we'd love a
demonstration.
So Representative Cates.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you very much for your
presentation. Um, I was lucky
enough to have a couple of
interim committees that were
hosted by Luna College and uh
and it's just is real testament
of how you serve our community.
It is a true community college,
uh, and I, and today's
presentation just reaffirmed,
um, that, and so I just wanna
thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and and
Representative Kates, um, I tell
people, um, so I've been at Luna
for 4 years. I've been president
for just over a year and I
really, I've been in this
community since 1997, and I
really thought that I knew this
community. I really, and I've
always worked with Luna
Community Colleges, as when I
was at Highlands and I wanna say
that just the past year
especially as president, what is
really affirmed for me is how
important Lunar Community
College is to.
this community and, and really
the testament of what our
nursing program has done and all
of our nursing students do go
through the Allied Health
program, and we have a fully
accredited, um, program, but,
um, you know, I'd never, I had
my, my brother is a doctor up
in, in San, he's retired now,
but he's a doctor up in
Farmington in the San Juan
College is a really good
community college and uh my
sister-in-law was trying to get
me to go up there and, and I
said, you know, I have a
graduate program, I have
research.
students, I have all this stuff,
and then, you know, when I got
to the community college, all of
a sudden I went, OK, I think
that it's definitely something
that I'm happy that I've
experienced in my career, and
I'm really happy that there's so
many people that have really
been committed to keeping Luna
Community College. We have a lot
of challenges, but I've really
have been so proud to represent
the community, the community.
Thank you, Representative, I
mean, Senator Stephanics.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
would like to congratulate the
president, um,
She has made lemonade out of
what she's been given and um
Luna Community College has got
had its ups and downs, and the
governor and the legislature
over the years.
Supports it, doesn't support it,
but I think they've come out of
it being very flexible. They've
been flexible with the forest
programs, they've been flexible
with the health, the allied
health programs, and I would
like to commend them for the.
That's all. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. uh Representative
Chavis, um, thank you, Madam
Chair. I, I don't have any
questions, but I also want to
make a comment. I remember, um,
and I don't remember what year
it was. I know it was before
2008.
Um, I was organizing Alta Vista.
I worked for a healthcare
worker, a union, and one of the
things that really impressed me
was that
The great majority of the nurses
at the hospital were from Luna
Community College. So I think
that's a great example of
growing your own, and I look
forward to seeing, you know,
what comes out of the behavioral
health because I think that's
also an opportunity for um rural
providers to, to be, um, you
know, for those jobs to be
filled with, with our own.
Local students. Thank you.
Senator Pope.
I'm good about I'm sure, but
thank you for being here.
Senator Cio Lopez. Thank you,
Madam Chair. I just, uh,
impressed with the programs that
you have that feel, that feel
very important needs in, in our
state and community, so thank
you.
Uh, representative Gonzalez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Well,
I'm gonna sing your praises
because um I have worked with
President Linder for many years
and many capacities and um I
know Matt probes in his
presentations, he kept
repeating, We build healthcare
providers. We build healthcare
professionals, and you have been
a part of that at all levels,
you know, while we're here and I
do think that Luna Community
College is a true asset to this
community, um, so much in fact
that, you know, um, all the many
discussions and all the work
we've had, um, very key in some
of the CTE legislation.
that I, you know, been
supporting in that pathway and
how looking at community
college, colleges in that
picture of regionalization and
being able to provide the CT
offering specifically as we're
talking about within the world
of healthcare, um, and more
drilling down even so what you
mentioned about the
The difficulty it is to find
instructors at community
colleges because you're not
alone in that, that I think that
is a huge backstop for building
this health career pipeline is
finding those careers and um I
do want to share, you know, here
in, in, within our community,
you know, creative solutions,
um, working with Alta Vista
Hospital, they were able to send
their faculty to the community
college, um, to help provide
those nurse, those nurses. So I
just really want to thank you
for all your work and your
support and just
Really leading the way as to
what a community model can look
like. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative Anaya.
No questions, madam.
Uh, Vice Chair Lopez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and just
want to say thank you for um the
commitment that you have here in
the in your community here in
Las Vegas and the surrounding
area, um, Luna College has
retooled itself over the years
to meet the need, um.
I mean, under, you know, former
President Campos and all the
others who've been um in your
seat before.
I know I have done um
I think the, the community's
work to make sure that
addressing the concerns and
needs for community, and Madam
Chair, healthcare has always
been where it's at and um I
think not just with the
behavioral health institute
that's here that I call it, um,
but also, um,
seeing how we will be addressing
um a growing population of
elderly, which I'm one of them
coming down the pike, um, making
sure that we have those who are
able to
work not just in a facility but
also for, you know, home for
home-based services too,
because, you know,
Uh, Madam Chair, that's a whole
another discussion, but um I
know that it's, it's where it's
at.
And I just want to say thank you
and of course, it's always
recruiting that next generation
of young people that meets their
needs, um, I call it for quality
of life.
Thank you.
And I want to thank you for your
for the work that you do and the
presentation and I think that
will be um the end of our day.
Uh, we will be back here
tomorrow at 9 a.m. There will be
no lunch, um.
We will adjourn at
Theoretically, 12:15, we never
did get the person on Zoom back
for a public comment, did we?
OK. OK. All right, so thank you
all for being here and uh we
will see you tomorrow. There is
a flash flood warning I just
saw, um, so be careful. Thank
you so much.
