Thank you, Mr. Chair, and my
bassador and the members of the
committee and we are honored to
be here and um thankful for your
invitation to present on our
company Falling Colors. We're
going to start with
introductions um of our team
that are here um before we roll
into our presentations, so I
will start off again. My name is
Reba Sarafin. I am the
stakeholder and provider
relations specialist for our
company and part of our customer
success team. I'm also a
licensed.
Mental health counselor in the
state of New Mexico, a national
certified counselor by the
National Board of Certified
counselors and an enrolled
member of the Hickory Apache
tribe, and I'll pass it on to
Tim.
Hi, my name's Tim Harville. I'm
a senior product manager
following colors, uh, I've been
with the company about 6 years.
I moved to New Mexico from
Washington DC and found home
here and uh my role at the
company is really about trying
to make our technology platform,
uh,
Better to better serve
behavioral health community of
New Mexico.
Pass it to Joy.
Good afternoon, Sam Wolf, uh,
general counsel and chief
operating officer for Falling
Colors. I'm also native New
Mexican, graduate of UNM School
of Law. I've been with the
company formally for about 4.5
years and was counsel outside
the company prior to that for
several years. Thank you for the
opportunity to present today.
And hello, my name's Joy Costro
Hale. I'm the chief executive
officer of Falling Colors. Uh,
I'm also, uh, born and bred New
Mexican, uh, we're a family
founded company. So you could
say that I've been with the
company since the day I was
born, depending how you want to
count, um, but I formally joined
the company about 7 years ago.
Um, the reason that we're here
today to speak with you all is
that we serve as the
administrative services
organization for the Behavioral
Health Collaborative and the
agencies across New Mexico that
offer behavioral health
services, including HCA, CYFD,
DOA.
an ECECD among others. You've
probably heard our name come up
in other presentations. Many of
the data nuggets that were
presented in various
presentations, including some of
what Nick showed you yesterday,
come out of our system. And
recently you all asked us to
come here to talk with you about
what our role is, what the scope
of the ASO in New Mexico is and
how we serve behavioral health
across the state.
We have 3 goals in this
presentation. First, we hope
that you walk away with a clear
understanding of who falling
colors is and why we do the work
we do. Second, we hope to
clarify and explain what the
role of the administrative
services organization is and
what the division of
responsibility is between the
ASO and the lead agencies. And
finally, we hope to show you a
sample of the type of data that
we collect, analyze, and
visualize in this capacity and
open a conversation with you all
about how that data.
be useful for the committee and
making decisions across the
state for behavioral health.
Sam's going to kick us off.
Thank you. I want to give just a
little bit more background on
the company itself, as Jerry
noted, we are in New Mexico
founded company. Uh, we are
headquartered in Santa Fe. We
still have the majority of our
staff in New Mexico from El
Gordo to Nambe.
Um, we are also a public benefit
corporation in 2020, this
legislature passed a law
allowing corporations to
register as public benefit
corporations. We were one of the
first to take advantage of that
law. What that means is that our
commitment to supporting our
communities and the environment
is literally written into our
corporate charter, uh, which is
a big step. Not a lot of
companies have been willing to
take that step. We are also a
certified B corporation. You may
all have started noticing a
little bee in a circle on more
and more businesses.
That is a third party assessment
created by a nonprofit company
called B Lab, which evaluates
company companies on hundreds of
different metrics, um, and then
verifies that the companies are
actually following through on
those metrics to see that we are
actually supporting the
environment, actually taking
positive steps towards
supporting our workers,
supporting our communities. That
is an assessment that we have to
go through every 3 years when we
recertified last year we were
very proud to see that we had
received the 4th highest score.
in the world out of over 8000
companies that had been
certified globally. So this is
a, a big demonstration that we
actually put our money where our
mouths are when it comes to
supporting our community,
supporting our workers,
supporting our environment, and
again most of those workers are
here in New Mexico.
We also have a nonprofit
foundation, the Falling Colors
Foundation. One major step that
that foundation took a few years
ago when we saw that the world
was shutting down due to COVID
and before any of the government
assistance had become available
to people, our foundation
donated small grants to over 200
small businesses in Santa Fe
County. We got that money out
the door to them within weeks of
the shutdown before any other
assistance was available. We're
very proud of having been able
to support that.
Um, and we also do, of course, a
lot of support for local
nonprofits, the New Mexico
Cancer Foundation, Girls
Incorporated, uh, many other
local organizations that are
supporting New Mexico in various
ways. All of this is to say
basically that we look at
supporting behavioral health
care in New Mexico, not just as
a line of business. We're here
and we are doing this work
because we believe in supporting
New Mexico. We are trying to
make our state stronger. We are
trying to find ways that we can
help.
Tuning to our next page. Um,
many of you are familiar with a
little bit of the history.
We are of course the ASO for the
Behavioral Healthcare Services
Collaborative. It's been noted
that the collaborative has had
some sort of fits and starts or
some peaks and valleys and what
it's actually doing. One very
important thing that it's done
is allow various agencies. There
are 15 or 17 different
government agencies that are
part of the collaborative
because of their participation
in the collaborative, they're
able to work with us as the ASL.
And although the initial
contract is for
through the collaborative we
work directly with those
agencies individually to
identify exactly what it is that
they need and to deliver those
services. So there's kind of a
core of services that we provide
to all of those agencies. Um,
but what DDC needs and what
ECECD needs aren't necessarily
the same, and so we customize
our offerings to make sure that
we're supporting them as
carefully as we can. Uh, we
initially signed on as the
contractor for the collaborative
in fiscal year 2017 with a
three-year contract.
With 31-year renewals that was
up for renewal and put out
through a public RFP process
last year. We were again
selected for another 3 years
with 3 options to renew. So we
are one year into that 2nd round
of the contract. Um, some of you
remember, of course, uh, how
things were with behavioral
health services in New Mexico
some years ago. The provider
network had pretty much been
destroyed. Um, we've heard a lot
with some of the MCOs there are
still many problems that many of
the providers have with
Waiting a very long time for
payment, months and months and
months for payment. Um, there
were fewer than 100 or
approximately 100 providers in
the network when we came on in
2017. Uh, the state was paying
approximately 12% for the
services operated by our
predecessor, um, same ASO
Services, and there wasn't a lot
of transparency about where the
funds were going. There were
often questions about, well,
what the state gave this money
out. Where did it go and what
does it actually accomplishing.
These are things that we have
made major stride.
And we have grown that provider
network to over 800 today. Those
are providers who are actively
contracted through falling
colors with a contract that
protects the state, has all the
requirements that the state
wants in there. They are active
in our system and as soon as the
state agency gives them a scope
of work and says we would like
you to deliver whatever services
they might want to deliver, they
are ready to go in our system.
Our payment average, yes, sir.
Could you
You mean deliberately not have
wanted to do this, but just to
help us, could you refresh our
memories? Who was the
predecessor organization? Was
that Optum Optum Health.
Thank you.
Um, so our average payment time
from invoice approval by the
state to these providers is 6
days. We're very proud of that.
Our contract says that we have
to pay 90% within 30 days and
the remainder within 90 days, we
beat that always uh and pay
within 6 days of state approval
of those funds. As I said, the
prior contractor was charging
over 12% when we came on with a
smaller number of agencies and a
smaller amount of funds we were
charging at
About 10% with economies of
scale we've managed to drop that
to 6.6% today. So during a
period when inflation nationwide
has risen by about 25%. We've
dropped our fees by 35%.
Talk, I mean, my colleagues are
going to go through in detail
some of the services, but slide
6 here on page 3 has a general
overview of some of the services
that we provide.
Um, and the, the orange side on
the left is what we consider our
core ASO services. So we
contract with all of those
providers. We train them to use
our system and in what the
requirements of their particular
fund might be that includes a
lot of, for example, a
particular fund might only be
available for veterans of a
certain age or it might only be
available once a week or
something like that, so we make
sure that the providers are
aware of what rules apply to the
funds that they have been
allocated and how do
Use our system to bill for those
services. Um, we handle
invoicing, so when the providers
enter the services into our
system, it turns those into an
invoice and makes it available
for state actors to review those
invoices and verify that this is
in fact something that they want
to pay for. So that authority of
actually approving the invoice
goes through the state. We
aren't making the call on should
this service be paid for or not
as some of the other, you know,
MCOs are doing, we are
processing the funds as the
state directs them to be
processed.
We also handle all the payments
we handle recruitments. Um, if a
payment turns out to have been
made inappropriately or that it
should have been Medicaid
eligible, something like that
since all of these funds are
payer of last resort funds. Um,
we handle the recruitment, so
through that process we have
brought back over $7 million in
funds that was inappropriately
paid for one reason or another,
not suggesting that it was some
kind of malfeasance, but it was
determined later that that fund
should not have been paid out.
We were
Cover that on behalf of the
state and make it available. We
don't charge anything for that
service and we provided a lot of
data for the state we collect
and make available that data.
Uh, my colleagues again are
going to give a detailed example
of what some of that looks like.
On the right hand side of slide
6, you can see another range of
additional services, and these
are kind of standalone data
platforms we do federal data
gatherings such as TED's, um,
cat cans, giras, that sort of
thing, we handle.
critical incident reporting
Carein SIA, there are a whole
bunch of different programs that
require data collection, the
following colors handles as
well. One thing I want to note
is that we don't charge anything
for all of those additional
standalone data projects. Those
are all handled as part of the
ASO services. Um, with that, I'm
gonna pass it on and let my
colleagues address some of the
some of these specific services
we provide in more detail.
All right, thank you.
So we're looking at slide 7 just
to orient you all, where we
flipped to white background. Um,
so as Sam said, we've been doing
this job actually for quite a
while now. Uh, we started in
2017 in this capacity and we've
built up to the point that we're
administering over $2200 million
annually in human service
dollars that go toward
behavioral health across a
variety of agencies. We are
contracting with over 500
providers, uh, excuse the typo
there, and are able to track
almost 3 million encounters with
New Mexicans.
Every single year.
In that capacity.
Oh, sure. Thank you. I
appreciate you.
mentioning that.
Is that any better? All right,
excellent. Thank you. um.
I was saying to our capacity
able to administer over $2200
million that go toward
behavioral health services in
New Mexico were contracted with
over 500 providers to administer
those services and we're able to
administer over 60 behavioral
health programs that look at a
variety of populations, special
populations, children, adults,
aging, and so on.
In that capacity, we're tracking
almost 3 million encounters with
individuals who get services
through our system.
As an ASO, our purview is to
offer end to end behavioral
health administration
management. For us, that means
contracting, payment processing,
data collection, outcome
tracking, services and claims
collection and validation, burn
rate management and financial
reporting. As Sam noted, we
always strive to do that as
efficiently, accurately and
transparently as possible,
meaning that our goal is to exec
execute the state's vision for
behavioral health in the best
way possible.
Going to the next slide, I want
to share in a bit more detail
what we do as an ASO and then
what stays with the state
because I think there's often
confusion there and thinking
about, well, what is an ASO? How
does it differ from an MCO? How
does it different from program
management.
I think the easiest way to think
about this broadly, is that as
the ASO we are not setting
policy and we are not setting
vision. We will never say how a
dollar should be spent. We will
never choose which provider is
the right provider to do it, nor
will we decide who are the right
people to be getting those
services. However, once those
decisions are made, it is our
job to execute that as best as
possible. That means getting
providers paid timely for their
services, collecting the data
that's needed to see if the
Programs are effective and
working with the state decision
makers so that when they're
setting that vision, making
those decisions about how
finances should be managed. They
have everything they need to
make the next step in the best
possible way.
In particular, our focus is very
much around building out the
provider network.
So we do full service
contracting, including customer
support and training for all of
the vendors in the network. Uh,
one thing to note is that we
don't set the contract language
or the scopes of work, but we do
execute that. So the state will
decide what is an appropriate
scope of work for a provider and
they'll give us to get those
signed to work with the
providers to understand what
services they are, and to get
them configured in our system
for billing. Likewise, we do all
of the payment and processing
and data collection. That means
that once a provider
has been brought into the
behavioral health network,
they'll use our system, uh,
which Tim will be talking about
in a bit more detail to actually
go in and bill for services. Uh
we can through that we can
collect specific encounters, we
can collect claims data and we
can collect data for special
projects, all of which is tying
the outcome and project data to
the payment data so that the
state and the providers can see
in a single place all of the
folks they're serving, how that
project's going, and how they're
getting paid for it.
A critical thing we do in this
capacity is also the enforcement
of all payment rules. Obviously,
many of these programs have very
complex claims processing rules.
There might be requirements in
terms of how many services a
single person can get in a week,
and so on. Our job is to get
those rules from the state and
make sure they are appropriately
enforced. We often do that
automatically with the software
that we build and also have a
program compliance and financial
services team that review the
invoices to see if there's any
questions or surprises coming.
And
Finally, as Sam mentioned, we
support the federal and state
data and assessment tools. So
any program that needs
additional data collection
beyond what comes in with the
claims and encounter can reach
out to us and we'll turn on
surveys that are for clients or
for providers so we can start
tying data collection to the
billing process itself, which
allows for more flexibility when
a program gets started to say,
hey, what kind of data do you
need to show that this is
effective? What kind of data do
you need to report to the feds
in order to get the kind of
Information and funding that you
plan to apply for next year. So
our system offers a lot of
flexibility in being able to get
not only the clinic and basic
payment data, supporting data
for specific programs.
If you look at the next slide,
slide 9, as Sam mentioned, uh,
one of the things that we also
take very seriously is the
handling of this money,
including recruitments. Our
scope is broadly the non-Mdicaid
dollars of New Mexico, which
means that the dollars of last
resorts is for people who don't
qualify for Medicaid or for
programs that aren't Medicaid
eligible. This often means the
most vulnerable populations as
well as new projects or programs
that are being stood up and
don't have federal funding. And
so it's very important that
these
are used as effectively and as
accurately as possible because
frankly there aren't that many
of them, and they often need to
go a very long way.
In that capacity, we support a
variety of reimbursement models,
everything from taking
Medicaid style claims to
standing up fully custom
encounters. One of the things
that I think is worth noting is
that we're very proud of how
closely we work with our
providers to successfully build
our claims acceptance rate is
93%, which is higher than the
leading industry standard, uh,
this the excuse me, the 7% that
gets rejected is less than half
of the claims rejection rates of
the MCOs nationally and
That's in part because we have a
team that sits with providers
and if they get a claim rejected
because they entered the data
badly because they didn't put
the right zip code. We have
someone who calls them and says,
hey, let us talk you through how
to resubmit this correctly so
you can get paid for the
services that you were
contracted to do.
Along with that, uh, we really
work to make invoice review and
creation as easy on the state
side as possible. We know that
program managers have far too
much to do and so have designed
a system that aggregates all of
the information in a very easy
to read and easy to approve way,
including building into our
system a way for program
managers to go back and forth
with providers to say, hey, can
you add some clarification? Can
you improve the documentation
here and so on.
Many of the things that you're
hearing today, some of the
challenges around time to
payment, the time to, uh, the
amount of claims that are
rejected, the fact that
providers often submit services
and just don't hear back from us
whether or not they're going to
get paid. Those are the kinds of
things that we focus on. It's
our job to make sure those
things don't happen by making
the payment system transparent,
making sure providers have all
of the information they need to
build accurately and to reaching
out to both the state and the
providers, if anything seems to
be stuck. We don't let invoices.
sit in our system unreviewed. We
don't let partial payments just
sit there. We're the ones that
will reach out to the state and
advocate and say, hey, this
provider hasn't been paid yet.
This invoice has been in review
for weeks. Can you take a look
at it? So we're really in a role
where we can make sure that
those behave behavioral health
dollars are being administered
as effectively as possible.
Going to the next slide, I think
it's worth also calling out
really what we don't do. Um, so
fundamentally we are the
administrative services side of
the ASO. We are not the policy
side. What that means is, first,
we will never determine
treatment plans. We're not
clinicians and we don't decide
who should get care. It is on
the providers and the state
decide which populations they're
serving. We will also never deny
claims based on the content of
those claims, as long as the
claim is contractual.
valid and following the rules
set by the state, we will accept
that claim. Moreover, we don't
benefit from claims rejection,
so we are not incentivized in
any way to make sure providers
aren't getting paid, which is
often a complication with, you
know, entities that take on
roles like ours. Instead, if any
claim is rejected or recouped,
those dollars go back into the
pool for billing, so they go on
to serve other behavioral health
services across the states.
Additionally, we will never set
costs. I know there was
discussion earlier about
increasing the Medicaid rates to
150%.
We follow the funding tables
that are set by the state, uh,
and always reach out to them to
say, hey, there was a change in
Medicaid. Are you guys
interested in matching or not.
So we're not working on the cost
side. We merely make sure that
it is implemented correctly.
Likewise, we do not select the
providers or determine their
scopes of work while we handle
the contracting and the
enforcement to make sure that
everyone is billing within their
contractual obligations. We are
certainly not here to say what
is most appropriate for New
Mexicans. We just want to make
sure that it gets done in the
best way possible.
Alright, with that.
You want to tell us a little bit
more in detail how this works
and what our system looks like.
Sure, um,
Moving on to the next slide.
Well, this is going to be the
shortest slide in the bunch. Um,
the AAO process.
If we had video, I'd love to do
this in more of a schoolhouse
rock like how a bill becomes a
law. Let's track a dollar
through the system way. Uh, but
we're just going to talk through
it.
Uh.
So, first of all, let me just
say the process is intended to
be as simple as possible for
providers.
And is empowering as possible
for the state. Uh, on slide 12,
uh, you'll notice we have
labeled, uh, who, who's
responsibility each action is.
The vast majority.
All the decision making really
comes from the state agencies,
uh,
We as the ASO are just there to
execute the state's wishes.
So at the beginning of the
process, uh, a state agency on
the roof.
So a state agency receives
funding. Uh, that's the magic
that you folks make. Um.
Imagine the beginning of the
fiscal year, BHSD, uh, gets, you
know, such and such amount state
general fund, uh, they decide
how much of that they're going
to invest in the ASO, uh, and we
set the initial budget for the
fiscal year.
Uh, broken down by Funsource.
Those amounts may change
throughout the course of the
year and and money may be added
or removed from the contract.
Uh, that takes place through a
budgetary letter of direction
process. We work with each
agency individually uh on a
monthly basis to uh adjust
funding as needed.
So the state then decides where
they're going to put the money,
which programs and services
they're going to support.
And they identify providers who
are going to provide those
services.
There's over 60 programs in our
system. Uh, many with multiple
projects.
Um, as an example today, I am
thinking back to the pool family
example from yesterday, the uh
semi-fictional uh family. So one
of these projects is uh the
move-in assistance and eviction
prevention program through BHSD
supportive housing.
Uh, MHR over in Clovis is one of
the providers who who
participates in uh move-in
assistance in eviction
prevention or meat as we fondly
call it.
Uh, so the state then directs
falling colors to contract with
the providers who are
participating in that project.
If they're new to us, that means
signing a business associate
agreement.
Uh, client services contract and
an attestation as to their
credentialing with the Medicaid
MCOs.
Uh, we do not do separate
credentialing. Uh, we accept the
MCO's prudential.
Uh,
we then have a team that, uh,
facilitates the process of
contracting, making sure that
the provider sends us everything
we need to get them on boarded
in the system.
And the system will not allow a
provider to bill for services
until all these boxes have been
checked.
So at this point, the state
creates a scope of work for the
provider. Uh, they determine how
much money they're going to
allocate, what services it's
going to fund, what period of
time they'll be expected to
deliver those services in what
the documentation requirements
are going to be.
Uh, we send out that scope of
work, uh, to the provider for
their electronic signature. Once
that's been executed, then the
state will direct us to allocate
uh whatever money has been
allocated, say in this case
$120,000 is going to be set
aside for MHR for move-in
assistance.
Uh, they'll specify all those
things in the scope of work,
Falling colors isn't making any
of those decisions.
Uh.
I think at this point we can
move on to slide 13.
Uh, we're in our compliance and
support team who internally we
call the Dream Team, uh, trains
the provider on using our
system, on billing for the
services and answer any
billing-related questions they
have.
Uh, and after this, then MHR is
going to provide those services.
Um, once they've provided the
services, they entered them in
star for billing that may be via
encounters, as is the case with
the service we're talking about,
uh, it could be through claims.
Um, and then once a week, uh,
our system bundles them together
into an invoice that gets sent
off to the state program manager
responsible for this project.
Uh,
The state agency can then
approve it, deny it, they can
mark certain parts of it for
correction, uh, and send it back
to the provider to say, you
know, oh, we need more
documentation for this service
for this client, etc.
After it's been reviewed and
approved, uh, then falling
colors will pay that invoice
again with about a 6 day average
turnaround.
Usually faster.
Um,
And if questions arise from
either the provider or from the
state, they just reach out to
our support desk, which is 100%
human, uh, almost entirely New
Mexico local. Finally, to help
the state understand how this
money is being spent, we compile
all this service and client data
into reports and dashboards that
we're going to get into much
more detail on a little bit
later.
So that's the basics of a dollar
moving through the ASO process.
Um, our system is called STAR.
Uh, SAR stands for state
tracking and reporting. It's a
software platform that we built
that sits in the middle of, of
all this process.
Uh, there are a number of
modules that work together to
create a seamless experience for
providers and program managers
for collecting data, managing
the money, and getting providers
paid.
Part of that's client
registration, where we're
collecting core demographic data
about the people being served.
Uh, as well as, uh, federally
mandated data for reporting, uh,
such as TED's.
Uh, there's the service
collection module, uh, happens
either through encounters or
claims.
We've got a highly customizable
business rules engine, uh, that
we configured to ensure that all
the right information is being
included in billing, that we
enforce limitations on
timeliness, how many times the
service can be billed in a
period of time, etc.
We also built a custom survey
and assessment engine, uh,
which my colleagues have already
made reference to, we support
all kinds of industry standard
assessments like
the GR.
Uh, the cans and the cat.
Uh, and with programs that need
program specific assessments, we
work with the state to build out
those assessments and collect
them at whatever frequency is
required.
There's an invoice management
system that will talk more about
in a second, that handles the
bundling of services and
invoices, the review and the
approval process, and the
payments to providers, along
with recruitments when that's
necessary.
Uh, finally, there's a reporting
system, extensive reports on
financial and program and client
data.
Interactive management
dashboards to provide additional
insights.
And then a number of other
standalone data platforms as Sam
mentioned, uh, things like
CareLink, uh, the methadone
central registry, uh, critical
incident reporting for the LCA
and and BHSD.
Let's talk a little bit more
about invoice management.
Our invoice dashboard is
designed to provide both kind of
high level and more granular
visibility into spending, uh,
program manager can, can drill
down into a project to see how
spending compares among
providers. Uh, they've got
trackers to give them a quick
access to different statuses of
an invoice, pending approval,
pending payment, corrections
required.
Uh,
They can review invoices line by
line, look at individual
services for individual clients.
Uh, access the supporting
documentation, the providers
have uploaded.
As part of the review process,
uh, following colors does
provide another level of review.
Again, we're not making any
decisions about what invoices
should be approved or not, but
we will, for example, flag
abnormally high dollar invoices
for a provider. If anything
shows up that's say over $60,000
is our general general threshold
for us to say, all right, let's
let's think about this. Maybe
you guys want to take another
look.
Um,
Then once uh once invoices have
been approved, we get the money
out the door to the provider,
uh, via EFT very quickly.
Uh, and then on a monthly basis,
I just wanted to point out we do
the Medicaid check, uh, in which
BHSD will download a Medicaid
eligibility report from our
system, look at all the services
that were built that are
theoretically Medicaid eligible,
and then they'll make a
determination as to whether
those should be recouped and
built to Medicaid.
Uh, or whether it's correct that
they were paid through our
system.
So moving on to slide 17.
Uh, reporting on the utilization
of funds.
Uh, the people making decisions
want to know how much money
there is and where it's
allocated and how it's being
spent.
So we offer several different
burn rate reports to the state
program and financial managers.
Uh, to view that utilization
sliced and diced a variety of
ways.
Uh, at a glance, they can look
at the overall budget.
How much has been allocated to
providers, how much has not been
allocated yet.
How much has been paid out and
how much remains along with a
percentage utilization,
actually.
Much easier to read on a screen
than on this half a piece of
paper, um.
But our goal for everybody is to
get these numbers as close to
100% as possible at the end of
the state fiscal year.
Um, they can break it down by
fund type, like federal or
state.
individual fund by project, and
then by providers who are
participating in that project.
So at any time, uh, the state
financial authorities should
have a very clear and up to-date
view of where their money is
allocated and how it's being
used.
Uh, and going to, to Joy's
earlier point about um
us not being incentivized to not
pay claims, um, we only get our
management fee on dollars that
actually get spent on behavioral
health services. So we're
incentivized to get those
dollars out there.
So that's an overview of the
core aspects of the star
platform. Um,
Behind it is uh I would say
industry leading technical stack
that values privacy and
security.
Uh, the system's entirely
cloud-based. There's nothing
sitting on physical servers that
could be compromised and, and
everything's fully redundant and
uh we practice disaster
recovery, um, scenarios.
HIPA and 42 CFR Part 2 compliant
so it meets all the legal
standards for privacy.
And we've got a great
information security team that
uses both automated and manual
processes to monitor all of
these systems for intrusion.
Uh, and finally we have a great
engineering team and quality
assurance team, uh, that perform
testing any time we make any
sort of change to the system,
uh, and they're ready to push
out hot fixes if there's an
error or a bug that makes it
into production and uh keeps
people from
Billing and getting paid.
So as you can see, we try to be
a good active partner and
provide a good platform, uh.
For this money to be spent and
talk more about our being a good
partner. I'll hand it off to
Reba.
Great. Thank you, Tim.
Um, so I'm gonna be reviewing
the next 3 slides, starting with
slide 19 on there. Um,
highlighting areas that
distinguish our company from
others in our customer success.
As part of our customer success
team, um, they focus on
providing high quality customer
service to our users. The main
component of this is directly
interacting with our
stakeholders, our providers, and
our users on various levels to
establish and maintain good
communicative relationships.
We want to learn and be
knowledgeable about our users,
about the areas and the clients
that they serve and how to best
support them in their work. Here
are 8 areas that we focus on to
help accomplish this, um,
starting with meetings, so we go
and attend to a lot of uh
meetings on behavioral health
and mental health related
topics, including meetings like
this, um, I've been sitting in a
couple of the, um, committee
meetings, not only for this but
for the legislative.
Finance Committee. We do
department meetings, so we meet
with Behavioral Health
collaborative and their agencies
under like BHSD CYFD, uh, ECCD,
and so on, as well as provider
meetings, meetings that the
providers have or project
specific as mentioned we have
some standalone projects like
CareLink, Consumer satisfaction,
trait first, and so on. We
attend a lot of conferences, um,
on there. I'm not only on the
state level but on the national
level, so attending the
American Counseling Association
conference, American Psychology
conferences there as well as um
most of the New Mexico based
ones, so the Social work
conference, the counseling
conference, the New Mexico
Behavioral Health Providers
Associations, and then some of
the specific uh topic areas and
behavior health such as the
responsible gaming association
will have their conference
coming up in a couple of weeks
that we will be attending also,
um community events attending
town halls.
Uh, health fairs and awareness
events like state recovery
events, the Albuquerque and
Santa Fe recovery events will be
coming up statewide soon, um, as
well as domestic violence,
bullying, and other areas on
there. It's important for us to
learn what is happening and be
aware of the behavioral health
and mental health areas and
topics, um, and conversations
that are happening, um, which
brings us to committees. We
participate in sit-in several
committees, um, some of them on
a broader scale, like the
Social work task force, which is
now becoming a coalition on
there as well as project
specific committees, so the
treat for steering committee,
Cain, or consumer satisfaction
steering committees are also
there. Um, we value education.
It's important for us, and we
welcome the opportunities to
educate the public on what we
do, um, especially in
presentations like this coming
here is a great opportunity for
us to educate you on what we do
as.
And ASL and what we do for New
Mexicans here in the behavioral
health world.
Uh, networking is also
important. It helps us build
relationships and create
professional connections, the
more we work together, the more
we accomplish. So it's good for
us to network with not only
legislatures but department
secretaries, department
directors, providers, the users
of our systems, and not only
network with amongst us or
helped them to network with
others if they see hurdles that
they're coming against.
One of the things I'm most proud
of is our site visits. Um, this
is one of the things that we
actually go out into the field
on there. I know a lot of times
when we tell providers we're
coming to do a site visit, they
panic and they say, oh what are
you auditing us on? It's not,
it's a very friendly, neighborly
visit there. We want to go and
be out in the field with the
providers. Learn about the areas
that they're in, learn about
their agency, what kind of
services they provide. What is
their clientele? What region
of the state they are agencies
that are in rural frontier areas
often run very different than
the urban areas like Albuquerque
and Santa Fe, and it's important
for us to go out there and
actually see what is happening
in these agencies, build those
relationships, and discuss their
successes, their challenges, how
can we make our systems better?
What can we do to help
Step by step instructions with
screenshots to familiarize them
with our system and so forth on
there as well as informal. So we
have a lot of ad hoc trainings
that happen, some one on ones,
on demand trainings that go on.
And as you know, the behavior,
health and mental health field
has had a high turnover, so the
increase in that has happened as
we see a turnover and not only
secretaries, but directors and
users of the systems and so
sometimes we
Might train one month and 2
months later we're training
again because that's that um
position has been vacated or
left and they haven't had the
opportunity to be trained um by
their predecessor um and their
positions that are there. All of
this information is gathered by
myself and our team that we go
out in different areas and it's
gone, we take it back and share
it with our team. We feel that
that is vitally critical for us
to not only educate ourselves
but educate our teams, our
developers, our
Port staff, everybody so that
they understand their clientele
and who they're helping because
that's the best way to make
things successful.
Moving on to the next slide is a
snapshot of the provider network
by services rendered as Sam
mentioned, we have over 800, um,
active providers in our system.
This is just to give you an idea
of some of the services are
rendered in a different areas,
um, like I mentioned in site
visits, we do go to different
areas, so we go to Silver City,
Gallup, Farmington, Taws. I was
just in Clovis, um, a day
earlier for this meeting and
visited with MHR in
I got an update as they have a
new CEO there, um, so learning
about them, going back and
visiting regularly and as you
can see, um, New Mexico is very
distinguished and is very
diverse in their populations and
their services, so it's
important that we reach out to
all the areas that our network
of providers do in different
areas and looking at the
services that they do whether
it's client base or
community-based services.
Which brings us to our customer
service and support.
Um, as you can see, there's some
feedback and comments there,
responsiveness.
Easy to learn great value,
straightforward partners,
beneficial.
This is what we value at falling
colors. We value the direct
connection between our users and
our company. We are their user
success is our success and our
being responsive and
communication with our users is
important to us because we want
everybody to be a big fan of
falling colors like you see in
the middle there. We want to
have the best customer support
ever on there and by doing that,
this is what we give them. So on
a regular, on a month a yearly
Bass, as you can see we have
support tickets that come into
our support desk at support at
Fallingcoolors.com. Last year in
2023 we service over 14,000
tickets that came into our
support desk, which averages to
1160 tickets a month. That
fluctuates, as you know, as a
fiscal year turnover some months
have um more tickets than others
on there. Um.
And for this year, um, last, uh,
last week we pulled the numbers
again and we had already
serviced 8,156 tickets on which
averages right in what we did
last year with 1,165 tickets on
there. We're very proud of our
support team and they
responsiveness, time to
resolutions for average
questions coming into our
support team or assistance
needed is 30 minutes to 2 hours
and the average for larger
requests which may be a.
At a request or report request,
um, something that we may need
to collaborate with one of our
partners on to get those
addressed, um, take anywhere
from 12 to 36 business hours to
address on there. And again, we
want uh stress the trainings,
um, not only does our
stakeholder and provider
relations do those training, but
our support team does trainings
too. They do, um, formal
trainings as well as um various
ad hoc 1 to 1 on on requests
trainings on there again the.
Turnover has been, has increased
significantly since COVID, so we
see our teams doing that more
and more, um, to make sure that
our users have their skills and
knowledge, um, that they need to
get their job done to be
successful and productive, um,
collaboration is really big on
that also. So a lot of those
projects or trainings are collab
collaborative trainings with our
partners, so they're with BHSD
um or the project managers like
treat first managers or caring.
Managers, consumer satisfaction
managers, I think, because
basically we want to give our
users exactly what they want,
and we want to make a difference
in their experience with using
our system. So that I will hand
it over.
All right, can you guys hear me
this time? All right, excellent.
So you've heard a lot about our
focus on efficiency, provider
advocacy and trying to make sure
the finances are as transparent
and accurate as possible. I also
want to tell you a little bit
about the kind of data that we
collect in this process and
hopefully with a focus on what
might be useful to you all in
the future. Uh, one thing to
note is this data is masked and
anonymized because it contains a
lead agency financial data and
potentially PHI and since it's
It is a public forum. We decided
to take away the specific
provider names and the specific
agency names. However, we're
happy to work with you all
individually to walk you through
in more detail what this data
looks like, but this really is
to give you a sample of the kind
of data that can come out of our
system and the kind of questions
that this group and the lead
agencies could start asking,
using the analytics that we
offer.
So
Taking a look at slide 23.
One of the main things obviously
we focus on is tracking state
funds and it's really important
for us to give back to each of
the lead agencies as well as to
the behavioral health
collaborative as a whole and
understanding of where the money
is going, how much is being
spent, and what trends look at
over time. One of the focuses we
took on last year was working
with lead agencies to focus on
dollars that never got allocated
to programs. One of the main
ways that get reverted,
especially in state general
fund, is that they never
actually get a
Signed out to programs. They end
up in the state budget, but that
last step of getting allocated 4
billion doesn't happen. Using
this kind of expenditure data,
we were able to pull out custom
reports for our lead agencies in
this format to say, hey, here's
where funds are sitting that
nobody's able to access. Here's
programs that are overspent.
Here's providers that have used
their full allocation. Are there
ways you'd like to tie these
together so you can start
executing more fully on the
programs with the money that you
already have.
By breaking down the data in the
way that you see, we can look at
trends in terms of spending over
time, we can get a sense of how
much different programs we're
using and we can focus on where
there's a mismatch between
what's in the funding table and
what's actually going out into
the field.
On the next slide, budget
utilization, you'll see that we
can also do that in terms of
really looking at how money is
being spent in terms of
allocations. One of the most
challenging things on the
programming side is to know how
fast money is going to be spent,
right? Sometimes a program gets
stood up and all of the money
gets burned right at the
beginning because providers are
standing up training programs
they need infrastructure
support. They're opening new
branches, and that means that
the money that was supposed to
be allocated for a year is
already gone in the 1st quarter.
Or alternatively, sometimes
providers have a really hard
time executing on the programs
that they're contracted for,
which means that the funds are
just sitting there despite the
allocation, despite the scopes
of work and not getting spent by
this kind of utilization
breakdown were able to help
identify places where the cash
flow actually isn't reflective
of the program goals and get a
sense with our lead agencies of
where they might either need to
be doing outreach to the
writers, outreach to their
program managers or potentially
shifting the goals of the
program.
given the challenges that
they're seeing in the field.
If you have any questions again
on the specifics, we're happy to
get into them more. This is
really just to give you a sense
of the type of data that we
could all sink our teeth into,
especially in partnership with
the lead agencies that are
actually the ones who own this
data.
Looking at slide 25, as well as
being able to get a sense just
of the overall spend trends. We
really want to get a sense of
what kind of services are going
out across New Mexico, uh, like
Tim in my fantasy world, I'd be
giving you an interactive
presentation here because all of
this is clickable. So I, for
example, could open up one of
the counties that you see on
this map, and we could see all
of the top services that are
going toward that county, how
many folks got served, what the
population was and how much
money actually
Not spent there that gives us a
way to look at how these
services are being distributed
across the state. What the
utilization rate of different
services are and where there's
imbalances. For example,
sometimes we can see that
there's an area that has
inpatient residential and
absolutely no outpatient. When
you're able to look at those
side by side, it's much easier
to say, oh, maybe we need some
transitional facilities or maybe
we need some outpatient
facilities in that area because
right now everyone's going to
inpatient because that's their
only option.
Be able to look at what's
expensive, how these services
work, we can help start giving
the state the information it
needs to roll out broader
behavioral health programs.
One thing to note, I see you
looking at your watch. I'm
almost done. Thank you.
We're able to support both
client-based services and
community-based services and
community services can mean
things like broad training
programs, prevention, as well as
provider and staff support. So
giving training, um, also we're
able to do things like giving
bonuses to staff for retention.
I know some of the conversations
that are coming up in this
session or how do we pay staff
to continue working in New
Mexico by collecting this kind
of data we're able to see where
are there extra funds, who needs
to get paid, and so on.
On the last two slides here,
this is an example of how we're
able to dive in in more detail
to who's actually getting
served. We can break down the
client demographics by all of
the standard demographics, age,
gender, ethnicity, race, as well
as do a focus on under or
unserved populations across New
Mexico by by pulling this out,
not only can see we can see
where there's gaps in service,
but we can also look for places
where there's additional funding
sources. The feds often have
special programs for exactly the
kind of
gaps we see here and armed with
this information, New Mexico can
actually go out and bring more
money in for some of the special
programs that would serve the
populations that right now
aren't getting all of the care
they need. Finally, we can look
up all information in our
provider network and really see
who's uh being served where
those providers are located and
identify gaps in service and
retention, in capacity, so
hopefully we can continue
building out that provider
network as best as we can as a
state.
So,
Thank you for listening.
Uh, I just wanted to close us
out on the very last slide. So
as Sam noted, um, our cost for
all of these services is 6.6% on
every dollar that runs through
us, uh, and for that we are able
to offer all of the
administrative services
organization, uh, services we
talk about as well as all of
these supporting services. And
because there's a lot of bubbles
and because obviously all four
of us like to talk a lot. I just
want to summarize a little bit.
I said at the beginning of this
presentation 3.
goals for you all? First, to get
a better sense of who is falling
colors and why do we do this
work? Hopefully what you can see
is that we are a team of
dedicated New Mexicans who
really care about behavioral
health. All of us are here
because our families or our
friends have been affected by
behavioral health across the
states and we think that by
bringing these kinds of
technical and financial
services, we can increase the
impact substantially in the way
that behavioral health is run.
Second, you all asked to have a
better understanding of what is
ASO and what do we do? I hope
you can walk away with the
understanding that is our job to
execute the state's vision for
behavioral health as best we
possibly can, bringing accuracy,
bringing transparency, and
bringing provider support to the
Behavioral Health Network while
allowing the state, which we
know is experiencing
unprecedented turnover and a lot
of vacancies, the space to
actually think about how to do
the programming to improve
behavioral health. Finally, I
wanted you all to get a sense of
the type of data.
We offer, we would love to
partner more directly with all
of you and show you versions of
these graphs that aren't masked.
Let's talk about the kinds of
questions that you guys have
about your regions, about the
state as a whole, about specific
programs. If it's non if it's
non- Medicaid behavioral health
dollars, we probably have
information that can help and
we'd love to be having those
conversations with you all. So
again, thank you guys very much
for your time and we'd be happy
to take any questions you have.
Well, thank you. I think there's
a lot of questions, so this is
very good, but we have a lot of
time.
Because we're scheduled to end
at 3:30, but we could go on till
5:30 or 6. We have plenty
audience. I'm so sorry.
No, we have another
presentation, but we just pushed
Maggie back a little bit and
she'll she'll go to the
reception with us. It'll all
work out. So we have plenty of
time. We shouldn't rush
ourselves. Um, I, I just want to
thank you. Do do you have any
recommendations?
Or could you at a future time
maybe pull together some
recommendations for us as
legislators as policy centers,
what we might be doing to
improve the overall functioning
of our social service and
behavioral health service
systems because you, you also
handle all the social service
contracts, right? The the
anything that's non-medicaid or
is it just the behavioral ill?
I'd we handle a variety of
non-Mdicaid, most of its
behavioral health, but there's
some programs running through
us.
That that are broader than just
that behavioral health scope,
what do you call them, the um
Um, domestic violence programs,
so they, those run the sexual
assault programs,
Kara,
you Kara? Yeah. So, so there's a
lot of, a lot of, you know
what's really going on, and it
would be incredible to have you
make some recommendations to us
for how policy changes might
improve the situation.
Yeah, we would love to one of
the things we've been kicking
around within this committee
since I've joined it 20 years
ago, is why the hell do we have
managed care organizations, is
that really a valuable thing, or
would it be better just to
contract with an ASO?
To handle the paperwork but let
the state be making the day to
day decisions about who's
eligible and what services and
what providers, uh, could we do
it that way for 6% instead of
14% or whatever the the MCOs are
getting now. I mean, that's,
that's one of the things that
we've kicked around here. And it
seems to me that the L-payer
claims database that we've been
talking about.
In essence, you, you guys could,
could pull that together, I
think, using the tools that you
have already developed. Uh, yet
the health department has been
futzing around with that for.
Yeah, it's a long time, yeah,
and getting nowhere.
Uh, so, uh,
Any recommendations you maybe
some now, but certainly in the
future if we could call you back
and have you make a formal
presentation on what steps might
be taken to improve things. Sam,
you had some determined. Yes,
thank you very much. Um, one.
One recommendation I would add
is bring that data in, you know,
have tell, tell the state
agencies what needs to be
collected and also the more
access we have data, for
example, there's a lot of
Medicaid, Medicare data, um,
that we've talked to various
state agency leads over the
years saying we could give you
so much more robust a picture of
what's happening if we had
access to those feeds.
We don't, um, and that we've
never been told no, it's just
one of those things that has
kind of bumbled along that we've
never actually gotten traction
on making that happen, so having
some legislative authority be
behind saying this data should
be more accessible would give us
uh a lot of opportunity to kind
of show what what could be done,
you know, we have great data,
great insight into.
A substantive but not very broad
piece of what's happening here.
Um, you all have the authority
to give us the access to
additional data so that we could
really start showing a much
broader picture of what is
available there, um, and
certainly we would love to, I
mean, I, I think the most
effective way to have a real
fruitful conversation about
recommendations is to have more
conversations about what areas
are we focusing on, you know,
having, having a real
Focus and saying, OK, let's
target this this year, you know,
pick something else next year,
but figuring out how to narrow
that in a way that we could
really deliver the most
effective thing and working with
you all again as Joy said, we
have these dashboards, we have
this data. Let's talk and find
out what you wish you could see,
what kind of reports do you wish
you could pull out monthly or
have sent to you monthly knowing
what that is, we can help to
deliver that within the purview
that we have. Thank you. Thank
you, sir.
Uh, OK, let's go to the
committee. We'll just start with
Senator Hickey and go this way
and come around and end the
Senate Representative Thompson.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
thank you for your presentation.
I was looking at my watch
because time is limited and I
could fill up another hour of
questions with you because I've
run health plans and basically
I'm looking at what you're doing
is a very sophisticated but
different claims engine that a
health plan, right? I mean, it's
essentially when you break it
down, that's what you're doing.
And that's what ASOs do or
health plans do posing as ASOs
and of course we've had a
terrible history with the IAC
and the ASO's, uh, there, but.
Um, the first of all, I want to
thank you for sponsoring the PBS
Newshour every night, so I
really appreciate that, um,
secondly, um,
The you talk about the
behavioral health collaborative.
Um, I don't think they've met.
I mean, there's no, so I'm not
sure how you're getting
contracted and um I, rather than
going into it, I, I, I would
hope to meet with you because I
think there's some real
opportunities here, but so I
want to kind of outline them
what we can do to get data so
that we can make more informed
decisions and how it
particularly with the
legislative Finance Committee,
and I'll draw that in a moment
so that we can have data on
healthcare, which they don't
have, we don't have
We don't know what we're doing.
Our staff and the LFC staff both
together
and um
Uh, because the LFC has been
looking at, at the IAC and
Medicaid uh for years, but they
really haven't had the
sophistication to be able to
understand what's happening. One
particular question, do you do
the contracting with the
providers?
I mean, do you, do you actually
negotiate price?
And, and if you do negotiate
price on what standard percent
of Medicare, um, charge masters.
I mean, do you all know what, do
you all know the the difference
within healthcare and the games
that healthcare, uh, providers
can play in their pricing. So if
you're doing the contracting,
I'm hoping you're very aware of
the games they play.
Mr. Chair, Senator Hickey, thank
you for the question. We handle
the contracting with the
providers as designated by the
state, so the state will say go
contract with this.
This provider that provider, um,
and we use a contract that is
preset between us and the state.
So our contract, our ASO
contract with the state says
this is the template that we are
allowed to use with these
providers. So you don't set, we
do not set prices. OK, so that
goes back to the state who's
been fooled all these years by
the provider systems and
actually paying and we're
overpaying 20-300 million
dollars to IBAC providers just
as an example.
Because they don't understand,
they didn't understand the games
that those providers play
instead of using Medicare
reference pricing they use
charge master percentage that
they can change any day of the
week that they want. So that's,
uh, that's good to hear, so
we'll work on the state around
that piece of it. Um, the, the,
Right now,
We have a all-payer claims
database, Mr. Chairman, and, uh,
panel, and it's been in DOH for
5 years. It's taken forever. Um,
the LFC who wants to look at a
number of things and are they
efficiently, uh, is money being
spent? Well, I'm now learning
that the Department of Health
and uh I'm putting this out
there in the Department of
Health. You can answer this, uh,
because you have the contract.
With
Milliman and you're not turning
data over to the LFC.
Same goes for Medicaid.
As the MCO data, it's all just
sitting there and it's not being
turned over to the LFC to be
able to analyze and so the LFC
has come to a conclusion that
they need to make their own data
warehouse. So as the raw data
comes into both the uh uh
HSDHCA, uh, and to now the
Department of Health, there
should be another pipe that just
goes off over to LFC, but that
needs to be
and I'm imagining if you're
doing claims engines, you would
also be able to do data
warehouse build. I mean you know
how to clean up. I'm, I'm
assuming you know how to clean
up a claim because they can be
awful and um so that may be a
way that we as a legislature,
however we get a support
committee structured for us, how
whatever that LESC is that will
ultimately get.
It's all worthless without data.
And so I'm uh hoping and, and
I've, I, I would like to meet
with you because I can go into
detail about how this is being
set up because I've been working
with folks in the LFC so that we
can get the data so that finally
we know, are we significantly,
as you're showing here, are we
generating value where the value
is needed and right now we don't
have a clue.
So, uh, that, that's basically
what I wanted to
give people a vision of and the
potential that is here with what
you're doing, um, leads me kind
of my last basic question. So
you don't get involved in any of
the payments to Medicaid
providers for behavioral health
through the, through the
Medicaid program. Am I correct
in that? That just goes money
from them to the to the uh MCOs
to the system.
because we are finding that in
primary care and probably in
behavioral health that the
systems who employ those people
are not paying them the
increases that we have
adjudicated and and legislated.
So our intent as a legislature
is being thwarted. And one of
the things that I am working on
and I'll bring up to the
committee later that I'd like to
do a report on is I am meeting
with hospitals to see how they
in an auditable format.
are indeed paying the, the, the
all the providers at all levels
who are seeing Medicaid patients
that they are actually getting
that money and it's not being
scraped off along the way, and
that would be another activity
that we would that that I have
some consultants working on, but
that's just another example of
what we want to do, and I feel
at least my role on this
committee have knowing
healthcare and claims and all
that is to see that.
Our intent actually gets
fulfilled and not smoked, um, in
the process. So, uh, Mr. Chair,
I'll, I'll finish with that, but
I would, uh, uh.
I would love to sit down with
you for a couple hours, uh,
sometime in the not too distant
future and go through where I
think there are, where we can
bring resources together that
are there and figure out where
it's going to be in the long
run. Maybe you'll contract with
this committee someday. I mean
that would be ideal to do these
type of activities so that we
know what we're doing.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Senator,
um, you're right, we should sit
down and talk. We'd love to
because I want to answer
everything you just said now and
then we won't get to the
reception till 7. so to answer
briefly, no, we are not doing
any of the Medicaid payments,
those go directly through the
MCOs, um, a little more broadly,
indeed we're very comfortable
with data centralization,
aggregation, cleaning,
pipelining, we do a lot of that
kind of work pulling in data
from different systems already,
um, and agree with you and the
LFC that often having the raw
data means
You can get more insights
because often when you're
getting very disparate
information from different
sources. It's averaged
differently. They made different
choices and so it's hard to
compare even the same quote
unquote data point across
different programs. So we'd
certainly be interested in
talking with you about just even
a strategy on that, uh, yet even
more broadly, um, one of the
things that I think you're
speaking to in US chair for some
recommendations is I do think,
um, being able to look across
all of the different programs
using the same types.
of data in the same analytics is
really important. Things end up
very fractionated and so data
gets lost. It's hard to compare,
um, and as you can see even here
being able to pull in data
across the different lead
agencies gives us a much better
picture of those non- Medicaid
dollars in behavioral health and
certainly we would make that
recommendation in general, where
data can be centralized,
combined, and visualized. It's a
much more powerful tool than
tiny slices or snapshots. So
thank you.
Just to finish up on that, if I
might, Mr. Chair.
Healthcare spends.
$14 billion through the state,
larger than the state budget by
2 or $3 billion. Yet we have,
and it's all about, it's money.
It's, it's metrics everywhere
and we have no idea of what
we're doing because none of it
is coalesced. I mean, what
you're, what you're saying that
you're doing with these
different agencies, they're
little spots. It needs to be put
together an entire picture
around health that includes the
social work and the and the deal
and
And the social determinants of
health that all needs to come
into one pool that then with the
skill base to be able to go in
and then run your fields, what
you want to look at much of what
you presented in your data here
on a statewide basis, then we
can plan because otherwise right
now we have no idea what we're
doing because we don't know the
data, so we're just.
Kind of playing darts with a
blindfold.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Hickey.
Representative Kate, do you have
any questions?
Yes, we can come back to you.
Representative Martinez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
presenters, first of all, can
you tell me what ASO stands for?
Mr. Chair, representative, um,
it is administrative services
organization.
So you're basically a data
collection and billing company.
Uh, chair, representative, we
are a financial services and
data, um, and, and I only call
that out because I think the
ability to actually make those
payments, right, we do the ACHs,
we manage the bank accounts.
There's kind of a whole truly
financial side to it, um, that
makes less pretty pictures, so
we do more of the graphs, it's
really I'd say a two thing is we
handle the money itself and then
we track all of the data that's
tied to that money to make sure
that it's doing what it's
intended.
I have 4 questions I'm gonna ask
because I'm on limited time and
then.
You can answer.
Um,
First of all,
What is the amount of the
contract with
With the state as a whole and
uh.
Was this sole source or did it
go out for RFP?
And uh do you, is your, I, I
didn't understand is your
contract with BHC or with
Other state agencies as BHC just
an umbrella for all the
agencies. I'm not exactly sure
how that works.
And how many providers are you
working with?
Across the state because it
seems like you're working with
every provider.
In the state
Um,
So uh
Those are my 4 questions, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you for the
time.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman,
Senator Mar uh Representative
Martinez, thank you. Um, the
amount of the contract is there
is a set amount over a 3 year
period, uh, which is basically
a, I'll give you a little bit of
history. In the first round of
the contract, it started out
with saying, you, we, we will
spend $40 million this year.
That changed. Different agencies
said, well, we'd like to add
some money to that, and it
became over the six years of
that contract, it became.
Relatively cumbersome to add
those dollars and change those
dollars. We had to go through a
full amendment. This also points
to your third question about who
the contract is with. Every one
of those amendments. So if CYFD
said we want to add $1,000,000
to this fund that we want to
support. We then had to get an
amendment signed by the
Secretaries of CYFD, DOH and uh
BHSD. It was very, it just took
too long. So what they did in
the 2nd contract, and this was
done through a full RF.
It was not sole sourced. It was
an RFP process that was fully
executed in through late 2022,
uh, and signed last June and we
became the ASO for the 2nd round
of the contract formally on July
1 of 2023.
Um, so in this round, what the
state decided to do was put a
maximum value of the 3 years of,
I think it's 800 million. It's a
larger number than they
anticipated would be spent.
So that they didn't have to go
through the amendment every
single time. Um, but there is a,
you know, at the beginning of
the contract year we get a
formal table saying this is what
each agency has actually
allocated through the contract.
This is what they anticipate
spending on each of the
programs, um, and then if they
want to change that, sometimes
they want to pull money out,
sometimes they want to add money
in, they want to move it from
one program to another, then
there is a formal process that
is governed by the state.
where they go through what's
called a budgetary letter of
direction saying, OK, we are
changing this, uh, we had $1000
dollars allocated to this fund.
We're going to move it to a
different fund, so all that is
tracked, um, as far as who the
contract is with, it is signed
by the three secretaries of
CYFD BHSD, and uh DOH
um so the collaborative is
essentially kind of the umbrella
or the door that they came in
through any agency.
That is a member of the
collaborative can participate.
So we also work with ECCD DDC,
um, a few others, they aren't
formal signatories on the
contract, but they do come in
through the fact of the
collaborative and their
membership in the collaborative,
um.
As far as which providers we
work with, I don't know how many
there are formally in the state.
We have contracts with, I
believe at last count it was
848.
Um, and then there are a few 100
others that are individual
schools that are providing some
behavioral health services
through funding that comes
especially through DOH and that
sort of thing, so they're not
quite behavioral healthcare
providers in the traditional
sense, but they are still funded
through this, you know, we have
contracts with them
individually. Um, I hope that
answers your questions.
And one edition here.
Chair, um, representative, may I
add a quick note. One thing to
clarify in what Sam just said is
there's two types of dollars
that end up in our contract, and
this is a point of confusion
often. Uh, there are the direct
dollars which we manage, but we
do not keep. Those are the
dollars that go to providers and
if they are not spent on
behavioral health, they go back
to the state. So we are the
manager of those dollars, but we
are not the owner of those
dollars, if that makes sense.
And so a lot of what you look at
in our
In fact, those are big, big
numbers in there. That is not
what we are getting paid. Those
are the dollars that we are
responsible for managing in our
capacity of the ASO. Our fee is
a separate line on that which is
the much, much smaller line, and
that's that 6.6%. So the way
that works is at the end of the
year, the total amount that went
out to providers of that dollar
bucket. We've charged an
additional 6.6% in admin fee on
that. Uh, and one thing, uh,
Senator Hickey brought up on the
MCO payments that I think can
get tricky is we do separate out
that direct dollar and that
admin fee, so we're never
skimming off the top or taking
away from what a provider
payment would be. So just a
clarification on the contract
because I know there's been
questions about that before, is
that $800 million is not dollars
to us, it's the dollars that we
have the purview to manage on
behalf of the states and always
goes back to state bank accounts
if not spent. Thank you.
May I please have one follow up
question.
Starting to talk.
I'm not I'm, I'm, I'm not sure
how the contract.
Works since
The behavioral health
collaborative has been inactive
for so long.
Um,
Could you kind of explain how
that happened?
Yeah, Mr. Chair, Representative,
uh, the Behavioral Health
collaborative is still active,
um, so there was a CEO of the
collaborative um until about a
year and a half ago, um, Bryce
Preettinger, um, she retired in,
I believe it was April of last
year. Um, and that position is
still open, but there are staff
on the collaborative, um, so the
BHC sits inside of the HCA, um,
so Nick Bucas, who actually
presented yesterday was the
interim director for the
Behavioral Health collaborative,
and there's a staff person under
him.
Ray Durran, who has paid for
that position. So I agree with
you, it's not been as strong as
we would like to see, but it is
an active entity inside HCA.
Representative Vincent.
No questions.
Welcome, Senator Lopez. Oh,
thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, I appreciate this
information, um.
shared and of course, you know,
devil is in the details, so you
know there's a lot more that
goes behind what you've
presented here. Um, Mr. Chair, I
think
it, it expands to see what else
could be extrapolated as the
word is for our behavioral
health initiatives work with the
CYFD.
Um, if there's any overlap, what
else can we say? I mean,
looking to see um
Most of the persons or.
Cases, data that you have, is
that just referral referring to
adults.
This is also include children.
Uh, Mr. Chair, because as you
know, that's one of the concerns
within CYFD about what services
and how we provide for families,
etc. This may be another
opportunity for information um
that I think would add value to
so much of our discussions and
such, um, so that's another
question to ask at another time,
but I may be in touch as long as
it's not Medicaid because they
don't do Medicaid, but I think
there's still some overlap in
there that that could add value.
Um, so I will probably be in
touch with you on that, um, and
then, you know, Mr. Chair, we
passed the Behavioral Health
collaborative gosh back in the
early 2000s. I remember the
discussion we had. I've been
around a while, um.
And how it was supposed to do
this wonderful.
I don't know what you call it,
this wonderful opportunity, and
I think the, the initial was,
was good, but as time has
progressed, and of course we had
a
An 8-year problem um in between
there that, uh, it just doesn't
seem in my estimation from
looking at it, Bryce, I think,
did her best that she could, but
there was just so many issues,
um.
I, I think of as
as Doctor
sorry, Doctor Hickey, but
Senator Hickey has also
mentioned, you know, the
behavioral health collaborative,
I think needs to relook or
revamp, um.
To see what, what may be some
changes need to be made or
something to augment to give it
like a little kick in the, you
know what, um, to really do some
work for, I think what the
original intent was and again
some of this data may help us
um.
To look and see what we can do,
Mr. Chair. I don't have any
ideas now, but maybe somebody
with much more talent can
present.
But I just believe that the
collaborative needs some work.
I'll just leave it at that.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Lopez. Yes, I
mean what we have here is an
opportunity, I think, to take
advantage of.
A resource that we're just
learning about.
Hm
And it's up to us now to make
fuller use of it.
Uh, Representative Chasey.
Mr. Chair, Representative Chavez
wants to go before me. We both
had a similar theme. OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, so do you do work with the
early childhood department
specifically um around home
visiting.
Mr. Chair, Representative, we
do. OK. And so, so my question
is, is around a couple of
things. One, payments, so you,
you don't do, you already said
that you don't do Medicaid
payments, right? So you would,
you're the reimbursement for
home visits then would come from
the permanent fund.
From
So the general fund. So, so
then, um, so my question is,
would you, so then you would
have data in terms of from the
beginning, from the start of the
home visiting program, you would
have data or information in
terms of how many home visits
had been done from, say, the
beginning of the program until
now.
Correct?
Mr. Chair Representative,
largely yes, so we've been
working with ECECD since the
start of that program. Um, I
will note that we are in
partnership with UNM, so UNM
collects some of the home
visiting data. Um they were
doing that before it got rolled
out as a payment structure. So
we handle the financial side.
UNM is currently collecting the
home visiting side. We do get
number of home visits in our
system and we're actually
actively working with ECECD to
centralize that and bring all of
the data into our system.
Um, so, so a little bit of both,
but we do have access to that
data and we'd be happy to talk
with you about it. OK, so then,
in addition to that, then you
would have, would you also have
data in terms if you have data
in terms of all home visits that
are made, right? So then you
would also have data in terms of
what was paid from the state and
what was paid from Medicaid,
correct? Chair, representative,
we have half of that, so we have
all of the non-Mdicaid dollars
that have gone out and you know,
Broken down by a number of home
visits which providers, which
county that would need to be
coupled with the Medicaid
dollars paying for those same
services. Mr. Chair, the
information about Medicaid data?
Would it be the MCOs?
Mr. Chair Representative, uh,
that's a good question. I think
that's, that's some of the
discussion here is we, we would
love to see that data more
centralized, um, hopefully MAD
would have some of that, um, but
I would, it is, I think it is
distributed and that is one of
the challenges, quite honestly.
OK, so then we would be able to
see Mr. Chair, we will be able
to see whether or not home
visits had increased or
decreased.
Correct.
OK.
Um,
OK, I think that's all the
questions I have. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Representative Chasey.
OK, Mr. Chair, thank you. Um,
so,
I, I, just to be clear, you have
no authority over the spending
of the contractors.
Right, OK. Mr. Majority Leader,
that's correct. But you tell
them if they are, um, tending to
maybe draw too much down for
what's being, what their
contract is for.
Mr. Chair, Majority Leader, yes,
so, indeed, we, we are not
responsible for allocating
dollars or deciding how they
should be spent. What we try to
do with our data and reports is
bring, bring to light all of the
information that might be needed
to make those decisions. And
some cases that might be success
where we say, hey, you are
exactly on track with your burn
rates. He's a couple of
providers you might reach out to
if you want to expand or if we
need to flag where something
isn't going in line with
expectations, which could be
overspent.
underspend, unallocated dollars,
things like that, so we won't
make per se recommendations, but
we can point out the places
given when we see the program
goals where there's a mismatch
with what's actually happening.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I think
maybe you want to have the
secretary come at some point
because it sounds like maybe
they're, um, it, it's not a
policy issue for these people.
They're doing,
they're doing something other
than the policy. And, and we
want to know.
Um, we didn't ever intend for
Medicaid to fund home visiting
exclusively. That's a part of
the whole idea of the uh early
childhood permanent fund. So,
um, I, I, and these folks
couldn't answer that question,
but I think the secretary, we
might want to hear from the
secretary on.
Mhm.
You see, you see, easy, easy.
Wait, there are too many ands
So,
And, and just 11 last point for
one for a number of years, I was
um I worked for a private
company that provided therapy
services, speech language, OTPT,
and we were one of the early um
Medicaid waiver providers for
the state.
Billing for that was the biggest
nightmare on Earth.
um, and
It was to me as the director of
this agency and working with our
accountant and our billing
person, it just
It, it, it seemed like the state
wasn't spending enough money to
do it right. Are you doing that
work now?
So for like a private provider
who's providing Medicaid
services,
but oh, not Medicaid. Oh, OK. I
wonder who's doing who has ever
figured out how to do the
Medicaid waiver deed bill, oh my
God.
All right, thank you. That's
all, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you so much. So, um,
I feel, I feel like I'm kind of
on the synchronous bandwagon and
I will say that I am on their
board half the time. I don't
know what they're talking about
because I'm not real techie, but
it is your data, first up, are
you part of of synchronous and
if not, could you be?
Mr. Chair, representative,
excellent question. Uh, we're
totally independent from them,
um, the way I think to think
about it is that we're
downstream. So synchronous is
what a lot of the providers are
using to manage specific cases
and so on. And then ideally that
information comes into our
system where we're handling the
payments and doing that
aggregation. One of the things
that we're actually in
conversation with right now is
looking at direct integration
for ingesting various types of
EHRs, one of the challenges in
this space is that
Writers historically have have
done whatever they want in terms
of which they select, which is
just a hard data exchange
problem. Um, so actually knowing
that the state has gone with
synchronous, gives us a path to
say, oh, here's a really obvious
point of integration. So we are
in fact just texting about that
during one of the earlier
presentations. Thank you so much
for that, um, and then just on
slide 28, um, it's, uh,
providers and provider one, is
this just a sample or is there a
way that we can have the
Of who provider one actually is.
Mr. Chair, uh, Vice Chair, um,
that this is real data, it's
masked, um, because like I said,
it was going on a public website
and we didn't want to share
since it's, it's confidential,
but we would be happy to sit
with you and walk through what
this data actually looks like.
So, so yes, it is all available
and it is real, real data
sitting right here on my
computer. OK, and so it could be
Mr. Chair. It could be something
that could be shared with LFC
when they're working on trying
to figure out where the money is
going, I mean, whatever they're
trying to figure out, Mister.
vice chair, yes, and um actually
we're in conversations with the
LFC data group, we mocked up
dashboards for them over a year
ago, um, under Bryce, and then
when she left that project
really got put on hold, um, but
the LFC actually reached out
quite recently to the HCA
saying, hey, could we continue
this project? And so we're
working with a couple of folks
on the HCA side to finalize
those dashboards, um, directly
for the LFC, and we would
absolutely love to work with you
guys on a similar project.
So we sit with them, say, what
are your questions? What would
you like to see, and so on. OK,
thank you, and I, I get texts
all the time, so I'm looking at
my phone, so excuse me for that,
but um, I've gotten a text that
there has been movement toward
decreasing the, the dollars
going into home visiting, is
that true? I mean, and that
services will be decreased. Do
you, do you have any idea if
that's true? If so, why, um.
Mr. Chair, as Vice Chair, I
don't have that data in front of
me, folks, I think that's some
we, we have that data, um, but I
would have to look into it. I'd
be happy to follow up on what we
get is the allocations, so we
could give you how much was
spent in FY 24 total with
whatever breakdown you'd like,
and then how much has been
allocated to date for 25.
OK, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
So just to follow up on that, if
there were a provider who said,
oh, we've, we haven't been able
to get prompt expenditure.
And it was a non- Medicaid home
visiting program.
It, it might be that it's at the
departments because you don't,
you say you're getting things
out in 6 days. But it, but you
only get
handed something to, to prepare
a check for, for something that
the department is oked as having
been expended. So the delay may
actually be upstream from you
all at the department.
Is that, is that an accurate
statement, Mr. Chair, that's
correct. So the way it works is
a provider bills in our system,
we process it against all of the
rules, and if it's a valid
service by the contract and the
rules engine, it gets turned
into an invoice. That invoice
then gets sent to the state
program manager for them to
review and give a thumbs up on
or send back for corrections.
Once we get that approval from
the state, it goes into our
payment review and processing,
which is that 6 days. Um, I will
say we have a team that actively
follows up with the
States when an invoice is not
being reviewed because we see
that, um, have a little bit more
direct access to those program
managers and the providers do.
So we do work with the program
managers when we see those kinds
of delays happening.
Representative Kates, you ready
now? Thank you. Thank you very
much, Chair. Thank you for your
indulgence. So you've clearly
established you do not, um,
provide services through
Medicaid uh your, your service
is not what I'm asking is, are
you not capable? Do you not want
to, or has it not, or you are
you uh looking to grow, but
obviously we'll have to evolve
in a different manner to be able
to accommodate Medicaid.
Pyramids.
Mr. Chair, representative, thank
you for the question. Um, we are
certainly capable of processing
Medicaid claims would be
interested in doing so. I would
say one important distinction
draw is that MCOs do do some of
the clinical side, right? So
they're deciding appropriate
courses of service, that isn't
something that's in our scope
and we don't really have the
team for it. So it would be more
the model that Senator Hickey
spoke of, of really dividing the
labor of the administrative
execution site for payments, um,
which I think we're very good
at, if I may say so.
The decision making and clinical
care which would need to live
with the states. So in that
model we'd be very comfortable
working with Medicaid dollars.
Yeah, thank you for answering.
Thank you. So, um, just as a
provider myself who spent many
years providing um uh you, we
all, we've heard the testimony,
the, the, the, uh, the mistakes,
people can be subject to expert
in providing the services, but
not necessarily as an insurance
biller and having to in the
state doesn't seem to uh really
or the NCOs are not providing um
uh sufficient technical
Support and those manners, I
will say other programs that are
Medicaid driven have been
working on similar data, uh.
Processes, organizations, but
the state is not paying for
them. They're making the
providers pay for them, and
that's why they're clunky and
there's several of them and
they're not moving any kind of
direction and they're not
managing the state's money in
large streams, instead, they're
doing the individual and um I
just see the efficiency of this
model, but just know that there
are other things out there.
That we might be able to um
provide an RFP process, um, but
to be able to expand the
services because I, I don't
think we're gonna run out of uh
opportunity here, um, for
everyone. So, uh thank you.
That's all I wanted to say. Are
you talking about the
developmental disability waiver
program. I'm talking about
therapy docs is out there, um,
there's a a portal that uh
waiver uses.
Uh, the state only provides like
5 pods for it. You have to pay
extra money for extra pods on
it, um, it's so that if your
individual who's on the waivers
and a residential program and
they stubbed their toe and then
they go to emergency room and
then they put information in it,
you know, they, they have a lot
of different than the eye
therapy docs is mostly billing,
but I think that this is all
data and
And just understanding the data
management part of it will allow
individuals to get services at
the doctor's at the day program,
at the residential program, and
they can all see the
information, be able to see
information along with the
billing, then you can pull down
the data instead of then also
asking the providers to fill out
these crazy surveys that are
work intensive and take too much
time and now the
person's not providing the
services they're filling out the
surveys for the state where it's
if they were, and, and I've said
this about DOH for decades now.
They are wonderful at asking for
data, but then they don't know
where to put it, and I don't
understand because early
intervention fit does a great
job of gathering data,
organizing it, reflecting it
back, which is the quality
process, um, fit does an
excellent job of doing
that I never understood why
other Medicaid programs are not
doing that and just a side note
to a Representative Chavez's
question, if they are counting
the non-Mdicaid portion of all
the home visiting, then they,
they may not have the full
dollar amount spent, but they'll
have the number of homes.
Because it all has a portion of
general fun and house, so their
number should be fairly accurate
of home visits.
Just even without the Medicaid
portion of it.
And so that's that.
Thank you, Representative. I, I
just have a couple of things to
say. Uh, first, uh, I was in the
Senate when Tim Keller, uh, was
the first person that I heard
put forward the idea of the of
the um
Public benefit corporation and
the B Corporation, and I'm not
sure he was the one who
sponsored the legislation in the
state, I think he was, but he
was one I heard debating it and
making the point that the public
benefit corporation freeze the
the uh the owners of the
corporation, the shareholders
from having to make only profit
their orientation. They could
take into account, is this going
to help the community and, and
we can put our efforts into
that, even though we
be able to make more money by
doing something a little more
unscrupulously, uh,
but I didn't know we actually
had something so you're, you're
the first such creature we've
we've that I've met and I'm very
glad of it. Are there very many
others? Do you know of any
others? I know that, uh, thank
you, Mr. Chair. Um, I believe
that Taoski Valley is also
registered as a public benefit
corporation, um, they're another
I think me.
Wolf, maybe, um, and I'm not
sure whether what others there
may be out there. I know that
there is, we could say there has
not been a bandwagon of people
jumping onto this form of
corporate registration. It turns
out there's not as much money in
it we were very glad to see the
legislation passed. We've been
watching it in other states and
we're very excited to see it
pass here and we're glad to be
one of the first adopters
then
you use a word that immediately
red hackles on my
On my neck, and that is um
recruitment, recoupment.
And, and that's because the only
other time I'd heard that word
used in connection with billing
and so was in connection with
the Medicaid program, where they
use it in a very different way.
They'll go into some provider's
bank account.
Two years after they reimbursed
them and say, I'm sorry, that
client that you saw 17 times
that year, turns out not to have
actually been eligible for
Medicaid, although you didn't
know that and we paid you as if
you were, but we want that money
back and they'll take it back.
We we'll withhold your next
reimbursement if you don't, uh,
that kind of recruitment is what
I thought, but you're talking
about a very different thing.
You're talking actually about
something that I wish.
The city of Albuquerque had.
the city of Albuquerque.
Do you, you don't contract with
any, any local municipalities.
They had a contract with um Hope
Works, Saint Saint Martin's, you
know Saint Martin's.
And lo and behold, the internal
auditor for the city, discovered
that some of the people that
Hope Books had served were
Medicaid eligible and they
should have been billing
Medicaid, so they accused them
of double dipping and this big
thing.
That's exactly what you're
trying to avoid. You, you go in
and you, before, before you send
out the checks, you do the
Medicaid recoupment. You check
to see if those services should
have been paid by Medicaid. Is
that, is that the way it works?
You
Uh, Mr. Chair, thank you for the
question. Um, the way we do it,
we go ahead and make the
provider payment.
I'm sorry, go ahead and make the
payment to the provider and then
on every 30 days, there's a
review of what should have been
Medicaid eligible, uh, if a
service in uh BHSD generally
does that review and sends us a
list of uh services that they
would like us to queue up for
recoupment.
Does it then generate
Medicaid bill. It does not
initiates a a conversation
between the provider and the uh
the state
uh about how to handle
the Medicaid for this and if you
had, you would have saved us 75%
of the cost, otherwise we paid
the full the full fee. And so if
they, if they do identify that
something was Medicaid eligible
for billing, have the provider
go ahead and bill Medicaid, and
then we'll.
deduct that from uh future
payments until it's you don't
keep the recoupment that goes
back to the State Department
that goes back into the
the fun pool. On that point,
sure, yeah, so just thinking
back to the destruction of our
um behavioral health services,
if you all were doing, and I
know you don't do Medicaid, but
if you were doing Medicaid at
that point. Do you have a sense
that you could
prevented that by checking the
billing as it comes in and if
there was a wrong date or
whatever, you know, the made up
things were that destroyed all
those companies. Do you have a
sense that you could have
prevented that?
Mr. Chair, Vice Chair, uh,
that's a big question, um, what
I will say is that I think the
way we handle data and payments
is very different. So there is a
lot more real-time transparency
and if there are surprises in
billing if things aren't making
sense, if there's too little or
too much, we catch that much
earlier on. Um, so it's
obviously hard to go back in
time for hypotheticals, um, but
I do think that, you know, in
part, we actually also lived
through that. Uh we were an
evaluation team as a provider
during that time.
And I think saw a lot of what
went wrong and many of the
systems we've designed and the
accountability there is in part
because we saw how badly things
can go when nobody's looking
closely enough when there's not
appropriate transparency. Um, so
I would certainly say we are
very guided by what happened in
that period of time and would
absolutely do our best to set up
anything to avoid that probably
successfully. Thank you.
Oh
Well, I want to thank you all
for, for the presentation. It's
been very helpful. I would hope
that this is the start of a, of
a relationship between what you
do and what this committee needs
to have done, maybe staff.
Both our own LCS staff and the
LFC staff might be able to, to
work closely with you and as we
need things uh.
Researched and, and, and brought
to us, we would reach out to you
and have you make another
appearance too. And with some
more recommend, if you think of
other things that, oh, I wish we
had said that, that would have
been a good recommendation. Feel
free to send it to us. And thank
you so much for your, for your
appearance here.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you
all.
Um, so members in the final
panel today is one person, it's
not really a panel. It's Maggie
McCowan. Oh, who else?
Oh, good. All right, good. A
two-person panel. So Maggie
McCowan from the Behavioral
Health Providers Association of
New Mexico. Come on up.
And Pamela Stanley.
Good. Come on up.
I
How's that?
So we lost one person, just one?
Oh no.
OK. Well, good afternoon.
I'm so happy to see everyone.
It's exciting to be here.
I'm Maggie McKellen with the New
Mexico Behavioral Health
Providers Association, and I was
born and raised in New Mexico in
Las Cruces, and if you haven't
heard from me already, you'll
never forget that I am an Aggie
all the way. There's no, there's
no options in it, you know.
So anyway, I'm glad to be here.
I've been looking forward to
this presentation for almost a
couple of years, so it's going
to be really exciting and I hope
that um this evening you will be
talking about this presentation
among the other opportunities
that are being presented. It's
very exciting.
My partner at the table is.
Introducing herself.
Good afternoon.
Pardon me.
Good afternoon, uh, Mr. Chair,
Vice Chair. Yeah, thank you.
Thank you. I, all right.
Um, and members of the
legislative Health and Human
Services Committee. I'm honored
to be here today. I am Pamela
Stanley. I am a licensed
professional clinical counselor
in New Mexico for over 17 years
and certified cognitive
therapist and have lived in New
Mexico for 26 years now, so I
consider myself a New Mexican
and I'm happy to be here to
assist Maggie today in the
presentation.
Thank you
Where, where do you practice?
I practice remote and uh have a
private panel, um, but I
actually practiced for a year
and a half on the BetterHelp
platform, remote uh during COVID
so that I could actually provide
services to those patients who
could not get in anywhere, uh,
but we could see them remote um
through the Better Heal
platform.
So
So I
I'll get it. I'll get it. We're
going to be presenting on a
pilot project that the
behavioral health provider
Association has sponsored for
the last 2 years. And that's
important that it was a pilot
project, um, and we'll talk
about that as we go on, um, this
first time we named it, it we
called it the data project. And
then after it moved along about
a year, it became metrics that
matter. And so now we're
referring to it as the
Um, as the payment reform
initiative and all of this is a
function of the pilot nature of
our project because as we
started and I'm going to go
through that start with you as
we started opportunities really
opened up and became clearer and
clearer on page 2.
You'll see our agenda, basically
we're going to go over um
briefly our, our, um, uh,
historical uh uh activities in
years 1 and 2. We're going to
talk a little bit about the
planned payment reform process
and what the future of this
might hold all of the members of
our team are listed here and
you'll see that the provider
association has worked very
closely with Health Management
Associates who
You may know are also managing
the primary care project for the
state primary care council for
the state and also with
synchronous and the state uh
behavioral Health Services
Division. So that's been a, and
I put every all those names on
there because the activity on
this project has been
phenomenal, um, to be in
meetings to solve problems,
detailed problems, but large
problems too about how the data
transfer was going
take place was unbelievable to
see the effort that this team
and their supporting members put
into making this work, and I am
so excited to be able to show
you, uh, show you some of how
this has worked, so we're going
to go over.
Uh, some of this, the project
description is written up on
page 3 and I, I mentioned this
started as a pilot project,
still is a pilot project, but
the goal was to really identify
some behavioral health specific
metrics that could be used
realistically in uh in
value-based purchasing models.
This came out of uh some work
that we did. We did this with
the primary care association.
5 or 6 years ago, we had
contracts with the Delta Center
who was also partnering with the
National Council on developing
uh value-based purchasing in New
Mexico, and we tried a couple of
different things and um learn
some things. So what we learned
was that it's really hard to
make those changes because it
requires a lot of information
changes when you talk about
standardizing data. You're not
just,
You're talking about something
that is takes 4 or 5 people
along the chain of data transfer
to be able to figure out how to
standardize it. It takes a lot
of effort. It takes priority and
it takes um people who are
willing to invest that time and
I'm going to talk about our
first pilot team, um, we also
learned that we had to have a
strong leadership involved
because in order to make these
changes, uh, leaders of
organizations
Had to be able to tell their
staff it's OK to make this
change, to do something
different. It it can all be just
handed down. And we also learned
that um that
And this came from the people
that participated in our
projects that they learned best
if they were working with other
people, other providers, and we
had those all as requirements
for participating in our
project. And sure enough, it's
turned out that um that that
these things all have to be in
place. And I'm going to talk
about that a little bit more. So
we started off the first year
with simple goal of developing
some behavioral health metrics.
Pam's going to talk.
To you in a minute about some of
the difference between
standardized behavior health
metrics that actually come from
physical health and are not
under the under the control of
the behavior health provider and
are not often focused on the
behavior health need of the
patient. So we set about setting
up um defining behavioral
metrics. I'm going to talk a
little bit more about that and
then we're also going to talk
about how those metrics
Got transferred into data and
one of the exciting things
you're going to see in your
packet and Pam's gonna talk
about our actual dashboards with
behavioral health metrics, which
are going to tell you exactly
how patients are doing on
certain axes and certain uh
qualities. Um
the um
As this project has developed,
it's become,
uh, it's become
I wouldn't want to say a work in
progress. It's like a flower
unfolding. We take a step and
then we find this new
opportunity and we begin
discussing it. We, we
successfully identified the
behavioral health metrics that
was kind of easy. That was the
first year and the 2nd year, if
you'll turn to page 4, you'll
see the timeline, the first year
SFY 23, we worked on defining
the metrics, and then on
The next year, but we've just
finished. We worked on
transferring those metrics into
uh data that could be, um,
analyzed and baselines could be
established, so we have a full
year of data about patient
outcomes to be able to show you
based on what was done the 2nd
year. Now we're moving on into
what we hope will be the the
shining star of this, and that
is um behavioral health payment
reform.
And we're just getting started
on that and felt like this was a
really good time to show you
what we've done so far and where
we're going to go.
The next two slides, 5 and 6.
Are the
Agencies that we have worked
with in the first year, the
first, the 10 for the first
year, and we have 9 for starting
right now to participate in the
project, and Pam's gonna share
with you what all that they do,
but we do go, we, we have
representation in all levels. We
have representation from all
parts of the state. We, we want
to do better in bringing people
in and we've spent a great deal
of time recruiting and trying to
To encourage people to
participate. But as I said, it's
a heavy load and we've, I'll be
frank, some of our provider
agencies who were excited in the
beginning,
dropped out because they felt
like it was too much to do. They
had other initiatives going on,
a lot of issues. We worked as
much as we could and we actually
pulled several of them back in,
but we now have 19 agencies
around the state represented on
those two pages.
who are participants in this
project, which means that they
are collected they've agreed to
collect the data on the metrics
that we are providing them that
they have agreed to participate
in developing the um the the uh
provider, um, progressive with
the what is the data, data
collection.
Pet data reform, payment reform,
sorry, lost it there for a
minute. That seems to be
happening more and more. Oh
well, so payment reform is the
next step, and I'm skipping over
some of these that you can read
and understand yourself so that
we can spend the time on the
exciting information. I will
draw your attention to page 7,
the project purpose. I met I
mentioned that at first we were
starting to build on a common
set of meaningful behavior
health providers.
We are also supporting behavior
health providers and developing
infrastructure and capabilities
to submit and, and uh reliable
quality. A lot of this was
mentioned in the last
presentation about how important
this is.
Um, we are also wanting to
develop the system to transition
from fee to service to
value-based payment.
And um this is in alignment with
the work that the New Mexico
Primary Care Association has
just initiated the first of
July. They started their new
payment reform process, and we
want to be aligned with that and
be able to do the same thing
with behavioral health and then
finally, um,
We want to support New Mexico's
vision for integrated behavioral
health, primary care, and and
performing, transforming
practice delivery. That's little
little print, big ideas, because
the data that we are able to
demonstrate, um, the metrics
that we will be able to
demonstrate and the results of
collecting and analyzing this
data over the course of the year
is directing us specifically to
opportunities.
To improve practice with clients
and make, make
Outcomes for people who are
experiencing behavioral health
issues, more realistic and more
viable.
So,
The next page, the lesson I'm
going to go over before you get
into the good stuff is I want to
talk about what our 1st 10
providers did to develop the
metrics and you're going to get
to see the metrics too, which is
all, which is really exciting.
The first time I saw them and
showed, I, I got really excited
because they said they could
tell by the information that
been entered that the client had
chronic illness and the, the
behavior health provider could
see, could look up and see.
Where the client had been seen
by physicians for that chronic
illness and that physician could
see what interventions were
going on with the behavioral
provider and it was pretty
exciting.
Um, so the pilot metric
development was provider driven.
That's an important point, uh,
frequently in my work at the
association, we do, we have to
have evaluation sessions and
feedback about um how how
providers are experiencing their
work with the with the managed
care organizations and one of
the things I heard repeatedly is
an extreme frustration with
being
As to collect data that didn't
have any meaning to them, didn't
have any meaning to the uh
client didn't have any meaning
to the provider who was
providing the service. This is
when we say provider driven,
this is what it means, and they,
these are the things that they
did in this first year to
develop those metrics. First of
all, they conducted a national
scan. We looked at national
programs to see what else was
happening in the field. They
also
collaborated with the pilot
organizations representatives to
gather input on what metrics and
meaningful.
And feasible, uh, uh, metrics
could be collected. They met
regularly in focus groups and
they collaborated with each
other. They also did a, uh, they
also did a readiness survey to
see what kind of things did you
need to have in place as an
agency to be able to um conduct
these conduct these metrics, and
they finally came up with a set
of 10
mandatory.
6 I'll let Pam explained it 6
mandatory measures and for
optional measures too that they
would all be collecting and so
Pam's going to share with you
how that, how that developed,
um, and as I said, she is going
to be able to share with you not
only the metrics, but the reason
that they're different than the
ordinary behavioral metrics, and
now what they can do by being
processed into standardized
reporting formats.
So Pam, I'm gonna let you take
it over.
Thank you, Maggie. So as Maggie
mentioned the metrics that have
been selected, our provider
driven, um, provider based, uh,
for those of us as practitioners
when we look at heus measures,
for example, that are measures
that a managed care organization
might use. They don't always
truly get at whether or not
there's improvement in a
patient's outcome. Um, so as an
example, one of the heatest
measures previously was.
Um, did that patient get their
depression medication refilled,
um, but as you sit with a
patient in your office and you
know that they haven't taken
their medication, and you ask
them if they got their
medication filled, they reply
yes, um, but they're not taking
their medication. So, um, the
measures we've selected like a
depression survey or a GA 7,
which is an anxiety survey.
Actually, if you monitor that
over time really does prove
whether.
not someone is getting better
along with observation, right,
when you're seeing that client
directly in front of you, um, in
their report. So we look at
things like affect, self-report,
but we also used standardized
surveys, tools like a PHQ-9 or
GAD 7 in order to do that.
So in looking at traditional
measures or metrics, um, some
heinous measures like a 7 day
follow up measure, are really
relevant and, and very
important, um, but not all. And
so very important that the
committee selected the measures
on page 10, um, and I'll walk
through those measures, uh, with
you. I, I think this is one of
the most important aspects of
the project. So the mandatory
measures there are 6.
Um, there are
Level one metrics, which is
looking at outcomes, providers
pick two of those and then level
3 metrics are process measures.
That's what we call process, um,
and they're asked to pick two of
those measures.
Um, so
one thing that I think is really
important that flows into page
11.
Is that in this process we have
the provider's contract with
Synchronous, the state's health
information exchange for
behavioral health providers,
some of you may not understand
that most behavioral
practitioners don't actually
sign with synchronous and have
that information. It's really
critical because it shows all of
the care that that patient has
received, that if you are not
part of the HIE synchronous, you
would not see as a provider. Um,
so
And your patient sits down in
front of you, um, and you have
that information, you can do a
much better job helping them. So
the connection in this project,
I, I think it's poignant to
mention the contract between the
provider organization and
synchronous. So now we have all
the data in a common data
repository within our state, um,
and, um, we're pulling that
information from the provider's
electronic health record systems
into the HIE.
Um
That process is going to be
automated, so the goal that
we've all heard about many years
in healthcare is working in
healthcare of interoperability,
um, has actually been realized
in this project and will be
continued in the way of
developing uh interfaces between
an electronic health record and
the state's HIE.
Um, so the measures are pulled
from the provider's database,
uh, the electronic health
record, um, and
That is done monthly and that
happens in the 1st 7 days,
business days of the month, um,
and so we pull all the measures
from their patient roster, they
get to select um how small or
how comprehensive that patient
roster is of who they include,
um, and some of that was.
Intentional so that we could
meet the providers where they
are, um, this was a big lift to
have small community-based
provider organizations pulled
this level of data, um, and it
took us a good 6 to 8 months to
really work out the bugs of
pulling that data, standardizing
it and making sure it got into
the database, the HIE.
So, um, let me just
Moved to slide 12.
Um.
This is really what I've
captured already on page 12, I
would say that um now that we've
had a year's worth of gathering
data, um, I'll show you the
sample dashboard uh uh metrics
for the various metrics, but
with the initial 10 pilot
providers were now able to have
a year's worth of data and we're
turning the corner to now look
at the outcomes and we're asking
the providers to pick.
A couple of measures that they
would like to focus on improving
outcomes. So maybe it's access
to care from the time a patient
initially contacts their office
until the time they're seen by a
licensed professional or a
community health worker in that
time frame, we're capturing that
information, um, we've seen a
decline in that time frame. So,
so access has gotten slightly
better even in years' worth of
data.
Um, and so now we look at
practice transformation. And
what that means is we have a a
leadership group, uh, but also,
uh, what we call office hours
and in this group, it's, you
know, really colleagues, um,
behavioral health colleagues
were looking at the dashboards
and the data and deciding what
measures we should focus on to
improve outcomes, um, and also
best practices, so they get to
sit alongside.
The colleagues who have done
this for many years and learn
about, well, what protocol do
you use treatment protocol for
suicide prevention. What works
best for you? And I think as
many of you know, depression and
suicidal depression and suicide,
um, we ranked 5th in the nation,
um, in New Mexico for suicides,
3rd in the world. So the
measures again are very
important.
Um, and I'm gonna flip over, uh,
let you read some of the slides,
but on page 14.
As I mentioned, there's a wealth
of data for the providers in the
HIE synchronous. So you can see
different, you know, graphs of,
you know, patient care admission
data, emergency room utilization
data, um, there's a, a product
in synchronous.
Called The Circle of Care.
So provider can actually submit
their roster and say these are
my current patients. So if that
patient ends up
Um, at the emergency room or
possibly being admitted or
remitted, that actually sends an
alert to the office and where
there's a case manager, whether
it's the evening or the weekend,
that alert would allow them to
go and meet that patient in the
emergency room, or at least talk
with the hospital. So the level
of coordination from just the,
the connection in this
interoperability is really
significant.
Um, if we look at page 15, this
is actually a sample of our
dashboard for the mandatory
measures.
And you can see uh the data
collection from last July, uh,
so it's a fiscal year all the
way through June of this year.
And the dashboard shows each of
the measures like if you look at
the PHQ 9, the baseline for 6
months of December, for example,
was for for PHQ-9s in June of
this year, uh, that scores 20.6.
Um, I wanna make a note about
that because clinically this is
important. Um, some of the
groups started to pull the data
um and do the screening and what
they recognized.
was that they were not
administering depression
surveys, a basic, you know,
outcome measure for depression,
um, consistently.
So not only did they use these
metrics and are they using them
to report a KPIs, key
performance indicators to their
board, but they also have
revised um their practices to
do, for example, a GA 7 or PHQ 9
on a regular basis. What that
means is that as a practitioner,
they are monitoring the
outcomes, whether or not their
client or patient is getting
better in every single session
when that patient comes in.
Um, so it's a more, um, more,
uh.
Quickly and and more accurately
knowing how that client is
doing.
Um, social needs assessment. I
do want to comment on that. Um,
we know that, you know, uh,
Everywhere we look now, we are
looking at social determinants
of health. I think many of you
may be familiar with the study
that was done at the University
of New Mexico, um, and, um, of
the Office of Community Health,
and that tool now being well RX,
so some of our providers are
using a prepare screening tool,
some are using well Rx um we're
gathering that information, but,
but here's the exciting thing
about this, um, again, as a
clinician, I get so excited.
about seeing the the potential
of improvement and helping our
patients. Um, now we're going to
look at the data for the social
determinants of health and begin
looking, OK, so what
interventions are you using to
help that patient get financial
access, get housing, get food,
get transportation, um, so very
exciting. So, on this graph, um,
to the right on page 15, you can
see the dashboards show the
trend.
The measure desired direction
should it be going up and
improving or down and improving,
um, and then the percent change,
uh, for from our six month
baseline to the 12 month
baseline and then we do a little
bit of, you know, red, yellow,
green, uh, just to see, you
know, like, is that measure
getting better? Um, is it
staying the same? Is it getting
worse? So we'll be looking at
that in that regard, um.
So, let me just flip over to
page 16.
These are the process measures
and again, the pilot
organizations or the provider
organizations are asked to pick
two of the measures. So the
Vineland um is actually uh the
most utilized assessment for
intellectual development and
disabilities population, and
that means this is a pediatric
uh provider. So another, um, I
think success of the project is
that in the patient population,
it's very diverse. We're
Looking at pediatric or
children's outcomes, we're
looking at adolescents. We're
looking at adults and then
seniors as well.
So I'm, I'm not gonna go through
these measures in in more
detail, but I will move on to
page 17 for you to look at these
outcomes measures. So we have
depression remission, um, and,
and again, I, I wanna just point
out depression remission and
death by suicide because our
suicide rate um ranks 5th in the
nation in New Mexico, and 3rd in
the world, um, and from the US,
um, when we look at depression
remission and.
By suicide, those are related,
right? So if we manage suicidal
depression successfully, we
prevent suicide, um, as best we
can. So important measures that
we have on here. And again, you
can see as I'm walking through
these, how relevant they are,
um, and perhaps in some cases I
would say more relevant than
just a basic kind of canned heat
measure not to criticize heous
measures they are significant,
they are important to track
outcomes, but these are just
more
specifically relevant to
behavioral health practitioners.
So I'm gonna flip over and just
Give you a summary on page 18,
um, as we looked at our measures
for this baseline year. Um, we
will be setting targets, but
we're working on that right now,
really assessing the data, you
know, we're we're just at the
beginning of August August 1st,
of course, with like a year's
worth of data that has to be
still somewhat, you know, sussed
out, but we have improvement in
8 of the measures already, um,
one, it's a basic data
gathering.
And 2, there are actually
improvements in some of the
outcomes and we'll be drilling
down to take a look at that more
in our office hours forum along
with the leadership group and
their insight.
So
little to no detectable change 5
measures there and one measure
got worse, um, which was
actually ED utilization, um, a
very important uh measure. So
again, we'll be working within
the office hours forum to drill
down and take a look at why did
that happen? Is it a seasonal
expected, you know, influx, or
is there something else going
on?
So, again, the page 19 talks
about practice transformation
with the original 10 providers,
not the 9 that we've just added
July 1 of this year. Um, the
original 10, they will be diving
down and looking at improving
outcomes and seeing if they can
use best practices in
transforming um some of their
clinical and operational
practices.
On page 2, it's just talking
about the state fiscal year,
which is now, um, project year
3, growing the data ecosystem,
so adding those 9 providers is
our way of expanding the data.
Um, we have at least 7 counties
um that will be gathering,
collecting the data on for this
project. So we're really excited
about that to have in total 19
community-based provider
organizations, um, a couple of
which are CCBHC clinics.
That have, you know, immediate
access. So we're very excited
about that in the project.
The project has really two
components to it. It has the
metrics that matter, and then it
has the payment reform aspect um
that we are currently working
with BHSD um under the
healthcare authority on um and
in doing so, when we look at
these quality measures, we are
working with BHSD and
collaborating with them on of
these measures, which do you
feel are the most important? And
are there other measures like
access
Measures that you would like to
see in place of some of these or
in addition to. So we'll
continue to work on those
quality measure outcomes.
So for the payment reform, um,
we're we really are looking at a
2-year runway, um, so that we
can um socialize a payment
reform model with providers and
provider organizations in
behavioral health and other um
arenas. We have a concept that
is a behavioral health primary.
Um, we need to develop a work
group and define what a
behavioral health primary is, so
that.
A patient or somebody who's
assigned to an MCO, um, has
somebody as a behavioral
practitioner that they would be
assigned to that they can see.
So that would be similar to a
primary care assignment or
attribution that you guys may
know or be aware of, um, and so
we will work on that, um, and
then we're looking at developing
a quality pool, uh, very similar
to the primary care payment
reform where we would, you know,
select measures.
And again, collectively um have
providers collect the data and
then offer an incentive for that
pay for performance.
I mentioned the socialization,
so I won't go through that
again. And then I'm going to
turn it back over to Maggie to
go through uh the next couple of
slides. We
We really believe that there are
huge benefits to the state of
New Mexico from this project.
Um, the benefits to providers is
we've talked about that in terms
of it being provider driven, the
patient benefits are
extraordinary because it allows
the patient provider to really
focus and target effectively on
changes that are going on with
the patient and how they can be
even improved.
And that we can achieve greater
wellness in the state, the state
system, I, I couldn't help but
listen to the last presentation
and think when they're talking
about data and having data
available to make decisions and
they distinguish between the
decisions that the that the
following colors was was
responsible for from the kind of
decisions that patients and
providers in this project are
responsible for, but they are
all certainly
Interconnected and paint a good
picture of what's going on with
behavioral health in New Mexico.
Pam didn't mention that this
that the dashboards that you see
are um can be seen by the
provider, the individual
provider can be seen by the
agency and can be seen by us
collectively in the project, but
I cannot see an individual. I
cannot see an individual
providers, patients, we've got
really strong um
Walls around that and are
protecting that, but the benefit
to the state is significant
because as we roll out,
hopefully the alternative
payment method, then we will
begin to see, and this has
always been the, the carrot with
um the value based payment is
that it's gonna be we're gonna
pay providers for more money for
what they're doing, and that
was, and there are individual
contracts for behavior health
for value-based purchasing.
With all the MCOs and with
individual providers. This is a
system-wide effort that can
allow us to move forward with
making substantial reimbursement
to providers who are able to
demonstrate that their patients
are getting better because of
the care that they're receiving.
We can show it, we can
demonstrate it. Before I close,
um, I wanna just make another
comment, um, the project
principal, uh, Garner
HMA and I made a presentation on
what we've done so far on just
the metric portion actually at
the last national council for
Mental Wellbeing national
conference in um Saint Louis,
and it so happened that they had
a team that had just completed a
research paper on quality
metrics that mirrored much of
what we were talking about. They
attended several of them
attended our, our presentation.
He spoke to us afterwards and
then uh a month or so later
contacted us to talk with the
National Council about our
project and what we were working
on. So I had a great
conversation. We actually have
another one scheduled next week.
They, they, these are direct
quotes from people from the
medical director of the National
Council who said this is
groundbreaking, you're at the
forefront, and we will, the
National Council will do
everything we
can to make you successful. Now
we're going to go back and try
to find out what that might be,
but uh it was and and those are
words, I understand that those
are words, but they're very
encouraging words to people in
the business in the industry who
understand what has been the,
what has been missing and what
has been missing is an ability
to define progress and treatment
outcomes for behavioral health
clients that are specifically
behavioral health related. It's
pretty simple.
But it, it's important and it's
worked. So with that, I'll share
with you um the kind of our,
well, just so you'll, in case
you were wondering just what
we're looking at in terms of our
financial obligation, and I
know, I know, I think.
Nick is still here, director
Lucas is still here. Strong
supporter, I have to give him
kudos. He's we pounded on his
door many, many times. This
started, as I said, as a pilot
project, original funding
through last year came through
some of the COVID-related monies
that were available, um, and
this is the project we are
funded through this year, so we
are funded through July 1st of
next year, and we're already
working with the, with the state
on
Developing and preparing for
the, the transition into the um
payment reform process of the
model. So I hope that you are
just thrilled and are going to
talk to each other about it all
night.
But I will be happy to answer
any questions you might have.
Well, thank you very much, both
of you. uh, and we'll turn to
the committee now for questions
and start with Senator Hickey.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and
Maggie, uh, thank you so much.
Uh, I know we've talked about
this and, and I know you called
me about this and I'm like this
is a tough one. I mean, how do
you take something as subjective
as behavioral health
interactions and put that into
some objective criteria and
actions that can actually be
measured and and measured in a
computer format and um it
it sure seems, uh, I, I didn't
have a lot of suggestions.
But you have definitely come up
with some meaningful measures
and I think probably much more
successfully than the primary
care entities and, and
organizations are going to come
up with a program that has real
substance to it. Um, it's, it's
pretty tough in, in general care
to come up with some of those
measures that have meaning over
time and so, uh, I congratulate
you and hope you keep going
forward. My main question for
you is
this is a process that has to be
paid for, I imagine synchronous
if if not already at some point
it's gonna want to get paid for
the data and organizing it and
giving it back to you. That's
how they sustain themselves uh
by the services. So when you
outlined your a million to 2
million, so forth. Is this money
that HS
HSD Medicaid has said they would
come up with to support you and.
Are you targeting this bonus
money, um, to come out of them
or or are we gonna have to go
through the MCOs to get the
bonuses paid, which really makes
me nervous.
Uh, um, I can answer um
Mr. Chair, I'm getting a text
that people can't hear you.
OK. Is that better? We'll see.
OK, I'll try and um
Mr. Chair, Senator Hickey, uh,
that's work in progress. Um, we
have a really strong working
relationship with BHSD, um, and
we don't, and we're working on
finalizing over the next several
months finalizing funding for
next year. We are looking at it
as it rolls out because we don't
know exactly like a lot of
projects, you don't know exactly
what it is, but we're very
hopeful, and we're also
Looking at alternative funding
sources for um well one, we're
gonna just talk to the national
council to see if they're
interested in supporting. I
mean, I, I don't know, but I'm
learning that we can ask. So the
answer to your question is I
don't know all the answers yet.
Um, this has, as I said, this
has changed and morphed as we've
gone through this project, um,
but the answer to your question
about the payment to the
providers, there's an effort
under
way right now with um
Oh, I can't, what's the name of
the state actuary that's working
on
Mercer. Um, they're working with
Mercer and looking at the data
to try to figure out how much
money is going to need to be in
that pool and that payment pool.
Um, I don't have anything more
specific than that, but we'll
definitely keep you informed.
Uh, Mr. Chair and, and Maggie,
thank you for that. I understand
it's an iterative process,
particularly when you're kind of
uh uh leading the way, there's
not a lot to look at. Um, I, as
you have heard me say, uh, and I
believe that to private
practitioners in mental health,
um, and who are in private
groups, they are receiving the
120% increase in payments and
And um, but I, I know if, if, if
their behavioralist in systems,
the word I'm hearing
anecdotically is they're not
getting paid that money, and
I'm, I'm working, I'm gonna be
working with the systems to
assure and put a path through,
but as you evolve in this, um,
please keep us informed, uh, and
I'll try and develop a mechanism
where we regularly are, are
getting in
For and, and we will, uh, I hope
to be able to write something in
legislation this year that
requires that money to go
through and an auditing
mechanism, uh, that it's gonna
be there so that we can be
assured. Uh, so, that'd be
great. The, the, but
once my
As, as I'm learning, still
learning, um, don't wait for a
bill in the legislature, um.
Later this year to pay for this?
I mean, because the chances of
it actually getting funded are
pretty.
Honestly, by the time House Bill
2 gets put together, what's left
over is not, is not huge. Um,
and I would encourage you to um
uh start working with a with the
HCA to put because they're
building their budgets now to be
submitted September, I, I think
first it is or close to that.
This is where you need to get
the funding done, so you got a
month.
To go in and, and make a deal
with Carrie Ar Miho and and Dana
and folks, uh, and Nick that
you're gonna get this funded.
That's time, Senator. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Senator.
Did you want to respond?
Me? Yeah, did you want to
respond to what Senator Hicky
said? No, OK, I, I think that's
that's good advice. Thank you.
Yeah, I assume that if Nick's on
board, he's gonna be asking for
that as one of their priorities,
so we'll see.
Look at Nick's head nod like
this, yeah.
Representative Chavez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, I just have a, a couple of
questions. Um, one of them is,
so basically you have a total of
20.
Oh.
Or 1919, 19 organizations
participating, OK, I counted 20.
Um, do you know how many
patients that represents?
And if you don't, it's fine. I
just was kind of wondering Mr.
Chair, Representative Chavez, I
do not know. I can get that
information because the
contracts that each provider has
with synchronous and they are,
you are correctly synchronous
is, is part of our contract. Um,
identifies the maximum number of
providers that are going to be
covered under that contract so I
can, I can pull that. I just
haven't done it and if I can get
that information to you. OK,
thank you. And then I was
interested in in um the idea
that if, if a patient shows up
at an ER or even probably at a
um mental health ER, right? That
the, the provider, the therapist
will, will be um alerted to
that.
So does that mean that all of
the ERs are part of synchronous.
Participate in it. Do you want
to? Pam's gonna.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Chavez, yes, the uh hospitals
are part of the synchronous
health information exchange. So
that is how the alert would come
through and then be sent to the
behavioral provider's office.
All right. Um, and then if a
patient presented, say, just at
a doctor's office.
Would that also be the case
with, with synchronous?
Um, alert the therapist or, or
all of the doctor's office is
also part of of the synchronous
network. Mr. Chair
Representative Chavez, um, I'm,
I'm not sure I understand the
question. So if one of your
patients, a patient that you're
seeing, a patient that a
therapist is seeing shows up at
a doctor's office in crisis.
Um, say they're suicidal or um I
don't know, they've gone off
their meds, um.
Are they also part of
synchronous and would you be
alerted?
Biosynchronous that that your
patient has shown up at a
particular doctor's office.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Chavez, that really, the patient
would show up at the provider's
office, right? And so that
triage would actually occur
between the clinician, the
behavioral health practitioner,
and the patient. And then an
assessment would be conducted as
to what is the appropriate level
of care. Um, so that alert isn't
necessarily going back to the,
the HIE um until or unless the
patient goes to the emergency
room or is admitted in the
hospital. However,
um, and then eventually down the
line that claims information
would be part of the synchronous
database as well. And I hope I
answered your question.
Representative Chavez, not
everyone, not every provider in
New Mexico is part of
synchronous, so there's gonna
be.
They're working on it. They're
working hard on it, but it's
not, it's far from universal.
OK. All right. Um,
Let's see, uh.
I think that's all my questions.
I, I had another one and I lost
my train of thought. So if I
remember, I'll come back.
Senator Lopez.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair, and
Really just some comments again.
As I mentioned for your the
previous presentation, this is
promising.
We've had many a discussion on
this committee over the years
also, um, and asking questions
if you have repetitive visits to
it to Caman in Albuquerque or
wherever else, how are we
tracking the data? Because if
they do present themselves, um,
is that indicative of what,
right? I mean, there's other
questions that come along with
that for system and, you know,
um.
And I would only venture, of
course, that maybe the numbers
have increased, of course, with
all the other stressors in our
communities. So I, I'm hopeful
to see where and of course
everything costs. There's always
a price tag attached, but, um,
I, I do appreciate, um, Senator
Hickey mentioning to get on the
list of to make sure that you do
get some funding in this
upcoming um legislative ses
session beginning in 25.
Because if it's in the executive
budget, it makes it a better
case for us to sometimes add
more money to it, but it, it's
good for you to be.
In the executive budget when it
comes forward. And then one
comment I just wanted to make
too is I'm very happy to see
that an organization in my own
area and Representative Chavez,
it kind of reflects our area
with Centro Avila.
Um, I know that they've been
providing some wonderful
services for the community. And
uh I, I was just, we were
looking for numbers, and I know
Centro Avila, I was just looking
online, um, on a report that
they sent out, and they have
about 1,061, 1,051 clients that
they serve in our
general community of the
Southwest area of Albuquerque.
So if this is just one small
piece if you look at all.
The others I can only imagine
this is a pretty good number.
And gives us a good snapshot
because even if you look at PMS,
PMS services, different parts of
our state.
And then of course, too, if you
look at um the additional pilot
organizations, right, for
clinica de Familia, that's
another section of our state, so
I think this is, this is a good
snapshot for New Mexico, for us
to look at. So I want to say
thank you for your presentation
and I look for much more
information too. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Senator, and then
Representative Thompson.
You, Mr. Chair and thank you
ladies. This is a really
exciting. I do want to say um I
was beyond thrilled to see
Jumpstart Autism Services on
there with, with one in 36 8
year olds having an autism
spectrum disorder. It's long
past time that we start.
Thinking about how we're gonna,
how we're gonna handle that
population. Um, and
In transparency, um, the, the
CEO and founder of, uh,
Jumpstart, worked with my son,
so, uh, so I'm a big fan just
out of curiosity, adding on the
new, new like the Bland or
whatever those things were. Has
there been any problem in
getting payers to pay for that?
Has there been any pushback that
you don't need to do this so
often or you don't, you, you
know, these are, these are not
whatever excuse. Has there been
pushback from payers?
Um, Mr. Chair, and uh
Representative Thompson, I'm not
sure I follow you, push back in
what regard? in not wanting to
pay for, for, um.
I mean, for instance, you can
only get a mammogram once a year
and if you try and get more than
one. So uh is there anyone who's
saying that this isn't necessary
to do these measures frequently.
Representative Thompson, not
yet. We haven't, that's their
next on our list is to begin
talking to them. So this is,
this is the first public
presentation about this project.
And we've been talking about it
and developing it, but the uh we
have not engaged
Managed care organizations yet
that's coming up and, and
everything, all the cost to the
provider participants in this
that they have are assumed by
our project, by this project
costs. So, um, we are paying for
the providers to be contracted
with synchronous, that won't
continue after they move into
the next phase of the project,
but we are offering that as an
incentive to help them
participate and get their daddy
in.
Thank you, and that's something
I'd like you to keep track of
and, and come back to us if it
turns out that the MCOs or
whoever are saying, you know,
this is redundant and you don't
need to do it so often and then
just in my last 39 seconds, um,
in terms, I mean, it would be
great if the state would fund
this fully and fingers crossed,
but I'm.
An optimal up.
Optimistic pessimist. Um, so
have you thought about like
private foundation, you know,
the Keller, and I don't know the
Kellogg Foundation or or any of
those kind of or shoot um Mr.
Chair, yes, we have. I mean, and
again, it's um we're going like
year by year where we're at and
what, where, what can the state
commit to us? Where do we go the
next step? So all of those
things are in all of those
things are in play.
Yes, yes, and we, yes, we are
doing that. OK, good, because
I'd hate to see this drop
because the state uh.
For whatever reason, doesn't
continue to fund because this
can be really, really helpful
across the board. So thank you
very much for your work. Thank
you.
Um
Thank you both for your
presentation. I had a couple of
questions or comments, um, when
I heard value-based.
Um, I mean, that means a lot of
possible things. I know PMS has
had a value-based.
Project through Medicaid for the
last several years were uh
A
A defined population within
their service area.
Uh, was paid, they were paid for
keeping them healthy.
This was in the physical area.
Are you thinking of something
like that? In other words, every
service they provided, they
didn't have to send a separate
bill in. They were, they were
given a monthly payment for each
person that was in that pilot
project.
And that was then supposed to
cover whatever they needed to
keep them healthy and, and if
the person had to go to the
hospital or became ill or
whatever, that was not.
That was considered to be not a
success, you know, in other
words, they, there was no
incentive for PMS to have people
get more intensive levels of
care
that they got reimbursed the
same either way.
Um, so is that the way you were
viewing value based, that it's
based on keeping people within
those parameters of those
measures that you have?
Those metrics
Ham's going to respond.
Mr. Chair, thank you for that
question. Yes, that is part of
our model. Um, we have drafted
it such that it is in tears, so
we will meet providers where
they are at, um, so initially,
if they wanted to start out as
FIFA service, but then also, um,
participate in the pay for
performance, they could do that,
but if they want to and feel
capable of in their readiness to
take on cappitation, which is
that per member per month.
Payment they could absolutely do
that as uh one of our tiers in
our model. So so you're thinking
of several possible ways in
which value-based
Could be used as a basis for
reimbursing an agency.
Yes, to allow that flexibility,
um, and also, you know.
The clinic, the providers know
what their their patients or
clients need best. And so if we
pay them that way, they're able
to actually use the money for
the programs that are the most
effective for that population.
Um, have you had any contacts
yet with the MCOs?
No, we have not, Mr. Chair. No,
not yet. Not, not, not official
contact. I think there's been
some chatter, but I don't think
there's anything official. There
hasn't been anything from our
office.
I mean, I can think of them
possibly being very interested
in this in that it, it certainly
makes for a cleaner.
Uh, much more focused and
outcome-based approach.
Uh
Mr. Chair, we hope so, yeah, I
have one. I just want one quick
comment about the tier model. We
are what we do not have is a
penalty to any provider who
wants to participate. Some of
these projects around the state
have imposed a penalty for not
reaching a certain level, but it
was really clear whenever I met
with the National Council folks,
they were very excited that we
were not using a stick. We were
only using a carrot method to be
able to engage providers and
This process, so it's kind of
encouraging.
Well, yeah, for somebody like
PMS, the
The
I mean, it's not really a stick,
it's a they just don't.
They have to pay for a more
intensive level of care, more
expensive to provide level of
care if the person does get ill,
but it's all still within that
same payment. So would you have
that component based factored
in,
is that part of your tier 3?
Mr. Chair, which component
the
Capitation.
That, so that would be in the
higher tier. Yeah, if they
wanted to do that and I think an
entity like an FQHC would much
more easily be able to take that
cappitation and administer it.
The other benefit is that um in
that model, um, there's
integration between physical
health and behavioral health,
which is really necessary for
good outcomes, right?
Um, right now there are only
gathering this data for your
purposes. They're not submitting
it to anybody?
That's correct. Unless, you
know, they would get paid for
that, right, within a managed
care organization. I'm sure
they're submitting the claims,
but really the collection of the
data is for this project only.
Well, keep us posted by all
means. This is fascinating to
watch and look forward to
hearing further reports.
Thank you very much. It's good
to see all of you. Good to see
you, Maggie.
Thank you, Pamela. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
So members, did anybody else
have another question?
I, I was hoping we could take
just a few minutes to kind of
talk about where we're heading
over the next few meetings, uh,
issues that you want to make
sure get included, you know, we
have a meeting in Socorro at the
end of the month.
We have a meeting in Silver City
in late September 23rd, 24th,
25th, I think.
And then we have the uh Rio
Rancho meeting in October.
And then the final meeting in
Santa Fe, those last 2 or 4 day
meetings. Um,
So we want to make sure that
we're, we're, we're, we're
covering ground, dealing with
topics that you're interested in
that you wanna make sure get
identified. So here's an
opportunity to bring up
something that you might be
particularly interested in
seeing us make sure we get on
our agendas, uh, Senator Hickey,
several, OK, Senator Tay, why
don't you bring up stuff?
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
As, as I've mentioned and we
talked about last year PBMs.
There are two different kinds of
PBMs who operate on a completely
different model than the
traditional ones, uh, and
Presbyterian uses one of them,
capital RX, um, and they,
they're saving a lot of money
and they don't play the shell
game, um, and they operate off
of a
A different pricing standard
where you can't play the shell
game.
And then there's another one
called Right Way RX, um, that.
Also it has a completely
different, very transparent
approach, discounts and uh both
of them are going to be
presenting to the secretary, uh,
HCA as she controls that
contracting, but I thought it
would be good if in the October
meeting, we could put together
maybe a 2 hour period where they
could both each present but also
have adequate question time and
yes,
and um.
Uh, and, and they'll, they'll
bring their top people here so
that you can question them and
I'll help them format it so that
you then you can understand what
the different formats will do
and the money that that it will
save. Um, I'm looking to save
Medicaid money because I want to
put more money into paying
clinicians in Medicaid, 150% is
certainly a hell of a lot
better. It's a doubling, but it
was awful to
To begin with, but again, to be
competitive, I think we're going
to have to go further. So that's
and, and, and we've just got to
reform the whole purchasing of
drugs, um, the, so I would like
to, if we could put that on the
calendar for a later calendar
you've you've heard me talk
multiple times about assurance,
developing a methodology whereby
we can audit the hospitals that
they're actually paying the
clinicians, uh, as I've said,
all the anecdotal discussions.
I've had with providers in
primary care, um, uh, the money
is not coming to them the 120%
and the 150% that comes in
January and uh it's complicated,
but it's doable to put in a
legislation and auditing
methodology and I'd like to
maybe present that or to the
committee in November. In our
last meeting, yes. Do you have
somebody that would make a
presentation, yes, OK.
And then lastly, um, also in
November, uh, there's a lot of
discussion about prior
authorization. You may or may
not remember that, uh, uh, while
initially I objected to a bill
because of safety measures on
eliminating prior authorization
for medications, uh, last year,
the bill to get through and it
did get signed, um, and all
immunologic drugs are not to be
prior off. Well, none of the
pharmacies know about.
This, um, I mean, it, it's
under, it's under the OSI and um
we, uh, uh, and I know that the
OSI is anxious to reduce prior
authorization and so is the
medical society and, and uh the
concerns I had about safety, I
think there are ways to assure
safety, but we may, you know,
we, what are the things that
might make New Mexico attracted
to practice in, uh, and live in
is if we could get
rid of the vast majority of
prior authors find a way to do
that, um, that it makes life
easier for the clinicians in
their offices and especially
easier for you as, as the
patient, but I'd like the
medical society and OSI in
November to present on kind of
where they're at.
Medical and OSI and, and I'll,
I'll work with Xander to get
that organized.
OK, Representative Kate, thank
you, Chair. I too, I have 3
suggestions, uh, possibly for
the October Rear Rancho,
uh, meeting, um, one is,
um, uh, I would like to have a
presentation, a panel of
representation from loveless
hospital, uh, Presbyterian Rust
and Sandoval Regional Medical
Center. Um, the west side of the
first thing the central New
Mexico is our largest population
in the state. And for the first
time, the West Side population
is larger than the East Side
population. There are little,
very little opportunity for
growth on the east side, the
west side will only be growing,
and what is our healthcare
infrastructure, how are those
three hospitals serving that
area, um, where are their plans
for expansion, um, what are
their specialties to be able to
serve that growing population.
That would be one of my
suggestions. Um, another is, um,
Uh, only San Diego County in
California is the only county in
the country that has more uh
tribes than Sandoval County. So
while we were there, I would
like to have some sort of
presentation about um.
Uh, the healthcare needs and how
they're being addressed in, in,
uh.
In that area, it doesn't have to
be exclusive to the tribes of
Sandoval County. I know that um
others have businesses there
that they're making investments
like Laguna Pablo.
Um, and, and obviously like uh
uh Sandia. Um, my other, uh,
request is that we have some
kind of presentation or tour of
a site for a developmental
disability services. Um, we have
several providers in the
Corralis area in the town of
Bernelio in Rio Rancho, that
whole area, even uh Westside
Albuquerque that we could, I
could help arrange, um, there
are a couple of things that
I'm trying to get the committee
to understand, um, is how the
services work and how does um
dignity of risk and
self-direction work, especially
uh with so much conversation
about changing the uh actual
development of disability
waiver, um, and rules and in
competency, um, understanding
the importance of bringing uh
voices in the
Maybe not uh communicate in the
traditional manners we're used
to seeing communicate.
Um, and being able to see that
firsthand on how those services
are being provided currently in
the way the structure is.
Those are my 3. Thanks.
Anybody else represented Vincent
or Represented Martinez.
Um, Mr. Chair, I, I, uh,
I had this conversation with you
at the first meeting, and I, I
again would like to ask that we
get a presentation on the med
mill.
Issue, um, I provided Xander
some
some information um
because I think it's important
that we're, let me, let me add
to that.
I just went up to say hi to
Grace Phillips at lunch and
she's now in charge of risk
management for the counties and
apparently our
Legislation from a few years ago
that
Um,
shifted responsibility for
insurance liability. The
counties are having a hell of a
time getting insurance for any
of their jails or police or
whatever. So the whole issue of
ensuring against risk are, are,
are providers and our and our uh
correctional facilities is
becoming a major issue.
Um,
uh, the, here's the dilemma with
it. It, it, who would make the
presentation and then the other
side would want an equally large
thing. And then we're not the
body that's gonna have a, it'll
be judiciary that decides it,
you know, I mean, for finance, I
don't know. I if it were
something manageable, I could, I
could see us getting into that.
I, I just don't know.
I provided Xander uh a
nonpartisan group that would
make the presentation. People
were actually involved.
In
The insurance part and the
management part.
Uh, because I think this is an
important issue that
We need to be educated about.
So
OK. Anything else?
Representative Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I was
wondering maybe we could have a
presentation on um like a
potential oversight mechanism
for CYFD.
And, uh, maybe the ombuds or
maybe the commission that you
had even spoke about.
OK.
Um, Senator Lucas, any ideas?
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
The um
They're, I think the committee
has received a copy of a report
on the Children's Code.
And I would like to see if we
could get a report, a
presentation on that. I don't
think we've got it. You haven't
received it yet?
From,
it's on the Children's Code task
force, and I believe it was sent
to um to the committee if not,
I'll make sure Kristen Conley
from the Children's from the Cen
Wolf's Law Center.
I'll make sure that she sends
it, but I'd like to, um, ask if
we could have that presentation.
This isn't the, what is it
called the the HM 5 or set at
Memorial 5. That's another one
that's on CYFD. Yes sir, it's
different is the Children's Code
revision. Children's Code Task
Force is looking to, um, we
already have a some proposals
looking as to how we redefine
neglect.
Um,
within that aspect and there's
much more to it, but there's
already some proposals ready so
if we could, and I'll make sure
that it comes, Andrew, that you
get a copy if you had not yet.
Um, because we're having a
presentation on it August 13th
already in courts, corrections
and justice.
So I'll make sure it gets to
you, so maybe that could be for,
um, if not in September maybe
for October also, because
Kristen, um, works at UNM.
So it might be more convenient
for her to do a presentation at
that time.
It's already done. Do we have a
full, we have a full Secorro
schedule, and
there's, we could fit something
Siro at the end of Sero would be
fine if we can schedule it,
yeah, just so it's closer for
some of the participants, um,
and then Mr. Chair also Senate
Memorial 5, we should have
something by November, so it may
be for our last meeting, um, to
have a a presentation as to what
the task force will decide by
that time, but that's the
Intent to bring it forward to
this committee also would that
tie in with
Representative Vincent's idea
about oversight of CYFD. It's
part of our discussion, um, but
we have yet to, to have a
representative Chavez sits on
the task force also, but we have
yet to, we're getting a lot of
information on workforce. I
mean, all the different areas of
um that affects CYFD.
And we still have to um have a
full day of discussion amongst
task force members to come up
with some recommendations, so.
It, it does include um
The ombudsman and the bill also
Senator, that you had proposed
to.
You have an advocate here with
Representative Chavez who
brought it up.
So yay but that's all part, so
if I could at least maybe for
our last meeting for that.
Sounds good. Representative
Chavez, do you have any other
ideas?
I guess I'm thinking you're
Mike.
Um, so a couple, yeah, I think,
and I don't know that there,
it's kind of we've already had
presentations on some of this
stuff, so maybe it's more in the
uh towards um, you know, some
ideas for legislation, but I
think in terms of the behavioral
health really, um, you know, how
do we move from
From doing piecemeal to really
global kind of um.
If I don't even know what to use
sort of a global approach to
building our our behavioral
health system, right? from um
using the money that you talked
about in terms of, you know,
actual capital and then also,
you know, the workforce, right?
How do we move um towards really
moving a little bit quicker on
that and I think one of the um,
the presentations that was made,
I believe it was by the um.
Uh, person from Eastern who
talked about some of the issues
with um it was either the
stipends or the scholarships. I
don't remember which right now.
Yeah, and so how do we get, you
know, get all that kind of stuff
figured out, um.
To me, that would fit in well in
that session where we prepare
legislation for endorsement that
might be, you might want to pick
up those items as bills that we
could, or maybe a bill on that
topic that would incorporate
all. Yeah, and then I think in
terms of what um, Senator Hickey
said in terms of health care,
there's some follow up stuff
that I think we, we need to do,
um, and so I can get with Xander
about that. We, yeah, we, and I
keep getting information on.
Uh
Global budgeting for hospitals,
we have the Sam Howarth report
that we have we ever really
passed it out to the committee
and discussed it. It's been sent
out. We haven't really
discussed. We haven't had a
committee discussion of that,
um, and, and of the mergers and
whatever the OSI is doing,
is she gonna they're they are.
They're having a huge.
Right, yes, they, the OSI is
doing lots of uh.
Trying to make peace.
Between all the different
entities, so that's ongoing, but
we could hear from them. I mean,
we might, we might want to hear
from the OSI just in general on
a number of topics in November,
actually one that I forgot about
was remember the mental health
parity when I was talking to the
health plans, um, are you in
fact, uh, enforcing the law as
it's written, I'd like to have
the 4 MCOs testify, uh, and, and
they're overseen by the OS.
in terms of implementing parity
so that we're sure people are
getting access. Rio Rancho in
in.
October, yeah.
Yeah, Mr. Chair, the OSI is on
their 2nd round of tours around
the state. The first one was
about the mergers and
acquisitions. I think this is a
different topic, but getting an
update from them as well rearch
would be.
I'll check with him. I'm sorry,
Representative, I got on a site
conversation. What's up?
Yeah,
I agree.
She agrees. OK.
That's you know.
Um, yeah, we were just trying to
figure out, we, we, we haven't
even brought up DD yet and the
whole thing around the way or
you, sorry.
Representative Thompson, what
would you like to bring up?
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and some
of this is just things that I
think we need to keep track of
and.
Keep uh
I don't even want to say gently
nudging, bringing the hammer
down, um, single credentialing.
Um, and then.
We've heard a lot about
psilocybin and it's been 2 years
since we've had a, so maybe an
update on that, um.
The UNM workforce report that
that they give us on health care
is not funded by us, and there
also are some uh representative
Chandler and I met with um with
the UNM folks and.
We looked at who is on there,
their board to decide about
recommendations and it's very
skewed. It's very skewed toward
corporate medicine in a way from
patients, so I think looking at
that and thinking about funding
them but also thinking about
having some control over and for
those of you who don't remember
the report we got last year said
things like, you must do this
with medical malpractice and
that's not what what that report
is for.
Um,
and then some of this is just my
frustrations and putting it out
there, it seems like we have a
perverse disincentive for MCOs
to provide some services, um, if
they're getting the money to
provide, let's say, speech and
language pathology, and they
don't hire anybody, what happens
to the money? Do they get to
keep the money, which makes it
an incentive for them to limit
services. Um,
And then ways to get real data
from MCO, the bill that we
passed, Senator Munoz and Woods
bill that was supposed to help
the rural hospitals has turned
out that that wasn't exactly
what happened and and the um the
hospital association.
refused to provide data to to
the LFC.
And so we, we made judgments
based on faulty data and now the
hospital association is saying,
well, you know, you can't trust
the data that you use because,
but they didn't give us any, so
I'm really frustrated with that,
um.
Let's see, there's a filmmaker.
We, we, we have to ask them to
come, yeah, um, a filmmaker who
made a film about doing pelvic
exams on women under general
anesthesia without their consent
that that's a fairly standard
practice in med schools?
Yes,
as a, yeah, they practice. They
practice on women. Yeah, you
sign a consent, but you don't, I
mean, there's the, the, the
movie is wonderful and it talks
this woman had been sexually
assaulted and she woke up during
her surgery while they were
doing pelvic exam and just so,
um, maybe find out if that's
happening or not, and then of
course DD waiver, um, the money,
the, the waiting, I mean, we
don't have a waiting list, but
we also don't have services, so.
I mean, yeah, you're off the
waiting list, yippee, you can't
do anything, so, um, those are
just a few.
We need to put that on March.
Yeah, exactly.
More than Mike,
Mike.
Mike
She thought you were calling
Mike.
Yeah
Yeah, yes, I, I think we need a
minimally a day towards waiver
and and the tour that I'm
requesting as well.
Tell me more about the tour. I'm
really fuzzy about what you're
getting at there. What would it,
what would we be visiting a DD
waiver agency?
Uh, you'd be visiting an
environment for where
individuals on the waiver are
getting services and so it could
be, there's several options. One
could be the Arcas greenhouses
out in Corrali and and how does
employment and how does
supportive employment will work
and um I'm hoping if, if, if you
say no and you'd rather see a
day facility by a brazos.
In Burnley, we could do that
too, but what I'm hoping is for
the committee members who are
not as familiar with this
community to um understand how
individuals with disabilities,
um.
have the right to express their
wants and needs and to for them
to be considered and how their
staff is trained to be able to
make sure that their voices are
included. I think that this
relates to compensency and I
think this relates to things
that we're asking to change that
we're finding out maybe changing
the rules or things that are
we've been asked to change in
the last couple of years, um,
regarding, uh, this very
vulnerable.
Population and I think that
those of us who are not
Familiar with that community can
learn from being in that
environment.
perhaps as an alternative to a
tour, cause we just people tend
to not go on tours. If the
people who are interested go and
they're not the ones who maybe a
panel of, of people with the
people with the people on the DD
waiver or something so that I
mean I I like the idea we can we
can talk about it, chair, I I've
tried to do something similar on
another committee, on another
subject matter, and the tour
worked very well. This is the
thing is is that I think that.
This panel has been very good at
listening to people talk to them
and to know how to read
PowerPoint presentations, but I
think there's something to be
learned and being in an
environment that sees where
individuals have the dignity of
risk and are being able to earn
money and uh and be able to
participate in uh what they want
to do, the healthcare, what they
wear, what they're doing in
their lives. But, but I, I see
the
Risk of it and I, I'm most
certainly hear you when you're
saying that individuals
May not participate.
Did, did you look into Silver
City? Was there an agency in
Silver City? I will find one for
you, sir, that that might, I
mean, the, the problem is the
Rio Rancho meeting is already to
take a half day off from Rio
Rancho to go visit a, a program,
kind of awkward when we have so
many things booked there, but
Silver City is not as heavily
booked.
I definitely have one for Sero,
sir, but, but, but I'll find one
for Silver City. I have
definitely one in the Sea.
me with exactly check out,
check out Silver City and see
that could be made to work if
there's an agency there that.
I don't know the name of one
right off, uh, but
Representative Harmil in Socorro
has it runs. I'm not sure she's
very got a lot. I'm sorry. She's
got a lot of uh DD.
Knowledge and she may even have
an agency.
OK.
Let's, OK, let's look into that.
Well, you certainly filled up
our
idle hours with the
Quite a few ideas here. I, I
feel bad about Representative
Martinez, but I, the whole
mid-mouth thing is just such a
snake pit.
And the two sides agreed to yeah
we can talk, um.
A possibility is trying to cut
this elephant into bite-size
pieces. If we have the OSI here.
Uh, I, I'm interested in knowing
what kind of influence are we
able to have over private
insurance,
because uh Representative
Thompson and I were at an event
and we had a lot of medical
providers there and they had a
lot of anger and a lot of things
to say, but when I listen to
them, it was really about the
private medical malpractice
insurance, not what
We
Covered in legislature so our I
said I'm, are we able to have
any sort of influence over
private insurance? I mean, they
feel like we, that there's a
model in California that we can.
Yeah.
So that, that's, that sounds
like an OSI question.
Not, not a med mal panel, but an
OSI question.
Yeah
Um, I don't know, for me it just
sounds like opening a whole new
can of worms that it's gonna go
in 10 different directions and
there's already been agreement
like Representative Thompson
said there's already been
agreement between the parties in
terms of how that whole whole
thing is gonna work.
So I don't
I
I agree, don't open up the same
can of worms. I'm trying to find
out if there's another can of
worms on the table. That's what
I'm trying to do.
Well, I think we've, we've
exhausted ourselves and uh
once again, uh, and well, it's
exhausting just thinking of what
we still have to cover,
but,
but a reminder, you have the
invitation, I think, at your
place for the reception which
will take place as soon as we
get there, apparently. Um,
and, uh. And you have a little
maps. Oh, wonderful. That's
exactly what we need. We who are
And with that we'll call this
meeting of the Legislative
Health and Human Services
