This is our, uh, this month's
newsletter. I'm gonna go over a
couple of things very quickly.
Most of this is stuff that
you've heard this week, uh, as I
said before, we're
Trying to do dual purpose with
their newsletter. Obviously, we
want, we want it to be
informative for you and the rest
of the members in the body, but
also keeping folks informed
about uh in the general public
about what you're talking about
and what we as staff are
proposing for you. And so, um,
the, the big story here
obviously is about the
presentation that you heard
yesterday from the from the
executive and PED about their
request for uh school budget.
I'm gonna come back to the
chair's letter at the end if I
could.
Um, on the back page, we have a
short story about uh
Merritt's presentation, uh,
preventing sexual misconduct in
schools and some of the steps
that might uh.
We might propose for you all,
and then our graphic and little
blurb there at the bottom is
about those on ramps to
education that you heard from
PED about, um, we thought this
was an interesting graphic to
share, um.
We've, we've been very pleased,
I think with the way that the
PED has uh coordinated those
efforts, right? The last 5 years
you've invested a lot of money
in educator prep and retention
and recruitment, um,
Those, those efforts haven't
always necessarily been aligned
at the start, and the folks over
at PED have done a really nice
job of putting those programs
together in a cohesive way where
if someone raises their hand to
be a teacher, there's a place
where they can do that. So
that's decided to put that
there. And then the last thing
is from the chair's letter, I
won't get into the letter too
much, but he touches on federal
funding, and you all talked a
little bit about that over the
last couple of days about how
the change in administrations
might affect federal.
Funding
Obviously, a lot of schools in
New Mexico benefit from Title
One funding, um, IDEA for
students with disabilities, um,
Most states in the country,
especially those with, you know,
low income populations.
Um, benefit greatly.
From these programs. And so I
think everyone is, is, you know,
cautious and waiting to see what
happens next. But we, we as
staff will continue to keep an
eye on that and and inform you
of anything that, that we know
of is happening and work with
the department to to see if
there's any changes that might
affect them as well. So that's
our newsletter.
Uh, usually have a small
personnel update, uh, the update
for this month is we're in the
process of interviewing, um, for
our deputy director position,
and I hope that by the time we
get together next month before
session starts, we'll have a new
deputy director. We're also in
the process of uh hiring um
A new position and that I've
talked about before, a research
assistant and sort of uh
publications and committee
services. Again, I wanna thank
Alonzo. He's our office
administrator, does all our
finance stuff, HR things. But
since Maddy's been gone, he's
also serving this dual role of,
of helping us wrangle all of
you, which is really easy. You
guys are super easy to wrangle.
Um, and so I just want to thank
him for that, but this new
person will come on board,
hopefully. We did have a really
good candidate. They decided.
that this wasn't the right fit
for them in the moment. So we're
still looking a little bit and
we'll have an update for you in
January. And with that, Mr.
Chair, I'll stand up for any
questions.
Thank you, John. Questions from
the committee about the report.
Representative Garrett.
Mr. Chairman, John, when is our
January meeting. People keep
referring to it. Yeah, uh
tradition, Mr. Chair
Representative Garrett,
traditionally our January
meeting is on Martin Luther King
Junior Day, that's the day
before session starts. Uh, we're
scheduled, uh, tentatively in
the morning should be relatively
short meetings, so we have the
room reserved from 8 to 12. I
don't anticipate that we would
need the entire morning. Uh, but
we'll be doing, we'll bring the
rest of those bills that we
talked about yesterday for
endorsement. We'll bring our
budget back to you after.
We've gotten feedback for
approval. We um traditionally
also have our annual report for
your approval at that time as
well.
And Mr. Chair and John, can you
also check with LFC and see if
they have a meeting scheduled
the same day and time. So, Mr.
Chair and Representative, they
absolutely do have a meeting at
the same time, and it's been a,
we've, we've been doing some
coordination. It's gonna be
difficult uh to avoid overlap.
There's a lot of new, uh
Member training, uh, we've,
we've been working with LCS.
They have some mandatory
training for all members on that
same day in the afternoon. So
just a lot of conflicts and
unfortunately means there's
going to be some overlap.
Thank you.
They
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just
wanted to comment on the date of
that meeting, you know, coming
in to the legislature when I
came in and 21 in that meeting,
being on the Doctor Martin
Luther King Jr. holiday. Is
there a reason why we do it on a
day and I, I just
For me, it's just, you know,
having it on that day. I know I
go to a lot of events, many
community people go to a lot of
events, and I understand it's
right before the session, but is
there a reason why we have to
have it on that day?
Mr. Chair, Senator, um, I would,
I would need someone with a lot
more institutional knowledge
than I have to to be able to
explain it since I've
worked here, that's the way it's
been done, but I don't, I don't
know the reason.
So, so, Mr. Chair, I, I would
just ask to consider that and
let's just look at that, um.
I mean, I just think it's an
important holiday. I understand
we have important work to do,
but
Let's just look at that date, if
it's possible. Thank you, Mr.
Chu.
Thank you.
Other ques uh representative
Lujan.
I just kind of second that
motion, there's not a motion
made, but I would second that
idea, I think, um.
I'm on, uh, I'll be at LFC
myself, Mr. Chair, and we are
meeting at the same time, same
day.
Um
And I know you said in the
afternoon, we want to be
cautious about the training and
all that, and but maybe the day
before.
Um
be a consideration and, and for
reasons stated also by Senator
Pope. It is a
This, uh, it's gonna be busy
here in the roundhouse too with
um so the celebration of of
Doctor Martin Luther King Jr.
but I just think we have other,
we're.
We spread thin, so I'm just, I
would just.
you know, there's not emotion
obviously, but I would just say
I, I would support that idea as
well. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Other questions, comments.
Representative Robert Caballero.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I
just, I wanted to add, it's,
it's um it's not really a
celebration day, it's a
commemoration day, which makes
it.
Particularly important that
those of us that have um.
Committed
To participating in
Commemorating that day.
And I think that perhaps
Um, and as long as I've been
here and I've brought it up a
few times even in legislative
council about perhaps changing
um the way we meet on that on
that day before, uh, so I just
wanted to add my support for
whatever we can do to influence
changing that um meeting day.
Thank you.
Thank you. Any other questions,
comments, Represent.
Uh
Good.
that I'm, I'm so sorry.
So I was looking at this time
while looking at you,
thank you, Mr. Chair. I, I just,
uh, John want to compliment you
on the staff. Uh, I think in it
has been a pretty smooth
transition, uh, going from uh
one director to another and uh
nobody appreciates uh good
management until you don't have
it. And uh so I just wanna say
Uh
Good job, good job all, and that
includes staff because staff
doesn't support the director,
then we have other problems. So
we've, we've been in this
committee when times have been
very different, so, uh, uh, I
deeply appreciate your
leadership, and I think the
collective.
The Collective goodwill of your
team. That's all I want to say,
Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. My only
comments, you know, kind of the
same thing, great staff, uh
appreciate the hard work on
working with the PED those are
nice smooth, it's nice when you
see them here and they're
relaxed being in our committee
rather than feel like they're
about to get overly grilled for
things they have no control
over. Um, and also working with
the, the finance committee on
things and came to way to let
the members know that I've been
talking with
representative or with uh
chairman Rometo about that first
Monday, so not the day we're
talking about the next Monday,
potentially having a combined
meeting with the House and
Senate Education committees and
anyone else who wants to come to
go over budget again in lots of
detail. Our chamber, your
chamber have lots of lots of new
people and kind of some overview
of above the line between the
lines below the line, grant
funding, uh
all of those, you know, to those
of us who have heard it for a
while, makes sense to somebody
new it sounds like you're
looking at alphabet soup in a
bowl and trying to make sense
out of what's coming out, so.
So we're looking at potentially
that Monday, uh, typically that
week they send us all home
Friday, get anything else that
you need, and then Monday's too
early to start hearing bills,
but that'd be a great time to
kind of set up the two
committees and have a combined
meeting as to where we are on
money and budget and education
and kind of uh education budget
101 for brand new people who
have no idea what above the line
and below the line means.
So if that makes sense for
everyone. And again, even if
you're don't end up on one of
the education committees, you're
certainly welcome to come to any
of you that are on the finance
committee, where we look for
more people with an education,
um, love and be.
Mr. Chair, um, we'd be happy to
prep whatever you need for that,
uh, happy, and also I just want
to say, you know, whatever form
of organ um events happen, we're
happy to to work with with folks
there. And just to remind
Millions of people watching, um,
that we're always happy to help
all members, uh, at any point
with these sorts of things, we,
we know that it's, it's can be
complicated and confusing,
always, uh, willing to help. And
if I could just, at the risk of
being self-indulgent a little
bit. Thank you, uh,
Representative Verera. I meant
to start this morning with a,
with extreme gratitude to the
team. They all know that we've
been, they know how busy we've
all been, um, and not having a
deputy and not having that
community services person has
meant.
Everyone has had to pick up a
little bit of slack, and they've
been real just
Such good spirits about it all.
I, I, they're probably
complaining maybe behind my
back, but I don't hear it.
And so I really appreciate all
the work that they do, and I
just wanted to say thank you,
Representative for reminding me
about that.
Wonderful. Thank you, John.
Anything else in this area, this
topic?
If not, then I believe we have a
Miss Juanico, if you, if I say
that right?
If you would please talk about
the Indian education division.
Your funding and things of that
sort. Welcome back.
Remember that you were like
brand new with about 3 days up
in Taos a year or so ago
So you hit your stride.
Um so thank you, Mr. Chair. Gui
guys that will help us dry
trash, so I might say ahaa
Hanahuta
a Yakoguinwahita,
uh, good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. Thank
you for having me. My name is
Katie Anne Winiko and I'm the
assistant secretary for Indian
education. Um, I also represent
my own uh
I'm from the Pueblo of V Ama,
uh, raised there and uh
transitioned onto a different
paths and so thank you Mr. Chair
for acknowledging yes, on the
3rd day in my space, he welcomed
me and I always appreciate the
warm welcome.
Um, so as mentioned today, I'm
going to present um how the
Indian education fund currently
operates and functions and I at
the end I will end with the uh
$50 million Indian education
funding proposal.
So first I want to acknowledge
um all of your support in
increased funding over the
previous 4 years. I'm currently
we are sitting at $25.5
million 5.5% of that million,
um, were separate from our
regular Indian education fund,
20 million has been flat
funding, um, over the past two
years, and so on the first slide
I'm on slide 2 or page 2, you'll
see the incremental increases
there. So again,
just want to acknowledge and
thank you for your support of
Indian education, as well as the
support of uh the Luhan E
Grisham administration.
Moving to slide 3 or page 3. I
also want to talk about all the
accomplishments that have been
happening across the state, um,
through the Indian education
awards that are released each
year, um, so I also want to
point out that these are only 6
examples and so the Indian
education division works with
the Pueblo 22 Pueblos tribes and
nations across the state that
are eligible for funding, but we
also work with around 40 of the
89 districts and charters that
have high numbers of Native
American students, and so this
slide does not capture all the
wonderful things that are
happening with the funding
currently, but to highlight some
of them and this data was
actually gathered from our first
round of quarterly check-ins,
which we just started
implementing this fiscal year to
support spending down and this
information was gathered during
that time from our team in face
to face conversations with
grantees, uh, so for the Pueblo
of Cochiti.
They're using a lot of our
funding to offer virtual
tutoring for high school
students who actually don't want
to make it to the Pueblo, but
still have access uh to teachers
or educators to provide those
services after school, uh, for
the Pueblo OK win game we'll
talk about this also. We're
seeing continuing to see
increased numbers of community
members who are earning their
520 Native American language and
culture certificate and for many
pueblos who are just initiating
that process, um, they're
seeing.
Tremendous gains and using our
funding to support that, you
know, developing their language
committee to certify their own
tribal members and then using
our funding to supplement those
salaries and so specifically to
the public of OK Owinga, they
saw an increase of 4 community
members attained their
certification.
For the Pueblo of Pierre, um, we
also understand that the with
our funding, the the publics are
able to hire and employee, um,
actual certified teachers for
after school programming, which
speaks volume to the commitment
of our educators across the
state, um, but we also want to
acknowledge the location of
where the pueblos are. We have
to provide enough stipends or
salaries, right, to attract them
to our communities, and that's
how our funding is being used.
as well.
Albuquerque Public Schools is
doing wonderful things across
the board, but one thing we'd
like to highlight is the
availability of language and
cultural courses within their
district and you'll see noted
there at 8 of their high
schools, they are able to offer
uh Navajo and Zuni to their
students again using our funding
to support that process, um,
middle college, high school, uh,
what they're seeing increased
rates of uh students who are
graduating with college course.
Credits as a senior in high
school and so middle college
high school using our funding to
support that as well, and the
last example on this slide
Hamish Valley Public Schools,
um, doing so well with their
language and cultural classes
that their students were invited
to the Pentagon and White House
to perform again, our funds can
be used for those types of
experiential learning
experiences. They can use them
for flight tickets per diem
hotel stays to again expose
students to other.
areas across the country. So
again, a lot of things
happening. These are only 6
examples gathered from the 1st
quarter of this fiscal year, my
team will be meeting with all of
our grantees in January and then
twice thereafter to again
support spending down, but also
to acknowledge what support
systems they need to continue
spending, but also to highlight
all the objectives and outcomes
they've reached at that point in
the year.
Moving on to slide 4, so slide 4
or page 4 and 5 were actually um
a breakdown of how the fund, the
all the funds that we are in
control of at the Indian
Education division currently. So
you'll see last fiscal year 24,
we were funded at $20 million
and the outcome of that session
is that would that would be
multi-year funding and so that's
20 million was first awarded
last fiscal year. What?
Remaining the all of our
grantees are continuing to spend
down for fiscal year 25. Again,
we were funded at 20 million,
500,000 thanks to all of you,
uh, was added to our budget
500,000 was used to support
artificial intelligence and STEM
professional development for our
teachers across the state that
we all know have impacts on our
students.
We also at the division uh
support the awards and spending
of um tribal capital outlay, and
I don't want to miss out on the
$5 million appropriation, as we
all know, another outcome of the
last session was that 4 million,
uh, we've allocated to the
Navajo Nation and 1 million to
the Pueblo of Zuni to carry out
the provisions of the Indian
education Act.
Now moving down to I'm still on
page 4, IED and education
division also um has taken on
the responsibility of the tribal
and rural rural community based
extended learning grant, and the
last session we asked for
reauthorization of that fund. It
started out with 13.3 million in
fiscal year 23, uh, what was
remaining is around uh a little
less than 7 million that has
been reauthorized to publish
tribes and nations to spend down
by June 30, 2020.
5.
Moving on to the next page, page
5. we also have the
appropriations for tribal
capital, uh, outlay specifically
for libraries and education
centers, um, there is a $10
million that has already been
awarded to publish tribes and
nations from the ARPA funding.
We also have 2 million that has
been already awarded to the
Pueblo of Acuma and was recently
reauthorized as well, um, and
then we also have 20 million for
tribal capital.
outlay which was house Bill 505.
Again, all that funding has
already been awarded to publish
tribes and nations through an
application competitive process.
We move on to the next page, uh,
page 6 is what I'm looking at.
Um, so something that was
requested of me uh to speak to
was the remaining balance and
the intentions of what we will
do with it into the upcoming
fiscal year. And so you heard me
talk a lot about a little bit
about um the increases in the
520 certificate holders across
the state. So again, uh, those
are certifications that
acknowledge community members as
having a cultural knowledge and
capacity to be.
be able to teach language and
culture either within a district
or within their home community,
so again, seeing those numbers
increase, uh, for this fiscal
year, we did allocate around
$1.3 million to support those
salaries, and so that was a
competitive grant districts as
well as published tribes and
nations were invited to apply
for a portion of the 1.3 million
we received according to those
applications, 93 requests.
To supplement salaries to
supplement either from a
district Pueblo um tribernation,
um, because we had 1.3
available. Uh, we were only able
to find 54 out of those 93, and
so with any remaining balance,
we intend to release another
application to support those
salaries of the 520 certificate
holders, um, so clearly there is
a need to continue, you know, as
we see the number of 520
certificate holders increase
will also.
We need, we'll also see an
increase for salary support, and
so again, I think that's funding
that can be spent, um, in the
best ways individuals who are
actually out there teaching
language and culture as we know,
a lot of the public tribes and
nations have identified that
language loss is real and so
supporting those salaries is
super important.
Um, moving on to the next page,
page 7. it's a continuation of
what we intend to do with the
remaining balance, um, I did not
note on page 6, there is um a
number there. No, it's moving
forward. I'm sorry. So back to
page 7. another way we can uh
utilize our fiscal year, um, the
remaining balance for the
upcoming fiscal years again to
support all the things that are
already happening and going
really well. Some of those
things include teacher prep.
Programs, uh, language and
cultural programs, um, within
the Pueblos tribes and nations
as well as tutoring programs
that you heard me highlight and
again continuing to increase the
number of 520 certificate
holders across the state and as
a by uh indirect way, we can
also then focus on student high
school students who can earn
their 520 certificate as a high
school senior, um, and therefore
maybe attracting more students
as they leave high school,
right? They have the option of.
earning, uh, a teacher's salary
and working within their uh
Pueblos tribes and nations to
teach language and culture.
Moving on to page 8.
I also want to highlight some of
our goals and strategies and so,
um, I also am very humbled to be
here. I continue to be excited
about the work, uh, that the
division is doing under
secretary designate Padilla, um,
and this page highlights that,
um, there are a lot of good
things happening in the division
currently again looking at how
do we continue to support our
grantees and spending down their
funding, but also how do they do
it effectively? How are they
doing it to direct?
meet outcomes for Native
American students. And so this
page actually speaks to the
goals of our division moving
forward, um, actually into this
fiscal year and moving forward.
The first goal, uh, to continue
to increase accountability to
improve student outcomes for
Native American students. One
way our division uh will
strengthen this is by looking at
our application for funding, um,
you've heard over the past
couple of weeks, some of the
data related to where we need to
improve for Native American
students. We talked and heard
about attendance being a some an
area that we want to target for
Native Americans and.
through our application, we can
actually capture that.
If you're allocated $200,000.
Tell us what attendance
programs, you are going to
implement with this funding and
so again using the application
as a way to hold our grantees
accountable. Um, the other thing
that we've started incorporating
through our division is those
quarterly check-ins, um, having
a continuing to build
relationships with our grantees
to be accessible to all the
questions they have about their
grants, but also continuing to
encourage them to continue.
spending, and so that has not
been done before where
implementing it this fiscal year
and we've heard a great response
from district leaders um and
understanding the grants, what
it can be spent on and what's
not allowable, so we'll continue
that moving forward.
We're also working on um
updating our reporting
requirements. So part of the
rule currently identifies that
our grantees will submit a
midyear and end of year report,
um, the way I've been messaging
this to try publish tribes and
nations and also districts and
charters is that when we
continue to ask for funding, we
need to be accountable to the
way we're spending that fun
those funds, and one way for me
to capture that data is through
reporting and so we're going to
be a little bit more stringent
in the data that we
collecting so that we can
present that data to you, um, as
we're sitting here in the coming
years.
The other thing we'd like to
integrate is site visits, again
offering uh in-person support to
our grantees, um, again, our
grantees are very excited at the
fact that we're accessible to
them, and I want to initiate
that in a in person kind of
venue moving forward.
The second goal, uh, ensure
grantees spend down funds
effectively, uh, they are doing
well. We're seeing requests for
reimbursements. I actually do
that work because I'm down a
fiscal person, and so, you know,
I'm learning so much and seeing
how our grantees are spending
their funds, but also I can see
the number of requests for
reimbursements that are being
submitted, something that we've
required recently, um, under the
direction of Secretary designate
Padilla is that our grantees are
submitting requests for
reimbursements monthly.
ly
And so I'm pretty Santo Domingo
sends their request for
reimbursements on the clock and
it's looking through those and
processing those so that I know
firsthand that they are working
on spending down their funds
because I'm approving those
requests. Uh, we also intend to
provide professional
development. A lot of our
published tribes and nations
specifically has have asked for
a building capacity within their
own departments related to the
fund.
And then of course, continuing
to offer guidance on how they
can spend their fun that's
awarded each fiscal year.
And the last thing I'm super
excited about. We, we've heard a
lot about how do we support our
grantees and understanding what
tribal consultation is, what are
the requirements and what
happens when we run into
roadblocks. And so one thing
that my team has initiated is a
case loading system, so me and
my team have broken down all of
our grantees into caseloads, and
so what has started happening is
me and at least one of my team
members, um.
are attending tribal
consultation hosted by the
district and not to run the
consultation to observe and
learn and identify what support
systems do we need. So we
recently attended tribal
consultation. Uh, we were
invited by Superintendent
Montano for Berna Leo Public
Schools, which actually was a
great starting point. Vio public
schools has many offer services
to the Pueblo San Felipe Santo
Domingo, um, they have many
students and it was a good way
for us to see how
those conversations were or were
not happening. Um, what
questions the district was
asking and how the pueblo was
responding and so again it was
our first um observation, but
moving into the next years, we,
we are going to be uh heavily
involved in ensuring that the
districts and charters and the
public tribes and nations are
being responsive to what's
required in the Indian Education
Act.
Uh, moving on to slide 9, so
we're going to transition to the
$50 million Indian education
funding proposal. And so, I
first want to acknowledge again
thinking and coming in with a
frame that there are so many
great things happening with the
awards that have been allocated
to publish tribes and nations
but also districts and charters,
and one thing that we're also
focusing on within the division
is tribal consultation, um, you
know.
the state meeting with Pueblo's
tribes and nations to gather
feedback and implement that
moving forward and so slide 9
with the um identifies a list of
ways that we have engaged in
conversations with tribal
leaders about the $50 million
funding proposal, and you'll see
quite a bit of conversations
have happened. The initial
conversation, um, has happened
years ago.
So, the $50 million proposal is
really a response to all the
feed that feedback we've heard
from tribal leaders across the
years. And so when we think
about tribal leaders who come in
sometimes one term at a time.
This conversation may not even
be related to the current.
Governor or president. It's
happened over 4 years, um, and
so again, super excited to be
behind this proposal, the
increased continued increased
funding for our published tribes
and nations, but also our
districts and charters. Again,
uh, we have the conversation
during our fall government to
government Indian education
summit that was held at Buffalo
Thunder, uh, where Governor
Lujan Grisham was there to hear
the feedback from Pueblo's
tribes and nations, and that one
is important to highlight
because tribal leaders at that
time.
Provided feedback that we then
took back and implemented in the
proposal.
We've also presented a couple of
times to the all public council
of Governors. We have met with
Navajo Nation President iggrants
specifically to talk about the
proposal we've met with
President Thora Walsh Padilla
from Muscalero Apache Nation, a
tribe, the only one we have not
met with is Hickoria. We've made
many attempts and we'll continue
making attempts to make sure
that we are giving them their
respect as well and talking
about the proposal individually.
Um, so moving on to page 10,
which is our last page of the
presentation. I want to
highlight the key features of
the Indian education funding
proposal. And so again, coming
from a space of remembering that
this is what public's tribes and
nations specifically have asked
for direct funding and so one of
the key features is that publish
tribes and nations will not be
required to apply for the
allocation, they will be awarded
the allocation.
at the beginning of each fiscal
year. Um, however, that will not
change for districts and
charters. Districts and charters
will still be required to apply
for their portion of the
funding. Um, however, the amount
doesn't fluctuate. We dedicate a
certain amount to Albuquerque
public schools. They apply for
that amount and it's awarded.
Um, so again, the application
process will not change for
districts and charters. It will,
however, adjust for published
tribes and nations.
The next bullet point, um, the
function of the funding will be
based on 120 day student data,
uh, reported in the previous
school year, which is very
common. We do that already use
the data that's provided to us
from districts and charters. We
are identifying students in the
Native American population only
those that identify as being
part of the 122 tribes or
nations. So we're not
encompassing.
anything other than those
students who are tied to one of
the 22 published tribes and
nations.
The next bullet point, uh,
funding will be recurring for a
minimum of 3 years, and so one
thing we know from our grantees
is that when we allow a longer
window and time frame for them
to spend their funding. They're
able to create long term goals.
They have longer time to spend
the funding and to plan that out
and be strategic about the way
they're implementing their
programming.
Moving on to the second column
of funding for public tribes and
nations will not be
reimbursement based, so
currently again they're
submitting requests for
reimbursements, this would not
be that.
Also, unspent funding whatever's
remaining at the end of the
fiscal year will not revert back
to the division, and will remain
with published tribes and
nations again to carry out their
long-term goals and objectives.
Increase funding will be
provided to students with
special needs, so a function of
the funding right now and how
we've populated the numbers.
We've also, we've identified
students who have individualized
education plans, those students
will receive increased funding,
um, to for public tribes and
nation specifically, so if a
student has an IEP, the public
hibernation will receive
increased funding for that
student to carry out and provide
the services that they need.
Next bullet point, um, something
that we've also heard in
conversations with tribal
leaders is how do we support BIE
tribally controlled schools. And
so this will be a function and
key feature of the proposal as
well, a smaller proportion, uh,
to become a little bit familiar
with the process and see how
successful we are is going to be
allocated to BIE tribal
controlled schools, um, a
conversation that I know you
have all heard is, uh, the
deficit or or the salary
supplemental we need in those
uh.
BIE tribally controlled schools,
they're not getting paid as well
as we would like them to be paid
and so some of the funding could
be used for that. And then
again, um, our districts and
charters under the $50 million
proposal. It was important to us
that they didn't decrease in
funding. Everyone across the
board will see increased
funding, including our districts
and charters.
And so again, super happy to
talk about the proposal based on
uh feedback from tribal leaders,
um, it's exciting and and really
well needed funding that we
continue to need to see within
our public tribes and nations as
well, as I mentioned in our
districts and charters across
the state, Indian education
division supplementing about uh
supporting about 40 of those
districts in charters across the
state.
Um, and with that, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, I will
stand for questions.
Thank you very much. Appreciate
it. I have on the list, uh,
she's over talking, so let me
move to Representative Garrett.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Assistant Secretary Wana Cohen.
I want to thank you for starting
with your introduction in your
native language, because we're
talking about culturally and
linguistically responsive.
Uh, life in our state and having
state employees, members of the
state legislature and others who
speak before us.
Bring their language shows that
it's a living reality and so
thank you and to everybody else
that does that.
Um, just two questions. Um,
I was not able to go to the
tribal, the government to
government consultations this
year because they overlapped
with committee meetings. But
last summer, um, some of the
governors brought up the fact
that in the in the Indian.
Education Act, there's a certain
point where you have to bring in
the tribes, pueblos and nations
for consultation. They felt that
that was too late in the
process, as in has that, is that
getting addressed so that
there's earlier consultation,
rather, it was like step 9 or
15, that's, that's just off the
top of my head. That's not what
it is. But is that being
addressed. Um, so, um, Mr. Chair
and uh members of the committee,
um, thank you so much
Representative Garrett for.
The question, um, so if you're
speaking directly to government
to government summits, and when
we host those, um, definitely we
as a team with the governor's
office always debrief on the
feedback that's provided at at
the summits on the timing, you
know, is based on what's
happening in the year we take
into account the feast days that
are happening, any cultural
events that we know for sure are
happening and then there are
some set some events, cultural
events that, um, like my own
Pueblo, we, we wouldn't know if
they were happening. They tell
you the night before.
And so we first consider those
dates, um, in working with
public tribes and nations, um.
I don't know if they're
happening sooner. They're
usually around the the same
month or time if we think about
the upcoming uh summit that we
we are going to be planning for.
We have to navigate the session.
And so again, it's really hard
to navigate again, what's too
early, what's too late. If
you're referring to tribal
consultation with districts and
charters, um, the goal that I
spoke to is going to help that.
And so one thing referenced in
the act and I applaud you for
knowing that, um, is that.
Anytime that districts and
charters are thinking about
making adjustments to
curriculum, anything that
affects native students, they
should be engaging in tribal
consultation before those
changes happen and so one thing
we're doing in our division, um,
and I hope to release in the
upcoming year when we see new
tribal leaders in their
positions is identifying and
training them.
About the act. When is it
required? Those are some of the
questions we're having. Um,
Pueblo's tribes and nations want
to know when is the district and
charter supposed to acknowledge
us and the district and charter
are asking the same thing. When
am I supposed to let them know.
And so again we're we are
launching those steps and so I,
I know it's a roundabout answer
and it's not specific, but, but
I couldn't speak to whether or
not it's happening earlier.
Um, Mr. Chain, Assistant
secretary, no, it, it's your
obviously very cognizant that
it's an ongoing process. It's
just not on July 21st and
December 14th or something. And
then my other question is, I
understand that we now say
there's 23 tribes nations and
pueblos because of Port Sill,
um, am I correct in
understanding that, because
that's what I use and it's 22
here. It's, it's not a small
point because we want to make
sure everybody's acknowledged.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Representative
You're, you're correct. 22 of
the published tribes and nations
are eligible due to their
student numbers. Fort Sill and
communication with the
governor's office as well,
looking at the data for sales
students are not so much the
majority are not located in New
Mexico.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative.
Representative Lujan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for the presentation. um.
Um.
And I'll just prefaces. I, I
went to Native American school
here in Santa Fe, um, and SFIS
is in my district.
Um, and I have, I still have a
cousin there actually, um.
I just want to say, um, I, as
we're looking at the funding,
uh, part of this, uh, you
mentioned Capital Laly, in your
presentation, this is just what
we did in 2024, 2025. Is that
correct, Mr. Chair?
Not what we're moving forward
for the the the this budget.
Mr.
Chair, um, members of the
committee and Representative
Lujan, um, yes, this is current.
Currently, what we're
functioning, this is not moving
forward. This is currently in
our account. What I'm
responsible for as a division
leader currently. I just wanted
to get that because uh, um.
I'm an HAFC member and I've been
attending our LFC, uh, meetings,
uh, most of them this year, and,
and I just noticed that there
are some
You know, the, the requests that
are in for um for this next
session. So thank you for that
clarification. Um, next, I, um,
How Mr. Chair, and I'm just
wondering, as we are, we are
working and to have better
communication and and and
working relationships with our
tribes hallucinations.
Has there been any kind of
education for us, uh, in
reference to how their budget
processes, um, done, Mister
Chair.
Um, Mr. Chair and Representative
Lujan, um, if I can clarify the
question is related to the
finance process within the Pablo
tribe nation. Yes, Mr. Chair.
Um, so Mr. Chair represent
Luhan, um.
If I'm speaking honestly, I, I
know firsthand from being a
director, uh, for the Pueblo San
Felipe, for the Pueblo of Acama,
for the public of Owinge, how
they generally function um and
and and that's my own knowledge,
uh, which I feel like and to do
my own harm makes me super
excited to be in this position
cause I can navigate that,
right? What did I feel like as a
director and how can I support
them in my current position, but
in understanding that at the
state level, we have not. We, we
don't have any knowledge.
but that definitely I can write
that down as professional
development because you know,
um, in meeting with uh Navajo
Nation, right? The process looks
very different from the Pueblos
tribes and nations, and how do
we support their process and not
create extra roadblocks, um,
that may not be apparent for
public tribes and nations, so
again, um, thank you for the
idea. Thank you. I think it's
really important for us to get
an understanding even how they
they probably don't even work on
the same physical.
um, calendar as we do, um, and
each is individual and has, you
know, they, they're probably,
um, probably some similarities,
I would say in time wise, but I
would like to know that, you
know, have more information for
us.
As appropriators maybe LFC or
here LESC as well, um, members
to understand these processes so
that we are being more fiscally
responsible and responsive, and
there's not a lot of
duplication, right, because we,
we don't know what.
You know exactly what they're
going through and and where
they're budgeting their money,
some pueblos and tribes and
nations have more money due to,
you know, different factors of,
of their um their their uh
revenue support, but uh I, I
think that would be really
interesting and fascinating and
for us to really get into uh a
better communication and
handling of how these uh uh
monies are being um spent in in
in in how we can do a better job
with that. My next question is,
are we, are you anticipating
reversion of of funding, I know
we got uh.
What does it say? We got a
reauthorization for the tribal
and rural community-based
extended learning grant.
But anywhere else are we going
to see reversions of any of the
funding that we've we've given
out for this last fiscal year,
Mr. Chair. So Mr. Chair and
Representative Luhan at this
time, I would not be able to
say. I think after my next
quarterly check-ins, which the
team will be doing, we'll have a
better reference of that. Um,
but currently, as I mentioned,
they are doing well at spending
down, um, I think the
conversation of how important it
is related to continuing to ask
for funding is really affected
by how they're spending
currently, and I think that's
helping, um, representative.
And I also wanted to mention
that um in regard to the fiscal
responsiveness and
responsibility, uh, tribal
leaders have also.
For a.
For a different approach, um, as
well, they too are asking how
does the state award affect us
and where do we sit in a big
picture of the $20 million and
um I, you know, piloted a
presentation to Governor uh
Maddalena from Hamus in that
way, coming down from the 20
million, where is the pueblo of
Hami and he acknowledged that
this is a huge eye opener in
that.
The state is really supporting
the Pueblo of Jemes in
understanding the bigger
concept. So again, back to your,
um, third question. I can have
the numbers after our quarterly
check-in, but now we're seeing
again, we're seeing healthy
spending happening across the
board. Yeah, and and that's just
how we, you know, we have a
physical, uh, spending budget,
and I'm sorry I'm taking a
little more time, but I wanted
to, uh, also ask on the IEP, um,
uh, allocation you're asking
for. Um, can you maybe walk, uh,
and if you can't
it now, maybe walk me through
that too are the students
getting the title one or other
federal funding as well of the,
you know, they qualify through
the schools. And then I mean, I
appreciate that you, you want to
give um additional funding if if
they are under an IEP or have
special needs. Can you just give
me some more information, Mr.
uh, so Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Lu Han, so my
understanding is, yes, through
the district and charter. Yes,
you're correct, not directly to
the published tribes and
nations, and so again, one of
the.
Key features under uh Governor
Lou Hong Grisham's
administration and this proposal
is acknowledging that deficit
and so under the current
function, we would be allocating
2 times more for the students
with the IEPs at for their
funding to be awarded directly
to the published tribes and
nations. That is not a function
for districts and charters
because of the first scenario
that you already gave, they are
already receiving funding for
those students. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, I, I really do, I think I
have more questions, but I'll
talk with you later.
This is, this is good
information. I think moving
forward you'd like to have more.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
head.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Secretary, uh, for, for your
report. I'm curious how many
students did you have, uh, last
year at the 120, you're basing
this funding on enrollment.
120 days after the, after, you
know.
For the count. So how many
students do you have, uh,
statewide. Mr. Chair, um, and
Representative Herrera, we had
around 36,000 Native American
students.
And what is our total student
population, uh, this question
isn't for you. I'm gonna ask
Johnson, what is our total
student population, uh.
Mr. Chair Representative, it's
about $300,000. That's what I
thought.
So yeah, so we're talking about
11%, right, of the population. I
just wanted to know, I, I
happened to sit on a board of a
local library and I when I see
that we have 20 million to
really um design plan,
construct, renovate, furnish,
and equip tribal libraries
statewide, and especially for
the communities or the pueblos
of heme, Santa Clara, Santo
Domingo, and the Mescalero
Apache Nation. So is this money
just for
Building the libraries.
Uh
Mr. Chair and Representative
Jareta uh your.
It's for planned design,
equipping and constructing and
so, um, I also want to point out
that the slide there may
identify specific um pueblos in
the language, however, I can
guarantee that more of them were
awarded and not just those that
were identified. We did ensure
that those were that were
identified in the language were
awarded, but we also
incorporate it more that applied
for the funding, but
specifically.
plan design, equip and
construct. And can I ask you
what is your, what are the
operating budgets and who picks
up the tab for the operating
budgets of these tribal
libraries, who picks up Mr.
Chair and Representative
Herrera, um.
I'm not sure I understand the
question. Uh, who pays the
operating once the library is
built, it's built, but then you
have to pay it it's just an
empty building unless you have
staff in there, unless you have
an operating budget, you don't
have a library. I, I run a, I,
I'm a treasure of our local
library represent aerrera, thank
you for clarifying the published
tribes and nations would be
responsible for the operational
costs. And do you know how much
they're putting into that on a
yearly basis?
Mr. Chair, Representative Penne,
I would not know, um, the answer
to that for sure. I do know
again that um a lot of our
funding, um, awarded through
Indian education if we think
about operating operational
costs, the Pueblo tribes and
nations do use our funding to
support salaries. A majority of
the funding is spent to support
salaries within the tribal
education department's tribal
library, so we cover some of
those costs, but, uh, the entire
team know, and again, I would
not know the total cost that you
have asked.
I, I can just tell you, Mr.
Chair, for a little local
library and this is one in
Dixon, and we do about
1000 visits a month it's kind of
incredible, um.
That operating budget is about
274,000 a year, and that, you
know, we have like 5 really
part-time staff. So it, it's
hard to keep these little
libraries going, and they also
get money from the uh the, the
rural library Endowment Fund,
which is uh which is going to
come in when that fund is
totally funded, and hopefully 50
million all a local rural
libraries and uh uh Native
American uh libraries will get.
Uh, probably 50,000 a year,
Jasper operating costs, and that
will be supplemented by local
fundraising. So I just
I just wanted to ask about that,
and I
And we have 50 million coming
in, uh, that's the new
appropriation, the, the funding
proposal for 50 million.
Uh, and that money will go out
automatically, uh, people don't
have to apply for that.
Right? Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative had a
specifically to publish tribes
and nations, no, they would not
apply. Um, that does not change,
uh, for districts and charters,
districts and charters will be
allocated so they can plan. Uh,
this is normally what happens
each fiscal year. We we budget a
certain amount right to go to
publish tribes and nations a
certain amount to go to
districts and charters. We then
provide their allocated amount
that they know they can plan on
for the next year. They apply
and they.
reward it. So, uh, specifically
published tribes and nations
under the proposal no, would not
be required to apply districts
and charters, yes, will be
required to apply. And Mr.
Chair, I'm just, I'm just
curious about that because I
want to know how much actually
goes the school district gets
bilingual education funding, and
they get Title One funding from
the feds for for uh any uh dual
language students. So how much
money I, I'm just curious, does
a, do you
Expect and, and maybe you can't
answer this, but we do have a
superintendent on, on the panel
here. I'm, I'm curious how much
you get from uh you anticipate
from um applying for it and
getting funding, in addition to
your bilingual ed funding and
your Title One funding. I, if I
may, Mr. Chair, direct that to
um um Representative Baca also
superintendent Baca.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you, Representative,
I believe it's also under the,
is it Title 4 funding as far as
for the Indian total 3.
OK, thank you, Sonny. Title 3,
and I, I, I believe, uh, Mr.
Chairman, it's also, is it on a
um
As far as a per pupil as far as
racial or the district, right,
so districts that serve more. I,
I don't know, uh, Mr. Chairman.
And uh Represented Harea. What
is the actual
Amount per student that we
serve, do you have that?
Or no, as far as
Um, that the district gets.
Under Title 3?
OK, so, um
So, you know, as I do, I do, I
do that we do based upon this, a
district will receive the
students or uh allocation for
the number of students that they
serve from um from the tribals,
uh, communities, and it varies
for every district on top, I can
actually figure out what we're
getting, but I do know that it's
Uh, it is on a a per pupil
basis.
Mr. Chair, does anybody know
kind of the range or or how, how
much that totals would would
Sonny know that?
He's looking
old, we all go to say thank you
secretary. I'm sorry. I, I, I'm
just trying to get, I'm just
trying to get a handle on how
much is going to every student
in um to every Native American
student. We combining all the
fun Chair Representative, so
one, I think it would probably
require a little bit more work
than just looking at Title III.
So remember that
I get a lot of fun if you could
if you could give us a little
bit of time to to look at.
Because this doesn't include
impact aid, for instance,
there's right, there's a lot of
other issues that are going to
go beyond. And some of it may be
on a per pupil basis, and some
of it may not be, uh, if
they're, if they're block grants
and so.
If you give us a little bit of
time, we can work through some
of these, these things cause
there's multiple, Mr. Chair, oh,
I'm looking at the tribal
education status report from 20.
22.
Um, and the grand total from
Johnson O'Malley.
Navajo Nation, Indian Education,
formula grants, Indian Education
Act, impact A.
It is about 4.3 million and it
seems like in some cases it
might be on a per student basis,
but in other cases it might be a
block grant. So it's
This is just what was reported
through the PED report. I know
that the
Appropriations for impact date
and other sort of.
Um, appropriation team and for
in education are a lot higher
than that, but this is just
what's being reported as
operating budget estimates for
these tribes, Pueblos and school
districts and charter schools.
Um, Sonny, thank you for that
information. What I'm, what I'm
trying to get back at what I'm
trying to get at here and you
know, I, this probably isn't a
popular opinion, but I'm just
gonna say it anyhow, um.
I think we've done a lot to
dress Yazi.
I don't think we've done an
equal amount to address
Martinez.
And 70% of our kids
Are
Hispanic in all of our school
districts, and I, I am worried
about equity in our educational
formulas. So, so, um,
When uh Pueblo and um.
Native American communities, I
understand why we have to
support this, but I'm getting a
little worried that we're
getting too one-sided from,
from, from, from the
legislature. I'm, I, I
understand.
I understand and I talked to
Pueblos years ago when I was
directing a foundation, I said,
well, if I were you, I'd just
start my own schools because,
you know, this was like 20 years
ago, couldn't be any worse. And
I, I get why we have to pour
money into this, but I also, I'm
also worried about the inequity
here.
Or, um, uh, for our, for, uh.
Really, for other populations
that are really suffering, and,
and just, and just as much in
many cases. So that, that's, I
guess it's an opinion, um, I'm
gonna look at this. I'm gonna
try and get better numbers so
that I can see what we're doing
as far as uh as far as you know,
rectifying Yazi, but also what
are we doing for Martinez?
That's, that's what I want to
know. And are we
Are we doing the same amount?
And when I see 80 million now,
plus another 50 million and I
see 2.5 for the Hispanic, 2.5
million.
As opposed to 130 million for
the Hispanic, uh, act, you know,
education act. I get a little
concerned.
So I guess that's an opinion and
I'll look at those numbers and
do a deeper dive, and, and see
how we can kind of equalize the
formulas for this uh state.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Raymon Caballero.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
When about Mister chair, I
think, uh, representative Baus
has the floor.
Uh, no, I don't think I ever
rep.
You know, that was a transfer we
can get back to you and I'll put
you on the list. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And um thank you secretary for
uh excellent um presentation.
I, I wanted to, um,
Just highlight a couple of
things, and then ask a few
questions. Um,
I want us to first and foremost
recognize the the sovereignty,
tribal sovereignty here. That's
extremely important because as
we delve in and ask questions,
we have to always do so in
acknowledgement of
Not crossing into.
Um, or
Violating um tribal sovereignty
when we talk about consultation,
consultation means just that,
but honoring the parameters of
that consultation. So for me,
that's an extremely important
point to always um
Begin with when we're talking,
uh, when we're receiving your
reports. And so I wanted to lay
that out.
And then the other um
One of the questions I had has
to do with, again, consultation,
but
Yeah, I, I'm curious as to
whether our local education.
Agencies, school boards, um,
have reached out to your office
and perhaps invited
presentations.
By you, um, especially in those,
for example, in Albuquerque
public schools, which has a big
pocket of Native American
children.
And I'm wondering if they've
made an effort to invite you to
make presentations before them.
So Mr. Sha members of the
committee, um, so thank you for
the acknowledgement of tribal
sovereignty when I think about
the proposal and the key
features, um, I, I think also
acknowledges that no application
process, right? Um,
understanding that the community
members are the experts to teach
their own students. So um thank
you for acknowledging that, um,
so to answer your question
specifically, um, I could not
speak to the request on behalf
of school boards from my
division, uh, specifically, I do
know.
that the districts and charters
are now yearning for more and
we're at the onset of them
asking us to come and teach them
about tribal consultation and so
one of our goals into the next
fiscal year is to uh really uh
dive into a guide, um, but also
acknowledging sovereignty,
right? It's a balance beam of
what can the state provide
guidance on and how do we
capture the voices of the
Pueblos tribes and nations
before we even release anything
to districts and charters, and
so again us observing.
tribal consultation is helping
that process. Um, I do know that
Secretary designate Padilla did
speak to the school board
association a couple of weeks
ago and also spoke about tribal
consultation and the importance
of that and that it needs to be
happening and so again I I I'm
excited along with Secretary
designate Pad understanding that
this is now where we can focus
on, um, because they're asking
for it, um, and just the walk
over here, we were talking
about, you know, the upcoming
regalia Bill. How are we
proactive in getting that
information out.
2 school boards, and not only
district leaders, um, with doing
the day to day work, so we're at
the onset is the best answer I
can give you right now.
Thank you. And that that's
really important for us to be
able to um address uh at our
local level as well, so that we
can make sure that we're
honoring um
All of our work in that and
Protecting tribal sovereignty
and addressing it.
Um, the other
This is a request and it's been
made of me, and I don't know
where to go for this, um.
Our schools more and more,
especially I, I know my dressing
Albuquerque Public schools in
particular, as well as Las
Cruces, where I come from.
Um, are very, um, would like to
begin to introduce our children
to doing land acknowledgements.
And in order to do those land
acknowledgements, we come from
different tribes, nations, and
pueblos, and so is there a way
that your office could look at
perhaps present uh providing
land acknowledgment statements
pertinent to our particular
tribal, um, communities that are
represented in these districts,
and that would be a really
important. That came up as part
of a discussion with uh around
ethnic studies, and as many of
you know.
Uh, I'm in the Chicano Chicano
studies program, but I'm also in
the Native American studies
program at UNM and have been um
graduate studies, and so this is
an important um
Component of us taking what
we're doing into the uh high
schools, middle schools, and
elementary schools, and it also
it lines Mr. Chair, with our
languageccess Act, because it
begins to get us familiar.
Um, with speaking our language,
but not just familiar. It begins
to get us comfortable because a
lot of times our children are,
um,
Finding themselves.
Not comfortable in speaking
their languages, once they
Immerse into our school
districts, and this is another
way that we can provide.
That sense of belonging, because
if any student belongs in our
schools, it is our native
children.
And that's important, and we
need to provide that for our
children. So I appreciate
whatever you can do in that, in
that area. And finally, um,
I want it to um,
Just
commend you, um.
For uh particularly on page 5.
And, and then, um, your final,
uh,
Page, which is even more
impactful. Number 10, page 10.
Because I know that for a long
time we've been discussing an
Indian Affairs Committee.
And then other committees, we've
been talking about not being
reimbursement based.
Um, not reverting.
Uh, and addressing special
needs, but special needs being
the whole child.
In our case, with our native
children, we have to address
special needs.
In the whole of our child.
It's not just
The, uh, particularly if they
have developmental disabilities
or other types of needs. It has
to be put into that full
component, because we're dealing
in, and, and we're inviting
children that come from
generations of um
Terrible experiences, um.
Just by mere fact of who we are
and our histories in this state
and in this region. So I think
it's, it's um
Uh, commendable that this
finding got written in.
And it's going to be um
Addressed. And so that was that
and I final note, um, I know
that I also am involved, I'm one
of those individuals that I'm
proud to be native.
Indigenous
And have a strong Hispanic um
background, um.
On my mother's side and my
native background is my father's
side.
Um, that makes me
Special
Uh, in my world.
But it also makes me uh
enlightened to
The notions that we do have a
black education Act.
We have an Hispanic Education
Act.
Today we
Addressing Indian education Act
and all that has to do with
Indian education. And I think
that we as a committee, we as a
body, um, need to entertain.
And request, uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
reports such as this.
From whomever in our PED is
working in those two areas,
black education and Hispanic
education, because it's
important to receive how we are,
um, working within those
communities and the getting the
reports and um addresses.
Perhaps any particular questions
that either the legislative body
or various committees may have
in reference to how we are
distributing uh our resources.
I, I
Very much, um, do not want to,
Mr. Chair.
Get us involved in a discussion.
In this arena of black
education, Hispanic education,
and Indian education.
In the terms of equitability.
And I, it's, it's, it doesn't,
in my view, apply, but it does,
we do have a responsibility at
the PED to offer those reports
to us so that we can then see
next chart out how we're doing,
how we're responding in our
responsibilities in the Yazi
Martinez, which we're gonna get
a report on, um, next, but
that's really important because
the equity question has to do
with the bigger uh uh.
A bigger social economic,
educational arena than what we
can do here. So that was, I see
you're coming forward if you'd
like to, if it's OK, Mr. Chair,
um, address, and then that was
my final point. Thank you.
Mr. Chair Representative Robo
Copa, I just wanted to address
that.
Point, your last point. Um,
I agree with you. I've had um
recent conversations with um the
Hispanic Education Act advisory
council and have really talked
about how do we make sure that
they're much more engaged this
topic with the legislature,
particularly in the interim, I
think we have a great
opportunity to talk about those
acts, what we're doing under
those acts, and to have
conversations around funding as
well, so I very much.
welcome that, not just in the
way of a report, but an ongoing
conversation about um what is in
these acts, and these acts are
very different than the Indian
Education Act. They're very
specific provisions in the
Indian Education Act that do not
exist in the other acts. So
talking about what is it that
we're doing under those acts,
um, and again, really having
those funding conversations
early on, I think are really
important, and I know those
advisory councils, um, are very
interested in.
ga g ing with the legislature.
Thank you. Thank you both. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Baca.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for your presentation.
Uh, need clarification, page 6.
Um, you talk about the 5:20 uh
certifications and the need to
supplement 25,000 to the
salaries. Can you explain that
real quick?
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, representative
Walker, yes, um, so 25,000 is to
supplement, of course, whatever
salary the district charter
public ribernation has decided
to pay them out, right? So we're
not fully funding the entire
salary again, only supplementing
the portion. I understand that
it's up to the district or
charter to determine uh how much
they are paying those
individuals, of course,
following the level 1, level 2,
certification licensure process,
right?
everyone starting out with a
level 1 520 is equal to that, so
should be starting out at a
minimum of $50,000. Again, a
portion of our fund is used to
supplement those salaries.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman,
and, you know, this may be a
question because
I believe that.
When we, we, we address that, I
think a couple of years ago, but
Was it also based on how many
classes or how many students
they were teaching, right? Cause
that's what we're talking about
level 12, and 3, that they were
started at the whatever that was
50,000, and then based upon the
number of classes or sections
was that how it was based, Mr.
Chairman?
Mr. Chair Representative Baca,
so the, the statutory provision
around 520 certificates only
indicates that they have to have
a minimum of 50,000 or a of the
equal to a level one teacher.
There's, there are no other
provisions about salary or how
they progressed through the
system or any of those things
specifically related to those
licenses.
And we can come back, Mr.
Chairman and thank you, John,
for that. I just was wondering
it's like, I thought we were,
that this is already occurring.
I didn't see the need why we
were having to.
Supplement, but I'll, I'll move
on with that. Uh, Mr. Chairman,
and, uh,
Me of secretary.
You earlier brought up about
funding additional funding for
special education services paid
directly to the tribes.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, where are
those services taking place?
Mr. Chair and Representative
Baca, the services will be
taking place within the
published tribes or nations or
within the district or charter,
and so the one of the other key
features and acknowledging
sovereignty is that when the
Pueblo tribes and nations are
allocated the funding, they can
then decide how that funding is
being spent, they could offer
contract services to support
students that are already in the
district, um, they can contract
people to help the student
before after school within the
Pueblo tribe or nation.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, as it's been clearly
that I have 20 years of special
education experience. So I guess
my, my question is,
The coordination of services and
if the
Information and the hours of
services are dictated in the
IEP.
Are, are these gonna be counted
towards? So if I'm a district,
um, am I gonna be able to count
those hours towards my service
provided. I, are we gonna have
somebody from the tribe, um, or
Pueblo, attend those item uh
IEPs so we can coordinate that.
And then how will we be
capturing that or making note of
it, because I do believe that
that was a statewide IEP system.
I'm looking at the Madam
Secretary there, so I, I, I
guess I just needed to
understand how it all fits
together, because
As was brought up earlier, we
are receiving money through the
federal government, through
IDEA, through all these other
funds here.
Um, I recognize the fact that
some funds will be paid through
the district, but then
I just want to know is how that
works with the IEP, I mean, as
far as, are they going to be
captured in the IEP, um, and
then we'll reports.
They they'll have to be
communication between that.
To make sure that we don't have
an overlapping of services or
that were in compliance with all
the requirements under IDEA
because that is, that's a
federal requirement.
Mr. Chair Representative Baca,
this would be in addition to
what um the LEAs are providing
under an IEP, so this would not
be integrated into an existing
IEP that would happen in again,
a charter school or um district
within New Mexico. Um, I will
just say that.
We have heard over again many
years from our tribal leaders,
um, about the scarcity of
supports for students with
disabilities, particularly in
rural communities, which, of
course, the vast majority of our
um tribes, pebbles and nations
are in more rural areas of the
state, and so this is an
acknowledgement that um there's
additional funding needed to
support those students, um, in
their academics and something
that.
Assistant secretary. I'm not
sure if she mentioned, um, you
know, we've talked about no, no
grant application, but there
will be very specific guidance
in terms of how the funding is
to be spent, and so the funding
is to be spent on improving um
educational outcomes of our
Native American students, there
will be um discussions about how
the funding is spent is intended
to be spent and then an ongoing
sort of.
Um
Um, reporting as assistant
secretary Juanico explained to
make sure that the funding is
being spent in a particular way,
um, so I just wanted to, to add
that additional information.
And, and take, we'll probably
have to, um.
Go offline. I don't wanna say
because one of the things Mr.
Chairman, as I see
Added responsibility for
communication between and
coordination between the
district and the tribe.
Right? When we're talking about
Services and we're talking about
that the tribe will then provide
services, or they also do
evaluation that's gonna be
shared with the public school.
Uh, I, I think those are the
types of things that we need to
consider. The same thing like uh
Mr. Chairman, when we're looking
at Bernalillo, which I believe
serves 7 tribes, I think,
probably.
That's gonna be the are are
there gonna be some type of
agreement that's gonna be have
to be done with each individual
tribe.
What will be the guidelines for
those agreements, and then for
reporting, if we have and we
talked about funds being paid
directly to the tribe, will that
be reported directly to PED?
Will it flow through the
district, and what if there's an
issue or concern with some of
the funding and or spending.
Of that. I think those are,
those are things that I think we
need to probably
Clarify and understand because
if I'm that ern district and
I've got to make 7 different
agreements and talk about how
we're going to coordinate and
how we're going to provide
services here and how we're
going to be fiscally managing
the money.
And how all of this is going to
be reported to the state.
It seems like it's gonna take a
A huge commitment on everybody's
part. So I wanted to hide that
um
Mr. Chairman and uh I think I'll
give my time. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Representative Garrett for the
2nd time.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, this
is kind of a point from my dear
friend, Representatives.
I, I think that
We have 200 years.
Tribal.
Culture and language.
That we're catching up on.
And so, um, I do believe it's
not a question, it is equitable
to have a large fund serving our
tribes, nations, and pueblos.
When I was, I sorry to repeat
something I've said before, when
I was 13, I was at Nazlini
School for 2 weeks.
When the matron would wash the
mouths out of soap, but I know
we have Spanish speaking
students that have that same
thing, but
We have a a moment an
opportunity now that if we don't
claim it for language and
cultural restoration, it will be
lost, and when we see the
statistics on Native American
poverty and language loss, we
know that the elders of those
nations that are the carriers of
that culture are only gonna be
with us for a short time. So I
feel that
Down the road, the money might
be different, but we have to
capture this cultural.
And language.
Opportunity because it's only
it's now, it's now or never. So
I, I feel like it's not an
inequitable amount. I just
wanted to say that. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative. Uh,
my only comment, it was a little
bit picking up on what uh
Representative Garrett is. We do
have 23 Pueblo's nations. It's
important that we put that in
and put an asterisk if for i
only has, you know, they're,
they're not included because
they only have 15 enrolled
members, it's something like
that last I heard, but it's
important that they are always
acknowledged because, you know,
there's uh some pushes to
decertify them and other things,
and when they're left off the
list that tends to help that
narrative.
that there are only 22 and that
they're not real when in fact
they very much are so just.
I know you didn't do it
intentionally or anything like
that, but, you know, just, and
again, with a little asterisk
that because of their small
numbers and again, I don't know
exactly what it is. They do have
some, uh, they're kind of
scattered across a couple of
different districts, but they
are actively working on trying
to increase their footprint and
number of people, it's a little
chicken of an and an egg, you
can't come back if there's
nothing for him to do, but you
got to have them here in order
to start building community and,
and businesses and other things.
So that's thank you so very
much, very much.
She
The hard work, um, and continue
to, to want to see good things
happening out in the communities
with this money to support
students broadly and generally
towards better lives and better
situations. So thank you.
Thank you.
You may want to stay there cause
I think yeah.
This, this next piece is the uh
pet response to the Martinez
Yazi lawsuit, so.
Stay nearby, please, if you're
able to and we appreciate having
you here in our meetings. You
are always welcome.
So John, whenever you're ready
then.
All right, Mr. Chair, uh, you'll
find a
Brief, brief, uh, behind tab 12.
So I'm gonna just real, real
quick recap. Uh, you probably
remember we talked a little bit
about the original motion that
the plaintiffs filed in
September in the uh Martinez
Siazi Consolidated lawsuit, uh,
that motion essentially talked
about um.
The plaintiff's view that the
state, and namely the PED had
still not made enough progress
in remedying the case itself,
but specifically calling out the
need for a remedial action plan,
um, that motion from the
plaintiffs um called for LESC
and LESC staff.
To lead the coordination and
development of that remedial
action plan.
And so today I'm gonna talk a
little bit about the pet
response to that, to that
motion.
Um, the biggest, I think the key
takeaway here for the
For the PE's response is that it
doesn't oppose the plaintiff's
request in their motion, um,
In creating a plan toward
compliance, but it does oppose
the plaintiff's request in their
motion that this plan be mainly
authored by the LESC.
Um, I also wanted to talk a
little bit about the PED in the
response to the to the motion.
Did, did provide some rebuttals
uh to some of the arguments for
why the plan or why LESC and
staff should be um involved in
this process.
The the
Argued that the request was
based on dated information or
unsupported allegations, and
that uh actually the context
isn't what the plaintiffs are
arguing. It's not that the, as
the plaintiff suggests, one
where PED has ignored the
court's orders, made no efforts
to improve educational inputs
and outputs for at-risk students
or otherwise demonstrated a
complete inability or
unwillingness to provide a
constitutionally adequate public
education system.
So Py's response provides, like
I said, uh, some arguments
against some of the, the claims
that the um plaintiffs made in
their motion in September. I'm
actually not gonna talk too much
about the back and forth between
what the plaintiffs claim is or
is not happening and how PEDs
responding to whether or not
those things are true, that's uh
um a matter for the court,
obviously to decide. I'm gonna
talk a little bit about um
How you all and we as staff um
are sort of involved in this and
and PE response specifically to
um our involvement.
So again, PED's response notes
the department acknowledge its
acknowledges its primary role in
New Mexico's education system.
And while the department quote
cannot accomplish this task
alone, PD and its professionals
are in the best position to take
the lead in developing a
remedial action plan.
He is respectful of the
expertise and insight of the
LESC and would not oppose the
LESC playing a role in
development of a plan.
So
Right, that's the, that's the
takeaway here is that um PED
feels like it should be.
The um primary developer of the
plan.
That you all and we as staff um
could be involved in that
process but shouldn't be leading
that process. I do want to
mention, uh, you know, the, the
latest news that came out of PED
yesterday, which is PD has, has
just published uh uh revised or
updated version of its strategic
plan and so um that's not
something we've had a chance to
take out, take a very close look
at. It's not, it's not in this
uh brief, but I thought I'd
mention it anyway. It does
include
5,
Overarching goals, if you will.
To accelerate literacy
achievement, accelerate
mathematics achievement, improve
student attendance, increased
graduation rates and foster
shared accountability. We can do
a, a, a much deeper review of
that strategic plan and get back
to you with more information if
you'd like.
And maybe the uh the secretary
can speak to that if she wants
to or if you have questions
about it.
This big section in the uh on
the second page here is actually
sort of getting at some of those
arguments without getting into
the specifics. It has, has a
little bit to do with
Um, a question that a lot of you
have brought up before is what
are we actually aiming at?
Um, in the plaintiffs, uh,
motion in September, they
focused on the fact that
Some of the metrics, academic
metrics that we've been looking
at have not shown uh a lot of
positive growth or as much
growth as people would like to
have seen, um, in the response
PD actually argues that the
court really focused on inputs
to the system. If you go back to
Martinez, the original findings
of fact and conclusion of law in
that case.
The argument is that outputs are
insufficient because inputs are
insufficient.
And so, as the state.
Provides more funding, increases
programming, those inputs are
getting better and PD argues
that those inputs are actually
should be the the metric that
we're looking at, not
necessarily the outcomes, right?
And again, I'm not gonna get
into whether or not someone's
right or wrong here, that's not
my job. I just, we just felt
that it was important that you,
um, hear that.
Argument, um, and then the last
section here is, is to talk
about the timeline.
Um, PED points out that the
timeline called for in the
plaintiff's motion in September
seems uh not feasible given the
how busy the legislative session
is. Obviously, the court has
still not scheduled a hearing.
Uh, we expect a response.
To the response from the
plaintiffs, and so when that
happens, we might know more
about uh whether or not the
court will schedule a hearing
anytime soon, and whether or not
um we'd get more direction from
the court as to the, the
timeline after it's all been
heard.
I want to make sure I'm not
forgetting something here, but I
think that's uh a high level.
One last thing I should say is
nowhere in their response does
PED or the state argue that they
have complied with the courts.
findings in the original
Martinez Yazi ruling.
Their response does not say
we've done it, we don't want to
be a part of this anymore, only
that they should be uh leading
the development of the plan that
was called for by the plaintiffs
in their September motion.
And so with that, Mr. Chair, um,
we did not, again, bring you a
full copy this, the PED's
response was a little shorter
than the plaintiff's 200-page
motion in September, um,
As soon as the court makes a
ruling, and there are actual um
ruling that you all will know
about. We will definitely share
those court documents until
until then we, we felt it was
better to give you the high
level, but we're happy to point
you to those, uh, motions if
you'd like.
Thank you, John. You are very
much appreciated and always gets
frustrating when the, the
lawyers get involved in
everything is things tend to
slow down a lot of times instead
of actually making progress
towards things. Questions from
the committee.
Representative Hunt
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I, I
really appreciate this
information piece. This is.
I think um
You probably have gone into
executive session to discuss the
case. Have we, no we have not.
All right.
So
Um, the, the paragraph that
stands out to me is on the the
back page of this and see 1234,
the 5th paragraph paragraph down
full paragraph of note PED's
attorneys also assert concern
about separations of power
between the judicial legislative
and executive branches.
But
first time I'm done, so I'm
happy with
somewhere.
Mr. Garrison, if you turn off
your mic, whoever was watching.
Thank you. Um,
So that that paragraph there is
um.
It is interesting to me because
I think that would settle the
argument here if there is one.
I mean, we all have to work
together. I mean, that's just,
that's just how, how we all work
together.
I mean, the executive um agency
is dependent upon the
legislative branch to to help
and formulate the budget, right?
We, that's, that's how this all
works. We're dependent on LESC
whatever we give you to work on.
I mean, that's the way I see it,
but I think we need some more
definitive, um.
Ruling from the court, would you
agree with that, Mister Chair?
Mr. Chair Representative, um,
again, I, I, I won't, I won't
make any legal, legal comments
about not qualified to do that.
I will say to your 0.1 thing I
didn't point out here is in that
last paragraph of the same
section, uh, we did refer to uh
the presentation that we made to
you to you all last month in
November about long term
planning and the need for
long-term planning in general,
right? This, this is something
that other states have
undertaken, not necessarily in
response to a lawsuit, but.
Often in response to a lawsuit,
and it isn't necessarily about
responding to the only to the
findings in that lawsuit, but to
your point, the roles and
responsibilities of each of the
of the actors, if you will, in
the education system in a
particular state, who's
responsible for what? What are
we all trying to accomplish and
what does it look like to
Senator Soul's question often
about what does it look like to
say we've done it, right? That's
not something we've determined
as a state cohesively and
something that we talked about
in November in terms of that.
For long-term planning process
that that.
Could happen.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I, I, I
appreciate that, John, and, and.
I, I agree too, but I that's,
it's, it's very circular how we
need to work together to really
accomplish this because, you
know, in in LFC when we we do
discuss this and we're looking
at those measures and
everything. I mean, we're like
where how are we addressing this
through the budget, right? And
then we listen to the hearings
and we have with with PED what
are you bringing to the table
and how are you addressing it?
But then again, like through the
the policy work and everything
that this committee does. I
mean, we all have a piece of the
pie.
it's very circular in the way
that we, we, um.
We work and we have to work to
accomplish, um, the goals of, of
what you, what what what is
addressed in the.
Um
The complaint here, um, so.
That's just my 2 cents, and I
think we all know that, Mr.
Chair, but it would be
interesting. It will be
interesting and uh when we do
get a ruling, and it looks like
we haven't set a date for that,
but
My more as I'm looking through
this too, Mr. Chair, it's just
like, well,
When we have these different
funds, you know, from the
perspective of the budget, we
have these different funds and
then we give kind of like a, not
quite a blank check, but uh, uh,
a blank check in the sense that
we're saying, OK, we're gonna
give you this money awards or
whatever, and then you're gonna
decide how you're going to spend
them, and I think some of that
can get lost and how we are
addressing some of this, so the
thoroughness of of really having
all that information in the
court hearings is really
important. So we're
Um, one of the things I would
ask our lawyers in the legal
senses to make sure that they
have all that information as
we're all addressing this
because I think some of that is
lost, um, information wise
because we piecemeal things in
in the sense of we give this
money here, we give this money
there, we say you do that and we
say we're addressing it.
But to your point in the plan,
but um, how is it being planned
and spent, I just want to make
sure we're not losing that
information because we're giving
um money and then we're saying
you decide how you're going to
spend that, and I, I just really
wanna emphasize that because
that could be lost. I feel like
we're, we are addressing uh Yazi
Martinez in a way that I haven't
ever seen, and it's increasing
and maybe it's not gonna, it's
not enough this this year again,
but I feel like the the
Diligence and and the focus is
there, um, to some of the
comments that have been made
today, I think we need to, um,
we need to take that those,
those comments into
consideration and the full scope
of of the lawsuit. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you for the
time.
Thank you, Representative Roel
Caballero.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you. Is there uh along the same
lines, I, I.
Hi
Like the long term strategic
educational planning process.
That should be, in my opinion,
undertaken on a regular, it
should be part of the SOP my dad
would say standard operating
procedures, SOPs, um, for all of
us.
And so there's nothing that.
as we can begin that process. So
my recommendation would be that
this would be a plus if
The entities, public education
department LESC everyone charged
uh in this.
Arena of education gets together
and begins that process, but I
think
Going back to my
Other statement earlier, Mister
Chair recognizecognizing tribal
sovereignty first and foremost.
In our discussions when we bring
together our, our tribes,
nations and pueblos because
Um
We as a state,
Don't have a right to impose.
OK.
We don't have a right to impose
whether we money's involved or
whether money policies involved.
We do not have the right to
impose. So based on that,
My recommendation would be that.
That process.
There's nothing to exclude or
preclude it, nothing pending so
you're in a perfect position,
um, to
And the secretary is here to
find ways to begin that.
With
The tribes, nations and pueblos.
Determining self-determining
what their
Educational attainment for their
children, their educational
inputs and outputs to put it in
the language that we're using
here are relevant.
And um placing those in
perspective, but only to be able
to do that, we have to not only
include um our, our, um,
Tribal education component
office, but we also need to
include the other entities that
I know are PET tribal education
aren't aware of are there,
there's too many for to to
actually there's not that many,
but there's a tribal education
and I failed to make.
To, and he's sitting here and I
can't recall the official name
of the entity. Um, but Mr. Peos
is here and he can
Add to that. Um, they have to be
sitting at the table, and so
that's, that's what I would
recommend, and then I would also
recommend Mr. Chair, that in
speaking with finances
sometimes.
Um, we want to take the big
brother approach,
inappropriately.
When it comes to funding our
communities, our tribal.
Nations and Pueblo's
communities. We don't have a big
brother position in this, they
have.
They're in that position. So
they need to share with us what
is appropriate in terms of
reporting.
And how
Best to offer that to us through
the mechanism that we have,
which is through public
education department. I have
high hopes that with the
leadership um that we have in
place, that they will know.
Where and how to place those
that the the information that
has been requested here,
appropriately in the reports,
and so as not to impose on, on,
um, on the cyber sovereignty.
Um
On their sovereignty. So it's
not that's, that's what I wanted
to recommend. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just
wanted to refer you back to our
presentation in November, part
of what we what we presented
there was uh a crosswalk.
Between a lot of the plans, uh,
it's not that people are not
planning. It's that people have
not necessarily planned
together.
And so you've got a uh a number
of different plans in the, in
the crosswalk or the crossover
between those plans is very
significant to your point.
Anyone else?
A couple of comments this
summer, I was at a conference up
in the kind of the Northwest
area and chatting with the lady,
I think she was from Idaho, but
about the Martinez Yazi lawsuit.
Their comment was, yeah, we're
under lawsuit too. We just
ignore it.
And I'm like, you can't just
ignore your Supreme Court, you
know, but that's, that was their
strategy. I'm glad in New
Mexico, we're not doing that,
that we actually are, are taking
it seriously and, and working
towards that. Now, with that,
and many of you have heard me
make kind of these comments
before, but changes we make in
education are like savings
bonds. You don't buy a savings
bond and expect full value of it
6 months later.
Yet it feels like that's what
we're being asked to do is to
make a change that's gonna fix
everything in 6 months, and it's
not gonna happen. Uh, the
Mississippi miracle where they
moved out of the bottom for
reading was not a miracle, it
was more than a decade in order
to do that.
And so I, I find myself always
asking, what is the objective?
That we're headed towards with
Martinez and Yazi. You know,
what objective measures are we
going to use that we can measure
and agree on.
That we've met it or we're
making sufficient progress to
get out from under, and I never
get that. I get a list of
activities, activities are not
objectives.
And you know, until we know what
it is, I feel like it's a
goalpost. It's always moving
around and just keep doing
things and we'll tell you if
it's enough. You know, that's
not a way of managing things. We
need objective measures, um, and
Judge Singleton, the initial
piece.
The objective measures were low
battle scores and low reading
scores on standardized tests,
that was the objective measure
that was then used. Everything
else in the findings were
probable things that might help
that in the long run, but those
are not objective measures.
Those are very subjective. And
so until
the pe, the plaintiffs, LESC.
You know, we come up with what
are the, the measures that, you
know, we can measure and say
we're there or you know, we have
narrowed the gap to under 5
points or, you know, but some
objective measure and on which
test which measure.
Then we were all just paying
lawyers to argue with each other
in the ether, out and about the
thing without making real
progress towards it. I think
certainly this committee, uh, I
think I can speak sort of
broadly for the legislature
wants to do right by our kids.
Absolutely wants to, but we have
to know what that is, what is
the measure we're headed
towards. How do we know that
we're there. Um, and I get very
frustrated when I keep getting a
list of, well, you know, we need
to do this. Well, doing this is
not getting towards an
objective. It's somebody's idea
of what they need. Um, early on,
one of the advocate groups put
out a big slick thing of all the
things we ought to be doing to
address Yasi Martinez. I read
through it 3 times. It was
probably 20.
pages
The word math was never even in
the publication, yet that was a
bigger concern for student
achievement, then what's the
reading? And they never even
talked about math.
No, I'm math achievement, and
how do we do that? Um, and in
general,
Public schools, schools in
general get blamed for the ills
of society, because that's where
the inequities show up.
Most of the inequities are not
inequities in education. There
certainly are some, I'm not
saying all, most are not their
society. It's problems in our
society, in our communities that
are reflected then in our
schools. And until we
acknowledge and start working on
fixing the problems in society
and community.
We are always going to have
inequities in education and
education does its darndest to
fix all of those, but we're,
we're fighting against a pretty
heavy current of, of problems in
communities. So I'll start, stop
lecturing. It's the only time I
did today, you'll notice I
mostly just ran the meeting, so,
but John or secretary anybody
like to comment.
But that's how I view all of
this. We want to do what's
right, but tell me how we know
when we're there, Mr. Chair,
thanks for the comments. I think
um
What you're getting at it, I'm
sure, I, I can't speak for the
secretary, but I, I know that
um.
Working in the department, there
is this feeling that
Schools are being asked to do a
lot. I, I will say that a that a
long term planning process.
Probably should include
Multiple agencies, right? And,
and, and, and the tribes and
Pelos that's called for as not
necessarily because it's called
for, but because they're
integral to obviously
self-determination and also
helping us to understand what
needs to happen in those
communities, to your point,
because some of these are not
school issues, some of these are
community issues and how do
those communities play a part,
um, and what are the resources
they might need to do those,
those kinds of things, and you
all are addressing a lot of that
outside of education, right?
We're a staff.
We, we wanna know all the
things, but we're, we're still
focused on education. I know
you're working on a lot of
things. Um, and I don't know if
the secretary wants to.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, a couple of
things that I just wanna touch
on based on comments and I
haven't had the chance to look
at the document that uh director
Senna has shared with you all.
Um, I just want to reiterate and
and affirm that we all
absolutely are here focused on
improving um the educational
opportunities and outcomes for
our students, and that's what um
we are all working on together
every single day and uh that is
the shared effort. We also have
shared accountability in
reaching the outcomes that we
need to um achieve for our
students, and that includes
Uh, executive state agencies
that includes our legislature
that includes our um school
districts and charter schools,
um, and many more, and so I just
want to say that um we do work
together. I think very well. I
think that, um, we'll see what
the court decides in terms of uh
a plan that they would like to
be done, but I would agree that
it needs to be inclusive of all
of the shared accountability,
all of the entities that have a
role.
And have a decision points in
terms of uh funds that are
appropriated in terms of how
those funds are utilized and
what we're doing for our
students um around the state,
so, um, I just want to say that.
We have accomplished a great
deal together and I don't want
to be dismissive dismissive of
that. I don't want anyone to be.
We've done a great deal, um, and
we have more to do, and the only
way we're gonna get it done is
if we collaborate and do that
together so we absolutely
welcome that. Um, and would need
to have the legislature's
involvement in all of that work
as well as our, as long as, as
well as our districts and
charter schools.
Any other comments, questions
from anyone.
just lastly, I just think um the
government to government
relationship is going to be
essential as I brought up
working with those budgets with
each other, I think is essential
and it's really, um, having the,
you know, having everybody at
the table, as you mentioned, uh,
Madam Secretary, um Mr. Chair, I
think that.
I think there's a missing piece
here and and I think the other
missing piece too is the voice
of our kids. I'm not hearing
that enough.
Uh, and I, and I know that
that's the focus of Mr. Chair
and has been and and I and I and
I commend him on his work on
that, but I think we really need
to get to the kids, uh the
students, uh, their voices a lot
more involved.
And what, how we're planning.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair Representative Luhan,
I agree with you completely and
I should have said a key
partners are our tribes, Pueblos
and nations as we've been
talking about this morning in
the previous um presentation
that that's absolutely essential
in this.
Thank you. And again, thank you.
graciously for being here with
us, sticking around, you know,
it, it's so important that we're
working together and understand
where each group is coming from.
So really appreciate that and as
you're always welcome.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chair.
Appreciate that.
And I think our last one is
Connor with
Some rules updates.
And thank you committee. We're
doing well on time. We're right
about on track with everything
unless hunter's got long stories
and singing and jokes to tell
us.
And Connor, I think whenever
you're ready.
All righty. Uh, thank you, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee.
I know that, uh, this is the
last thing I believe and folks
are ready to, you know, get the
holiday started, so I'll be sure
to take as long as humanly
possible. Um, so, so thank you,
everybody. Uh, so this is just
gonna be pretty brief, it's just
an update to the proposed rule
that we reviewed back in
November. Uh, this was a
proposed revision to NA 629.1,
which is general provisions, uh,
and specifically to
uh department rule in alignment
with two pieces of legislation
that were passed in 2024 as
legislative session, namely
House Bill 171, now known as
Laws 2004 chapter 2, which is uh
relates to graduation
requirements and laws 2024
chapter 43 or Senate Bill 137
regarding school board training
and a charter school governance
training requirements. Uh, so
I'm not gonna go back over all
of what the proposed changes are
that we have included that if
you'd like to read more of that
and we also covered.
that last uh meeting, but there
are a few updates the department
has provided in the meantime, so
they've extended the public
comment period until January
10th of 2025 to allow for people
to weigh in on the new language
that has been added as part of
this proposed revision. So
starting off, uh, just, this is
sort of in response, uh, just to
a general discussion about how
the removal of demonstrations of
competency has been proposed as
part of this rule change. Uh,
and so prior to this, the
enactment of this legislation,
New Mexico had a
a high school diploma process
that consisted of two parts.
There was the required course
units and completing those, and
then there was also the
demonstrations of competency on
core subjects, be they math,
reading, science, language arts.
Uh, with the passage of the
graduation requirements bill in
2024 session, those
demonstrations of competency
were eliminated. So now, uh, New
Mexico no longer has a final
exam sort of way of requiring
students to graduate. It is now
purely based on the completion
of coursework.
And so, in line with that, uh,
prior to this the passage of
this law, PED had developed 3
programs of study for students.
There was the standard program
of study. There was the modified
program of study and the ability
program of study. And this would
provide 3 alternate pathways for
students to satisfy graduation
requirements in order to receive
a diploma of Excellence in New
Mexico.
Uh, after the removal of these
demonstrations of competency,
the Department appears to be
phasing out the modified program
of study leaving there being two
options, should this will be uh
adopted, meaning there will be
the standard program study for
the vast majority of students
and then students who are
determined by their IEP team. I
really want to stress that, uh,
this rule really affirms that
the IEP team is is the person
responsible for determine is the
group responsible for
determining that making these
decisions rather, uh,
they, if they are determined to
have the most significant
cognitive disabilities, they can
be enrolled in the ability
program of study. Otherwise,
they would be in the standard
program. Uh, this applies
beginning in the 2025, 2026
school year for everyone that
has not started 9th grade by
that year.
Uh, everyone prior to that will
still be able to be enrolled in
the modified program of study.
So, ultimately, the change there
has to do with a streamlining of
the programs of study and the
pathways to receiving a high
school diploma in New Mexico.
Uh, there's a standard program
for the vast majority of
students and those who are
determined to have most
significant cognitive
disabilities can be enrolled in
the ability program study should
this rule be adopted. The other
uh big update that I wanted to
cover is in regards to.
question that Chair Romero had
last time we covered this rule,
and it relates to a small change
to the number of years listed as
required to participate in, uh,
the statewide system of
assessments. And so, prior,
prior rule language says, uh,
grades 3 through 8 at high
school. Uh, that has now, uh,
been proposed to be changed to K
through high school. Uh, the
difference there being and in
talking with the department is
our understanding that the
reasoning behind this
just to recognize that uh as the
department and departmental
guidance and in departmental
practice, uh, New Mexico's
statewide system of assessments,
well, uh, most of the tests
start in 3rd grade. There are
screening tests and other uh
efforts that take place prior to
the 3rd grade year, and so this
language change is really just
to make sure that rule language
is consistent with with practice
of assessments in New Mexico.
So those are the really big ones
that I wanted to cover, uh,
beyond that, I think, uh,
everything else was covered last
time. So with that, I'm happy to
stand for any questions folks
may have.
Thank you, Representative Baca.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Connor. Uh, I, I
didn't have a question until you
said the very last thing there,
the K-12.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, so
I, I understand that we have a
designated assessment.
Currently.
3 through 8 and
But do we have a uniform
assessment that every district
will be using K through.
To
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Baer, thank you for that. So let
let me to clarify that a bit.
It's not necessarily uh like a
subject test that we're talking
about here, it's more like a
screening tests for English
learner status or uh dyslexia,
those sorts of screening tests
that are, uh, take place prior
to grade 3. That would, that's
uh part of the broader system of
assessments, the state provides.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman,
and, and, uh, and thank you for
that. I do, I do agree that the
data is something, in fact, I
just having a conversation about
it. I, I just wasn't sure
because then you have like your
universal screenings, you have
your, uh, as far as gifted
screen. So I think that they're
just, we, we as a committee and
you as the folks that are
analyzing this, just need to be
cognizant and make sure that we
have uniformity as we heard the
other day is we sometimes
compare apple to oranges. Well,
we just want to make sure that
if we are looking at these other
grades.
That the assessment be used the
same so that we can make
informed decisions and be able
to kind of take a look at the
data. So, Mr. Chairman, I thank
you for that, Connor. Uh, if you
can just kind of get back and
we'll figure that out. I would
appreciate it.
Uh, Mr. Cherson, I do also want
to uh clarify also that I
station is a is a test as part
of our statewide assessment that
would be K through 2 as well, so
that's part of that scheme.
Thanksentative Lujan.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. Yeah,
I didn't, I'm gonna follow up
with that question too, so.
In including uh the.
In case you 12 now, but the,
those were not, what does that
do? because.
I'm hearing, Mr. Chair, that
these are two separate types of
assessments. I mean, we're
assessing kids early on for, you
know, developmental things,
mostly it sounds like, and then
we're assessing later at
starting in grade 3 for
academics. Am I missing
something, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair
Representative and and to
representatives question a
little bit too. I think what the
department is doing here, so the
the way the rule is currently
written with that 3rd through
8th grade and once in.
high school was to align with
federal summative testing
requirements, the year-end test
we take every spring. That was
what the rule currently
reflects.
I think what the department is
doing with these changes is
trying to reflect a larger
assessment system that exists in
the state, it is not necessarily
um indicating in the rule change
that we're not going to test
every kid at every grade, or
that we're gonna use, let's say,
a kindergarten screening tool as
a way to to judge schools or
evaluate schools. It's just
saying schools will take these
will will administer these
assessments because we know
they're required to various for
various.
reasons, including other state
laws that dyslexia screening is
a state law, you know, the, the
English learner screening is
required by federal regulations
and so I think the changes to
the rule really reflect
there're, there are just other
tests that schools also
administer to students, it
doesn't necessarily denote that
we're gonna start using all
those assessments or all of that
data in that sort of evaluative
way.
Uh, Mr. Chair, thank you, uh,
Director Senator. I do just
wanna, uh, really emphasize that
these changes that we're seeing
and this really are to just
align rule with practices that
are already in place as opposed
to uh requiring any new ones,
I'd say. I appreciate that,
yeah, thank you, uh, cause I did
send me and, and with the IE
process uh um IEP uh process.
Um
When, uh, so the rule change too
is to align um students.
Um, let me, let me get my
thought here cause that was in
my my mind too as I'm trying to
read off through this, um.
The IBT IEP team to have the
most significant cognitive uh uh
disabilities in which case they
may be enrolled in the ability.
So who is the I, I mean, we
aligning with the the new IEP
team is, is that part of it as
well, because I know that.
Is that, is that a change in
alignment identifying the IEP
and giving them the authority to
make these determinations, Mr.
Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Lujan, as I understand it now,
that really the language that
has been added regarded IEP
teams is once again to really
affirm the role that the IP has
as the decision maker in these
in these processes.
And, and what, OK. And what is
that capturing that wasn't
captured before?
The process, Mr. Mr. Chair. So,
uh, based on my reading of this,
uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Luhan, is that, uh, prior to
this, the language was not
specific in saying the IEP team
is the sole decision maker in
this process, although I'm, uh,
Jess may have something that
could help me out here, so.
You wanna.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman
Representative Leon, I think
many of us could have answered
this, so, um, Connor is is
correct in his understanding of
this, the IEP team has always
been the critical decision maker
in what graduation pathway is
available to students. That was
true beforehand and Connor is
simply pointing out they're
affirming that with very clear
language in this rule to uplift
that role. Thank you, that's it.
Thank you.
Thank you. Anyone else?
No, thank you, Connor.
Appreciate you keeping up with
all these things for us. Um,
currently, um, our next meeting
is on Monday.
In the morning before the
legislative session starts, uh,
typically that meeting is mostly
any final budget type changes,
updates as to things that are
coming out and then also uh
review of other bills that are
up for
Uh, endorsement from this
committee. Uh, please, if you
are looking at a bill that's up
for endorsement, don't just drop
it that morning where nobody's
got a chance to look at it.
We've had that in the past, uh,
and we find we all end up voting
for what looks like a good title
without actually getting a
chance to review what's in that
bill. Um, I think most of them
John went through just kind of a
summary of those, you know, so
kind of look through those if
you've got something else,
please make sure and get it to
John early before that, so the
team gets a chance.
To do a summary and an analysis
and, and those kinds of things
and we typically have tried to
keep endorsed bills on things
that are broadly
Education across the state, not
for a specific project in a
district, you know, that's a
really good idea and want an
endorsement on it, but broad
things that we've been working
on as a team over the, the. Is
that accurate?
If not safe travels, everyone,
have a happy holidays and
wonderful times.
Yeah, you guys, there's been all
these accidents last night and
