10 tab 10, um, just wanted to
say, uh, both, uh, uh, word of
thanks to the school district
for hosting us, uh, you know,
every time we, um, and you all
know this because um every time
we, we, we plan to come to these
committees, we, we call people
up and we say, hey, we're
coming, can you get everything
ready and they're, they're
always so responsive, uh,
Superintendent Hawkins and his
staff have been amazing this
week and in prior weeks getting
ready for us, so I just wanted
to say thank you to them and
just also and.
I say this all the time, but I
extend a word of thanks to all
the school districts that have
hosted us this interim, um,
especially those that that
hosted us during graduation week
in Berlin and Los Suas. It's
always a tough time for them no
matter what, and they did that
for us. Obviously we're hearing
a lot of homecoming things here
at Silver High this week and so
having us here uh while they're,
while they try to run their
normal business is a is an
imposition and we're so grateful
for them uh to do it for us. And
then I just wanted to thank
staff again as always.
They, I, I think you can tell
that they're working really hard
for you, trying to put together
high quality products, making
sure that you have, have all the
relevant information that you
need to make good decisions, um,
and, and our responsive when you
ask us those questions that we
don't always have the answers
to, but we're always willing to,
to find out. So I just wanted to
say thank you to them. They've
been amazing, uh, as I said last
meeting over these last few
weeks as we've worked a little
shorthanded and have been
supportive of certainly of me
and each other as
We do all the work, so I wanted
to say thank you to them as
well.
Uh, I'm gonna talk a little bit,
just real briefly about the
newsletter and you know, the,
the newsletter we kind of go
back and forth on internally
about, you know, where this is a
newsletter for you all to read,
um, you'll see that a lot of the
things that are in the
newsletter this month, um, are
things that we talked about it
at this week's meeting, um,
because we're also trying to
share the work that you do and
the work that our staff does
with the larger public and so
this is available like every
other item.
In our, in our agenda online. We
also send this out when we send,
we, we send a press release out
telling folks that you all are
meeting and uh uh talking a
little bit about what you're
gonna talk about at your
meetings.
And so hopefully the newsletter
gives those folks as well some
information, a little bit more
in depth, uh, before they come
to the meeting, uh, to give them
sort of a preview of of what you
all are gonna discuss.
So wanted to highlight just a
couple of things from the
newsletter. The first is want to
thank the chair for his letter
out.
Because our, because our chair
and so many of you have
education experience, you
understand the intricacies, the
complexities of running an
individual classroom that you're
that your principals and
superintendents face in running
school sites and school
districts, and I think that's
not always how the general
public sees education. You, you
send your kid to school and they
learn some stuff and then they
come home. But you all know that
that's a very complex system
that you're all talking about
and trying to address on a
regular basis. I think the chair
did a nice job of talking
specifically about the
complexities of what it takes to
be a teacher, the planning, the
preparation, the grading, the
feedback, all the things that
you all do as teachers and uh I
think this is a nice example of
why we should all continuously
value our, our, our educators
across the state. So I want to
just highlight that. Um, again,
the first story here is about
our our funding formula
proposals that you heard about a
couple of days ago, um.
To improve the responsiveness,
accuracy, and adequacy of the
formula and its methodology, and
I won't go through much more of
that because we've talked about
it this week, but just wanted to
let people know about that. On
the back page, some highlights
from the structured literacy,
uh, support models that you
heard from Merrit and and uh Tim
about this week. Again,
hopefully this gives people some
context for what's happening in
schools uh around uh structured
literacy, and then finally at
the bottom of that nice graph
that Jessica presents.
to you about middle school, uh,
so people can start to get an
idea of the sort of differences
that we're seeing in those
different middle school models,
obviously it's still um.
I think we we need to do some
more study. We need to
understand a little bit more
about why these results are what
they are and what actually
happens in some of these models,
but I think there was a really
nice breakdown again that across
New Mexico when you make policy
and budget decisions.
This is not a one size fits all.
You have so many different kinds
of models and strategies
happening happening across the
state, and you all have to keep
all of those in mind when you're
making sort of one size fits all
decisions so just again another
example.
of that
Complexity, so that's your um
newsletter for the month. I'm
happy to answer questions if you
have any, um, and it also kind
of lends leads itself to the
other thing I want to talk about
today, which is a vacancy and I
talked a little bit about this
last last month, um, so you all
know that that Manny is no
longer with us, and I talked a
little bit last month about sort
of readjusting or adjusting the
that position itself, Man.
He was great and he served US
community committee services
organized a lot of the things
with our um.
Our school districts are hosting
school districts, um, but as we
continue to sort of evolve in
the work that we do really dive
deep into some of these topics
as staff we've we've worked on
some, um, we wouldn't go as far
as to call them evaluations this
year, but sort of the the
beginning work into evaluation
beyond just sort of the research
that we do for you on a regular
basis and the and the analysis
that we do during session.
Um, and so, uh, we've talked a
little bit internally about
adding some additional capacity
to support with things like
building newsletters and press
releases, editing and compiling
work that we put together for
you in annual reports,
possession reports, the work
that we send out to school
districts and superintendents
and the quick guide after
sessions so that folks better
understand your intent and um
how those statutory changes and
and budget decisions might
impact them and so.
This, this job description, um,
just so you all have it in front
of you and you know what we're
looking for and if you know
anybody good, they'll send them
our way. This is really an
attempt to strengthen capacity
for the team so that our
analysts can focus on the
research analysis and evaluation
that they're going to do, and
then we have some of that
support both administratively
and in writing and editing and
hopefully that means you all get
better products from us as we
move forward.
Mr. Chair, that's it for this,
for this month's report, if
happy to answer any questions if
anybody's got some, otherwise we
can move on.
Questions, folks.
Right, I just want to say as far
as my letter, I always have my
wife read it before I send it
out to just make sure it's
coherent and the the one thing
that she had said, and I
appreciate your comments on it
for this letter, but she was
like,
Wait, what does this have to do
with anything you guys are
doing.
So he had to to kind of explain
to her a little bit about, you
know, fill it in a little bit
about, you know, the, and this
was really brought up from our
conversation with um with Dr.
Blakey in Albuquerque and how we
had that conversation about it's
difficult to really frame and
discuss, um, all of the
different things that go on, um,
in a classroom in a given day in
a semester.
Um, with people that are.
Farther away from education in
the classroom and I think parent
teacher conferences. um I've had
nothing but support from
parents, and I think it's
because of um.
Parents see what's going on from
a different perspective and when
we have parent-teacher
conferences, they get a good
idea of, you know, what we're
doing in the classroom, what
they've seen at home and how we
can work together in doing that.
It's just um explaining that to
folks who are farther away from
education, um, is incredibly
difficult and where do you even
start to talk about um all of
the things that go on in a
classroom before the bell even
rings.
Um,
To get on with the day because
so much can happen, but, but
yeah, no, I appreciate you
highlighting that. Um, it was
just really funny because this
is probably the one time my wife
was kind of like down on what I
had written, so.
I appreciate that. I'm going to
take that home.
Um, but any other questions
comments? We're good. Cool.
Thank you so much.
All right, folks.
So we will transition.
To our next presentation uh oh,
we got presentations going
around.
All right. Oh, there you go.
Thank you.
All right.
All right.
Public school insurance.
Daniel.
All right, we are now on item 11
of your binder with the brief
titled Public School Insurance.
So, Mr. Chairman for the 3rd and
final time this month, my name
is Daniel and I cover public
school finance for the LESC and
this time I'm very glad to not
be up here alone because I have
Patrick Sandoval, director of
NESA and Martha Quintana, deputy
director of of NIMSA.
So,
I just want to say upfront that
NMSA has been a great partner to
the LESC this Eram, and we want
to thank them for their
collaboration uh throughout the
interim.
So I'm gonna breeze through my
brief so you can spend most of
your time talking directly with
NSA. So starting on page one of
your LESC brief, you all know
the costs of health and risk
insurance are rapidly
increasing, uh, not just in New
Mexico, but around the nation.
And those increases are
impacting every part of the
economy, not just public
schools.
In the last few years though,
we've seen some strong increases
in premiums, specifically for
public schools and you all can
see those increases displayed in
figure one, where we're using
premiums in FY 15 as a baseline,
uh, and we're using that
business to show how much
premiums have increased for both
medical and risk since then. So,
as you all can see, the
increases for medical have been
pretty steady since FY15 and we
are now over there.
Now over 80% higher in FY 25 and
they were 11 years ago for risk
and the increases have been
pretty uneven with a few years
of stagnation followed by a
pretty steep increase in the
last few years, to the point
where risk premiums are now
around 70% higher than they were
in FY 15 and you'll hear more
from NMSA on that, but a few
factors in those steep increases
in premiums have been because of
the increasing cost of.
Treating chronic conditions,
changes in statute,
environmental impacts on
facilities and losses outside
the state that are driving up
rates within the state.
And one important thing to note,
uh, and that you'll hear about
is the cost that NMSA incurred
during the COVID-19 pandemic,
uh, that are also playing a role
in increasing those medical
premiums.
Uh, but despite all that, our
goal as your staff at the LESE
is to help you make informed
decisions around how to best
support public schools in
meeting those increasing
insurance costs without
adversely impacting the
educational experiences of
students or school's ability to
recruit and retain high quality
staff.
Uh, you are already pretty
familiar with NSA, but if you're
not, NMSA is the primary
provider of medical and risk
coverage to public schools in
New Mexico with only APS not
providing coverage through NMSA.
And one important thing to know
is that NMSA has two separate
fund balances that it collects
premium revenue for, and that
they use to pay out claims and
that is their medical fund
balance that is used broadly for
medical claims and the risk fund
balance that is primarily used
for claims involving property.
And that's important to know
because you all will likely hear
a lot about those fund balances
in the lead up to the session.
But if you turn to page 2.
Um, we have a section on how you
all fund those increases in
premiums every year, the NISA
board establishes premiums for
the following fiscal year, and
they request that you all
appropriate additional funding
to the SCG to support LEAs in
paying the employee, the
employer portions of those
increases. NCL, however, is not
required to set premium rates
that reflect the funding that
you all appropriate to the SCG
for insurance.
If you look at table one, we
have an overview of the recent
increases for two insurance
rates for both medical and risk,
and you all can see that that
rates were increasing pretty
evenly for medical until FY 24
and FY 25 and same for risk
where the increases were pretty
high in FY 16, they trended down
to 0 in FY 21 and they were
ramped up again in FY 23, 24 and
25.
What's interesting though, in
figure 2 is that despite those
consistent increases in
premiums, the total amount of
money being paid to NMSA for
medical and risk has actually
somewhat decreased as a
proportion of program cost from
around 10% in FY 17 for medical
to just over 8% in FY 25.
And risk has trended around 3%
of program cost.
And that signifies to us as
staff that the increases in
insurance may not be crowding
out other priorities at the
local level, because they're not
increasing as a proportion of
program cost.
If you turn to the top of page
3, you'll see an overview of
what initially happened with
premiums and FY 25.
Earlier this year, you all
likely heard about the pretty
steep increases in premiums that
NMSA had proposed to its board
with an increase of 15.25% for
medical and 32% for risk and
that proposal was significantly
more than what you all
appropriated to the SCG for
increases in insurance premiums
for FY 25.
Uh, but NSA established those
rates to respond to substantial
increases in prescription drug
costs, the $5.7 million in costs
as a result of bills that were
passed in 2023 that we included
in table two.
A migration of members to lower
cost plans and some large claims
from hail and wind damage, as
well as sexual abuse claims.
However, in response to those
pretty steep increases in
premiums I would propose or
initially established. LESC LFC
DFA and PED collaborated with
NMSA to bring those increases
down to a 10% increase for
medical and a 15.5% increase for
risk, but NSA made those
revisions to the premiums with
the expectation they would then
request a supplemental
appropriation in the 2025
session.
And you'll likely hear more
about that from them in their
presentation.
If you flip to page 4, we have
an overview of the cost trends
that have largely driven the
increases in costs for NMSA,
where 15% of NIMSA's members are
responsible for approximately
83% of the total paid medical
claims, and part of that is the
high cost of treating specific
chronic diseases like COPD,
cancer, hypertension and
diabetes, to the point where 267
members.
accounted for $60.5 million in
paid medical claims in FY 24.
Uh, for risk, some of the
primary drivers of premium
increases have been inflation,
uh, natural disasters,
geopolitical conflict, the cost
from COVID-19, hail and wind
damage, and the cost of settling
sexual abuse cases in public
schools.
If you look down on the section
on COVID-19, however, uh, this
is going to be critical
information for you all to know
in the lead up to the session.
During the pandemic, NMSA
incurred a large amount of
expenditures from providing
testing kits, testing kits,
paying for treatments and paying
for vaccines, uh, to the point
where those expenditures
actually contributed to a
drawdown in NESA's medical fund
balance.
And NISA, just so you all know,
has a goal of having at least
one month of claims in their
fund balances, and so that
drawdown from the COVID-19
expenditures is one reason that
NIMSA has cited as rationale for
significantly increasing their
medical premiums.
In 2022, however, NMS actually
tried to recoup some of that
money by requesting around $200
million dollars in reimbursement
from FEMA, but that request was
denied by the federal
government.
And so you all will be hearing a
lot from Nancia in the lead up
to the session about those
COVID-19 expenditures and why
they're requesting a
supplemental appropriation, and
so that is just context for you
all to have on hand as we
approach the session.
And finally, we have our policy
and budget considerations, uh,
where the goal is to support
public schools. Our goal is to
support public schools and
ensuring the increases in
premiums are not adversely
impacting the ability of schools
to recruit and retain high
quality staff or to adversely
impact the educational
experiences of students.
And so that should start in the
short term with an adequate
appropriation to the SCG that
reflects the expected increases
in premiums, as well as
potentially supporting NMSA with
those COVID-19 expenditures
costs, while in the long term,
there may need to be an
intentional effort, we think
about how we realize savings
through a targeted approach that
includes achieving greater
economies of scale.
That does it for me. I'm gonna
pass away to Patrick.
Thank you, Daniel, and good
morning, Mr. Chair and committee
members.
We do have a PowerPoint
presentation for you and
highlighted in there we do touch
on the request on our expenses
and our cost saving measures.
I
Turning over to page 2.
Nimsesia is comprised of 88
public school districts, 99
charter schools, 10 higher
educational entities and 18
other educational entities the
authority serves.
77,800 employees and dependents
with 46,567 lives insured under
medical insurance.
NSA is made up of 12 FTE and is
managed by an 11-member board of
directors consisting of governor
appointees, New Mexico
Association of School Business
Officials, educational entities
at large, AFT NEA publication
Commission, school board
Association, and superintendents
association.
OK, and we are having problems
with the presentation. Sorry
about that.
Going to slide 3.
Slide 3 represents Nimsia's
appropriation request for fiscal
year 26, the authorities
requesting an increase in
expenditure authority of 18.54%
in benefits, 16.28% in risk and
5.58% in program support.
We have additional slides for
risk and benefits to show the
need for the requested increase
in expenditure authority.
Most of the increase in program
support is in salaries and
benefits with minor increases in
contractual and other services.
For FY 26, the projected impact
on public school support is 39.7
million to fund the employer's
share of premium increases. The
increase consists of 22.1
million for employee benefits,
premiums, with an average 66%
employer contribution.
And 17.7 million for risk
premiums.
Turning to slide 4.
The FY 26 risks appropriation
request consists of a total
increase of $2,160,655,200.
355,200 is attributed to
increases in contractual
expenses.
14,492,500 is attributed to
projected increases in claims.
And 6,744,100 is attributed to
increases in excess insurance.
There is a slight increase in
transfers to program support of
$50,000. The risk ending FY 24
fund balance is a negative
$11,663,492.
And we expect the deficit to
grow to a negative $38,527,390.
By the end of FY 25.
Limia submitted a special
appropriation request to help
address the fund balance deficit
reduce premiums.
Offset the increased
self-insured retention for for
wind and he claims and assist in
sexual abuse.
And prevention efforts.
Turning to slide 5.
Effective July 1, 2024, the risk
rate increase was 14.99%.
The NSA board of directors had
initially passed an increase of
31.86%. However, after a meeting
with a committee consisting of
the legislative Finance
Committee.
Legislative education Study
Committee, Public Education
Department and the Department of
Finance and Administration.
The board reconsidered the rate
increase and reduced the rate
from 31.86% to 14.99% with the
intent of submitting a special
appropriation during this
legislative session.
The FY 26 risk increase can
range from 16.91% to 13.03%
depending on whether the
authority is granted an
appropriation. The goal is to
pass future rate increases that
are as minimal as possible.
Turning to page 6.
The risk fund premium for FY25
increased by an average of
14.99%, depending on the
member's frequency, severity,
and exposure trends. Nsia does
use a 5 year plan to help smooth
out the increase. The country is
facing the most significant hard
market in insurance history.
This hard market has affected
every private and public entity
account that has property
portfolio portfolios and
exposures to minors. The hard
Market coupled with massive
claims and inflation has been a
perfect storm in driving up
insurance costs.
Turning to slide 7, the FY 26
benefits appropriation requests
consists of a total increase of
$75,056,900.
25,980,700 is attributed to
contractual expenses, 70,553,800
is attributed to claims and
1,851,600 is attributed to
self-insured premiums.
There is a slight increase in
transfers to program support of
$50,000.
are anticipated ending FY 24
fund balance is $1,428,602.
And we expect to be in a deficit
fund balance of $15,886,7732 by
the end of FY 25.
Nas has submitted a special
appropriation request to help
address the projected fund
balance deficit, seek COVID
reimbursement and reduced
premiums.
Turning to slide 8.
The benefits rate increase
effective October 1 of 2024 will
be 10%. The NSA board of
directors had initially passed
an increase of 15.53%.
However, after a meeting with
the committee consistent
consisting as mentioned before,
of the LFC, LES C P E D and DFA,
the board reconsidered the rate
increase and reduce the rate
from 15.53% to 10% with the
intent of submitting a special
appropriation during this
legislative session.
The FY 26 benefits increase can
range from 10.25%.
To 9.53% depending on whether
the authority is granted an
appropriation.
The goal is to pass future rate
increases below 10%.
Turning a slide 9.
The benefits fund premium for FY
25 increased by 10% for medical,
5% for dental, and 3% for
vision.
Namia uses a five-year plan to
help smooth out the increase.
Some contributors to the
increased premiums are claims
costs exceeding revenue due to
high costs claimants, GLP1
medications and legislative
mandates.
Turning to page 10.
The risk program consists of
property liability and workers'
compensation. The authority
ensures approximately 35.5
billion in assets of which 23
billion are framed stucco
construction.
The most flammable type of
construction.
60% of properties are located in
Protection Class 9 or 10, with
10 being the worst protection
class.
And 60% are located in 100 year
flood zones.
The authority also ensures
46,000 employees, $2.1 billion
in payroll, 345,000 students,
45,000 athletic school
participants and over 11,800
vehicles, including buses.
Turned into slide 11.
Slide 11 displays the cost of
property and liability and
workers' compensation claims for
fiscal years 18 to 26.
Fiscal year 24 is un audited and
fiscal year 25 and 26 are
derived from our risk actuaries.
And the numbers were updated as
of June 30th of 2024, our last
actuarial report.
During fiscal year 2024, large
property claims were paid out
due mostly to health losses.
Turning to slide 12.
Slide 12 includes sexual abuse,
molestation, and in
inappropriate touching claims.
These claims include faculty on
student, faculty on faculty, and
student on student. fiscal year
2023 and 2024 are still
considered immature to help
reduce these types of claims,
Nimsia was instrumental in
passing House Bill 128, school
personnel background and
training. This bill strengthened
reference checks and reporting
standards of misconduct to PED.
NEXia also procured an anonymous
reporting system to Stop it
Solutions in FY 24 for school
districts and charter schools.
Going to slide 13.
This slide displays losses for
the last 10 fiscal years during
fiscal year 2019 to 2023,
members suffered significant
losses of 65.5 million due to
hell and wind damage.
The projected excess insurance
amount to be received for these
losses is 54.5 million.
These losses caused our wind and
he deductible to increase from
2.5 million to 10 million with
an aggregate of 25 million for
FY 24 FY 25 has a self-insured
retention of 10,000.
Turning to slide 14, slide 14
display displays the top 10
claims paid in FY 24.
It is important to note that the
date of loss on these claims was
prior to FY 24. All 10 claims
consist of property and
liability and 8 are attributed
to hell damage. Turning to slide
15.
Nemtia offers loss prevention
services through a contract with
Palms and Associates. These
services include prevention and
ergonomics, thread assessment,
active shooter, employment
practices, policy and
consulting.
School facility audits,
reunification and restorative
practices?
Yep,
the fire alarm.
Never mind.
Yeah
Yeah.
OK, so we can continue.
NSO also offers a technical
assistance program for special
education through cooperative
educational services.
Turning to slide 16.
House Bill 128 school personnel
background and training was
passed during the 2021
legislative session. House Bill
128 requires
Reports of ethical misconduct by
by school district personnel,
employees, volunteers,
contractors and contractors
employees to be reported to the
superintendent and public
education department.
Requires school boards?
To adopt policies to track child
abuse and ethical misconconduct
allegations enhances
requirements for work history
and other information on
applications for school
employment and and contractor
positions require school
district personnel, contractors
and volunteers to complete
school training programs. One of
the training programs is offered
and paid for by NISA through
Vector Solutions on sexual abuse
prevention, student boundaries,
grooming and electronic and
social media boundaries.
Palms and Associates also goes
out to school sites to provide
in-person training.
Palms and Associates has also
started completing HR audits and
training for districts and
charter schools focusing on
House Bill 128 requirements.
Turning to page 17.
Palms and Associates has
completed training for school
districts and charter schools as
a pre-auudit for House Bill 128
compliance.
The pre- audit educates the
school on what a House Bill 128
audit will cover and help
schools understand all the
requirements of House Bill 128.
Since the inception of House
Bill 1128 atical misconduct
complaints have more than
doubled from 2021 to 2024.
So we believe.
The interruption. It was a false
alarm, please continue as
normal. Please continue your day
as normal.
So we believe the bill has made
a big difference in reporting
ethical misconduct. Nsia and
Palms are always looking for
opportunities to present and
discuss the requirements of
House Bill 128, and we will
continue to educate members on
the bill.
Turning to page slide 18.
Nemtsia has seen a need to
educate students on navigating
healthy and unhealthy
relationships due to lawsuits,
the authority has received
concerning student on student
sexual and physical abuse.
Palms and Associates has created
a training titled Red Flags and
Green Lights Navigating healthy
and unhealthy relationships.
And is currently completing
training for school districts
and charter schools. The
training focuses on defining
relationships, identifying the
impact of unhealthy
relationships and building
healthy relationships.
It also focuses on resources and
support.
The training is new for this
school year and so far 10
districts and charter schools
have completed or scheduled the
training and over 6600 students
will be educated.
Turning to slide 19, NEMSia
entered into a contract
agreement with Stopit Solutions
to provide an anonymous
reporting system for NIMSA
member school districts and
charter schools.
42 districts and charter schools
have enrolled in StopIt at the
August Nimsia board meeting, the
NISO board of directors approved
an amendment to add a 24 hour
vetting service to alleviate the
administrative burden on
districts and charter schools.
We understand that some
districts can't hire additional
personnel and current personnel
are already assigned many
duties.
The 24 hour vetting service
should alleviate administrative
burden by
The contractors stop it will
manage the program and school
admins will only be responsible
for reported outcomes, to stop
its response center will handle
tip communication for the life
of the tip requires a minimum of
2 school administrators instead
of two school administrators per
building and administrators only
track tips and new messages via
email once per day.
Turning to slide 20.
Slight 2 displays statistics
from StopIt. Currently over
119,000 students have access to
the system. During the 2024,
2025 school year, students are
accessing and reporting the
system at a higher volume than
in the 2023, 2024 school year.
Some schools have alternative
anonymous reporting systems in
place and NMS has not asking
schools to switch to stop it.
The goal is to help every NIMSA
member implement and make an
anonymous anonymous reporting
system available for students.
And with that I will turn it
over to Miss Quintana to go over
the benefits portion.
Good morning, everyone, to
Romero and committee members. My
name is Martha Quintana. I'm the
deputy director of public
schools Insurance Authority. And
um to kind of reiterate and
share some more detailed
information on Daniel's report.
I'm going to start with our
benefits, medical and
prescription drug claims, and I
wanted to point out a couple of
points that we see that NFYA 21,
that's when we started seeing
that spike, uh, when COVID
started, but as you can see,
Um
We just kept on going up. We did
have a dip in FY 23, but as you
can see that um Bar Graf is just
shooting up to the sky off the
chart, so um we are anticipating
um and as we'll see in some
future slides, um, what are, um
uh where members are, and
unfortunately, we have some very
sick members on our plan that
not only, you know, show up in
one year, they show up in
multiple years, so they're
continued care, um, just
continues to rise. And when we
look at those, um, uh, you know,
top 10 diagnosis or, or we look
at these members that have these
serious diseases. It's the other
part of that cost is the
treatment.
Is there are wonderful
breakthroughs and technology for
treatment, but
They're also very costly, but we
want to make sure again that
we're, you know, giving our
members the best care that uh
that we can. If we look at that
orange bar, again, those are
prescription drug costs and
you're gonna see some detailed
information, um, the rise in
those costs and some of the cost
measures that we have been uh
putting in place to try and
reduce that.
If we move on to the next slide,
slide 22, we're looking at our
cost drivers and when we look at
this, this is something um.
Our fiscal analyst had um
shared, you know, when we look
at our little colorful um
triangle and inverted triangle,
we're seeing, you know, 50%, 15%
of our members account for 82%,
almost 83% of our medical plan
costs, um, and then if we look
to the right, and these are
numbers from um 2023 and
compared to 2022, but we can see
that um you know, we do have a
trend of, um, you know,
hospital, um outpatient
hospital um has uh costs have
increased. We've also seen that
medical uh drug spend, so not
from our pharmacy benefits
manager, but you know, folks um
needing um uh uh prescription
drugs, you know, while they're
being treated for their medical
condition. And then we have seen
that uh increase, um,
You know, almost 25 million or
an increase of 29.7%.
If we look at the next slide,
this is where we're looking at
our, um, you know, top
diagnoses, uh, of course,
diabetes is topping our chart
um, for this time period, but
another uh couple of sections we
want to point out where we have
seen an increase is asthma and
COPD, um, we've seen a rise in
breast cancers, um, uh.
Prostate cancer and, you know,
when we look at this, you know,
2067 unique high cost member
claimants, you know, account for
over $600 million in claims. If
we move on to the next slide.
This is just uh uh more detailed
summary of the high claimants,
high cost claimants that we saw
in um 2023 and some of these
claimants continue through 2024,
and we're looking at some of
those conditions. But one thing
to point out, you know, that um,
you know, 5 of these in our
cancer patients.
And then unfortunately, we have
a little newborn who um was not
born healthy and having serious
complications as well. But these
account for over $12 million of
our claims spend. If we move on
to prescription drugs, um,
again, we're seeing that trend
of, you know, an increase in
prescriptions, we're seeing an
increase in that average cost
for those prescriptions, um,
just some things to point out
is, uh, you know, an increase.
On drug costs of over 30% per
member per month, you know,
we're looking at an increase in
that non-specialty category, uh,
the utilization has been higher,
um, specialty medications, those
are those unique medications
that are um what we call
compounded drugs where multiple
um
Uh, uh, drugs are compounded
into one to assist that member.
And of course we have our um uh
those uh non-specialty uh drug
trends increasing for those GLP
ones, those anti-obesity
medications, and I'll talk a
little bit about that um later.
But again, we're seeing that um
just that rise in cost, that
rise in utilization is impacting
our plan. If we look at the next
slide.
We're kind of similar to the
medical plan scene where, you
know, this drug spending is, and
of course, we're seeing that
highest uh drug spend with our
diabetics, um, and huge
increases there, um, you know,
