uh the tech people that, you
know, gonna get it going, so
get everybody.
So those watching at home, I
hope you didn't, we didn't lose
you, that you're still back, but
I think the tech people saved us
again, the, I always have to
call on my daughter to fix my
oven why it's not why it's
flashing 12 o'clock all the time
or whatever, so, but Daniel,
whenever you're ready and
senator, if you'd like to re-ask
the question that we got partway
through and kind of get us back
focused on what you were asking
about.
If you remember, I always tell
people I've got, uh,
age-appropriate cognitive
decline when I can't remember
things, but
Well, since Daniel is sitting
out there in his brain is a lot
younger than I am, I will let
him continue on with his
dialogue.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, the
question was, uh, how are we
supporting family engagement,
uh, in school districts and
charter schools. I was talking
about some of the appropriations
that you all made, specifically
the one for attendance. Uh, that
was a Perth grow appropriation,
so it'll be in line for an
evaluation by PED. They're
currently uh drafting the
evaluation plan, I believe, for
attendance. That's one area. Uh,
you're also investing still 6.
million dollars a year in
community schools and family
engagement. That's another piece
where money is flowing directly
to schools that they so that
they can engage their
communities in whatever way is
responsive, most responsive to
their communities. Uh, there's a
few areas CTE, like out of
school time. There's a lot of
different structures in place
that encourage family
engagement. I was also
mentioning to you that is, uh,
the new EL factor that was
created in House Bill 63 has
language in statute now that
encourages distric
to use some of that $125 million
to support the long-term success
of students through family
engagement. So yes, there's
structures in place, uh, totally
get like the bureaucratic piece
that we're not really truly, uh,
Encouraging family engagement or
supporting family engagement,
but there are structures in
place right now at the state
level at least.
OK, Mr. Chairman, that brings me
to my questions. Are there any
standards set by PED.
For these schools trying to get
families involved.
Uh, Mr. Chairman,
Senator.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, so, um,
without remembering all the
specific language, some, some,
uh, Title one I think is, is a
good example and and Greg's
right behind me, so he'll
correct, he'll correct us if
we're wrong here. Some of these
grants actually come with
provisions that require school
districts to have, for instance,
a parent counsel in order to be
eligible for receiving some of
these funds, and so there are
some formal structures that
exist. I can, I can tell you
from a, so I was an elementary
school principal. And I was uh
working at a title.
one school, we had some of these
provisions, we had parent
counsels, um, and of course, you
know, turnout can be mixed. And
so there are formal structures.
Sometimes you get a number of
parents depending on the evening
or the, or the topic. Other
times not as much. Um, but as
Daniel said, we do have some
funding structures as well as
some statutory requirements or
provisions that requires school
districts to do outreach and for
parents to be involved in some
of those decisions.
Well, I appreciate.
That response here.
And I don't want it to be just
an open house where parents
come, that's not involvement.
In my opinion, that's not doing
the student any, any good, but
if there were standard set that
could be put forth by PED like
you might try this or you might
do this, and if you do this,
then you might have some
available money coming in. I
think that'd be very important.
Also, the importance of a local
school board also trying to work
to get parental involvement
because that is their job.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much for that. My next question
has to do with school lunches or
school meals. I'm sorry, it's
not just lunches anymore, it's
school meals.
Whenever we are putting over.
I think this number is
staggering $200 million into a
school meals.
Is this just during the school
year, or does it go on during
the summer months too.
Uh, Mr. Chairman Senator, just
to clarify really quick, uh,
it's $202.5 million in federal
reimbursements. That's the
federal share, uh, you will also
put up $48.8 million from the
general fund. My understanding
is that that universe of about
200 and what is that? $51
million includes breakfast,
includes lunch, and includes
summer, summer, it includes
summer.
OK, and Mr. Chairman, the reason
I'm bringing that up is that the
local newspapers headlines last,
I think it was last week, we get
our paper two days late.
So I'm always behind on the news
that happens there.
That they were discussing the
summer lunch program.
In the past, because of the
pandemic.
They were still having people
just drive through picking up
lunches and I have several,
several friends that do work in
the cafeteria services, there in
the Roswell Independent School
District.
And the concern was there were
people coming in that would pick
up like 10 to 12 lunches a day.
So they have changed that now.
And if there's a student, they
have to present an ID they have
to eat the meal there at the
facility where the lunches are
being picked up.
I think that is.
A step in the right direction.
Because we do want that.
The meal's going to the
students.
That's the purpose of what this
money's for.
So I don't know if other schools
districts are experiencing that
same problem or not, but that's
what was going on in that
particular district.
Let's see.
go back to my notes over here.
And you said that there's going
to be a designation for low
income students.
Or different designation for
low-income students. How is that
being, uh, how, how is that
proceeding right now?
Mr. Chairman Senator, uh, are
you referring to the new SEG
factor for loan from students,
yeah, so House Bill 63, as I
mentioned in the presentation,
right now the at risk index is 3
components. It's income through
Title I data. It's student
mobility, which is essentially
the number of times that a
student moves between schools
within the same district.
And then English learners.
So through House Bill 63, you
repealed.
Those 3 components of the risk
index, and you replaced it with
the family income index. The
family income index gathers
student household income data
from state income tax returns.
Uh, that's about 70% of the
students that we count
throughout the day, it comes
from their, their uh state
income tax returns of the
remaining amount, uh, those
students go to the healthcare
authority, and they go back to
PED to be matched through the US
census or through Snap records
or through Medicaid. So every
student whose household income
is below 130% of the federal
poverty line will now receive
additional units, additional
funding for
district or for their charter
school.
Thank you for that explanation.
I appreciate that.
Um,
Whenever we are talking about
students with disabilities.
I know that I've had several.
Therapists that have gotten hold
of me and I, I don't, I've
visited with John about it and
his staff regarding this.
Speech therapist in particular.
And I think that we probably
need to take a look at that as
far as
What these people are able to do
and
Their ability to progress on
that, because right now it's
kind of stymie.
Um
Whenever you're
uh explain a little bit more in
depth, if you will, dis
distribution of the block grant.
I'm kind of curious about that
whenever you said under on page
slide 5, I guess it was.
To talk to me about block
grants, uh, Mr. Chairman
Senator, uh, I, uh, right now
that universe of about $120
million that comes to us uh
through Title One. It flows to
our state through 4 different
equations that are set up in
federal law. And those equations
distribute money based on
different student counts based
on uh student poverty from the
census or from whatever source
that they get that money from.
Uh, the federal government, the
Trump administration has
elevated the concept of a block
grant, where the money would
flow to us in one block of
money, no longer through the 4
equations set up in federal law,
no longer with as many uh rules
or regulations that we accept in
exchange for accepting that
money, we would accept the big
pot of money.
And it would be up to you all as
members, uh, to decide how you
flow that money out to district
and charter schools. And so I
elevated the concept of the
at-risk index, using what we
already have in our formula to
push out that extra 100-ish
potential million dollars.
OK, thank you very much for
that, but he ultimately makes
the decision on where these
grant blocks will be.
Distributed
Is it strictly up to PED? Is it
just because of the need is
there. If the need is there,
wouldn't this help elevate that
particular school,
Mr. Chairman
I'll put it that way. Mr.
Chairman, Senator, I think
there's different considerations
right now around block grants,
the conversation around idea,
for example, the federal
government has elevated the idea
of that special education money
bypassing.
the state educational agency and
flowing directly to schools
flowing directly to charter
schools and bypass essentially
PED.
Uh
The
Title One conversation in my
mind from the way I'm hearing
about it, it would be up to you
all to decide.
What you want to spend the money
on, how you want to spend it,
how you want to set up an
accountability framework for
ensuring that that money is
being used in an effective ways
that achieve the results or the
outcomes that you all want to
see. Does that answer your
question, Mr. Senator, if I
could very quickly, I just, I
just want to clarify and
Daniel's done a great job. These
are, these are all speculations
about what might happen. And so,
you know, there's, there's
probably a number of ways that
that either the administ, the
federal administration.
might decide to do this, and
there would be a number of ways
potentially that you all could
respond to that.
And so at this point, uh, you
know, a lot of these are, we, we
want you all to be prepared
with, here are some tools that
you might have if if this were
to happen and to to Chairman
Sol's point, will continue to
update on a, on a monthly basis
to give you an idea of whether
or not you actually have to make
any of those decisions because
right now, uh, at least as as
far as education goes.
Right, some of the other
conversations around some of the
other federal funds across other
agencies, um.
Education is, is pretty secure
in that we haven't heard any
firm talk around.
Um, that there would be cuts,
but these are ideas and
conversations that people are
having that we just wanted you
to be aware of.
And I appreciate that comment
right there, John, because yes,
we, I
Seems to me like
Each state has its own
different.
Realm that they need to be.
Working on
And we definitely need to work
on ours.
But it's going to be interesting
to see what does transpire, but
like I said earlier, my main
concern is getting parents
involved in the education of
their child.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much. Thank you, Daniel.
Thank you, Senator, uh,
Representative Lata.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and uh
Daniel, thanks for the
presentation is informative as
always. Thank you. I appreciate
and respect that, um, you know,
I was part of the conversation
yesterday for the, for the
funding stability.
And so there's a lot of what
ifs, there's a lot of unknowns,
Mr. Chair. So I need you to look
into your crystal ball.
And you talked about uh
backfilling.
So, is, do you have an idea or
or something along the lines in
whatever pops up in the crystal
ball regarding long-term
obligations or one-time bridges
when it comes to the possible.
Uh funding uh or or the possible
funding that the state would
have to put in.
to uh to make up for Mr.
Chairman Representative Laura,
can you repeat the question one
more time so the question is
In your crystal ball
Thinking about what they, what
may happen with we may or may
not happen, depends if the, if
the smoke in the crystal ball is
white or blue.
You know
What choices or what programs
will merit.
One time investment or recurring
investment. Mr. Chairman
Representative Laura. That is
why we included.
Slide was a 4, actually no.
Slide 13.
Uh, we as staff very much and
you heard this from LFC
director, uh, director Soly
yesterday, but the need to
develop a framework for doing
just that, evaluating whether a
federal program merits
backfilling from the state,
whether the state is even in the
business of supporting specific
programs, uh, not every federal
program that's being cut.
I think it's on a warrant. It's
gonna warrant backfilling, just
because it's cut does not mean
that it's achieving the outcomes
that you all want to see, uh,
with state money. And that's why
it elevated uh the concept of
our per grow evaluation model
that we're currently building in
collaboration with PED,
particularly using what we
already have in the state, uh,
to really evaluate, uh,
Again, what money is being lost.
Uh, what impact was it having on
student outcomes, and is it an
area where you all as a
legislature, uh, want to invest
your funding, want to invest
your resources. So this is the
broad conversation here on this
slide around that potential
framework for doing just that.
Thank, thank you for that,
Daniel, Mr. Tur, and
You, you said something really
important that that is the um
Student achievement.
And so one of the things that I
think would that would need to
be considered would be looking
into um Martinez Yazi.
And how these backfills can can
relate with that, and we can
break those together. So I was
just curious, you know, just,
uh, I know right now what ifs,
and, you know, when everything
changes from day to day,
honestly. And I think uh this is
something that is really, really
been on my mind since yesterday
and the discussion that we had
yesterday about, you know,
Yeah
Developing possible different
scenarios for different, for
different um
Decisions that are being made at
the federal level and, and you
know, just, but yeah, it's hard
to grasp.
Something that that's, you know,
it's hard to grab water.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator Stewart.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you also, Daniel, for your
great work.
Got such great staff.
So my question is around
maintenance of effort.
You know, I, I, I don't, I think
you just briefly mentioned it,
but
What are they doing about
maintenance of effort? Is that
just gonna be lost along with
the lack of reporting. I mean,
it's just so ironic to me that
uh Congress is basically saying
we don't care. You spend the
money, we don't care if it
works. Uh, so we kind of washed
our hands of all of this if
there's no reporting and no
accountability and no interest
in finding out if programs are
working, um.
You know, we're talking about
efficiency in government, let's
evaluate what we're doing,
seeing if it works and if it
doesn't.
And money somewhere else. That
seems to be a concept that's
sort of lacking in this new
budget process, so
What, what are you hearing about
maintenance of effort.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Stewart, I think I mentioned
this in the idea of be slide on
slide 9.
So staff highlight.
Idea programs recommended for
consolidation.
And so I think idea and special
education in general is the area
where I'm seeing the most panic
across the country and people
are really afraid about that
consolidation conversation.
Mostly because people don't
understand what it means. They
don't understand what it would
do. And I think one of these
scenarios that people are sort
of talking about is the
potential that all those funding
streams are combined into one.
thing
That's then pushed out in some
way that technically may bypass
the protections and the
regulations or whatever that are
in idea.
I just want to say that idea is
still federal law.
Uh, we still have to follow
federal law.
And so, yes, people are having,
I think a moment of panic, um.
But the law stands idea is in
place. There's no conversation
around repealing idea or any
specific portions of idea to
your conversation on the
maintenance of effort, the
maintenance of effort is still
in place. I'm not really seeing
any conversation around
repealing.
Means of effort or idea.
Uh, but Mr. Chairman and Daniel
is, if they're just gonna
consolidate everything and send
it out.
Um, why would we then be
required to follow regulations
that in a way don't relate
anymore. If they're cutting our
funding maintenance of effort
says we're putting in the same
amount of money this year for
special ed as we did last year,
you know, and we can argue about
that, you know, whether or not,
well, what about exiting
students from special ed and
having reduced cost, apparently
they've never liked that
argument. So I don't, I don't
quite
understand what what you're
saying. I mean, of course this
is all speculation anyway, so it
it in a way it doesn't matter,
but I, I would be shocked if we
got a pile of money, and yet we
still had to follow all the
regulations cause maintenance of
effort save you're spending the
same amount. So to me they would
have to repeal that.
Uh, if they're not even sending
us the same amount they would be
uh undoing their own
regulations, so that's why I'm
struggling with that in
particular.
Mr. Chairman Senator Stewart, I
think there's just a lot of
noise right now across the
country. People are scared and
rightfully so. And I think
We're trying to not be
reactionary here at LESC, um,
I think the LESC work plan to
your conversation around the
cost conversation, uh, next
tomorrow, I think you'll hear
about the work plan. Um, I'm
currently temporarily covering
special education while merits
out. But I think the work plan
includes a conversation around
special education costs, and I
think it does relate to that
maintenance of effort
conversation. So all I want to
say to your question is, there's
a lot of noise. We're not going
to be reactionary, uh,
Here a staff. It'll be on the
work plan, we'll really delve
into the cost and the main
effort conversation, we'll keep
monitoring what's going on at
the federal level of update you
monthly. But as of right now, I
don't think there's really a
reason.
To be worried.
Senator Stewart, I think you you
touch on a on a larger point
about not just federal guidance,
but federal enforcement.
And um, you know, if, if it does
turn out that
So in the case of uh idea, um,
the transfer of these funds,
there's been talk of
transferring these funds in
special ed to out of the
Department of Education as they
work to sort of dismantle that
department.
Over to Health and Human
Services. And so, and, and this
doesn't just uh go for special
education, but other things as
well. If you ho hollow out staff
if you reduce positions, to your
point, the regulations might
actually still exist.
There may not be no one there
checking as to whether or not
someone's following them. Um, as
Daniel has mentioned, a lot of
this effort is to push some of
these decisions to the state,
and I think um
Regardless of your, your
perspective on federal actions.
What the state decides to do and
how it chooses to serve those
students that are federally
protected under federal law that
still exists, will be a question
for you all. Again, it goes to
um the question of how you
distribute money and who, who
should get that money, which
federal laws do we follow and
what state statutes and
frameworks, do we already have
in place or do you want to have
in place to continue those
protections at the state level,
if in fact they're either
eliminated or not, um.
Not enforced from the federal
level. So just those questions
of operationalizing a lot of
this, I think is, is what we do
know regardless of the amount of
funding that we get.
What decisions you all want to
make about protecting those
students that are federally
protected currently and are
protected in state law in some
ways too, um, will be a further
conversation.
Mr. Chairman, uh, thank, thanks
both to Daniel, uh uh and John
for that.
This is so complicated on so
many levels, you know, it
involves all of state government
and all of federal government,
you know, undoing things we've
had to do for years, so, uh.
I'm starting to feel like it'll
be fun. That's my new attitude.
We'll just have fun doing what
we do best as a state, which has
worked for our kids and our
people.
Other questions, comments from
the committee. If not,
Thank you very much.
Uh, we are now Martinez Yazi
update and that's good you'll
come down and Senator Lopez, if
you'd like to introduce
yourself, I don't think you've
introduced yet.
Yes, good morning, Mr. Chairman.
Um, Linda Lopez, state senator,
District 11, the Southwest
quadrant of Bernalillo County.
Good morning.
But
Jessica, we're just about on
time. We're actually about 10
minutes early and stuff. So
we're, things are moving along
and, and doing well and I
appreciate the committee asking
good questions and staying on,
on point in topic, um, as she's
getting ready, I think, uh,
Senator Stewart's comments about
You know, look at this as
opportunities to do things well
and right in New Mexico and so,
uh, certainly there'll be
challenges, but you know,
We don't have to view it as the
sky is falling, but let's be
aware and, and pay attention and
do what's right for our kids in
New Mexico and we've got the
ability
And quite frankly, budget money
to do so should we choose.
And staff,
you know, within the LESC within
the state.
Just go, when you, whenever
you're ready.
Thank you. Good morning, Mr.
Chairman and members of the
committee.
We're just working through who's
doing slides on this, and
that's, let me zoom in and the
laptop and then I'll get
started. All right.
Thank you again. Um, this
morning, I'm going to be
providing an update to you all
on the Martinez Yazi motion, uh,
those of you who've been on the
committee for a while know that
we regularly discuss Martinez
Yazi and its implications for
our work and how our work
connects. Our update today is
actually pretty narrow and is in
relationship to recent court
action that's taken place over
the last few months, uh, those
of you again, who served on the
committee last year, know that
director Senna presented to you
all in September about
motion that was filed by
attorneys for the plaintiffs,
and then we provided another
update to you all in December
about PED's response to that,
um, and at the time in December,
we told you all that a court
date would be set.
That is what had happened, and
we have an actual order from the
courts to update you on.
We're going to be working from
uh the policy brief that's
behind tab 4 in your binders, so
I'll give you all a moment to
flip to tab 4. You can find
that, and then I will update
you.
I don't hear any more pages
turning, so get started.
All right, so as mentioned, um,
the first judicial district
court, which is the court that
is hearing the Martinez Yazi
case and has been since 2014,
um, held a hearing on April 29th
of this year, and it was
regarding that motion of
noncompliance and request for
remedial action plan that was
filed in September 2024 by
attorneys for the plaintiffs.
You all will recall that that
motion argued that the state has
not yet addressed educational
deficiencies for students who
are named in that lawsuit. Those
include English learners,
students with disabilities,
economically disadvantaged
students and Native American
students.
And the plaintiff's attorneys
requested that the court order
the creation of a comprehensive
remedial action plan.
We brought that to you all
because there was also a
specific part of it that called
for the legislative education
Study Committee staff to lead
the planning process for the
development of at the April 2025
hearing, um, this motion was
granted, but only in part.
The court did agree with the
need for a comprehensive
remedial action plan, but the
court also disagreed that LESC
should lead this process.
Instead, the court ruled that
the public education department
is the appropriate body to lead
the development of that plan.
Other parts where the court
agreed though with the
plaintiff's motion is that the
court continued to find that the
state of New Mexico and the
public education department
remain out of compliance with
prior court orders from 2018 and
2019.
And the court also agreed um
that there's a continued
violation of the constitutional
rights of students to a
sufficient and uniform
education.
So as a remedy to that
noncompliance, the court ordered
PED to lead the development of a
plan and laid out um very
specific deadlines for progress
and finalization.
We'll get to those in just a
minute and a couple pages, um,
but it's, it's pretty rapid. So
that's kind of the take home
summary. I'm gonna go into a few
more details now on that motion,
uh, PED's response, what just
happened, um, in the final order
issued.
But bottom of page one here just
for your reference too, we did
include a timeline of key
Martina Yazi lawsuit events.
This is not every event that has
happened, but the takeaway here
that you all should sit with is
that it's been about a decade
now that we've been in uh
actually a little over a decade
that we've been um discussing
Martinez Yazi since when the the
initial uh filings were put into
the court.
So turning to page 2.
I won't, I promise, read this
entire page to you all or
anything like that, but we did
want to provide context for you
all on the plaintiff's motion.
Again, those of you who heard
this update from Director Senna
in September will recall some of
this information, but that
motion was dedicated to examples
of how in the plaintiff's view,
the state and namely the public
education department has failed
to meet court mandates to date.
Um, it cited the court's
findings in the original 2018
order and essentially said
there's a perceived lack of
progress towards improvement.
The motion also called out some
specific factors. It cited
really high rates of turnover in
leadership at the public
education department continued
poor outcomes for students named
in the lawsuit and uh
defendant's refusal to work
collaboratively on a
comprehensive plan.
Thereby they called for Elias's
staff to lead that planning
process.
The red box here on the middle
of page 2, outlines what the
plaintiffs also requested to see
in a plan.
You'll see that they included 9
elements that span a lot of
topics all the way from specific
special education supports to
how we get to high quality
teachers to systems of
technology to even department
capacity by asking the
department have a plan for how
they're going to fill all
vacancies and increase their
capacity to do high quality
work.
What the plaintiffs uh really
called for is one collaboration
and two much more specific
actions within a plan, so again,
that that initial motion, wanted
to see specific goals, funding
estimates, responsible state
actors and agencies and
objective measures of how we'll
know that we see progress.
At the very bottom of page 2,
again, just a little bit more
information on the proposed LESC
involvement that was in that
motion.
Uh, plaintiffs at the time felt
that LESD could be the
appropriate body because it's
essential that the legislature
be involved in the development
of a comprehensive plan. But
again, this was the part that
was denied, um, in the recent
order.
Moving to page 3.
got 2 sections here for you.
Brief one on PED's response,
which was filed in November 2024
to plaintiff's motion.
In the summary here is that PED
did not oppose the need for a
plan, but they did oppose LASD
leading this. Um, what they
proposed was working with LESC
in a voluntary capacity, but
also identifying an outside
consultant to help the
department to develop that
remedial action plan. And this
is also part of what actually
happened in the recent order is
that they are directed to work
with outside consultant, um, on
the note of outside consultant,
that doesn't necessarily mean
that it.
External to New Mexico or
anything like that, but it is
external to the department.
So the May 2025 order here in
the middle on page 3,
We actually behind this brief,
and I told you this now so you
didn't flipped it right away. Um
behind this brief, we actually
have the order for you because
it's very short. It is 5 pages,
um, with two of those actually
just being signatures of all the
attorneys and so that's one
thing I want you to remember
about this is it's, it's very
brief and it replaces the
responsibility for developing a
plan clearly with PED while also
granting plaintiffs motion to
have that comprehensive plan.
There's a strict timeline for
this whole process, and those
are those bullet points there.
So by July 1 of this year, PED
must select an outside expert
consultant, uh, the motion, or
I'm sorry, the order states that
with help from LASC staff if
they agree and submit a status
report to the court on this.
By October 1 of this year, PED
must produce a draft remedial
plan.
That incorporates input from
plaintiffs and stakeholders and
file another status report with
the court.
By November 3rd of this year,
PED must finalize the
comprehensive remedial plan and
file another status report, so
you'll see a trend here that
we're seeing a lot of um
communication back and forth.
And by December 1st of this
year, um, plaintiffs may file
objections to that finalized
plan. If they do a a response
reply cycle could follow from
all of that and a hearing may
also be set if requested.
So this is all coming up pretty
quickly. This gives the
department just about another
month to identify that outside
consultant and then about 3
months, uh, to produce a draft
remedial plan.
The part on LESD
responsibilities here that we
want to point out for you all is
that the LESC staff is not
required by the court to engage
in any particular actions at
all, so the order does invite
LESC staff to voluntarily assist
PED in a few things. One is
identifying an expert
consultant, um, and also
identifying, and this is
actually a quote here at the
bottom of page 3 that I wanted
to include for you. Um, again,
an invite for us to assist in
identifying all the components
and.
elements necessary for a
constitutionally sufficient and
uniform education for at-risk
students.
Moving to age.
Force is the final page of your
brief.
You've seen some of this, um,
before again in the updates that
director Senna has provided to
you all, but we wanted to
continue to elevate some of our
analysis of what's happening
with all of this.
So in the actual um plaintiff
motion in September, we noticed
that there was a large focus on
student outcomes as evidence of
noncompliance.
Well, we also noticed that PED
argued that inputs to the
educational system, such as
increased funding and specific
programs for students are
evidence of compliance, and this
creates a little bit of an
inherent tension with some focus
on outcomes and where our
students actually are.
And inputs to the system. So we
just wanted to highlight that
for you all as we continue to
monitor what happens next with
all of this.
And then we also have close with
just some considerations for you
all. Um, we have flagged in our
analysis that it's a little
unclear if plaintiffs and
defendants share similar view on
what specific components the
plan should address. There are
several key documents within the
Martinez Yazi case broadly.
There's a, for example, 608 page
fax. I actually wrote it down
here. Uh, yes, 608 pages pages
of findings of facts and
conclusions of law. There's also
an 8-page.
final judgment in order and the
actual legal responsibility to
develop a comprehensive remedial
action plan and which they'll be
responding to is just another
item that we want to flag for
you all.
Uh, LESC staff regularly
partners with the public
education department and so um
the request for us to partner
again we work regularly with
them. Uh, it's something for you
all to consider.
But that's the update on the
actual court case where it's at.
It's very brief, but you can see
here if you want to turn to it,
uh, the actual order from the
court is included here.
So with that, unless a director
Senna wants to add anything that
I may have missed, Happy to
stand for questions and much we
could talk about with the
lawsuit, but that is the update
on the court action that we
wanted to provide for you all
today.
Questions from the committee.
Yes.
Senator Figueroa.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Jessica. This is
Great update and a really tight
timeline. I think my question
pertains to bottom of page 3 on
your report.
kind of glossed over any LESC
staff involvement would require
approval from the committee.
Um
Does that mean, and this
question might be for Mr. Chair,
this committee needs to vote on
whether the LESC staff are going
to participate in this effort.
Yeah
Well, Mr. Chairs, uh, sorry to
interrupt. Um,
The the way that we see it and I
think the reason that we put
that in the in the brief is to
be very clear that as staff, we
work for you.
We work for the legislature and
we work for this committee in
particular. I don't know that we
were necessarily trying to imply
that you had to make any sort of
formal decision, but just wanted
to be clear that we don't, we
don't work for ourselves if that
makes sense.
Mr. Chair and director, I think
that's exactly why I'm asking
the question. If you work for us
or the legislature per se,
doesn't the legislature need to
make an official response to
this.
Court order.
Whether we want our LESC
committee doing this work or
not.
Mr. Chair Jessica, the court
order gives gives you no teeth.
You can make recommendations
that can be completely ignored.
So our staff could put in time
and effort and resources, and
poured possibly no purpose. So
can you speak to that?
Sure, thank you, Mr. Chairman
and Senator Figueiro for the
question. Um, I'd also like to
point you to page 3. I provided
this information in the brief,
um, but under the May 2025
order. One part I, I should have
mentioned is that in its order,
the court actually had concerns
about separation of powers and
asserted that LESC as a
legislative entity was not
subject to the court's
authority, and so the judge did
not feel that he could compel
ElliotC's staff to uh.
Lead this work. And so that's
just another factor for
consideration, uh, the, the
order is pretty clear that if we
are agreeable to it, it would be
on really kind of um.
A helpful basis to the
department, the responsibility
would continue to lie with them
for the actual development of
the planet itself, what
components it contains and
anything like that, and so it is
very clear that because of that
separation of powers concerned
from the judge that he only
felt.
We could help, really is the
takeaway from it.
Thanks, Mr. Chair Jessica, and
the that's part of the concern,
the summary reads in the court
order reads, and the argument of
the defendants of the PED is
very clear that they want
responsibility and control of
this plan. So I think my
question for the committee for
the chair is um
Again,
With no teeth, with no
enforcement, with no, with the
impression that PED.
Perhaps it's not particularly
interested in the LESC's.
Assistance, why would we do
this? And I could be wrong, and
we do have somebody from PED
here, so maybe that's what we
need to hear about, Mr. Chair
and Senator, um.
We missed a few things probably.
The first is that PD has already
invited us to this conversation.
And so we are, we are partnering
with them, and I think, uh, to
the, to your point about the
argument in the case itself that
they were the, the proper entity
to deal with with the
development of the plan is
absolutely right. Um, but they
have, they have already
expressed their willingness to
have us involved to whatever
extent that's that's possible,
um.
And, and to your point about no
teeth, I think, as we said, one,
we have a partnership with PD
that, that, you know, we don't
always agree on everything, um,
but we'll continue to partner
with them throughout the interim
and ask them to present to you
an updating where they're at, so
we won't have an update on this
in June because um
The they have until July 1st to
select that outside consultant,
but we would, we would present
to you, uh, in July and have PED
present to you in July an update
on who that consultant is, we
would potentially
Uh, update you on how we're
participating in that process.
Mr. Chair and director, that's
really all I needed to hear that
PED was interested in this.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator
Representative Baca.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Jessica for that. Um,
I agree that with the court
order that
PD is the appropriate place for
this to be addressed, OK?
But as policymakers and
appropriators, our involvement
in this is essential.
And so, Mr. Chairman, one of the
things that I think that's gonna
be crucial for us is the data.
OK, we have to have
Updates and data.
particularly relating to this
case.
So that we can monitor progress.
We can track as far as
You know, the status of it.
And that we can make
recommendations on
appropriations.
committee endorsed legislation
that's going to help support
this.
Um, Mr. Chairman, this is
actually for Greg.
Um
Broad.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and Greg, you
know, we talked about it, and we
talked about the Yazio Martinez
case.
How many people or departments
do we have designated
to work on responding and or
monitoring the Yazi Martinez
case.
Mr. Chain Representative, uh,
thank you for the question. The
The public education department
does not have a particular
division or bureau that is
focused just on the Martinez
Yazi lawsuit, but rather the
whole agency is focused around
making sure that the um
That we are making the
improvements that are required
by the, by the order.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, and I think that's
kind of to my point is that we
have to be more focused, and I'm
not saying that we have to have
a whole department designated,
but the one thing that is kudos
to our staff because they're
very focused and their various
as far as um able to disagreate
the data and stuff like that. We
understand that, which is why I
see the need of senator uh
figure out was said for us to be
involved in this process.
But I think that there has to be
continued collaboration and that
PED.
Has to, you know, as far as
designate some of that
information that will be
requesting, and I think that's
the important piece that um is
kind of missing, and I know that
everyone, cause I know that it
affects every department in
every area.
But I think that for PED to have
more of a focused
And it kind of carries over to
us because, you know, we sit up
here in these chairs with the
staff is who actually are really
the, the brain, you know, brain
power behind what we do.
They help us to make the
recommendations, so it's gonna
be important.
Um, do we refine that process
and even Mr. Chairman, so that
we, you know, as far as we'll
get some kind of a, you know,
whether it be the advisor when
they, when they picked this
consultant.
Uh, members of the chair,
whether it be the chair or
co-chair, they need to make sure
that, you know, that we're at
least informed of it and maybe
even a part of that process
because these the task that we
have is extremely important.
And PED as you say, does not
have the teeth.
We do
And I think that's where we need
to leverage that.
And I'm like I said before, I
want to hold us accountable.
And I want to hold PED
accountable so that we can
finally address this and help
kids and put this thing to rest.
And so I, I do appreciate.
This work
And Mr. Chairman, I'm just gonna
close and say that
You know, we need probably, as
we, as we go through the term,
we need focus and updates on, on
the information, the data, and
how we can do this and really my
hope is that by kind of
Boiling all of it down, we can
come in until November and we
can say this is what we're going
to address in our 2026 session
that's going to help support our
schools and support our kids.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, and if I may respond very
briefly, Mr. Chair, uh, I just
want to say that, uh, absolutely
the public education department
would be interested in, in
receiving additional staff
resources to, to address, um,
the, the order as well. Thank
you.
Thank you. Representative
Garrett.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. You might
want to stay up there.
I, I mean it may be or not be
relevant.
Um, I do think we have to
acknowledge the problem of
student attendance and all of
this.
Because we can have incredible
plans to meet all this stuff.
But if our students
Have high mobility and don't
attend school. We can't do
anything.
And I say that because one of
the groups is special education
students.
And I know as a teacher, we
would do an IEP and everything
and all of a sudden the student
would disappeared to a different
district.
And so I just want to
acknowledge the fact that I do
believe PED has made tremendous
efforts on all these issues.
Um, whether it satisfies
everything, obviously is.
You know, the issue here, but I
want to acknowledge the effort
that's made because
I think it's been sincere
pointed and effective.
But if the students are
constantly moving, it's very
difficult, and I know as a
teacher who's been in the South
Valley and the Southeast
Heights, we would do all the
work.
And then the student would
disappear and pop up someplace
else. So it's a challenge in New
Mexico because of poverty.
People are moving, um, sometimes
they have to, there's a number
of things going on, so I just
want to acknowledge that I do
believe PD has made tremendous
effort, um, and that has to be
acknowledged, um.
So there's many variables that
are out of control. Now, my
question
I, um, by July 1st, there has to
be outside expert consultant.
How is that going?
Mr. Chair, sorry, I forgot to
address you.
Mr. Chair and Representative. So
the, uh, we are in the middle of
working on this already as uh
the director mentioned, we, we
spoke with him about it as well.
We have received several um
several requests from outside,
um,
Individuals and organizations
that are interested in, in
providing that support to the
agency, um, and we are uh
working with our legal team as
well to, to figure out the best
way to procure um an outside um
individual or organization as
quickly as possible, and, and,
um, to make sure that they are
qualified.
Thank you.
And Mr. Chair and um maybe a
great specifically.
Um,
In this remedial plan
incorporating input from
plaintiffs stakeholders.
Um, I think it's important that
we realize
All the stakeholders and there's
been a turnover in PE that makes
it difficult, our special
education leadership has changed
a lot.
And um,
So some of these targets are
hard when you have changing
staff, you've got changing
secretaries, changing stuff in
special ed.
Um
My question is, how are we going
to get people to help draft the
remedial plan. How are we gonna
get representation from the
stakeholder groups.
Is there a plan for that in
place?
Uh, we are developing a plan.
There is not currently a
developed plan for how to engage
with all of the stakeholders
needed, um, to
Uh, to rep and you're exactly
right. There is, there's a large
breadth of uh stakeholders that
will be interested in providing
input um on the plan, and that,
that will be part of the
process, but we, um,
With the tight timeline that we
have, we've not yet been able
to, we have not yet put that
together.
Uh, Mr. Chair, do we have an
estimate of when that plan will
be in place since there is such
a tight.
Deadline? No, I, I don't know
that. Um, the secretary will be
here this afternoon and she will
have some slides on the, on the
response to the Martinez Yazi
lawsuit as well.
Thank you. Um, that's really
On my questions for right now,
but I just feel it's important
to acknowledge the efforts that
have been made, even if they're
not satisfactory.
continually made over the last 5
years, and I think
The department in light of
changing leadership, changing
positions within the departments
that are responsible for that,
it's a challenge. So thank you
for your work. Thank you for
being stable
under what, what is your
official deputy secretary
assistant secretary.
I want to acknowledge that
you're the longest standing
person we've had before the
committee. Thank you. Thank you,
thank you, representative. I
really appreciate uh the kind
words, not just about me, but
about the work that the agency
has done. We are working.
very hard. Um, uh, uh.
For all students in New Mexico,
but in particular also to make
sure that we uh take care of
this, um, the order for this
lawsuit. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. And there may be
other questions, so stay nearby,
and I appreciate you being able
to handle things kind of on the
fly or when, when things come
up, it's always nice having you
here. Representative Vice Chair
Romeo.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um, I
did have a question, Greg, if um
you had mentioned that there
were several requests of folks
to be a part of this, um, as
consultants.
Were they solicited or have they
volunteered or both?
So, I'm aware of one that was
unsolicited. I know that there
was another one, but I don't
know if that was solicited or
not.
OK, so then, Mr. Chairman, then
the department is actively
seeking folks and reaching out
to folks to be the consultant on
this
primarily unsolicited,
so, um, no, I don't know that
the agency has reached out to
anyone in particular yet. I'm
not aware that that has
happened.
OK, as even being prospects of
leading this effort. No, I'm not
aware of, of the agency having
reached out to anyone yet. OK,
cool. I just wanted to clarify
that. Thank you. Um, and Mr.
Chairman, I mean, while, while
Representative Garrett was, was
talking about the PED and PED's
efforts on this. Um, I also
think, um, it's super important
like represent Baca mentioned
that um we, the LESC staff are
involved.
in this process because like the
motion states um.
The court believes this is on
page 2,
to, at the end, the court also
believes that this plan will
provide necessary guidance to
the legislature and executive
branches of government,
particular, particularly when
making difficult budgetary
decisions that need to survive
political and economic shifts.
Um, I want to remind the the
LESC that part of our work over
the past few years is in the
roadmap, which are director is
going to give an update on for
tomorrow morning, um, that
We've been working on steadily
over the past few years and as
example, we've talked about
House Bill 63 and the changes to
the state equalization guarantee
quite a bit, um, that was an
integral part of the roadmap
that we've been working on and
part of that effort has been
that we, the legislative branch
have that.
Sort of consistency in terms of
membership. We have members come
and go, but we also have lots of
members that stay, um, and we
have a staff here that we can
leverage in the LESC in order to
um build on ideas that are going
to last a year, 5 years, 10
years down the road. So I think
it, it is super important and it
behooves the state that that we
at the LESC are a part of
whatever plan does.
get developed because we have
been working on it these past
few years. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, vice chair, uh,
senator is out.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much. I just I I'm gonna.
start with what they have been
talking about right there.
Whenever on page 3 of the court
order, it's talking about an
expert consultant. Did they give
you any realm of what to
constitutes.
an expert consultant, I'd like
to know what those.
Priorities are from the court.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman and
Senator Ezel for the question.
So the order does not specify
the exact criteria or
credentials in the meeting that
we've had with the public
education department so far and
I'll invite Greg to speak to
this too, if he so wishes. Um,
they will need to outline what
their expectations are for the
credentials of those folks, the
experiences that they might need
to have the expectations for
their work, and it's our
understanding that they intend
to really kind of develop that
list considering all of
The past court decisions in
what's expected in a
comprehensive remedial action
plan and solicit based on that
criteria.
And so the order itself is not
overly prescriptive in exactly
what those qualifications per se
need to be, um, but it is our
understanding that the
department intends to really
kind of evaluate their requests
or the the actual um intents to
do this work based on that
criteria.
Well
OK, Mr. Chairman.
Uh, Jessica also
Mr. Frosted at the bottom of
page 3 on the court order. This
is uh this injunction may result
in appropriate sanctions from
the court. Do we know what those
sanctions are?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Eel, um, those will be dependent
on the actual evaluation of the
comprehensive remedial action
plan that is submitted to our
knowledge and so the language
was pretty broad. The the court
hearing itself was really
interesting that the judge
mentioned there may be sanctions
if, for example, the plans
submitted if plaintiffs choose
to object to that plan, those
sanctions will likely follow
what those objections
specifically are. And so, um, if
we look at the arc of the last
decade of this.
case, it would likely mean
continued legal action and
potentially um additional
directives from the court for
specific items that we expect to
see, but it is a little bit
broad. Well, it, it sounds like
it is kind of broad. They're
wanting you to do something, but
they're not specifically saying
what has to be addressed and if
they
Find that you have failed to
comply with this in the courts
do take over. I'm I'm real
worried there.
I really am worried there.
I'm gonna jump back.
To page.
I think it's the 2nd page of
your handout.
Uh, the summary of plant
components requested by
plaintiffs. OK, it's saying
number 5, a system of technology
must be created that provides
all at-risk students and their
teachers, access to broadband
services and a dedicated digital
device both in school and at
home.
I'd like to know how that is
progressing. Do you have any
idea?
If
I know that the push was there
all homes in New Mexico has have
to have broadband. Well, that's
not the case. So I'm kind of
curious.
What are you hearing about all
hums of at-risk students.
Sure, thank you, Mr. Chairman,
Senator Esau. So this, uh, this
entire page, page 2 is dedicated
to that plaintiff's motion and
what they would have liked to
have seen in a plan. Um, this
one really follows, so one of
the updates in the case that
actually happened, I believe
2021 is there was a motion
around technology that was filed
by plaintiffs um in response to
what we were seeing with the
pandemic and educational
inequities around technology
being available to students and
so the September 2020.
For motion follows um that
request for technology. Uh,
again, this is what the
plaintiffs expected or hoped, I
should say, to see in a plan in
terms of um this connects to the
actual order from the courts,
that order does not mention
these specific land components.
And so it's a little unclear how
exactly these components will be
um involved into that process,
and this is a little bit then
into the public education
department's process for
developing a plan.
and the stakeholder groups that
they choose to talk to with
technology. Mhm.
And Mr. Chair and Senator, um,
in terms of devices, the agency
has made real progress in making
sure that all students have
access to a device. It is, I
believe, 98 or 9098 or 99% of
all students do have a device,
uh, that, that they have access
to. In some cases, that is a
cell phone and that is not um at
the level uh that the, that is
most beneficial to the students'
learning. And so we are, we're,
we continue to make progress in
that area. As far as broadband,
I don't have
that information at my
fingertips to provide, but, um,
the agency is, uh, we, the, the
state executive is working um
Diligently across the state to
increase
Um, broadband access.
OK.
And Mr. Chairman, I guess what I
want to point out in the summary
of the planned components
requested by the plaintiffs.
All 9 of 8 of those are.
Up to y'all to be able to
implement, but the 5th 1.
Whenever you're talking about
that broadband service, that's
beyond y'all's control.
And, and I have a problem there.
Mr. Frost, whenever you're
talking about some students are
having to use their cell phone.
We still have various through
throughout the state.
that if you want to use your
cell phone, you better climb to
the top of that hill or that
mountain, be able to get
service, even down there where I
live, there's areas out on the
ranch. I do not have service out
there.
So that's kind of disturbing.
Right now we have private
enterprise in my particular area
that is trying to get everybody
hard,
Everybody wired in.
But that one is gonna be a
toughie to do because that is.
Independent
Work that's being done that
You have no control over.
So that's a big ra ra.
As far as I'm concerned.
Mr. Charing Center, so there are
things that the agency has been
working on, um, there are
different services, Starlink and
others, um, that um that are
allowing access to students at
home that may not have that may
not yet have access to broadband
and we work closely with the
Office of Broadband as well. Um,
to make progress, but you're
right, there, there's still lots
of areas of the state that
aren't covered and it's not as
easy to give a student broad.
Bad as it is to give them a
device.
I agree with that.
All I can say is
Your timeline that they're
laying out right here is kind of
putting y'all under the gun.
So
Here we are.
Jump off. Thank you very much,
Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Caballero.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and um
thank you, Jessica. Thank you.
Mr. Brett for your being up
there for your presentation,
Jessica, you captured
um everything.
Extremely well. I will say, Mr.
Chair, that I, uh, sat through
the court hearing.
And um was able to listen very
intently.
Um, to the arguments, and I'd
like to begin by saying that I
think the plaintiff's attorneys
uh need to be commended because
they did an excellent job of
placing everything into
perspective, historically, as
well as bringing it to forward
in presenting um why it is
important for us to perceive the
way the court ordered, um, and
Mr. Chair in um
Staving
Um, the most important key
elements that had not been met
in terms of the original court
order, and the need for further
compliance. So, um, I was real
happy, Mr. Chair, with the
judges, um, order, uh, the
timeline, yes, is um extremely
tight, but I think what we need
to do, and I think PED and thank
you for being here, and I know
we're gonna to have further
discussion this afternoon.
I think what's important is to
avoid the pitfalls of the past
and why we're still in
noncompliance is that we have to
really have PED.
Understand the importance of
what this quote unquote expert
consultant.
is or who this will be.
It's not necessarily a
A person
But we need to acknowledge that
we have a pool.
Of experts around the state.
That has been working on
transforming our education
system.
We've seen them before our
committees. We've entertained
them, um, their, their expertise
for our own personal or
individual uh legislation, um,
drafting and, and pursuit of
legislation. Um, we know they
exist.
For us to truly turn around and
comply and meet the timelines
and comply with what the court
ordered. PED must change their
mindset.
Change their approach and
acknowledge and accept the fact
that this pool of expertise is
available, ready and willing.
And they are part of the um
plaintiffs, um.
Support.
They are the stakeholders that
the court acknowledged in the
court order.
The court order specifically
mentions stakeholders.
Together with PED, Mr. Chair.
And so
You have to remove yourself from
the way we've been doing
business the way we've been used
to doing things and adopt a new
way of doing things.
In order to create the systemic
change we need to create to
address the continued um
failures in our education. In
the failures, Mr. Chair, have to
do with tackling the root
causes.
Of what caused us to be here in
the first place.
Once we tackle those root
causes, or we at least begin to
address them and incorporate
them into how we're going to
change.
Our delivery of education, um, I
think we're going to continue in
the same cycle of missed.
Steps, missteps.
So I heard all of this.
Um
In the, in the proceeding, but I
also um understand that there,
in order to do the comprehensive
plan that has been suggested.
It is enormous. It is a tight
time frame. If you do not bring
in the expertise that you need,
the stakeholders and um
These are the persons that truly
understand.
What
Cultural.
And linguistic.
Relevance means in education.
These are the experts that
understand.
What the root causes are.
For, um, our students, not
succeeding.
These are the experts that truly
understand um what
multicultural multi multilingual
education means and how to best
to incorporate it. These come
from our tribal communities,
these experts, these come from
our Hispanic communities. These
come from all of our educators
that work in those communities.
In local in the local rural
communities as well as in our
local urban communities that
have been educating.
Um, our students and that have
been incorporating these methods
and methodologies.
Not because it's come down as a
standard, Mr. Chair, of any
anyway from the PED but because
they
Understand it that.
Core education has to be
addressed if we're with our
cultural and linguistic
relevance. So,
Again, it becomes monumental if
you look at it, singular and
narrowly, but it becomes doable
and successful if we look at it
comprehensively and a way an
opportunity to be able to use um
and work with in partnership,
this valuable.
Group of stakeholders.
And um so I can't emphasize that
enough, so.
My, my question, now that you're
here, is
Is PED willing?
Ready and willing to accept the
expertise from this valuable
pool.
That I've just suggested.
And if so, will you bring them
to the table?
And if so, will you accept?
What they define as relevant to
the core con uh rulings of the
first order and this order.
Mr. Chain Representative. So I,
I, I can say absolutely that the
public education department is
very interested in, in hearing
stakeholder feedback and in
using the resources that we have
around the state, uh around the
states to take advantage of the,
the cultural and linguistic
richness that the state offers,
Um, in terms of uh being able
to, to state that we would um
accept anyone uh
individuals, uh,
I, I guess
Um
To, to directly answer the
second part of your question,
which was, will, will the agency
accept the the uh accept the
recommendations, uh, uh, it's
difficult to know what the
recommendations would be and so
I can't, I can't, Greg can't,
secretary may be able to this
afternoon, but, uh, to say that
for sure, we would accept those
recommendations.
Mr. Chair and Greg, I point you
to page 2.
And the summary of planned
components requested by the
plaintiffs. These are the 9
critical components put forth by
the plaintiffs and the
plaintiffs are not just the two
that are named, but the
plaintiffs are the communities
behind all these these
plaintiffs, these plaintiffs
represent the oppressed
communities that have suffered
from not experiencing success in
their education.
So,
these components are critical.
These would be critical to
developing a comprehensive plan
in order to comply with the
order. They're not difficult.
They're, they're pretty
Much what you've been hearing.
But there's been a reluctance or
resistance by PED in the past to
accept.
What the meaning is associated
with each one of these
components, and that's why Mr.
Charro's critically important
for us to have the PED.
But it's also equally important
to have ESC's expertise.
Valuable knowledge.
A valuable research, valuable
history that has contributed to
valuable reports that have been
given not only to us, Mr. Chair,
but to PED in
The recent years in attempt to
respond to um making our
education.
For the student's named in the
in the lawsuit, not just
relevant.
But sufficient.
To meet for them to be
successful in life. So, Mr.
Chair,
It, it's right here.
These are the main components.
These can be put into a
comprehensive plan.
And that's what will be brought
forth.
So it's not just hearing and
using, using, it's not just
hearing.
But it, it's accepting.
This group of stakeholders as
the experts.
In order for it, for this plan
to be successful, so we'll go
on. I'll bring that up again
later, but I just, you answered
the question, so thank you. I
have another question, Mr.
Chair. OK, I just want to point
out the judges determined the
process of selecting of getting
someone selected as being the
expert, uh, and so, you know,
that process is not played out
yet, and so influencing, you
know, who that's going to be or
why.
what they have to do, that's
more the judge's role, I think,
and yeah, I don't think putting
uh Mr. Frostadt on, on the spot
saying, will they accept this or
not, that really is not our role
here at all, but please go on
with your other question.
Um,
thank you, Mr. Chair. And um
you're correct. Um, the court
order on page 3, letter B does
speak about, just speak to the
export consultant, but it also
um addresses in further and I
kind of lost the page where I,
where he talked about this, the
stakeholders.
And LSC.
And um so I just, I just wanted
to respond to you on that. So
they're they're the court order
never really the court orders
don't ever really give
specifics. They give guidance,
and so that's why this is an
important discussion to have at
this point. So, um,
In order for that guidance to be
in place.
Excuse me. So I have another
question, and the other question
has to do with um
I have to find my notes now, um,
Mr. Chair, sorry when I got off.
Uh, base with your, um,
Oh, back to LESC. So
There was considerable
discussion in the court hearing
concerning um LESC.
And some
uh not quite sure who brought
this up previous to me, um,
it, it is voluntary. I think
it's, it was stated in your
report, Jessica, that uh LASC's
um
Involvement would be voluntary
and then Mr. Senna already
stated that you're already
working with uh PED.
And so,
Ellie and C
2 PED already knows and has
identified the pool of
stakeholders in the past that
have been working with you, um,
I think you have a list.
And um I think they've presented
things in the past.
Uh, or you've done I I what I'm
trying to figure out
How
The list of
Stakeholders that the judge
refers to will be afforded to
PED in order for PED to be able
to comply.
With the expertise needed for
development of a comprehensive
plan.
Mr. Chair, uh representative
Roel Caveo. Uh, we don't have a,
a formal list of of
stakeholders, um, you know,
actually, we were just talking
about this earlier, you know, as
staff, uh, nonpartisan staff, we
really try our best to be guided
by best practice and research
and stakeholder engagement and,
and we've pointed to, you know,
our special education work a
couple of years ago, some of our
work around uh career technical
education and attendance as um
examples of how we've as staff
have tried.
To engage communities in those
important conversations, and I
think as as far as our
interpretation of this, uh, and
any input that we might provide
to the department, it would be
about being grounded in those,
in those best practices in
research and potentially
providing some advice or support
in engaging stakeholders
wherever they may be. To your
point about there are
established folks who, who care
about these things and have
brought forward their own ideas,
um, I think that's part of the
decision that the PED would have
to make.
And that the ideally the outside
consultant would guide that
process as well.
Um, thank you very much, Mr.
Chair, and thank you for uh.
Mr. Sinna and um
Everyone for your responses, uh,
finally, I just want to
reiterate that it requires a
different way of thinking.
For us to accept.
Not just a pool of community
people.
That have been around and that
have
Uh, interfaced with us and have
Presented to us in our
committees in the interim as
well as during the session.
It requires us to look at
The experts.
That we have some of the names,
I will tell you, Transform New
Mexico.
Um,
the Native American or American
Indian education group. There's
a num that even school boards
have come forward and talked
about how they're willing to
integrate and implement uh
elements that would be
successful. So we have a number
and tribal leaders, most
importantly, I mean, the major
components of this or the 23 uh
tribes, nations, and pueblos
that were participating.
as plaintiffs, and then our
Hispanic uh education group or
we have multiple experts. These
are not just lists of
individuals. These are experts.
Doctors, um, researchers, uh,
educators that have dedicated
their lives to uh education.
Still in the classroom, and
those that are retired, those
are in higher education.
I've already identified
The a list of the pool of
experts that could come together
with PED to ensure that we meet
the components that the
plaintiffs put forward.
That we comply with the recent
court order, meet the time
frame, and ultimately not be be
successful to the point where we
don't have to continue to be
raising motions after motions
after motions against PED in the
state for non-compliance. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Others.
On the list not send store.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
wanna
Go back and agree with the
comments of our vice chairson
Romero, about.
I have been worried for years
about the attorneys that we
asked to represent us in this
lawsuit because I agree that I
think uh ex-education experts,
uh, would be able to tell the
story of what the LESC has done
and what the PED has done in a
better way.
Um, so I certainly agree with
some of the comments of
Caballero, um, but I, I also
just want to, to say that I
believe that the PED has stepped
up in a huge way. And I'll just
give one example. Um,
Before I do that, I'll say that
I think part of our issues is
that we lost our first judge.
You know, Judge Singleton.
Uh, listen to this for years and
ruled, and I believe that she
kind of understood where the
problems were.
Um, but she's no longer with us,
and that has, I think, produced
all of this um.
Lack of focus for all of us.
Uh, so one of her quotes, this
came from the 8 pager, uh, not
the 608 pages of
Mostly park test scores.
Uh, showing how poorly.
We test.
On high stakes testing.
Uh, she said teachers must be
trained to teach reading with
direct, explicit sequential and
systematic instruction.
That's essentially part of the
definition of structured
literacy. So the PED uh and the
legislature for the past 5 years
has been spending $20 million on
professional development, and
the last two years, another
15 to 20 on a summer boot camps
before and after school
programs, uh, training teachers
so that they can teach everybody
how to read.
Last year, we had a phenomenal
increase in Native American
students' proficiency higher
than the rest of the state. They
increased by 5% to me, that is a
direct uh data point as a result
of what the PED and the
legislature has done the last 5
years. I don't know if the
people arguing before the judge
even know things like this
because it's a small part of a
much bigger picture, um.
You know, as with stakeholders,
we're all stakeholders, our
students are stakeholders, our
teachers, our our parents, our
stakeholders, so we're a motley
group.
From here to here, soup to nuts,
and I do believe that what we
have to focus on as these
students and how we want them to
succeed. To have their basic
language, to have their home
language, to be able to read and
write in their own language in
English.
Uh, so, uh, to be successful, to
go to either career or college.
Um, and we've done so much with
that career with the
apprenticeship programs with the
focus on CTE look good. Ah,
let's look at Rio Rancho with
their whole buildings dedicated
to it. We've not been sitting on
our hands. So what we've done to
the at-risk factor is stunning.
We have drilled down by using
the family and coming index to
really understand.
Poverty, the worst kind of
poverty, and that is where that
funding goes now, and there's so
much more of that. Uh, so,
I think this is a much bigger
picture, and I like the idea of
an outside expert.
That will come in and look at
everything we've done.
They'll look at transform.
They'll look at what the LESC
and the legislature has done,
um, because we've not been doing
nothing. We've been doing a lot.
Uh, I just think the problem is
so intensive. It, it's just so
problematic that we have all
these issues, and we worked at
all of them, and um
I'm just looking forward to
another uh Mississippi miracle
here in New Mexico after 10
years, uh, and I think we're on
track for that. But of course,
I'm not the judge, so.
But I just wanna shout out to
PED and LESC and the legislature
for the work we've done, and
it's extensive, and I just hope
those attorneys know what
they're doing.
You don't have to answer that,
correct?
Thank you. And just a couple of
comments as we finish up here.
Uh, this is a very bold timeline
that the judges sent has set,
uh, I know the pen is working on
meeting all of those and it that
sounds like the judge is very
serious about holding people to
such, um, and holding people
means all sides, uh, and
ultimately it's going to come
down to the legislature to
allocate the funds to make the
policy change.
s decisions, and things of that
sort and the administration to
implement all of those, uh,
similar to what Senator Stewart
was saying, I think we've done a
lot. Uh, I remember the request
from the plaintiffs when we
first started about changing the
at-risk index. Well, we've gone
over and beyond, we didn't do it
all at once like initially, but
we've done more than that, um,
and it really comes down to
In order to meet the
requirements of the lawsuit,
it's not a series of actions.
It's what are the outcomes that
we get for our students, and I
think too often we focused on
what we're supposed to do
instead of what the goalposts
are, where, how do we know that
we get there and things that,
well, we'll let you know if
you've done enough. You can't
function like that.
And so, you know, I, I look
forward to regular updates as
this moves forward, uh, from
first the PE as the outside
expert consultant is chosen and
then updates going along as to
how it's moving forward. Uh,
this group is not not us this
group, but those outside
consultants working with the PE
and with expertise and support
from the LESC are really the
ones tasked with the tough job
of
adding up what it means to, to
change what we're doing in New
Mexico, so we're meeting the
needs of all students and what
those outcomes look like, and
outcomes are not a series of
things that we do. It's what is
a result of what we do and, you
know, that's difficult. Um,
people hear me say regularly
that changes in education are
kind of like buying savings
bonds. You don't buy the bond to
be upset that 6 months later you
haven't gotten a full return on.
Your investment. It takes a
while for that to flow through.
Are we making the right choices,
the right policies to make
long-term changes in goals and
systems, and it's not a series
of activities, it's movement
towards goals and outcomes for
students and so with that I'll,
I'll get off my little soapbox
or whatever. I believe we are
scheduled for, for lunch at this
time. We are scheduled to come
back at 1:45, which I think
gives us a pretty healthy
lunch, um, so yeah, it's all
more than an hour and a half.
Please do come back on time to
go, oh, an hour and a half, I'll
head to Albuquerque for lunch
and you come back late, please
try and make sure back on time
and we'll try and start right on
time and get everybody on out of
here as, as scheduled. So thank
you all for a great morning and
