OK, we're going to get started
here today, and um now having to
do with special schools.
Um, we will go, let me see
which.
One is
Give me one minute here.
OK. The New Mexico School for
the Deaf.
Agency 980 in our packets in our
booklets, and we have Doctor
Herbolt here, the
superintendent, and I don't know
who the other nice lady is here.
You can introduce yourself.
Thank you, Senator Rodriguez. My
name is Joanne Corwin, and I'm
the director of the early
intervention program. I see.
Great. Thank you very much. OK,
then we can start.
And thank you for having the
interpreters here, and we can
start with your presentation. So
I am speaking a little bit
slower or slower than I normally
do because I wanna make sure I'm
not too quick for the
interpreters. So thank you for
being here.
Thank you so much, Senator
Rodriguez.
Members of the committee. It's
always a pleasure to come and
present before you.
Every year?
I want to talk a little bit
about a few funding requests
that we want to make.
And while I have a bigger group
with me today, as you've
noticed, and I usually do. I
have our director of early
intervention, as well as our new
director of finance, Teresa
Casillas.
I've also brought 2 students
with us today.
I have Jessie and Julian, and
they're really interested in the
legislative process and since
we're just 2 miles down the
road, I thought, why not bring
them so they can get a firsthand
experience on how things work
here.
So I'd like to focus on.
While I have a miss Corwin with
me today to talk a little bit
about our RPSP request.
Specifically, our RPSP request
as it deals with statewide
audiology and a statewide
audiologist. And that's
something that we are really in
support of, and maybe I can let
Miss Corwin talk a little bit
more about that. And if I can
direct you to this handout that
you see titled Infant Hearing
Diagnostic Project.
And it talks a little bit about
that initiative, and it looks
just like this one.
Give us a moment here, let me
make sure you have a lot of
people to file for. Yes, I
don't.
see that one here in my pile.
Let's see.
OK. Oh, this one here. Yes,
that's the one, and it's the
second page. Thank you.
That's the one.
You can proceed.
Thank you. New Mexico does a
great job of screaming every
newborn's hearing.
What we don't have capacity for
really here in New Mexico is for
the diagnostic step. So after
they've been screened at the
hospital, and if they refer on
their screening and they need
diagnostic services. There's
currently only 6 places in the
entire state that they can go
for that.
3 of them are in Albuquerque.
Out of the 61 of them is a pilot
project. It is no hunger pilot
project that we started in
Gallup, New Mexico.
Before we did this, tele
audiology program and tele
audiology, what that involves is
that we have an off-site.
Audiologist, pediatric
audiologist who through
telehealth is able to with the
assistance of an assistant who's
on site, the on-site assistant
goes ahead and puts the, the,
all of the equipment that's
needed on to the baby. Make sure
that the baby's asleep.
And then the audiologist came
through the computer through
telehealth can diagnose the
baby.
Prior to this in Gallup, New
Mexico, then the average age of
diagnosis was 19 to 20 months,
and that might seem like it's
early, but if you think about
how much language happens so
early.
Um, federal law, talks about the
need for 136, which is screening
by one month, diagnosis by 3
months.
And then into early intervention
by 6 months.
That means that we were way
beyond that. And so we've gone
from 19 to 20 months in that
area to 7 to 8 weeks. I'm not
going to go into a lot of other
detail around this, except to
say that given that sort of
critical time period for brain
development, for language and
cognitive development, it is
essential that we have early
diagnosis.
Even though we have the 3
centers in Albuquerque, where a
family to be able to travel to
Albuquerque for diagnosis of a
newborn infant is very
prohibitive.
The baby must be asleep during
the testing. If they have
traveled 4 hours to get to
Albuquerque. They're not gonna
be asleep. So the need for rural
New Mexico is high, and we're
hoping that you will be able to
support us in this effort. Thank
you very much, Doctor Herbel.
Would you like to say anything
else about this, or do you want
to continue with your other
requests.
Members of the committee.
I would love to add to Miss
Corwin's words.
I didn't know prior to this.
That only 1 out of 20 babies are
identified during the screening
and our actual deaf and hard of
hearing.
So the motivation for families
to do or pursue diagnostic
testing, often isn't there
because they think their child
is fine.
So, sometimes they're waiting
months before they figure out
that their child does in fact
have a hearing loss.
Or that there is um a, you know,
a loss of language and that's
happening really early, and we
know that when a child has
access to early language, their
trajectory in life is similar to
their hearing peers. They have
equal opportunities.
Um, they have great grades and
great academic achievement. And
so all we're asking is $40,000
to fund this statewide
audiologist position.
Excuse me, 100 and that was an
interpreter's error, $140,000 to
fund this position.
New Mexico School for the Deaf
Partners through all across the
state um to uh partner with the
Navajo Nation's other agencies
in order to have one consistent
audiologist to sustain this
program here in New Mexico. I
will now move on to the next
topic, if that's OK with
everyone.
Yes, you can proceed that.
Ask
Miss Casillas to come, sit with
me, because I do want to talk
about our financial requests.
Our land and maintenance and
permanent fund.
It's not keeping up.
With inflation.
With salary increases. And so
that is a concern for us.
The state has decided
On increases for cost of living
adjustments, and we're falling
behind.
Mostly because we are getting
increases.
But for like example, to propose
a 3% increase this year of the
legislative budget.
That excuse me, the legislative
appropriations that 3% is only
25% of our budget.
And it's 75% of our budget that
comes from the land permanent uh
or maintenance fund. And so it
is not keeping up with that. And
we're asking you to consider the
numbers that you see before you.
And think of how much we really
need to continue to support our
programs and run our progress at
the New Mexico school for that.
Um, we're predicting a shortfall
of $2 million and we're able to
make adjustments to
To stay afloat, but there are
other things to consider. Things
like
If legislature passes the
$10,000 stipend, the 5000 to
$10,000 stipend or special
education, uh, teachers or
special educators, um, that
funding goes through PED through
the public schools, but it
doesn't come to us. So we're
asking you to please think about
funding our special schools, our
programs.
As you pass some of these
initiatives.
It could cost us about $500,000
if we had to pass the same level
of stipend for all of our staff.
OK, Doctor Herboldt, um,
I'll wait a moment here. OK. Did
you have anything else you want
to add to that, or is that your
final request into the budget.
Uh, I request is a little vague,
I admit.
But it's really difficult to
predict exactly how much we will
be receiving from the land.
The projection is high for next
year.
And if it's high,
We're not as worried.
But even with
Different possible increases,
for example, the 3% salary
increase for educators.
Special ed stipend, etc. We
would still have a shortfall of
$2.4 million.
Obviously, we would have to make
choices within our programs of
what we want to continue to
support, um.
If you look at the back of that.
Great paper.
You'll get a better idea of
where we are.
OK, thank you for that. Did you
want to specify any specific
category here from this sheet,
Doctor Herboldt.
That you're talking about.
Members of the committee.
Senator Rodriguez.
If you look at FY 26
projections that last column on
the right hand side.
These are the projections that
we get from the state Investment
council.
Other projections you see listed
there as well are based on the
3% salary increases, etc. So we
would be operating at a 2.4
million shortfall. And again,
that's if the $10,000 stipend or
special educators passes.
That's another 50 $570,000. So
you can see there the breakdown
of those costs on that final
column on that chart.
We're doing an awesome job of
keeping our programs
operational, um, making do with
what we have now, a lot of our
students are doing great and
doing very well. We have a
phenomenal early intervention
program, a huge outreach program
we want to maintain that level
of services, if possible.
Thank you very much for
explaining that, Doctor Herbolt.
I think we heard your concern in
your request, and this has been
an ongoing issue for a while,
uh, in that the school for the
deaf.
Uh, personnel do not get up to,
do not come up to par and at
level with other um state.
A Special ed programs because
the state
Supports and puts in
appropriations through stipends
as we have talked about now for
special education through um
other programs, but the school
for the Deaf is left out, and
you are expected to come up with
it from your own funds.
And most of the time you don't
have it, so you are having to
cut other programs and take from
special needs kids.
To be able to just meet.
The same level.
And be at a level playing field
with the
With other special ed programs.
So I'm happy that you brought up
the 2.42 million for $193,191 as
specific as you are, that you
will be in a shortfall unless um
The state accommodates and adds
to your budget for this, and we
do understand what you
mentioned, that if the $10,000
stipend that the state.
is proposing.
Uh, for special ed passes then
this creates this shortfall for
you unless we include you in
that.
Proposal.
Thank you. I wanted just to make
sure we understand
exactly what you're saying. So,
all right. Um, and
At this
point we've got um yeah, before
we go on to questions, did you
have something, John, you want,
OK, uh, let me go on to
Representative Harry Garcia, who
had a comment or question
representative.
Excuse me, madam chair, um,
Thank you for the presentation.
You know, I had a, I had an
opportunity to visit that school
a couple years ago, you know,
they were struggling then with
funding, you know,
And Madam Chair and presenter,
you know, I supported cause, you
know, these students that have a
disability has the same right.
To succeed in life like
everybody else does. Just cause
you lose your hearing or your
sight doesn't mean that you're
listed a list of a person.
And we need to support these
people to make sure that these
uh kids survive, you know, make
sure they're productive members
of the community, because if we
don't do it, they're going to
fall through the cracks and then
we're gonna have a bigger
problem, you know, that's the
common and the concern, Madam
Chair, that we really, really
need to address, you know, it's
too bad that uh you're gonna be
in a $2 million shortfall.
Because if you cut, if you cut
projects or, or classes for
these people.
Then what happens at the end of
the day, that's my concern and
I'm in full support of you and
uh if I could do anything to
help you. I'll be more than glad
to do it. Thank you, man.
Yes, thank you very much for,
for recognizing that. Uh, I
appreciate that because having
seen the need firsthand at the
school for the deaf and the, the
special needs that exist there,
um, I, I hope that we can
Finally erase this deficit. It's
a year to year deficit that
continues, and every year we
have the school for the deaf
having to pay interpreters.
taking off from their time that
They can be serving deaf kids.
to come here and ask the
legislature to just make it
whole again every year. It is
time that we
Replenish this fund once and for
all and stop expecting the scoop
for the deaf to draw from their
fund balances.
And this goes for all special
schools.
They are constitutionally
established schools, and we have
an obligation.
And so we shouldn't do it. Let
me further say that we shouldn't
be doing this out of obligation.
We should be doing this because
it's the right thing to do.
It is something that we should
not be allowing to be created,
as we see here today, and that's
a deficit of 2.4, almost $2.5
million. So hopefully we can get
that corrected and we have a
Senator Gonzalez who wants to
comment. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, we have heard your request
and uh at this time uh.
Uh, we're not in a position for
making a motion.
But I am recommending that we,
uh,
Accept what they're presenting
to us and that we can work with
them, you know, it's really, uh,
Oh, as you mentioned, but it's
not a, we're not talking about
bringing to parody.
And we should support it to the
level that they're requesting.
Thank you, Senator Gonzalez. Uh,
do we have any other comments or
questions from this committee,
uh, yes, Representative
Catherine Brown.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, um,
doctor, I, I see that there are
several sites already for tele
audiology, uh, diagnosis, and it
says you're gonna add 3 others
in rural areas of the state.
Could you tell us where those
will be located.
Adam chair.
Representative Brown.
I'm actually gonna refer to Miss
Corwin, and she knows exactly
which sites uh those three refer
to.
Madam Chair, Representative
Brown, thank you for that
question. Right now, then the,
then the areas that we're
looking at are, uh, we already
have um equipment ready for um
the Shiprock Farmington area.
We also are have um things ready
for Clovis Portalis, most likely
we are in uh some uh
conversations with ENMU right
now. We would like to do it as a
joint effort.
And then there's also some
conversations around the Roswell
Las Cruces area, you would think
that Las Cruces would have
capacity and they do not, as the
second largest city in New
Mexico, oftentimes then families
go out of state or diagnosis
that is also prohibitive, but
one of the problems too is that
then they're outside of our um
our safety net. Children's
medical services.
tries to follow those children
to make sure they get hearing
aids, to make sure that they get
early intervention. If they go
outside of the state to Lubbock
or wherever, then we don't, we
don't find them until they're
older. So thank you for that
question.
Thank you, Representative Brown.
We also um wanted to let you
know that the request for the
audiologist is very reasonable
at the very least we should be
having audiologist testing our
children to see at an early age,
I passed a bill when I first
came into the Senate, and it's a
newborn hearing testing bill and
um requiring hospitals and
delivery centers to test
newborns for.
For hearing loss, and I'm, uh,
yeah, I'm saddened to see that
only one out of 20 that have a
hearing loss or a deaf from
birth, um, are actually
diagnosed accurately. So, um,
having audiologists uh available
to be doing that um early on is
very critical. So thank you so
much for that request. Uh, that
one is in the in the um
paperwork I have here as being
recommended for that particular
audiologist that you're
requesting. Now, as you can see,
um, the support here is, is big
for your request to at least
bring you up to the level that
others.
are at
You're not asking for more,
you're asking just to be brought
up to a level playing field.
What is so wrong with that?
So I implore this legislature to
finally close this gap once and
for all for our most vulnerable
populations, you know, we take a
lot for granted. This is a
population.
That lives in a silent world.
That is structured for the
hearing.
I don't know if anyone
understands what that limitation
is.
But I don't think we can,
because when we're born,
Soon after we hear and we
continue this population goes on
a lifetime with no hearing.
Displaced and displaced
permanently from a society that
lives, survives, and thrives
with communication.
Here we are with the deficit
again every year.
Just to bring them up to the
level that other special needs.
In half.
So let's get that changed and
hopefully uh replenish your
budget and make it whole, Doctor
Herbold, thank you for being
here today. Uh, I don't have
anyone else on the list for
questions, but um I appreciate
you coming here and we're gonna
move on to the school for the
blind, um, visually impaired,
um, and unless you have
something else you want to say.
I don't want to cut you off.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I just want to again
express my thanks and my
appreciation for your work, um,
and all of the work from all the
representatives. I know you guys
work tremendously hard for the
children of in the state of New
Mexico, and I can't express how
much I really appreciate it, and
I think, uh, we do a good job of
showing off of our programs with
our annual report, and so we
shared this proudly with you so
that you can read about our
accomplishments. One student
here, by the way, Julian, uh,
who was on the cheerleading
squad last year, won first
place.
In a national competition
against other schools for the
deaf of here in the nation, so,
um, that detail is also shared
in our annual report, and it's
just one of many
accomplishments. And with that,
I thank you.
you and let me say thank you to
Julian also and congratulations
to you.
Thank you for all
All right, we have next uh
coming up on the agenda.
Um, let's see, we've got the
school or we we you next, we
have to be sure yes, school for
the blind and visually impaired,
and then we have the New Mexico
Military Institute, so thank
you.
Madam Madam Chair members, thank
you for allowing me to speak
today. Um, my name is Heather
Miller. I'm the new
superintendent at NMSBVI. I
started on July 1st after our
illustrious Patricity be to
retired. Um, thank you for the
opportunity to share information
today about NSBVI, um, I just
want to talk about a little bit
some of our accomplishments over
the last year before I make our
budget requests.
Um, we of course have our two
campuses with a variety of
statewide programming, we were
able to serve 2,239 students
last year.
was 1649 of those happening
through direct services.
Our outreach department
continues to serve districts
around the state, we had 51 JPAs
in place last year.
To work on evaluations and
services. They also work with
our NMSU and NMSBVI, um, program
to certify teachers of the
visually impaired or orientation
mobility specialists and they
provide mentorship for that, or
birth to 3 department has been
able to expand their screening
materials and are reaching more
and more kiddos and provide very
extensive services around the
state.
Our instructional resource
center provides materials to
districts and students,
including brailed materials and
specialized teaching materials,
as well as teacher resources.
And our assistive technology
library provides not only the
equipment to students in
districts who request it, but
the training on how to use the
equipment and implement it
correctly.
On our campuses, we teach core
curriculum in line with the
expanded core curriculum, which
is designed for the skills that
we typically use to learn with
our vision. We have, we do about
80% of our learning throughout
our life, um, with our vision
and up to 90% in the classroom.
So the expanded core curriculum.
Allows us to teach kiddos those
skills that they didn't have
that in incidental vision
learning through, which allows
them to have those quality
education experiences and
successful post-secondary
experiences.
This last year we participated
in Make 48, which is a
nationwide competition among
schools for the blind, students
have 48 hours to design, build,
and advertise, um, a contraption
of sorts that addresses a need
that's presented to them. That
was such a successful experience
for the kiddos who attended that
we brought that model into our
school and we have created a day
where we immerse our students
into project-based learning and
tie STEM into
Our core curriculum and the
expanded core curriculum, which
has allowed us to not only grow
their academics, but also help
them learn those teamwork
skills, collaboration skills,
problem solving, and life
skills.
We had a student this last year
who wanted to be a landscaper as
his post-secondary goal.
And he designed a sensory
garden, so we worked with him to
build that sensory garden and is
now on our Al Gordo campus, and
it has elements that reach your
senses of touch, gearing, smell,
so that way you can have a full
experience when you're in there
for all of our kiddos. We have
wind chimes up a nice water
fountain, all of our plants have
beautiful smells and we have
everything labeled with braille
for our kiddos.
Um, we also updated our
strategic plan this last year to
make sure that we are in
alignment not only with best
practices in education, but that
we remain leaders in our fields.
We engage in many research
opportunities and are currently
part of research studies
statewide, nationally and
internationally. And we are
always looking for opportunities
to expand on that.
We've partnered with businesses
like Explorer to help them
increase their accessibility.
And we've partnered with the
American Printing House for the
blind to create learning modules
that are now being used on a
nationwide level.
So our budget requests for
fiscal year 26, we did estimate
a 3% salary increase.
So you will see what that salary
increase, it does leave us with
a shortfall, a potential
shortfall of a little over $4
million.
We did not include the stipends
in that, um, that is a separate
expense that would occur if the
stipends did come to fruition
and need to come out of our
budget, and that would range
between 1,040,000 and 790,000
depending on the criteria of the
staff that would receive those
stipends.
So based on those numbers,
NMSBVI respectfully requests
funding for any of those salary
increases or stipends, which
will allow us to stay
competitive with other school
districts and continue to
recruit and retain our current
employees.
And I just have to say I'm so
grateful for everything New
Mexico has done. I've, I, Patty
has just shared wonderful things
about the support she's received
from the legislators over the
years and I'm excited to, to be
here and be a part of that. Um,
I also hear rumor, um, Madam
Chair, that you're coming up on
retirement, so I extend my
congratulations for that.
But um, I am happy to answer any
questions.
Thank you, um, very much for
that presentation. Do we have
any questions or comments from
the committee?
OK. I just need some short um
clarification again, your total
amount that you're in a deficit
now that you're requesting help
for, what is the total again? It
would be $4,218,628.
All right, and that's a pretty
much most of it, if not all,
goes to the for to keep you at
par with your salary increases
like everyone else, right? OK.
All right. Thank you very much
for that, and I don't think
there are any questions or
comments, so we're gonna make it
short and we thank you for your
work. Thanks for being
innovative and for helping our
special populations. Thank you
so much for your support. Thank
you. Yes, we will take this
number into consideration, very
seriously. Thank you.
All right, we've got next the
New Mexico military institute.
There we go, agency 978.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you for hearing
us today. My name is Colonel
David West, chief of staff for
the New Mexico Military
Institute on my 19th year there,
and so it's been around a while,
I can tell you boiler numbers
and things.
I have with me today our uh uh
Colonel Dina Kerne, who's our
chief of financial officer as
well.
Uh, into my president,
Superintendent Brigadier
Generals McBurnett sends his
regards uh to the committee with
much appreciation for your past
and continued support.
Um
General McBurnett is attending a
previously scheduled event this
week. I remind the committee is
still an active US Army officer
and Army reserves.
Uh, he has met with Chairman
Munoz and various other
legislative members as well as
the governor, a higher ed
secretary and staff.
And certainly General McBurnett
does plan to be present during
the upcoming legislative session
and looks forward to meeting all
other legislators.
Again, it's a reminder, the New
Mexico Military Institute, which
was established in 1891 and
located in Roswell is a
prestigious military boarding
school and junior college.
Which is renowned for its
discipline and rigorous academic
environment and leadership
development programs. It's often
referred to as the West Point of
the west.
And mind is unique in its dual
role as a high school and as a
junior college.
Offering rigorous academics
programs combined with the
structured military lifestyle.
With a commitment to fostering
excellence and my emphasizes
character development.
Physical fitness and academic
achievement.
Its cores of cadets.
Provide students with a sense of
camaraderie and teamwork while
instilling values such as
integrity, responsibility, and
respect.
Graduates of EMI go on to excel
in military service, higher ed,
civilian careers with many
attending prestigious
universities and commissioning
into our armed forces.
The Institute is a well-kept
campus, historical traditions,
and a focus on leadership
training make it a compelling
choice for students seeking a
transformative educational
experience that prepares them
for the challenges of the
future.
In my legacy of shaping
well-rounded disciplined leaders
continues to make its a standout
institution in American
education.
We could not accomplish our
successes without the support of
the New Mexico legislature and
our governments.
In particular, we would like to
extend a hearty thank you to
this committee and each of the
members for not overlooking a
very special state educational
institution.
We also extend our special
thanks to your and our LFC
analyst, Connor Jorgensen.
HED secretary.
Uh, Rodriguez, her staff, and
certainly Governor Michel Leon
Grisham for their input and
guidance.
We've provided the committee
with some informational packets
to provide all of you with
what's going on withinMI to put
some kind of faces uh with the
names.
It lists the programs and
outcomes.
And certainly uh uh provide you
someone you might be familiar
with.
Some key points in another sheet
that I provided you, the white
sheep there.
Um
Points to what we believe are
Good returns on investment. I'll
just hit a couple.
were listed as the number one
community college in New Mexico.
And number 16 in the nation,
which puts us at the top 2%.
Our SAT ACT scores are 9% above
the national average, and that
have been for the last 10 years.
We are 4 time back to back
regional stem champions.
One of only 4 military junior
colleges in the United States.
We commissioned over 35 new Army
officers every year, the most in
this region.
Innama is 134-year-old
educational institution.
With the inclusion of the NMMI
preparatory Academy, which now
serves grade 6 through 8.
And do the two-year college.
I will tell this committee that
average out of 10 students that
we test for proficiency in the
state of New Mexico, 7 of them
do not.
qualify at grade level.
So we intended to reach down
into the more informative years,
6th, 7th, 8th, to try and
address that issue.
Our overall enrollment has
increased by just over 5% this
past year.
Even though in MI has no online
or distant education option.
We have increased our New Mexico
student enrollment, a matter
that the legislator had brought
up to us multiple times.
From over a decade average of
29%.
Currently 48%.
For the 2024, 25 academic year.
And we anticipate that that
increase will continue to go
over 50%.
2025, 26.
And finally, we have over 25%
females in the core.
That's on average higher than
any of the national academies.
And 38 US states.
Uh, and territories include our
cadets, as well as 25 foreign
countries, which make up only
23% of our core.
Madam Chairman, members of the
committee from a budgetary
standpoint, we generally would
convey that we agree with the
submittals of higher ed
department.
However, there are a few things
I just want to point out.
And certainly we want to give
thanks to what Madam Chairman,
you've addressed in some other
manners to the other special
schools.
And my, uh,
Understands that it's at times
when there's an increase for
salaries. Last year it was 3%,
year before 6%. Those are not,
do not get funded to the special
schools, as you pointed out.
And the point is, we certainly
appreciate Secretary Rodriguez's
effort last year in the
legislature to address this
issue for MMI and the other
special schools. We just want to
remind you that if it occurs,
we're not funded the same.
One of the issues that we're
concerned with this year is the
General Services Department is
transferred the health coverage
Authority over to the HCA.
And last year we were asked to
uh fund a shortfall, which costs
about $600,000.
We've been notified that this
year it's a $37 million
shortfall to the institutions.
We don't have the invoice on
that yet, but certainly are
concerned about what that might
mean to us.
The other is athletic travel. In
the past, we've come to the
legislature and others about uh
our continued regards of
athletic travel and again to
remind the legislature here,
NMMI is not only NJCAA but also
in MAA, so it also competes here
in the state.
But certainly the cost of
athletic travel and associated
in uh inflationary factors in
transportation, our rural
location.
And limited number of
contractors located in
southeastern New Mexico cause us
concern in this area.
Moving on to capital
requirements.
The higher ed department
submitted a project for us for
various campus plumbing projects
for $2.25 million. We certainly
agree with that.
Uh, it's wonderful to have a
historic institution, which is
romantic at some level, and at
some level it's uh troubling.
They have a historic facility.
So we greatly appreciate the
legislator's support in helping
us in those factors.
Innaiah um.
Currently pursuing a women's
softball program to address our
equity in sports numbers as
well.
So we don't have anything
formalized for that for today,
but certainly we're working on
that issue.
And
Finally, I would comment that uh
some of our challenges, of
course, are the nature of higher
ed these days or education these
days is online versus Nize very
structure. The idea that we have
a leadership laboratory, because
our students are domiciled 100%
there at the institute.
We're also concerned about the
academic rigor.
Our board is not found uh cause
to lower our standards. And so
we challenge our students and
it's difficult sometimes, it
makes it difficult for us to
turn away students as well.
Economic matters are always an
issue. Inflationary factors, the
cost of electricity or other
costs are always other
challenges of concerns.
And then, of course, there's the
percent of students who simply
choose a path such as NMMI.
As a veteran, I can tell you
less than 1% of the US
population serves.
And the point is, when you
consider that as somebody who
might want to get up at 6 in the
morning, put on a uniform and go
till 10 at night.
Gain a lot of benefit, but those
things are things that cause
people to pause, and maybe not
choose that pathway. So
certainly, we're always
concerned about that and in our
population.
With that, Madam Chair, I will
stand for questions.
Thank you. Yes, thank you very
much for that, for your
presentation and, and first let
me just say congratulations and
and all your accomplishments,
all that you do and all that you
are, uh, you're an amazing
school, successful, um,
wonderful programs, um, just, I
can't say enough, uh, and so
your problem and situation is
very much like the ones we face
with the other two special
schools is that, you know, the
state funds programs, uh
that
Basically
To help other programs puts you
in a deficit because we're not
bringing you up to that level
playing field, and we have to
always keep that in mind. Uh,
so, um, thank you very much for
that. I'm gonna defer to
questions or comments from the
uh committee, if there are any.
00, OK. Well, yes, we do, we
have one, Senator Gallegos,
thank you and thank you for all
you do. I, I live in Lee County,
so we have, uh, people that go
to, uh, family, and I think we
lose football to maybe, uh, but
just, uh, a thought. I was just
wondering and I've looked
earlier some your requests.
During the flood, did you guys
get affected anything on campus?
Uh, Mount Sherman of Senator
Gallos, I appreciate the
question. Um, we have two
interactions this last year and
catastrophic situations.
The short answer is no.
Uh, the long answer is it's our
community.
And so the point is, is uh the
other catastrophic issue was the
Riodosa fires, and I literally
pulled up in my driveway one
evening at 7 o'clock, the fire
marshal's standing in in my
driveway and.
Kind of an odd situation, right?
What do we need? He said, I need
your buildings. We have
thousands of residents from
Riodosa headed your way.
And so we ran and opened up
facilities, pulled beds down.
None of us were experts, but we,
by golly became uh efficient at
that. Uh, unfortunately, that
wasn't the end of it, that 10
inches of rain in the middle of
town.
Um, 2 people lost their lives
and just about 3 blocks from our
building.
And that's the difference, uh,
we often refer to the old post
up on the hill.
So I guess the foresight of
building there kept us out of
trouble, but
Uh, no, sir, we didn't have any
direct issues there, but we've
been in certainly involved as a
community.
Well, thank you for that chair
and uh I just know historically,
uh, you know, the, the areas
look to y'all for leadership
and, and education, and it's
just one of those things and
just the final point, uh, we've
always had the opportunity to
send people from us as, you
know, just uh donation someone
or our community, and that goes
a long ways to help kids out
that are in need. I appreciate
that, that scholarship.
And I don't know how long you've
done that, but the 8 years I was
in the house and 4 years in the
Senate, uh, I know we've sent a
lot of kids your way and get
mountain, yes, madam Chairman,
Senator Gyos you have, it's the
general Knowles scholarship for
those who are new.
Um, and the, the way the
legislature legislation is
written the statute's written,
as you may submit a name, so we
don't have to wait on you,
that's the name, but we can, uh,
generate names so that's only
for New Mexico resident
students.
And this past year we had,
there's 112 legislators, but
timing is always an issue. We
had 114 new.
We had over 250 students
attending NMI on that
scholarship. So thank you very
much for your support in that
area.
I'm pleased to have you on
Southeast you. Thank you.
Yeah
Yes, thank you very much, and we
have Representative Chatfield.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I was
just gonna ask you about the,
the Knowles scholarship and I
know that I used to have, get a
little packet and uh it, which
gave me the opportunity to
recommend somebody for that
legislative scholarship. I
haven't, I don't think I've
received that packet.
Recently, do I need to reach out
if, if somebody should happen to
show up that one, there was the
interested in going, do I need
to reach out to you or uh how's
that work nowadays, Madam
Chairman, Representative
Chatfield, you don't have to.
In fact, that's really our work,
um, so what we do is we uh
identify a number of young
people that would like to, and
if they qualify, so you have to
have a 2.0 and then eventually
maintain a sea and deportment,
which is the core grade.
Uh, if we get some number of
names, we try to match them back
with your area of
representation.
And then then we have our happy
moment and so first we say to
them, hey, congratulations,
you've been awarded this
scholarship. Secondly, this is
your, your state representative
uh for that, your sponsoring
representative for that, so you
don't have to do that and but
we'll let you know and um our
director of financial aid will
be up here during the session
with cadets, and they will be
inviting you to our, our
session, uh, our
Reception and those cadets uh
will be some of your sponsored
cadets.
Thank you.
Thank you, man.
Thank you, Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair, and
thank you for the presentation,
um, as far as the application,
is it still due in December, I'm
sorry, application
to apply, you know, for the
first year freshman,
uh, for the no scholarship, it
used to be, it used to be
December, so has that changed?
It has, Madam Chairman, uh,
Senator Gonzalez, we did change
the statutory requirement on
that some years ago. It's now
like July is a deadline.
But you know, families that are
waiting to hear about the
scholarship, and that was the
point of reading the statutes
and us attending to the business
is we want to go ahead and let
them know that they can get that
scholarship as far as assignment
goes, we'll do that certainly
before July.
That's the timeline. So there's
not a deadline on it of December
to clear that. OK. Thank you.
Uh, the other part, uh, just a
comment to Madam Cheryson.
I had the honor to serve with
us.
General Knowles in the House
side and
For quite a few years and uh.
You know, very, very defined.
Distinguished individual, you
know, that really worked hard
for that. The other part that uh
as far as um
The participants and candidates
that have come up from our area,
they have all been very
successful.
You know, it's that structure
and uh
Being in education one time at
that time, I asked the
superintendent, well, what are
you doing that we're not doing.
And they said it's quite this
way. It's this.
You have this cohort.
And then you have another
cohort.
And this one is trying to do
better than this one and they
just keep pushing up.
You know, their own limits, you
know, to.
Like a robber man just pulling
up.
And he says that's our success,
but a curriculum is very much
the same.
What every other public school
is, it's just that
You know, the effort that is put
in there into those cohorts.
Absolutely.
Madam Chairman, Senator Gonzalez
if if any of you have the
opportunity to come down, we
certainly invite you to come see
what's going on there and how
that works.
There's nothing more fantastic
than to see our young people
leading other young people in
the process of, of the
institute.
And it is a unique space and
unique place in the entire
world.
So thank you for your support.
Very well, thank you, thank you,
Rachel.
Thank you, Senator. Anyone else?
OK, I think we'll make this
short. We want to thank you,
Colonel West and Colonel, I got
your first name, Dina, but I
didn't remember your lastern
Kernan, thank you very much.
Oh, we had one more. Did you
have a question? OK, I'm so
sorry. Somebody raised her hands
here, so let's proceed.
There's been some media around
allegations of sexual harassment
by some of the cadets. What have
you been doing to effect and
improve in that arena?
Uh, Madam Chairman, uh,
representative, I certainly want
to point out I cannot speak on
the matters of litigation or or
uh investigation.
But what I would invite you is
you can go on our website, you
can read our safety and security
report, which has nothing but
goose eggs in that area.
Now remember that report, the
Clery Act is reports.
It's not adjudicated cases, it's
not criminal activity as defined
final, but it's simply reports.
So if I report a theft, it goes
on that list. So that's what you
see. You can look at every
school, every higher ed school,
that's a department, federal
Department of Education
requirement document.
That every school is required to
post.
So you can see how other schools
compared to ours as well.
We have that, we have vigorous
training at both the beginning
of the year, during the year,
posters everywhere, etc. to
safeguard against and mitigate
that.
I also will point out
You know, our students have
obligations as well.
And so we, you know, we have to
make good choices, all of us.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I think
it's important for the citizenry
to
We appreciate that you're taking
steps that you take it serious,
that it matters to
The cadets that could possibly
be affected in
I suspect that it dovetails to
some extent because you are a
military institute.
With what you see related to the
regular motive.
And there's been uh quite a bit
of controversy in that regard.
So I suspect that's one of the
reasons you're focused on
particularly at this time, but
I'm glad to hear, Madam share
that.
You're taking it serious and
matters and
We can direct people and this is
Aired so people can see this as
well. Thank you. Thank you.
All right. Anyone else?
This time there are no hints. I
thank you very much and
appreciate your coming all this
way to present before us, we
will certainly look at your
request and and understand the
issues. Thank you very much.
OK, now we will move on to the
um New Mexico State University
agriculture, and we're gonna
have the cooperative extension
service, um, agriculture
experimentation, I remember
that, and then New Mexico
Department of Agriculture, both
under that category.
Yes.
Hi, you can proceed. Good to see
you. Yes.
Yes.
Great to be here and uh thank
you, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, if it'd be OK, I
might first present on the New
Mexico cooperative Extension
Service, you should have a, a
handout with cooperative
extension on the front page. Uh,
and then I'll transition and
discuss the agricultural
experiment station. Um, but once
again, I want to thank you for
the opportunity to provide a
very brief brief background on
the structure and mission of the
cooperative Extension Service. I
had just one slide to talk a
little bit about our impact.
Over this past year, and then,
uh, to discuss our $575,000
increase in reoccurring funds to
cover a 10% operational increase
for the cooperative extension
service system as a whole.
And also, uh, to cover the
increased employer insurance
premium contribution for all
extension employees. Um, so if
you look at slide 2, and I know
most of y'all are familiar uh
with our structure, but we
really view the cooperative
extension service as the
community education arm of New
Mexico State University, and
that's primarily because of our
presence in all 33 counties from
our county extension offices.
Uh, as you know, uh, we were
formed back in 1914 to the
Smith-L Leaver Act and
our statutory program, and our
mission is quite simply to
provide research-based
information and programs to
improve the lives of New
Mexicans. Um, we stayed tried
and true to that mission, but
with that said, our CES programs
have really evolved over time to
continue to meet clientele needs
across the state. So it's really
balancing traditional
agricultural programs along with
pivoting uh to address changes
in technologies as it relates to
agriculture.
Um, climate resiliency practices
and even behavioral health and
wellness has become an important
piece for some of our
programming. Um, if you'll go to
slide 3, is this an overview of
our budget? Uh, this last year
FY 24, our overall budget was
right at about $36 million state
appropriations, as you can see
in that pie chart, uh, is covers
about 53% of our overall budget,
um, 70% of our budget goes to
covering personnel service costs
are
most important asset for the
cooperative extension service to
faculty and staff that we have,
and then we are able to leverage
the state appropriations at
about a 1 to 1 ratio, uh, with
county federal appropriations
and also grants and contracts.
Uh, if you'll go to the next
slide, slide 4, is just an
overview of our uh factual
structure, we, we operate with
about 330 faculty and staff on
an annual basis. We do support,
I think it's sometimes it's
overlooked, we do
support undergraduate students
about 30 per year during the
summer internship program, and
then as mentioned, we have uh
faculty in all 33 counties. I
want to thank our county
partners, uh, that provide our
facilities, uh, for our, for our
faculty in the counties, and
then, of course, we're
integrated into 9 different
departments within the College
of Agriculture Consumer and
Environmental Sciences at New
Mexico State. Um, the next slide
just kind of gives you an
overview of our programs and,
and of course we're probably
best known for
our 4H program, the largest
positive youth development
program in the United States.
Uh, we reach about 48,000 New
Mexico youth annually through
our 4H program. Um, A and
Natural Resource programs, but
that's what brought us to the
dance, that's still a real
priority for us, uh, and then
our family consumer sciences
programs are really evolving
more recently to addressing
different types of health topics
such as diabetes and mental
health. And then, of course,
community economic development.
I did want to thank you all for
your continued.
support for capacity funds both
at the state level and federal
level, give us the flexibility
to pivot and address emerging
issues that are important for
the state of New Mexico. I guess
one example, unfortunately has
been the involvement uh with
wildfires over the past number
of years that we've had a lot of
conversation about, um, also
address public officials
training through our New Mexico
edge program, work very closely
with New Mexico, uh, counties,
and uh then as I had mentioned,
uh, on health topics such as
Diabetes, food safety, and, and
mental health.
Um, the, the next slide, slide 6
is just a few of our
quantitative impacts. I, I was
just gonna kind of reference the
top and bottom row, uh,
clientele contacts we reached
last year about 660,000 New
Mexicans, so about a third of
the state's population. We
actually we're at a low in 2020
of 330 total contacts, and that
was following COVID when we lost
our ability to do face to face
programming. As we pivoted to
virtual modalities, what we're
seeing
And now as we're back into the
face to face structure and so
that's been very, very
beneficial, but also we're still
reaching new audiences by using
different virtual platforms, so
it's kind of a hybrid approach
to make sure that we're making
ourselves accessible to those in
in the best way possible. And uh
you might ask, how do you reach
666,000 New Mexicans with a
workforce of 330 faculty and
staff, and that's really thanks
to about 10,000 volunteers that
help support extension
throughout the state of New
York.
Mexico. And then finally, uh, I
want to compliment our faculty
for really doing a good job
increasing competitive funding,
mainly through federal grants
and contracts. Uh, we've
increased that from about 6
million in 2021 to just under
about 8.5 million in 2023. So
that brings me to the last
slide, uh, for the cooperative
extension service that I'd
mentioned earlier were
requesting an increase of
$575,000 400,000.
that is to cover the 10%
operational increase for the
extension system, and I did give
you some examples, uh, what that
will really help us do is to
better respond to emerging
agricultural issues, uh, respond
to, we're, we're seeing a, a
major uh increase in urban
agriculture requests, so it'll
help us respond to those
requests, uh, certainly to help
us leverage with our 4H program
to reach more youth, including
underserved youth in the state.
And then better support our
tribal extension program in
northern New Mexico.
And then, of course, leveraging
technology and then as I had
mentioned the other um 175,000
of the $575,000 request is for
increase in fringe benefit
costs, uh, for cooperative
extension service employees, so,
um,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, certainly stand
for any questions you might have
related to the cooperative
extension service or had to, to,
to roll right into the
agricultural experiment station,
uh, presentation and handle
questions, uh, whatever you all
prefer.
Senator
OK.
Go through the chairman, OK, I
got, I got the, I got the point,
so I'm, I'm gonna transition. I,
I, I know I'm, I'm, I'm one of
first, uh, uh, say it, it's
honored to be up here to give
the presentation for the
agricultural experimentation,
why I'm doing that is, as you
know, Doctor J Lilly White is
associate dean and director of
the Ag experimentation, but he's
on international travels. And so
I have agreed to, to try to do
my best to, to cover that and,
and thankfully have some
support, uh, if y'all.
questions if needed. So, so
again, I'm, I'm gonna try really
briefly uh refer to the, to the
handout with the agricultural
experimentation cover a little
bit about its structure, uh, and
then primarily, uh, discuss the,
uh, the, uh, request for an
increase of $972,368.
This is the cover also at 10%
operational increase as we asked
for for the cooperative
extensive service, and then also
to cover the increased employer
insurance premium contribution,
uh, for all ag experiment
station employees. So if you'll
move to slide 2, and as many of
y'all, I, I know work very
closely with the Ag
experimentation over the years.
Uh, know that the Agie
Spearriment station really is
the research arm of the College
of Agriculture Consumer and
Environmental Sciences.
Uh, and really focuses on
developing real world solutions
to problems that agriculture is
facing in the state of New
Mexico. You can see on the slide
A experiment station supports
research really designed to
enhance overall agricultural
profitability, to stimulate
economic development, improve
the quality, quantity and
reliability of our food and
fiber products, and certainly to
to manage and protect natural
resources with overall goals
again.
And as with the car extension
service, what can we do to
improve the lives of New
Mexicans. That's who we're here
to serve. If you'll go to the
next slide, uh, slide 3. I just
wanted to, to, to emphasize that
all research faculty within the
College of Agriculture, Consumer
and Environmental Sciences have
an ag experiment station
appointment if they're doing
research. And they're housed
within our 8 on-campus academic
research departments or on our
Well bag experiment stations,
uh, scattered across the across
the state, as you all know, uh,
the Ag experiment stations also
been around for quite some time.
It was uh uh started by the
Federal Hatch Act of 1887 and is
a constitutionally mandated
program in the state of New
Mexico. So again, I, I think the
importance of this is the
collaborations, uh, both on
campus and off campus at the 12
Ag Science centers to really do
fundamental and applied
research.
Uh, in technology to really
solve the challenges that that
we see faced in the state of New
Mexico.
Uh, slide 4, just a little bit
more background on, uh, uh, the
overall mission and structure,
uh, that experiment station
operates with just under 360
faculty staff and students, uh,
as I'd mentioned, faculty are
either on, on campus at our 8
academic research departments
are 12 ag science centers, and
an important point I want to
make is ag science or ag
experiment station works very
closely with the cooperative
extension service by design.
A lot of times our extension
folks are out in the field here
here from producers and
clientele, what are some of the
challenges they have that need
research to come up with
solutions that shared with our
ag experiment station, they
conduct that research, come up
with the answers and funnel that
back to extension to get out to
the folks that we serve across
the state.
Um
The, uh, slide 5 list of uh a
variety of uh research focuses
for the ag experiment station,
uh, and I certainly won't read
all of those. I think the
important point to make here is
that the areas of research for
the experiment station are very
broad.
And they focus on a variety of
agricultural industry needs for
the state of New Mexico. We'll
stay our researchers do a really
good job, I think, staying in
tune with what are the upcoming
challenges in the next 5 to 10
years and try to position
ourselves to be in a place that
we can, we can provide those
solutions that our clientele uh
rely upon.
Um, and then the following slide
is just a little overview of the
current budget FY 24, uh, budget
for the Ag experiment station
was just over $50 million. Um,
you can see that state
appropriations account for about
45% of the overall budget, um,
and the state investment is
leveraged over a 1 to 1 ratio,
uh, thanks to, uh, uh, grants
and contracts, federal
appropriations and sales.
I, I do want to think that we're
really proud of this experiment
station actually leads New
Mexico State University and
securing and obtaining the most
grants and contracts in the
other unit at New Mexico State
University. Um, they secured
just last year, uh, just, just
shy of $22 million so I think
that's wonderful bringing in
those resources and leveraging
with the state state dollars.
Uh, and that brings me to the
last slide on 7, page 7,
Again, that experiment stations
asking for an increase of
$972,368 reoccurring, uh, that's
to support the 10% operational
increase, uh, which amounts to
$772,368 and as I had mentioned
uh before, uh, the, the, the
remaining 200,000 is to support
increase in fringe benefit costs
for uh ag experiment station
employees, so
Uh, thank you all for, for the
opportunity to present on both
the cooperative extension
service and the agricultural
experimentation.
Very well, thank you, thank you
very much, Senator Woods.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
On your, um,
Health in church.
Is that a, a
I don't know how to ask this. I
don't know a whole lot about
health insurance. I know that
it's expensive, but
Um
How many different
Types of policies to you?
Offered, do you know off the top
of your head.
Uh,
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, that's a great
question. And, and, and I do
not. I, I might turn back to my
leagues. I don't know, uh, but
what we, what has been
articulated to us is from our,
our central administration and
and particularly the human
resources side, uh, is that
they, they've recognized that
the employer contribution to our
health insurance is, is not in
par with some other peer
institutions and to keep up with
other employers, uh, models that
are somewhat similar, so, um,
the, the discussion for the
whole university is increased
that employer contribution.
into those health insurance for
benefit for all employees of New
Mexico State University. The
challenge for cooperative
extension and ag experiment
station is we have to get direct
funding uh to cover that rather
than from ING, which would be
covered partially through
tuition, etc. So, um, we
understand that the university
is increasing the employer
contribution to, uh, the, the
health premiums and as a result,
Uh, both AES and CS are going to
be a bit short to do that as the
rest of the university
implements that.
I hope that clarified just a
little bit, Senator Woods, but
I'd be glad to, when I get back,
uh, to be sure that we have our,
our benefits office reach
directly out to you and provide
you that information. I would
appreciate that, um.
I noticed that uh
We don't have a particular
program that
That uh representative some moa
and I are always asking about
and that's the, the weather
stations, the
How do you happen to know off
the top of your head how that
is going. Have we got those out
or are they all functioning?
We, we are in the position to
give you that information, but
if you'll allow me to defer to
the program operations director
for the A experiment station. I
think she can provide you a lot
more detail than I.
Hello, Mr. Chair and Senator
Woods. Yes, sir, we have 215
weather stations installed. We
are currently bringing them
online. There has been some
situations in some areas with
the cellular reception, not
reading, and we're converting
those to satellite reception. So
we are in the process of
installing them all. They are
not all online yet, but they are
installed. OK, and uh Brook on
the uh on the
Relay of that information to
risk management. Uh, are you?
Do you have any information on
that? I know we're trying to get
That information to
Uh, in, in Washington to
Start using that information.
For our risk management, uh, and
USDA.
I don't imagine you have any
information on that, um, Mr.
Chairman, Senator Woods, I do
not, but our state climatologist
Dave Du Bois does, and I can
definitely get that information
for you.
Yeah, why don't you have him
contact me on that too to see
where we're at on that. Um.
Mr. Chair.
I think that's all the questions
I have. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Gallegos.
Mr. Chairman, thank you. Uh,
thank you for the presentation.
I wanna go back to the
insurance. If I understand right
in your other part of the
presentation we have 358 FTE.
That's all your employees?
Yes, so, but there one, let me
double check, make sure I get
these numbers correct
or slide 4.
Yes, sir, for the cooperative
extension service, we are uh
right at about 330 FTEs.
That's faculty and staff, and
then for the ag experiment
station, that it's there uh a
few more, uh, their total
numbers was 30058. Yes, sir.
And, and I was looking at Mr.
Chair, Madam Chair, um,
The increase in the 200,000.
It seems extreme, uh, and I
don't know, are you guys Blue
Cross Blue Shield, what agency
do you use? I know we have Blue
Cross Blue Shield. What is in an
area of my expertise by any
means. I don't know if there's
what the other, and there may be
somebody else, uh, Julie Hughes,
the program operations director
for carpetative Extension
Service.
Thank you,
Madam Chair, as well as um
Senator Gallegos, Mexico State
University participates in the
state's insurance plan, so we
have all of the same options
that state employees do for
insurance. I can't tell you the
number of options available, but
there's more than one provider
available for New Mexico State
University employees to choose
from.
And so depending on what
plan they choose the premiums
are a little different for each
situation. So the estimates are
based on what our current
employees are participating in,
and so it may be higher on some
plans and lower on others.
Thank you for that, Madam Chair
and Ma'am, I guess my concern is
usually you have lawsuits or
catastrophic losses that caused
such an increase as was
wondering if you have anything
in the history.
gone backwards of any kind of
Issue, I, I, to me it's an
extreme increase for, even if
you're looking at the uh 700
employees.
That's a huge jump on 200,000.
that I can't address, sir. I'm
sorry, I think we'll need to, to
visit with our central HR and
get back to you, uh, uh, what
was articulated to cooperative
extension and ag experiment
station at the university was
changing the employer
contribution.
To health premiums, and they had
estimated for us uh what that,
cause I was interested, what's
the overall impact that I need
to prepare for then, be sure
that our extension faculty and
experiment station faculty have
the the same fringe benefits as
the rest of the faculty across
the institution. And so central
administration provided us those
those uh dollar figures for both
extension and the experiment
station, but obviously we need
to get some more detail on
that to you all. Well, and I,
and I appreciate it, Madam
Chair. I'll check with
superintendent insurance because
if you're part of the pool,
Uh, the more people we have, the
less your rate should be and,
and that may be a discussion
that I need to have with her,
which I have other issues that
we're discussing, so I'll add
that to the pool, but thank you.
I guess my thing is trying to
get the clarity.
Of why the need. So I think
you've proved it from your side.
May be issues elsewhere, so with
that I'll yield. Thank you.
Yes, thank you very much for
that. I'm going to have to
request that we have our
questions and our responses a
little shorter only because I
realized we got 3 more items on
the agenda actually 4 after you,
so, um, we're gonna go on to
representative Chatfield, and
then we've got Representative
Baca and Senator Gonzalez on
this one. Thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Welcome.
Uh
Muller just ask all my questions
in one lump in the interest of
time, and you guys can kind of
hit the high spots, OK? Uh, I
would, I would like to hear you
talk a little bit about your
efforts to conserve our native
seed bank and some uh walk-ins
and stuff and kind of how that's
going. Uh, a little bit about
Watershed restoration, uh,
practices in the areas
devastated by catastrophic fire.
I know you guys got some things
going on there to help us out,
to be able to
Uh, revegetate those areas.
Lastly, uh, the Science Center
in Mora.
Uh, in conjunction with EMMRD
Energy Minerals Natural
Resources Department, putting in
a reforestation center. I
believe that was in the $80
million project, uh,
Hit the high spots and tell me
where we're at. Let us, so
everybody can know about Madam,
uh, representative Chapfield,
I'm sorry, give me that first
one real quick. I caught the the
next two, I'm sorry. I know you
guys put in some walk-ins to, to
conserve our native seed bank,
uh, I remember that uh the
report that you hauled all the
seed in New Mexico out of, out
of Moray in the back of a
pickup, so I know you got some
more, some more places to store
seed now and that you have a
a little New Mexico baby plants
stored in those uh walk-ins, so.
Tell us about it.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
Representative, uh, the, I'm
gonna defer to, to, to Brooke on
uh the first one and the 3rd 1,
and I'll answer your 2nd 1 very
briefly.
Madam Chair and Representative
Chatfield, yes, sir, it is more
than just about the baby trees
of you have said for years, and
we do have our revegetation
program that has been funded
that we are implementing
statewide. We currently have
seeds. I asked for an update
this morning and we do have one
seed that's planted right now
through the winter, and the rest
will be planted in the spring.
So we're moving that program
full forward with the um
leadership of Dave Lowry at the
Lidecker Plant Science Center,
and we're making sure that we
have
All the seeds and we're working
closely with the NRCS2 of the
Liondecker Plant Science Center
in Los Lunas.
And on your second question, we
do, uh, we, the range
improvement task force and
expertise on the task force has
been very engaged, uh, both with
the Hermit peak fire, but also
the more recent fires in the Rio
Doso area, uh, working not only
with producers, but also state
and federal agencies looking at
the watershed restoration, and
so, as you had mentioned,
extension certainly there at the
start of these natural
catastrophes, but I think an
important piece of extensions
there and lives in those
communities and leverage our
resources to help those
communities rebuild as they
restore those rangeland uh
forest systems.
And then the third one was the
Yes, Madam Chair Representative
Chatfield, Ill.
Just go over the highlights of
the New Mexico reforestation
Center, and hopefully that'll
answer some of the questions we
have received to date a total of
$40.5 million for the New Mexico
reforestation Center, which is
uh
Was created with the MOA between
the University of New Mexico,
Highlands University, New Mexico
State University and the MR
Department the Energy, Minerals
and um Resources Division
department of the state, NMSU is
the fiscal agent for that, and
that is our association with the
NMRC.
We are currently engaged into a
design contract with formative
architecture to design the first
phase of the reforestation
center which will be located at
the John T. Harrington Morris
Science Center in Mora, New
Mexico. We hope to have some
site designs early next year and
start moving forward. We do
anticipate a construction period
of at least 2 years, given the
winters up in the Mora area that
could be delayed some, but we
are moving full forward with
that and in.
junction with Mer.
So thank you, Madam Chair. I
just wanted to bring to
attention that these guys swing
a big loop, but they provide a
lot of services that we don't
often hear about right here.
They do a lot of, a lot of
services that are important to
our state and to our watershed.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative, and I
agree with you. I've seen a lot
of it and I'm very impressed.
Thank you. Our Representative
Baca and Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
will be brief and actually, I'm
just gonna tell you, we can
follow up. I, I've been, had the
pleasure of meeting with you
guys.
So, um, my, my, my questions are
just highlights is always has
been the community outreach,
what kind of services do you
provide?
for the community. That's the
first thing.
The other pieces, the K-12
collaboration and articulation
because
When we, we talk, providing
opportunities for service hours,
for even experimental, you know,
um, projects and internships.
In the area of CTE, so I will
defer my time for this, but I
would love to have a follow-up
conversation or like I said, I,
I love the, I love the accent
that I have in my district. So,
um, I do appreciate what you
guys do, and I will follow up
with you guys.
Thank you. All right. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative and
Senator Gonzalez here next.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um,
just, uh, one thing.
In reference to the noxious
weeds.
Are we gaining a lot or is it
the same or how do we compare to
say a few years back.
Uh, Madam Chair, representing
Gonzalo, that's a great
question, and, and um, my
background's wildlife range, but
I, I can tell you, um, talking
to, uh, Doctor Leslie Beck,
which is, uh, does a lot of work
for the cooperative extension
service and we have a whole team
on the experiment station
working with noxious weeds. We,
we do feel like there's been
significant progress made over
the past decade. Uh, I'm sure
doctor, or excuse me, Jeff
Whitty can also speak to this.
We're working, working
collaboratively because it's a
big
issue, um, but it's not an issue
that you're gonna ever fully
eradicate the noxious weeds, so,
uh, you know, it's something we
just have to stay on top of and
keep working on. I will say we
are moving forward. We have a
position right now for a new
brush, uh, weed specialist,
which is also going to be really
critical for extension and the
experiment station addressing
noxious weeds moving forward.
And then, of course, leveraging
that with the new IPM integrated
pest management uh position
because, you know, uh, not
one approach solves all the
issues as it relates to doctors
weed control.
Um, Manchurum.
It's probably a couple of months
ago I had a
So
Oh, a visitor with one of the
forest rangers in Taos.
And uh I brought up an area that
has really taken over by uh
specially salt cedar.
And he was telling me that they
couldn't do anything about it
because of an endangered
butterfly.
Um, Madam Chair, member, uh,
Representing Gonzalo, or Senator
Gonzalez, I'm not sure on the
butterfly. I knew there was,
it's, I'm beating myself a
little bit, but there was a lot
of controversy over salt cedar
control and the endangered
southwestern wheel of flycatcher
in the middle, Rio Grande, um,
but we do have uh quite a bit of
techniques that we can employ to
control salt seear, so it might
kind of be dependent upon
environmental analysis, so we're
working with the fish, US Fish
and Wildlife Service or other
federal agencies if there's
from a threatening endangered
species standpoint, whether it's
a butterfly or a or a bird
species, we'd be glad to follow
up, see if we get some
additional information on that.
You know, Madam Cha just um.
You know, uh
This is an area out of um 518.
From 68 going towards Mora Pen
From 68 going towards Mora Penas
years back, you could see the
river. You can't even see it
just so I'm sure that's taking a
big consumption of water.
You know, that would be much
better use for irrigation then.
this, that would be great if you
could follow up on that.
Thank you.
Madam Chair representative you
bet, and it certainly is a big
issue and we do have data that
shows how much water salt cedar
does, uh, cost us from uh
analysis standpoint and it's.
All right. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Senator, for that.
Representative Brown.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
just want to say thank you for
all the work that you do. The
extension service is absolutely
vital, not just to farmers,
ranchers, but to just homeowners
in general.
In Eddy County, we had a legend,
uh Woods Houghton, who you could
go to him with any question and
he already knew the answer, it
seems, and if he didn't, he
researched it. So a lot of
goodwill and good reputation
came out of his long service in
Eddy County. Uh, we did have
recently, not too long ago, a
year or two ago, a problem with
weevils, with the corn crop, and
this is where everybody went to
try to get an early read on
that. And um that's a big crop.
It's a big cash.
now in New Mexico, and I do
believe we have the best pecans
I've ever tasted, uh, grown in
southeast New Mexico. So it has
an economic
Reverberation when your agency
helps people who are growing the
food. So I really appreciate it
what you do. Thank you,
Madam, thank you so much.
Right. Thanks again to everyone.
I don't have anyone else on my
list, so we're gonna move on,
John. Thank you very much. We
have the Department of
Agriculture next and so we'll
stay on it.
Who's that.
Let's see, OK.
Good afternoon, ma'am.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, um, I
promised Connor 5 minutes, so
please hold me to it. As you
know, the Department of
Agriculture is organized as a
constitutional agency under the
New Mexico State Universityboard
Regents, um, I'm gonna try to
operate this, uh, slight
projector here. Uh.
I wanted to start the
presentation with a little
report on the land of
enchantment Legacy Fund, NMDA
received $2.8125 million from
the uh uh fund, uh, this, this
year.
On July 1st, we virtually had
all but about $6000 committed to
on the ground projects and we
were signing contracts and
getting the money out the door.
This is kind of how it laid out,
uh, a little over a million
dollars went to soil and water
conservation districts for uh uh
31 projects across 22 soil and
water districts. The healthy
soil program, uh, we were able
to, so of that $2.8125 million
we were actually a little bit
short with good projects that
were submitted.
I made a phone call to USDA NRCS
and was able to leverage an
additional $490,000 in federal
funds to match uh some of our
funding coming into the Healthy
soil program as part of this uh
legacy fund. And then uh uh
Senator Gonzalez, you mentioned
the noxious weed program. We
have stood up our noxious weed
program again for the, for the
state and uh uh we have
allocated, um,
Grants up to $60,000 from across
the uh uh various projects
across the state and I'm gonna
show you uh this next map gives
you an idea of the distribution
of all the projects that were
funded by the Legacy Fund. It's
making an impact. There were a
lot of folks who applied for
these, uh, my priority is always
been and will always continue to
be boots on the ground projects,
shovel ready boots on the
ground, 685,000 went to the
noxious weed program.
and various uh uh parts of the
state. It's one of those areas
that I really wanted to
concentrate on because of all
the wildfires, those wildfires
are really one of those things
that just kick off noxious
weeds, uh, because of the heat,
and we wanna try to get that,
get our arms around that. The
process that we use, we hold
extensive hearings, meetings,
uh, inform information sessions
either by Zoom or in person, uh,
we use the song, the governor's
appointed so.
Water Conservation Commission to
uh kind of vet uh a distribution
program, and this is what we
came up with for, for last year.
It's a good, it's, I think it's
gonna be effective in the long
run for the state of New Mexico
and I want to thank the
legislature and the governor for
funding that. For next year, we
are asking for um the similar
program projects like the
extension service and the
experiment station.
$125,000 for an increase in our
employee health insurance
program. And, and I'll tell you
the reason for that, and, and I
think Doctor Bourne was alluding
to this. NMSU made an
administrative decision to,
well, we were not competitive
with uh other employers, either
at the state or the county and,
and federal level with our
distribution of, of employee
health, uh, what the, what the
employers, employees were paying
To for their portion.
So they increased that by the
employer portion by 10% reduced
it by reduced that amount by
the, to the employees. So we had
to make up that cost. For NMDA
that makeup will be about
$125,000 is what the estimation
is. So the funds we, we
participate as the university,
the rest of the university in
the state does in the state
health insurance pool. But when
we changed our employer
contribution, this is the impact
the NMDA is $125,000. We
They're asking for a water, uh,
agricultural water resilience
coordinator. This is a priority
to address the governor's
50-year water plan and to help
agriculture meet the needs of,
uh, and the opportunities that
will come about down the road,
basically with to be able to
farm and ranch with less water,
and this will be a resource
person or resilience coordinator
that can work with the farm and
ranch community.
I've been before the committee
in the last couple of years
talking about compensation
parity. Last year, the committee
and the legislature provided us
with funds to uh raise our
employees' salaries. I, I can
tell you that we took our
entry-level salaries from 38,000
to 43,000. It made a huge
difference. Our vacancy rate now
is a little over 16%. Last year
it was a little over 23%. So,
uh, we were able to uh um raise
those and and attract new
employees.
But we're still behind. My
estimation when I compare the
rate of pay of our staff to
state state employees uh outside
the university system, we're
$2.6 million behind. Um, so I'm
taking a, a piece at a time. So
I'm asking for another $500,000
this year. Um, and I know the
state is having a discussion
about changing the employee
structure and that's gonna put
us further behind if we don't
have some kind of way to catch
up.
The second community ditch fund
is another request that's a uh
priority, um, the second
community this fund is a fund
that assists the community in
the adjudication process when
the state engineer's office
funded their, um,
The adjudication program in
their office to the, to the, to
where they're at, the
adjudication started happening
faster in our sick kids are not
able to keep up with what was
there this amount will bring
that fund of the $1.25 million.
It's a pass through, uh, the
money goes to the eos for, to
help them in the adjudication
process. The next 3 to 4 years
are gonna be critical and, and
when I met with Connor and, and
Connor just hats off to you,
you, you and Cole do a great job
in, in working and helping.
us along in the, in the budget
process, but we, we talked about
maybe doing a an increase for
the next 3 or 4 years and then
bringing it back down to the, to
the normal level, uh, just to
help get them over the hump. So
that's something that you all
can consider.
And the last thing on my list is
a uh increase for uh the, what
we call the value-added uh
market development approved
supplier program, that is a
program that has helped a number
of farmers and ranchers get
their certification, their food
safety certifications, get
their, get them into the
procurement process to sell to
school systems and retail and uh
and, and in other uh uh uh
programs that, that want to buy
institutional programs that'll
buy fresh fruits and vegetables
and and meat products. Uh, they
have, they're gonna lose some
federal funding. This will get
them over the hump, um, to, to
look at evaluating for the
future, but this has become a
critical program for the state
and for our, our agricultural
community.
The, the next slides are, are
basically descriptions of, of
what I had brought up, and so
with that, I'll stand for
questions.
Thank you very much for your
presentation. You did stay
pretty brief, so thank you. And
um yes, in order to move on
because we're quite behind here
on the agenda. I'm gonna go
straight straight to represent
the Senator Gonzalez and we have
um Representative Chatfield, and
then we've got Senator Woods.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair and
thank you and uh, I'm looking at
this on page 4.
And this is the one that has CSA
and community ditch fun. Well,
this need of legislation.
Madam Chair, Senator Gonzalez,
no, sir.
It's, it's already part of our
budget. This would bring that
part of our budget to 1.25
million for thee. All right,
very well, and thank you again
for the response that you did on
the noxious week.
Mm
Sure. Thank you.
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
welcome, Mr. Secretary. Thank
you. We have uh successfully
implemented a program to
encourage packing houses in the,
in uh New Mexico. We've got an
in-state, uh, meat inspection
program. It's
Almost up and running.
Uh
Can you tell me?
How many packing houses do we
have in the grinder?
And um
What are some of the needs to
get them, uh, where they're up
and running, where they're
producing beef.
Uh, give us an update on that
packing house.
That
Yeah, yeah, Mr. Chair, Madam
Chair
and Representative Chatfield,
there are, I believe, 6 to 7 now
USDA inspected facilities in the
state of New Mexico. We've got,
and I, I'll have to look at the
list, but there were at one time
close to 1718, uh, what we call,
uh,
Packing houses that were that
would basically do it for an
individual producer. Um, some of
those are working towards
getting, they would, they're
gonna love the state inspection
program so that they can become
state inspected, and some of
them are in fact working towards
the USDA inspection. One of the
greatest challenges we have and
USDA funded, uh, projects all
across the United States to get
more packing houses moved from
state inspection to uh federal
inspection or to get them in a
position to do that. And then
EPA changed some of the
regulations on wastewater for
the packing houses and uh we
also have a challenge with uh uh
what we call offal, the waste
disposal of, of uh
Uh, the byproducts of the meat,
basically. Uh, we had one.
Uh, produce one individual in
the state who would pick up that
o fall in the state, they, they
quit, went out of business. So
our packing houses are now
having to look at landfills or
composting or try to determine
another method of disposal.
It's, it's become a real
challenge for some of them, um,
not, if you're not, if you're a
small processor, it's really a
challenge. If you're a larger
processor, sometimes they can
market those byproduct.
uh into
Other countries or, or for other
uses, but the small processors
have a real challenge.
So, here, Mr. Secretary.
Is, is it true that there are
some solutions readily available
out there. We just need a little
bump in funding to.
Bring them to
Madam Chair, Mr. Sherry, uh,
Representative Chatfield, there
are some solutions out there,
you know, they can
infrastructure wise, the some of
the packing houses could update
their uh uh well, they're gonna
need to update their wastewater
facility systems for, for that
part of it on the uh uh on the
OL uh disposal, there are
solutions to composting, but it
takes some infrastructure
resources to do that. Um,
There's, there's an opportunity
to, to maybe look at putting
some of that in place and and
doing some economic development
work in, in that area.
Thank you, madam chair.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Woods, you're next.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um
Secretary Whitty the
The agricultural commodities are
in the tank, and we're having a
little trouble exporting and
right now,
We are net importer of food in
the United States.
And I know there's
you, you probably know a lot
more about that than I do.
And uh
In particular, we, we had or
main cash crop of pecans.
Are we, where are we sitting
with those right now. Madam
Chair, Mr. Chair, Senator Woods,
New Mexico is in a prime
position to be number one in
pecan production this year. Uh
primarily because of the
hurricanes that hit in the
flooding devastation that hit um
Georgia.
So we're, we're in a prime
position. We are working as a
department, um,
the country of India, uh, has
reduced their tariffs from 100%
to 30% on tree nuts.
We had an in, hosted an inbound
mission for from India in
January, uh, USDA held an
outbound trade mission to India
in April, which I was invited to
participate in uh at the USDA
expense, which is, which was
great. Um.
Mhm
We, we, we
committed to continue following
up. I've got uh another my
marketing division director will
be returning to India in January
on another USDA mission, um,
Because it, as the folks in
India have told us they have a
great, their their middle class
is growing at a rate equal to
the population of the US and,
and they have a great desire for
tree nuts, and they would love
to in they they wanna start
looking at importing in shell
tree nuts, which is right up our
alley. So, as I've told the
pecan producers and I've told
my, my team, if we're gonna be
number one in pecan production,
we better start acting like
we're number one. And, and
really pushed this and so we,
we, uh,
We were able to participate in
another outbound trade mission
last week to Morocco and met
with the number one tree nut
importer.
In that region
Last week. And so we are gonna
push the nice thing about these
opportunities is that USDA has
paid the paid for all of the
travel. So it's not costing the
state of New Mexico anything but
time, um.
Well, and I know you're so
involved in this stuff in the
trade missions, and I appreciate
that. Uh, we have right now got
the Mexican cattle blocked, and
I understand it's gonna be after
the first of the year sometime
before they'll return.
Um, no more, nothing else on
that issue at all, is there?
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, Senator
Woods, know that the, the
cattle, the issue with the
cattle coming in from Mexico is
they had some uh some imports
that were not approved come out
of, of uh Guatemala with screw
worm and uh so Mexico has
actually stopped that as well,
where everybody's all USDA and
all the states are working to
get their arms around the we
don't, we do not want screwworm
in the state. Yeah, yeah.
Um
I appreciate all the hard work
you do, sir. It's, it's always a
pleasure to see you and, and
your help and uh
I've got that, uh,
Bill put together or you got it
put together, baby.
I'm going to see if we can get
that vet bill through this time,
Secretary Rodriguez said that
she was all in favor of it, so
here we go, Madam Chair, Mr.
Chair, Senator Woods, Senator,
uh Secretary Rodriguez and I are
gonna be right there pushing you
all the way.
Thank you.
Thank you, madam. Yes, thank
you, Senator. All right, thank
you. I don't have anyone else on
the list, so I think for the
sake of time, Mr. Chair, did you
have anything to add? All right,
we're gonna move on, but I want
to say thank you for all your
great work and your good
presentation, all right, we are
quite behind, so we're gonna be
quick here. Let's go on to
policy spotlight New Mexico's
public light duty electric
vehicle charging infrastructure,
long name. OK, Josh, you're on
the program evaluator.
Great. Thanks so much, uh,
chair, members of the committee,
Josh Chapman from the evaluation
unit of LFC presenting on the
Spotlight report on New Mexico's
public electric vehicle charging
infrastructure is mentioned, uh,
specifically for cars and light
trucks, the full reports
available under tab E in your
binders. Uh, my presentation is
a narrow scope. I'm gonna focus
on how federal and state EV
charging infrastructure funds
are being spent, uh, and the
results of those investments. I
want to thank uh New Mexico.
leadership for their assistance
with this process.
Uh, as you know, in November
last year, the environmental
Improvement Board adopted new
clean vehicle standards which
require 43% of new passenger
vehicles that are sold in the
state to be zero emission
vehicles by 2026, and that's
meant to increase to 82% by
2032.
This transition is expected to
save New Mexicans $300 million
in vehicle fuel and maintenance
costs by 2050, supposed to
reduce carbon emissions by 62%
and cut health care costs by $62
million through 2050, uh, mostly
through improved air quality. To
meet those targets, uh, building
accessible and effective public
EV charging infrastructure is a
crucial step. Um, a while about
80 or 80 to
90% of EV charging happens
overnight at home, uh, the
existence of public charging
infrastructure is essential
still for addressing range
anxiety. So national surveys
show that more than 50% of US
consumers are still citing uh
charging station availability as
their main reason for not
considering buying an EV. Uh, if
you look at chart one on page 3,
you can see that EV adoption has
grown in New Mexico from point
2% of new vehicle registrations
back in 2016 to about 5.2% in
early 2024. If you look at table
2 on page 5, you can see that as
of last month, New Mexico has
326 public EV charging stations
with 793 charging ports, the
number of uh ports is always
higher than the number of
stations because most stations
have more than one port. Uh,
this is a little bit below the
national.
average, uh, but our state
benefits from a favorable ratio
of just 19 vehicles per charging
port compared to 27 nationally.
Table 3, also on page 5 shows
that New Mexico has a higher
proportion of fast charging what
they call L3 or DCFC stations
than many other states. This
higher proportion actually
represents an advantage of being
a later adopter as we are, uh,
in EV infrastructure, we've
essentially leapfrog over some
of the slower charging tech that
earlier adopter states invested
in heavily, and that's now
becoming obsolete and requiring
expensive replacements.
In states like California and
Florida.
Uh, in most cases, the EV
charging station will be
co-located near businesses and
other amenities to ensure that
drivers have something to do
while they wait, and it's an
important means of local
economic development as well.
Uh, for a tiny bit of background
that the DCSC stations can
charge most passenger EVs to 80%
in a half hour or an hour, uh,
and that provides an efficient
option for long distance
travelers, those people needing
quick top ups, um, people, uh,
in tourism, etc. I'll turn now
to funding and the, and the
deployment of this
infrastructure, if you turn to
Appendix A all the way in the
back on page 20 you'll see that
since 2019, New Mexico is
received about $67 million or or
appropriated uh for EV charging
infrastructure, primarily from
federal sources, uh, like the
National Electric Vehicle
Infrastructure Program, or NEVI,
which I'll mention many times
here, uh, and the American
rescue Plan Act, so that was uh
COVID relief funds.
Specifically, we got $38 million
from Nevy, uh, which is
allocated at $8.2 million
annually through 2026, uh, and
another 10 million from the
DARPA funds which are now nearly
fully or fully expended, uh, on
the heavy duty charging side,
the federal government is
funding New Mexico at a much
higher rate, so $64 million
that's a program for interstate
commercial truck charging,
that's uh the CFI program, which
is not the topic of the report
today. Uh, turning to state
funding, uh, it has played a
complementary role, I would say,
with the $16.7 million through
general fund.
appropriations and several
severance tax bonds, so that's
roughly a 3 to 1 ratio of
federal to state funding. Uh,
this funding has been crucial in
covering the required state
match for the Navy program.
If you look at the map on page
8, you can see where these funds
are being used. Ney's funding
stations along Interstate
corridor while uh ARPA funds are
supporting installations in more
rural areas.
The Navy funded stations have to
comply with strict federal
standards, including 600
kilowatt uh service capacity,
multiple 150 kilowatt charging
ports at each station and a 97%
uptime guarantee, they have to
be open 24 hours a day, 7 days a
week. There are many
requirements. Um,
So I'll talk just for a moment
about how the contracting works,
the the term public charging can
be misleading as the state will
not own or operate any of the
light duty charging stations
that are being developed under
this initiative, uh, private
firms are bidding for the
contracts to build and maintain
the stations. If you look at
table 5 on page 10, you can see
details about the state's
current construction projects,
uh, there are 2 stations being
built right now through a
public-private partnership.
ships. This is, uh, Navy phase
one.
The PPPs require the companies
to provide 20% of the funding as
a match requirement, uh, makes
them invested partners in the
infrastructure success.
Companies compete through a
rigorous process that evaluates
their technical expertise and
their financial capacity, their
ability to maintain a reliable
service, etc. Some of these are
local firms, uh, national firms,
even international firms, um,
DOT is giving out the contracts
through a transparent.
bidding process, so the issue an
RFP and the award points based
on a variety of factors that
include traffic rates, uh,
distances from businesses and
amenities, etc.
Uh, the companies you can see a
list of them also on page 10,
um.
So, construction is underway now
on phase one of Ney with uh 20
new stations currently in some
phase of development.
Just to say a few words about
the future development,
deployment, uh, phase two
expands beyond the interstate to
1300 miles of federal highways,
so focusing here on underserved
rural and tribal areas. This
expansion is detailed on the
map, uh, page 11. This phase
aims to reduce the disparities
in EV access across the state.
So phase 3 is meant to fill the
gaps from the first two phases.
Uh, environmental and consumer
advocacy groups have praised the
DOT's implementation of this
program, uh, particularly noting
the effectiveness of their
public engagement process, and
their strategic approach to
station placement.
The department's transparent
bidding process and a focus on
key travel corridors has
received positive feedback from
stakeholders we've spoken to. So
overall for a small rural state,
New Mexico is seen as doing well
on charging infrastructure.
Uh, looking at the cost issues,
New Mexico's bailed out for EV
charging infrastructure appears
to be consistent with other
states, uh, at least the ones
who've published their their
estimates. It's difficult to do
an accurate state to state
comparison, but, uh, New Mexico
averages $750,000 per Nevy
compliant station. Uh, we looked
at a basket of states that have
published their own cost
estimates and New Mexico comes
in lower than Wyoming. It
compares favorably to.
Colorado, Mississippi, um, maybe
a little bit higher than
Oklahoma, but it's early days
and uh many states have not
published their estimated build
costs yet and all of them are
working from estimates that
might not be perfect. Overall,
overall, however, uh, New Mexico
appears to be spending about
what other other states spend on
this infrastructure.
Uh, I'll turn to a couple of
challenges and the distribution
distribution data shows that 73%
of our charging stations are
concentrated in urban areas,
while only 4% of our stations
are located on tribal lands,
despite these areas comprising
13% of the state's territory,
um, LFC acknowledges that the
disparity is meant to be
addressed in phases 2 and 3 of
NEI, but this is definitely
something for the legislature to
keep an eye on.
Uh, another potential challenge,
uh, we looked at, uh, low
utilization rates and the high
charging costs in rural areas
that could pose risks to meeting
the state's targets for EV
adoption, when you have high
operational costs that are
spread over a few charging
stations, it creates a negative
feedback loop that can deter
further EV adoption. So many
states are, are confronting this
issue in their rural areas, uh,
states like Colorado and Oregon
have imp
limited strategies to address
this, including uh operational
subsidies and reduced off peak
rates, other, other schemes, um,
one of our three investor owned
utilities in New Mexico, El Paso
Electric is piloting a demand
adjustment writer that could
reduce costs per kilowatt hour
at these uh low utilization
stations where many states have
found that they needed to
subsidize charging rates to
defeat the negative feedback
loop.
Uh, finally, a few
recommendations. The report
recommends that DOT takes
several actions to enhance EV
infrastructure deployment, um,
They should support they should
submit a report on EV charging
stations cost and performance
metrics by July 2025 to inform
future investments, uh, they
should provide technical
assistance for tribal
governments and develop tribal
specific corridor plans.
Um, we should be studying
successful funding strategies
from other states such as
Colorado's rate structures or
Oregon's rural subsidies,
Washington has a mapping
initiatives that are really
interesting too. Um, and
finally, um,
The DOT should monitor El Paso
Electric's pilot, uh.
Demand writer, which could
significantly reduce charging
costs at these low utilization
stations for potential
applications statewide.
So in summary, uh, New Mexico
has made progress in building EV
charging infrastructure for uh
cars and light trucks. The costs
of the buildout seem to be in
line with other states and by
implementing the outlined
recommendations of the state can
continue to expand its network
efficiently and equitably. Thank
you, and I welcome your
questions.
Josh, thank you very much for
your presentation, all your hard
work. I don't have anyone on my
list. I think it's, let's say
yes, of course our chair here,
but thank you.
Thank you Madam chair. Let me
ask you a question on, on page
for your presentation, right?
Only less than 1% of all the
vehicles in New Mexico are EVs.
Great. And how out of the 14,
well, it's.
5% ish of uh of new vehicle
registrations now.
So I, I don't know when this was
done to you.
course in 71 2024.
Page 4 is right man.
Ah, OK.
Sorry, yeah. So, um, are, you're
looking at the top 10 counties.
Yes, ah, OK. Right, so
statewide, um, as of 7:24, yeah,
0.9% uh statewide.
Out of the 14,958. How many of
those are state vehicles? Oh, I
don't know. The Department of
Transportation is here and can
help us with that, I'm sure.
What percentage state state
vehicles? I didn't look at fleet
issues at all.
Yeah, it'd be interesting to see
how many of those are state.
Local government and not private
vehicles, right?
Oh, this percentage, I don't
believe it includes state
vehicles, but I can get back to
you on that one, Senator Munoz.
And but their EVs on the road,
so they got to have some
registration through the state.
mother, you know.
Thank you
Uh, this is chair of members of
the committee. So these numbers
definitely do not represent the
state.
Um, um, but we definitely have
that information. Uh, I'm not
sure the exact amount of state
vehicles. I know the DOT, uh, we
have, we currently have an RFP,
uh, few RFPs out right now, uh,
to transition our
Faithfully under the executive
order by 2035, uh, this upcoming
year, and so you'll see a
tremendous increase to those
numbers, uh, within the next 3
quarters.
OK, sorry about that.
So out of the 14, that's only 9,
that's only 1% of the entire
state in New Mexico, and yeah,
and you got a transition by
2035.
35 is the executive order for
the, sorry, uh, uh, Mr. Chair,
it's uh by 2035 for the state
fleet.
Uh, that 0.9% for those counties
represent the share of
registrations.
that are currently registered as
the electric vehicles within
those counties.
Um, and so that 0.9 represents
the total EV registrations.
In those counties
Um, the market share, which
means the percentage in in when
uh Josh talks about the 5%, it
means the market share is going
up to 5%, uh, based on new car
sales.
Uh, with a little bit over 2.1
million vehicles, I believe
registered in the state of New
Mexico, the, the market share is
increasing, uh, at a steady
pace.
So 5% times how many years gets
you to 100.
Pretty simple. So we still won't
meet that deadline to get there.
Well, first.
Obvi and so we're talking the
2035, the 21, 2035 Ford Fleet
transition, um.
But we're looking at and
especially for the Department of
Transportation perspective,
which is actually taking the
lead for Allstate vehicles.
Um, we, the RFPs, they were we
clean out right now, will allow
us to dramatically increase the
number of electric vehicles, uh,
based on the model of electric
vehicles as a service, which
will allow us to use electric
vehicles uh into the system
along with additional charging
stations.
Uh, as, as the report indicates
we made drastic increases to the
number of charging stations over
the last 3 years, uh, but the
infrastructure is a, a.
The necessity as we're
transitioning our fleets as
well, which the vehicle is a
service RFP which uh will be
awarded uh early 2025 will help
us dramatically increase those
numbers, uh, not at the current
rates that you're seeing now,
but you'll see the uh extreme
peak.
Of purchasing within the 1st 3
quarters of 2020, 25 calendar
year. Does this include all
private chargers too, Mr. Chair,
um, so the number of charges
that were represented in the
report are included.
Um, so we have over 700 public
facing charges that are both
publicly funded and privately
funded, but we're only tracking
the numbers and to make sure
that there's no confusion. We're
seeing public charges, it's all
charges that they're gonna be
available to the public 24/7 or
during business hours in, in, in
businesses are not necessarily
representing publicly funded or
privately funded charters. These
numbers do represent
public facing accessible
charges.
So how, how come you're adding
the public chargers in into your
sector of what you've
accomplished.
You're 326 charges across New
Mexico. But sure, yes, so those,
uh, because of the collaborative
efforts that we have with the
private industry, and working
with them to uh encourage and
adopt the installation of
privately funded um garden
stations, the funding that's
been provided really is to
supplement those, the buildouts,
not necessarily supplant the
necessity of private made
investments across the state.
Um, currently, the funding that
was uh indicated to the report
uh through ARPA, which, uh, this
body generously provided the 1st
$10 million. But that 1st $10
million we, we, uh, installed
approximately 86 charging
stations, 86 charging stations
across approximately 40
locations across the state. So
that's the 1st $10 million. Uh,
the second build out now which
has been awarded his round one
of the navy, which is uh 2
stations.
The little bit of over 100
charging chargers across 2
locations.
So if you're in charge, make
sure the state police gets the
first fleet of electric
vehicles.
Here we are looking at some of
the exceptions on the, on the,
uh, you know, uh emergency
vehicles and as well as
construction, but we definitely
are working with every agency
on.
So let me ask you, so if a state
employee, you know, obviously
she's a building inspector,
right? Who lives in, in San
Juan.
Asked to come to gallop and do
inspections, right?
So he's got to go get the car
out of lead charge it, right? I
to gallop, right?
And then drive back.
How many hours does he have to
sit and wait while the vehicle
charges.
On that 4 hour trip.
Uh, Mr. Chair, the, uh,
technology in the vehicles, uh,
depending on the vehicle. I
mean, we're averaging between
200 and 300 miles.
He charge
Uh, and one of the focuses that
we've made at the Department of
Transportation is to ensure the
investments that we're making
are on level 3 chargers, which
represent uh to the report, uh,
the ability to charge up to 80%
to 100% within uh anywhere
between half an hour and 1 hour,
um, you know, just like any
other device you're charging up
from 20% to 80%, uh, it, it
charges you pretty rapidly. And
so to get to 80%, you're
talking, you know, 2040 minutes
uh to.
go 80% or higher, it's gonna
take a little bit longer, the
charger slows down, uh, but it's
still within the hour range, um,
and, and so our investments have
really made sure to
Keep people from having to
charge for hours like level 2
would require the level 3
chargers are under an hour,
within 30 to 40 minutes from 20%
to 80%. Also, it's important to
note that Mr. Chair, members of
the committee that um I mean,
EVs are very different from gas
cars in the sense that most of
the charging happens at home
overnight, um, so it's, it's
pretty uh it's not unusual, but
uh the minority of cases where
you come with an empty car to a
public charging port and and
fill up your.
usually filling up overnight and
doing top offs were needed at a
charging station.
Yeah, but I'm, I'm talking about
a state employee that goes 250
miles round trip in one day,
plus travel to go do the
inspections, right? Then he's
got to take another hour out of
the day to charge to get to 80%.
Uh, Mr. Chair, and the
expectation with our fleet
management and uh DOT again is
taking the lead on that is to
ensure that there's adequate
charging levels patients for
level 2 and level 3, that any
Uh, Mr. Chair, and the
expectation with our fleet
management and uh DOT again is
taking the lead on that is to
ensure that there's adequate
charging levels patients for
level 2 and level 3, that
anytime of the employees pick up
a car, they're gonna get a car
with a complete charge, uh, and
depending on where they go, that
there are, there is
infrastructure in those areas
that will charge uh those
vehicles at a level that is
sufficient to get him back on
the road within that, that, that
hour.
And and is that the hour they
have to take for lunch?
We got to calculate this. If
you're gonna go to an EB fleet,
and I got to send the inspector,
right? He drives there, he's
gonna have an automatic hour to
get to 80% charge.
Plus maybe what he runs around,
he may go to fence Lake 60 miles
past that, and then come back.
And then, OK, he's got charge
again.
Get the 80%. How much?
Off time is he gonna have to
punch out or is he gonna get
paid to sit there and charge
that vehicle.
Well, he's doing.
Could be doing paperwork maybe,
but I don't know.
I mean, but I mean, this is a
calculation we have to add in
the basis of every agency,
right?
Mr. Sha absolutely one of the
things is, of course, our, our
policies, the way we govern,
we're definitely not going to
put it on the backs of our
employees, our employees are not
going to have to be penalized,
take time off of the charging,
um, you know, I, uh, speaking
from my own experience and
experience of employees at the
EFT, uh, those are, those would
be considered productive time
and we do provide uh equipment
that they can check their emails
and do other.
for the charging.
Just, just using some of the
math that, that you're providing
here, uh, unemployed driving 500
miles in one day.
Um
That would take the employee 9
hours. And so we'd likely not
send somebody to drive 9 hours
and 1 day to do any hours of
employee 3.5 hours to go do 2
hours' worth of work so that
they could drive 3.5 hours back.
And so, again, looking at the
vehicles that we have right now,
the Department of Transportation
of Ford Lightning. I can take a
Ford Lightning, um, well, I did,
go and stay somewhere overnight.
And so, um, and then going back
to your, and so those, that's
the math that we're doing, um,
that kind of presents a
realistic view. What we're more
concerned with, um, like at the
DOT is, whether or not the work
the employee is going to do is
going to lend itself to an
electric vehicle, and we've got
to do the research. And so if we
have a project manager that
says, I drive an hour to the job
site. I have my truck on for 5
straight hours and I have to
drive 1 hour back. Is an
electric truck going to be
sufficient for that kind of
work?
And so we've got to actually
pilot that and see if it's
successful and if it will work,
and if not, then we'll continue
to leave them in vehicles that
are currently exempt from the
executive order. And so what
we're looking to do to convert
quickly the 2035 deadline for
state fleet conversion is the
price agreements that we're
going to soon issue will allow
for us to make big sweeps all at
once of electric vehicles, just
like the Hawaii model. So in
Hawaii, if Hawaii DOT says I
need 75 electric trucks.
In a month, their contractor
will say, what do they need to
have on them? And then within a
month, they'll deliver 75
electric vehicles, and they'll
pay for those vehicles based on
their mileage use. And so when
we get these price agreements,
DOT can go from 2000 gasoline
vehicles to minus 200 gasoline
vehicles plus 200 electric
vehicles and in one fiscal year,
we could be 10% electric. And so
what we're working on doing
right now is a comprehensive
inventory of every single
vehicle.
in the state of New Mexico,
whether it's gas, diesel, or
electric, whether it's a
passenger car, SUV or truck, and
whether or not sufficient for
the needs of the agency and how
many miles it has. So what we'll
basically do when these price
agreements come out is identify
all of the end of life vehicles
by agency and start swapping
them out with electric vehicles
and the agencies won't need tens
of millions of dollars to do
this. They'll pay for them as
they need to use them. And so
that's our strategy. The small
increase you're seeing in
overall state adoption is
separate from what the percent
of state adoption will look like
for just state fleet vehicles.
So, but, but I'm talking about
real world situations, but I
mean.
Building inspectors, there's no
electrical inspector. He
retired.
He was out of grants.
They're sending him from
Farmington.
The mobile home inspector comes
out of Las Cruces.
And, and there's absolutely no
way that this is gonna work in
those deals, so maybe they'll
meet the exemption. Somebody
just sent me the math.
If we're gonna do this by 2035,
then we need 13,000 chargers.
Have you done that man, Mr.
Chairman, I, I don't see how
that maps up, um, but I could be
wrong again, knowing that 80% of
charging is done at home.
Um, 13 13,000 charges in the
state would serve how many
vehicles, how many hours of the
day. I'm, I'm, maybe we just
need to look at that map, like,
that's a
It's a number.
OK
it's got a lot of zeros.
I, I mean, you got, what's the
number of vehicles?
6,163,000 vehicles. I mean in
the state fleet.
Uh, we, uh, Mr. Chairman, to be
honest with you, that's why
we're doing the inventory, but
DOT is sitting at.
Yeah, we, we estimate maybe
about 3000, 3200, yeah, it was
estimating good, 3200 in the
entire state fleet, there's only
3200 cars. That's a DOT we're
estimating total but not all,
all of them are not subject to
the executive order. So we
estimate because we make up half
of that fleet that it's about
that number that we have to
worry about converting, but
that's why we're going through
the process now of that
comprehensive inventory.
Understanding that most of those
will be charged at um they'll be
Charged fleet charging at the
state agencies. And so what
we'll be working on in addition
to growing the public facing
because like you said, these
inspectors will be out. They can
charge at a gas station or at an
alls or at an RB's gas station I
thought we didn't, we're my gas
stations. What's that? But we're
not putting in a gas stations. I
thought we were putting them in
charging stations. Oh, Mr.
Chair, there, those charging
stations are located at gas
stations in many circumstances,
the number, the number for the
overall statewide fleet is 52.
100.
Uh, total vehicle.
We're focused on like medium
vehicles.
Then we'll look at the heavy
again, uh, to see if those heavy
vehicles, and of course, you
know, the construction,
emergency, those may fall under
the exemption.
How long does an executive order
last?
Well, Mr. Chairman, we're still
abiding by executive orders that
have been issued by Governor
Richardson, um, so they, they
seem to hold the, the, the
weight over the test of time.
Representatively.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh, I
know this is regarding
infrastructure for charging, but
in regards to the current fleet,
and when you have to either
trade in or or or retire then
resell your current fleet of
gasoline powered in vehicles,
uh, where, where do you dispose
of those at local auction?
uh, Mr. Chairman, that, that's
pretty much it. There's a
disposition of um inventory
process for all state-owned
inventory cars included, a DOT
in particular, we move through a
process that starts with local
governments, especially those
who demonstrate hardship and
then after other local
governments, um, the option for
the private sector or citizens
are allowed to come in and bid
on that inventory. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman, a follow up to
that is, uh, having owned a an
electric vehicle, and having
gone through the trade in
process of that
electric vehicle. I was dismayed
at how much of an impact that
the trade-in value was on that
vehicle, and how much less it
was in regards to what I'm used
to, you know, in terms of a a
gasoline powered vehicle I can
go to a dealership and they give
me what I think would be fair,
right? But when I saw because of
battery capacity of technology
advancement of other things that
it just reduces the value of
that vehicle. So what are we
going to do when we have all
these vehicles and then all of a
sudden you wanna.
retire them and then sell them.
I mean, you may be getting cents
on the dollar for that vehicle.
So, uh, Mr. Chairman
Representative, it's a good
point. However, we hang on to
the vehicles until they're end
of life, right? And so we've
identified with their complete
depreciation in terms of value
to the state. And so we're
getting rid of a backhoe or an
F-250 or uh, you know, uh, any
other passenger vehicle EV
included, we essentially move it
into that space where we feel as
though it no longer serves state
government.
right? Meaning that we've, uh,
we've essentially have received
an exchange for its price
everything we can get out of it,
right? Likewise to me and you,
when you have a truck now and
you say, if this thing gets to
180,000, I got my money's worth,
right? And then if you just give
it away, you figure you, you're
not at a loss. And so what we're
planning to do initially with
the surge of electric vehicles
is to use them like a lease,
which is pay for use. And so at
no point do we have to, we have
to worry about their disposition
or
uh, their trade-in value will
essentially use them until we
need different ones. And then
our contract, um, our, our price
agreements will allow the
contractors to make those
changes for us.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Represented Armstrong. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. Just uh
public service announcement in
uh Socorro.
Uh, it was supposed to cost
$150,000 to put in the charging
station, ended up costing 407.
And uh for every $1 that it
brought in, it cost the county
3.
So
It's not all it's cracked up to
be, uh, not nothing against DOT
or anything else, but just the
infrastructure of charging
stations in general, and the
map, I don't like the map.
I mean, you're, you're picking
winners and losers with the
charging stations and um.
Just the public service
announcement. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
We got Representativearana.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam
Chair. Um, I would like to say
in all the committee meetings I
went to all over the state,
there was always a charging
station for me everywhere I
went, and we went all over the
state, 17,000 miles on my car.
So thank you for that. We are
doing better than most states.
We are doing, um, actually, I
was just in Hawaii, they
incredible. They, they were
surprised how many charging
stations we had. So, um,
Yeah, I think you're doing a
great job. So thank you.
Appreciate you.
Thank you. I'm just trying to do
the math, so I have to 23,000
employees, let's say 10% of them
have a vehicle they drive,
right? You don't need to be
charged every day, so I took a a
different number that. So I took
half of that and multiplied that
times one.
Right? And an average salary per
hour just they call it 35 bucks
an hour, right? That'll cost us
roughly 25 million.
Uh, for the one hour of charging
for employees annually if
If that those are just rough
numbers. I'm just, we got to
calculate the total cost of what
it costs us to transition, and
it will cost us man hours.
Oh, thank you guys for your
presentation.
The Secretary can stay right
there.
OK Kayla, you're gonna start
this show who's gonna start,
Joey.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, um, the three
of us will just hand things off
and we'll try and move through
this pretty quickly. Um, and
we'll start off with Mike
Morrison, who's the chief
economist at DUT, uh, Mellory
Masonnais, our AD director, and
then I'll just wrap up the last
few slides might go.
So start on slide 2. This is our
July 2024 forecast for the state
road fund and associated funds
for NMDOT. We are currently
working on our January 2025
forecast and should have that
ready in January. Um, as far as
quick overview or summary of the
forecast, we do show that for FY
26, the uh road fund return
revenues are estimated to be at
about $557 million just is an
increase of about 6.
4 million from the FY 25 budget.
That, um,
is largely going to be driven by
uh
Increases in our state in our um
Growth fund interest as well as
um
Some increases in our um
special, uh, special fuel and
weight distance uh taxis is and
uh motor vehicle excise tax are
going to be the major aspects of
that. We're looking at our
gasoline tax is um dropped in FY
24, uh, it's gonna continue to
drop a little bit in FY 25 and
begin growing up to about 113
million, uh, from there on, and
then begin a slow but kind of
steady decline as we start to
see the impact of
Uh, more higher fuel efficiency
vehicles and electric vehicles
as well.
Um
Special fuelway distance looking
at um
A little bit of a bump as we get
out of the, um,
finalize our, our
Process out of the um COVID era
and looking at transition back
to a more even distribution
between goods and service
consumption, um, looking at
What clock size tax did take a
little bit of a hit as we saw
interest rates, especially for
auto loans start to increase,
that should go back to normal as
interest rates are expected to
decline as the Federal Reserve
starts lowering their interest
rates as well.
Mhm
Going on to the next page
looking at the other NMDOT funds
overall, we're looking at FY 26
budget is forecast at $661
million or a um increase of $5.4
million from FY 25.
Um
And that I think most of the
funds warming are relatively
flat going forward. The, we do
see a drop in our transportation
fund due to the elimination of
some uh
Penal uh feeds the penalty fees
for DUIs and other traffic and
and.
Um
So
in fact, thank you very much.
That, um
Have been eliminated in the FY
23 HB 139.
Yeah
Going on to the next page is
just a quick quick call our
finger chart, that's kind of a
list of some major uh tax
programs that go into the state
road fund and then how those tax
programs are distributed among
the different um beneficiaries.
Thanks, Michael.
Um, on this slide, what we're
showing, um, if you just kind of
take out from the previous
slide, the largest revenue, um,
sources or revenue tax
distributions that comprise the
bulk of the state road fund
budget for the Department of
Transportation, um, you'll see
them here in this pie chart. Um,
they're primarily the gasoline
special fuel weight distance and
vehicle registration fees, um,
in this, uh, past fiscal year
ending 24 June 24, the state
road received about 524 million
revenue.
from state tax programs, um,
those 4 I fired off you see are
the largest um slices of that
pie chart that combined with the
federal apportionment from
Federal Highway Administration
is what makes up the bulk of our
$1.3 million dollar budget.
Although the finger chart shows
uh uh for revenue forecast
projections for 2026. We present
this table here because you'll
see at that peak, uh, around
2026, between 2025 and 2030 on
slide six. The long-term
transition to alternative fuels,
um, will lead to declining
gasoline and special fuel tax
revenues for the state of New
Mexico,
uh, understanding that they make
up the the bulk along with
weight distance tax. We are
looking at declines in revenue
from those two.
sources, primarily gasoline and
special fuel tax. Um, if you,
uh, combine all revenues for the
the state road fund, you'll see
here, um, essentially, um, a 9%
decline from 2030 to 2040, and
another 11% in the 10 years
between 2040 and 2050.
And so, uh, what, what we've
shared with you over the last
couple of years as you're all
aware of is the increasing cost
of doing road construction, um,
not just in New Mexico, but
across the nation. And so we've
estimated those costs
conservatively be at least 20%
when you compare the price of
my, uh, both on pavement and
bridge. Going back to uh 2019
and the beginning of 2020. And
so it's being compounded, of
course, by declining revenues.
And so if you do
in that street math if revenues
have stayed relatively flat in
the last 4 years, cost of doing
business has increased by at
least 20%. We're fundamentally
doing 20% less work. By the end
of 2050, we'll be doing about
40% less work if we kind of stay
the course with the revenue
strategy for uh long-term um
road infrastructure improvements
in the state.
OK, page number 8. This is our
FY 26 budget request, column A
shows our operating budget in FY
25 column B shows our FY 26
budget request and column C is
the difference. Our FY 26 budget
request is 1.3 billion, a $30.5
million dollar decrease from our
FY 25 operating budget. Our
budget is made up of $556.5
million of state road fund,
$104.6 million of restricted
revenue.
$10.8 million from a transfer
from DFA and TRD for the parts
of entry, $644.5,000 for the
highway, um, infrastructure fund
balance and $579.4 million of
federal funding, the department
does have 4 programs that we
budget for. The first program is
the project design construction
program, that's where all the um
big construction projects live,
their budget is $793.7 million.
This is.
also includes debt service. The
next program the department has
is highway operations, that's
the districts that their budget
is $300 million.
The next uh program we have is
business support. Their budget
is $51.3 million and our model
program, which makes up
transcendent realm, um,
aviation, traffic safety, ports
of entry, and now PRC. The
budget is $106.3 million.
The big difference between the
FY 26 and FY25 budget request is
the state revenues grow growth
fund revenues did grow by $6.4
million are restricted revenue
grew by $1.7 million. We did see
a decrease from the weight
distance permit tax
identification fund for the
parts of entry by $1 million and
we have eliminated $60.6 million
of state road fund balance and
restricted fund balance. This is
something that we do at the, at
each every uh
The beginning of every um
request and then during
negotiations, we'll bring back
in our cash when now that our
artists completely know where
the department stands with their
cash. And then the last thing is
our federal funds did increase
by $21 million and that's due to
the bipartisan field that is we
are seeing a 2% increase every
year.
The next couple of pages, I
won't go into detail, but it
just shows each program that I
discussed, so the first page
number 9 is the um debt service
program and the construction
programs and their budget is a
$7793.7 million.
The next page number 10, this is
highway operations. This is the
districts. Their budget is $300
million.
Uh, page number 11 is business
support. Their budget is $51.3
million.
And then page, the next page is
the model program and their
budget is $106.3 million.
And so on, on the last, before I
start the last slide just to
clarify what um Mallory was
sharing is that the budget
request, um, um, reflecting a
$30.5 million decrease, for the
most part resolves itself during
the budget consensus process
which starts just before the
session begins and through the
first couple of weeks when we
essentially bring over the cash
balance or fund balance from the
prior fiscal year, and during
that process, we fundamentally
work with LFC staff.
to identify the allocation of
those resources by the 4
programs that, um, Mallory
talked about.
And so in the last slide, um, we
show just a high level of our
special appropriations requests,
which includes about 325 million
combined for maintenance and
construction, the uh rural Air
Service Enhancement Fund, uh,
$15 million which includes the
some expansion work across the
state for communities that um
are either expanding existing
flights or establishing a
service and then 10 million to
support our, our ongoing
beautification efforts. We did a
request, um.
funding through Capital Otley as
well, both for facility
improvements, um, and, uh, what
we're doing on the construction
side of things, um, that's 31
million for the maintenance or
the facility infrastructure
improvements and maintenance of
the agencies' uh owned
facilities. I'd like to remind
the community that DOT has, um,
the 2nd largest footprint square
footage wise of any other state
agency so second only to the
corrections department. We asked
also for 10 million.
poured heavy equipment and light
duty vehicle purchases, and 20
million to support our continued
EV charge infrastructure build
out um across the state that 20
million would of course include
the EV charging infrastructure
at state agencies to support uh
fleet conversion.
And that's essentially it, and
look forward to any questions
that you might have.
Questions from committee
members. Senator Woods.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
A question.
What is your
End of the year balance. What do
you expect your end of the year
balance to be on all goods.
Um, we
typically try this, um, Mr.
Chair, Senator, we've tried to
stay, um, have a fun balance
about $60 million.
And so we'll put, it's actually
90, we leave 30 in reserve and
then 60 we'll probably put back
into our budget. So your total
ending balances of all sources.
It's going to be about
60 million.
Senator, for state road when
it's 90 million each other
individual restrictive fund,
it's a lot smaller. I would have
to go one by one, which could go
from 5 million to maybe 15
million. Well, the question I
have, I don't see anywhere in
your, your revenue.
A statement here about interest
earned.
Surely you invest this stuff.
Mr. Chair, Senator, if you go to
page number 2.
And if you look at item 15
column number or column BP.
So we are projecting a $9
million in interest.
Um
Column 18 column 2.
He doesn't fall.
Distinguishes romance.
So you made
That is in me.
So you made 9 million.
And then you reapplied that.
So Mr. Chair, Senator, what
happens is if you look on line
21, call and P again, our total
revenue is 556 million. That
makes up our part of our entire
budget. So that's already
included in this request.
OK, 556 million is your total
state road fund budget.
That your ending balance right
now, but we do have cash
reserves, which amounts to about
$90 million annually on top of
that, on top of that, that has
not, has not been put into this
budget.
And, and I was just,
do y'all as an agency invest
your own money.
To to invest that money. That's
what the uh state treasury
office.
Take treasure does that, yes.
OK.
And he does that mostly in bonds
it.
But this, he does it in, uh,
this is
A cash or cash equivalent,
right? So that you can spend it.
Quickly.
The um street charge office will
split the um it's part of the uh
State general fund investment
pool is the road fund in there.
So some of the uh the funds are
put into a liquidity versus a
core pool, so that um there is
approximately 50% of that fund
is set aside for immediate
spending and then the other half
is set aside for a longer term.
In the course of uh
months, maybe up to a year or
two in terms of the uh
Well, of their investments on
here and I'm, I'm sorry that
All I see right now is just a
whole bunch of numbers, uh,
somewhere on here you, it says
how much you spend every year.
So where's what land item number
is that?
Oh, Mr. Chair, Senator, we do
not have that on here, on how
much we spend. I can tell you
that we spend about $130 million
a month.
130 a month.
And that includes um salaries.
OK.
A good round number.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you all, Mr. Chairman and
thank you to all of you for your
presentation on page 7.
See the, the total growth fund
revenues.
I guess our, our high peak will
be like 2030.
And then from there we're seeing
it to 2050.
And you mentioned 40%.
So, Mr. Chairman, uh, from 2030
to 2030, it'll be 9% and then
from 2040 to 2050, another 11%.
So with that period, 20%.
I know, Mr. Chairman, no. So
we'll, uh, the department or so
it be through the governor's
office or with us?
Will we be seeing any remedies
to
Because it seems like a long
time, but it won't be.
You know, and that we're not in
that position to 40% is a lot.
So, Mr. Chairman, the
Um, about a few months ago, what
we did was convened a group of
Um, really policy and financial
experts to answer that question.
What are we gonna do for the
long term sustainability of DOT
revenues.
And what we essentially did was
two things. One was we took a
deep dive into what every other
state in the nation is doing to
sustain DOT revenues into the
future. And 2 was we spent a lot
of time dissecting and scrubbing
some of the proposals that have
already been introduced by the
legislature over the last
several years.
And so what we're looking at
doing is generating ideas that
would support the debt service
for the authority that the state
transportation commission might
receive to issue bonds um in the
near future to support major,
uh, road construction projects
over the next several years.
And so we're looking at how we
might formulate the formulate
legislation around generating
debt service to support more
than a billion dollars in
commission bonding capacity to
address major road and
maintenance constructions into
the future.
And, uh, Mr. Chairman, is any of
this, uh
take into consideration of
Adding a feet to the guests and
special fuels and also to
electric vehicles, you know.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator, we,
we've taken a look at basically
every single revenue currently,
um,
Being put into the state road
fund and what percentage, what
percent increases would do to
revenues to the state road fund
and other recipients of those
tax distributions. What we
basically have determined is
that the largest revenue
distributions would be hit with
the smallest percent increases
if we wanted to yield a higher
revenue increase for DOT. And so
we have absolutely looked at
those 4 largest revenues which
are gasoline special we distance
and registration fees and look
to see.
What percent increases would
look like. And of course, as
we've done in the past, we've
looked to see what might be
digestible by way of an
increased distribution from
motor excise tax.
OK, very well.
Um
So, um
Just one more part.
Just out of curiosity, what is
this picture here?
This is on page.
For the last one, but so sure,
Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator
Gonzalez, those pictures, uh,
that picture on the bottom right
is that one of our patrols and
we included the picture during
our II presentation where we
also have patrol supervisors
come and talk about the physical
space challenges that they work
through, given the fact that
NMDOT hasn't for multitude of
years received any capital
outlay for building maintenance
and deferred maintenance. And so
going back to the state road
fund budget.
and how it's used, essentially
what we do is we pay for all our
building maintenance, uh,
upgrades and repairs, facility
repairs at all of our 80 plus
patrols and office space with
the state road fund. And so
every year we consciously make a
decision between money that
we're putting onto the roads and
what we have to do to make sure
that our, the men and women who
work in our patrols have, um,
safe space and equipment for
them to use. OK. And uh Mr.
Chairman, the last part is, uh,
I think it was
or the day before, um, that I
mentioned that the 10 million
would be very low for equipment.
And I think it was brought up
that uh there's an extra 10
million, 12 million.
Or equipment
Mr. Chair, Senator, we are
operating budget has 10 million
already in it, and this 10
million requests is an
additional, so if we were to get
it'd be 20 million for
equipment. OK. Very well. Uh,
again, you know, I think it's
low and uh but that's what it
is, when you consider 6th
districts, you know, it doesn't
go too far and then uh.
As you mentioned, also the cost
of equipment today, you know.
So thank you again, thank you
very much. Uh, anybody else?
Rodriguez is not here. Let me
ask you a couple quick questions
and the legislature is really
gonna have to finally figure out
whether, whether we're gonna
raise the gas tax or not, right?
because we're
We're on this password funding
is changing. We're starting to
slow in the economy, oil and gas
is starting to slow, the
flattening is coming in
and we can't ever catch up.
So
I would encourage you guys to
look at your fee scales.
Right?
And, and figure out. So if you
would say a number today that
you wanted to get a total
increase overall in fees and
scales, what would that number
be?
Mr. Chairman, are you referring
to the way distance tax revenue
that we generate. I'm saying
what additional revenue, what
number would you want to be?
Would you want to see 500
million, 200 million, 300
million, what number would you
want to see annually in fees.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, we, if I had
to give you a number now, and
we've, we've done some math on
each tree.
At least 25% increase to state
road fund revenue addresses cost
of increased construction costs,
right? And so that would be
ideal to essentially neutralize
the cost of inflation. We know
that's not realistic, um
necessarily because in order to
do that, a number of these
smaller distributions would have
to be increased by 40 or 50%.
And so what we're trying to do
is find a number that might help
us service debt, but through um
state transportation commission
bonds.
And so we're working on is in,
in fact, on Monday when the
State Transportation commission
hosts a special meeting, we're
asking them to consider a
resolution that would support
legislation to authorize him to
do bonding. In that scenario, to
answer your question, we'd be
looking at a number to cover
debt service.
And what's that number though?
About 1 point about 108 million,
Mr. Chairman, would support 1.2
billion, about 110 million in
annual debt service between 1.2
and $1.5 billion is what our
bond advisor has slow down and
say that to me. About $108
million in new revenue would
support 1.2 billion in bonds.
And if you had $1.2 billion.
How quickly could you get that
out in the economy or would you
just stagger those bond sales
over a time frame. Correct, Mr.
Chairman. We, we would work on
the priorities we shared with
you at the last Legislative
Finance Committee meeting by
districts and then we issued a
bonds as projectsgan ready for
construction. And if we lock in
those locations and not move
money around to DOT.
How, how can we do that?
Mr. Chairman, I imagine you'd
have the authority to do that
within the legislation, the
exposure there would be is if
you lock in a project that would
later be funded by a federal
grant, then it would take
changes to the legislation to
redirect our uh that funding to
different projects.
Well, that's where you have to
exercise your right to do it
correctly before you bring it to
us so that we know that.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, if a project
is not yet designed and we
haven't yet submitted a grant
for it, then there's no way for
us to know that it's going to be
funded by a federal grant, but
that happens on an ongoing
basis. And and so how many
projects do you currently have
out there that are unfunded and
what's the total dollar amount?
Um
Mr. Chairman, if I just go to
the project listing that we
provided to you all.
Last month.
last month, I believe the
project list that we presented
you last time was.
Sorry, Mr. Chairman, if you want
to go to your next question,
I'll pull it up right here.
Uh, no, I, I'll just, I, I wanna
see what you guys have done on
through weight distance through
vehicle registration, the gas
tax is gonna be a really hard
thing to get pushed. But if, if
we don't show some leadership,
And say, OK, we're gonna have to
increase speeds.
At some point in time.
Otherwise, I'm gonna hear the
council delegate from
Tohatchi, you see, that he hit a
pothole in his front end's out
of alignment.
And
Everybody on I-40.
So
I want to fix this, this
session.
Because general funding is
drying up.
And we need to get you a
reoccurring revenue source. EVs
are on the move. You're in
decline in revenues, right?
But I'm on to restrict those to
to projects that we look at, and
that we improve in the bond
sale, and I don't want that
money moved around here or there
or this story or that story. So
if you have that,
Schedule and, and look at them
all, excise tax, vehicle
registration fees, oversized
weight and distance.
Petroleum product loading fee,
special tax, and if we have to
make statutory changes, but if
we can somehow cobble together
108 million and do $1 billion
worth of bonding.
That should put us in pretty
good shape for the roads,
correct?
We believe so, Mr. Chairman, and
I apologize that number we gave,
uh, the handout we gave you last
month, um, showed those project
priorities totaling 1.7 billion.
We'd almost get them all done.
And that would bring us up and,
and in compliance. Well, not,
we're not in compliance, we're
out of compliance, really.
So I mean, I, I need some vision
out of this department and
saying,
I need to figure out how to get
$108 million of reoccurring
money in your agency to do a
$1.2 billion.
That's what I need from you
guys.
We can have that Mr. Chair.
And, and don't overload on one,
on overload vehicle excise tax.
I mean, if you got to split it
in, in several different
sections.
The weight, I'm sorry, the
petroleum loading fee is 1.8
cents. It generates 22.8
million, right? So every 2 cents
gets you 22 million.
If you did it all there, you'd
have to do 6 inches to get to.
I think that's right.
20, yeah. So to get it to write
100 112 million. But we're gonna
have to do something that's
created. Maybe it's not 6th
sense there, maybe it's 2 cents
here. Maybe it's $1.50 at
registrations, but I want you to
come up with a plan that gets us
to
100+ million or 100 million, so
we can get this fixed in in keep
our roads maintained, and that
should fix your real well. Then
it's dedicated to bonding.
Then do you think after that,
that you could figure out how we
can get operational without
having to come to the
legislature, because you are not
a general fund agent.
Right, Mr. Chairman, one of the
things just to point out is that
the 1.7 billion will continue to
focus on maintenance. That's a
big priority for us as well. We
have a billion dollars in
outstanding maintenance work
that we need to do as well, but
to be sure, that capacity would
alleviate a lot of the pressure
that's put on our federal
program right now. Some of the
things that we can do to support
operations is shift sum of
operations from state road fund
to our federal apportionment,
and that would give us
support there for utilizing
state road fund for ongoing
maintenance. So then we need
another billion for maintenance,
right?
That we could provide you with
those priorities, yes.
OK, so, so then bring me a total
plan, right?
Let's play catch up.
This or at the end of the
ketchup period right now.
And so, if we can figure out how
we can get to a certain number
and serves the debt with that.
And get bonding, sell a bond
package for a billion, maybe.
Maybe you have a maintenance and
half and.
In new roads, but we're gonna
have to figure this out cause
you're on a death spiral and
everybody's
We've been here for a lot of
years. Senator Gonzalez and I
remember how many years you
carried the gas tax.
So we're gonna have to figure
this out.
And and there's no more head
stuck in the mud. The governor's
gonna have to to be on board
with us, and we're gonna have to
maybe take some political heat.
But the number one issue in in
pulling is, is roads.
It's the number one, it was the
number one issue last year and
everybody wants good safe roads.
That was the number one issue,
and we threw a lot of money in
it, but we don't ever throw
enough money yet. So let's
figure out how to fix it.
And fix it correctly. OK? Thank
you. Let me ask you something,
uh, your 9 million short on your
budget overspent in your your
FTEs, how are you going to
account for that 9 million.
Chair, Senator, we are
projecting about uh $9.1 million
short right now that projection
is based off of overtime, we do
um project our overtime based on
last year's actual, so we kind
of combined them, so it might
not be as high, but we will
cover it with our cash balance
through a bar.
And so you're gonna borrow that
money out for overtime and it's
not just over time, it's also
filling. And then what did you
do with your uh FTE balance of
about 40 million last year, uh,
on your vacancies.
Joey, right? Yeah, that was,
that's too hot.
Yeah
Where did that, that vacancy
savings for the FTEs from last
year ago. senator, so any
vacancy with savings that we
have, um, in the prior fiscal
year, it drops to our cash
balance and then we'll pull it
out during the next legislative
session to put it back into our
budget.
So if we have, if we did have a
savings last year, I think it
was about $5 million that will
be put back in in our FY26
request. And then in your uh
financial statement here, you
showed the state infrastructure
bank at 0. She shows me $14
million in.
I'm not sure what he's
infrastructure bank on your
slide.
slightly.
Slide.
Oh it's like
So 00 balance in there, and I
showed 14 million in your share.
Mr. Chair, Senator, what page?
Just that
Um
I'll see.
State that's because we are not
budgeting anything, um, for FY
26. It's not showing our cash
balance. This is what we're
showing as what we are asking
for budget.
So, Mr. Chair, you're correct.
There's a balance there, and,
and we can report out on what we
have is that balance total as
well.
Yeah, cause they're asking for
more money this year, but I it's
not showing up accepting cash
balances I knew I'd see it
somewhere.
And and what is the plan with
that money for that stadium for
sure bank. What is it exactly?
Um, Mr. Chairman, the state
infrastructure bank provides a
zero interest loans to local
governments who need assistance
with closing the gap on their
road projects and right now
we're anticipating a loan, uh,
or at least that loan that we're
anticipating is committed to the
funding for the I-25 interchange
at Los Lunas.
Hm
So, they get 0% loan for the I.
I thought Los Lunas we had
funded a couple of years ago, I
thought we took ARPA money.
He had 17 million there, if I
remember right.
At 17 million for that
interchange at Los Lunas, and it
was fully funded in last year's
presentation.
So, Mr. Chairman, the uh
correction is we get to set the
interest rate and we have a
range, I think not to exceed 2.5
or 3%, so there is an interest
rate, but the total funding for
Los Lunas does include reliance
on that iblom.
OK.
Well, let's look at the loss of
this interchange is that it, is
that ready to go to construction
cause it's
Mr. Chairman, today they closed
out the RFP process and received
their bids for that project. It
is construction ready. OK.
And that had ARPA money in it,
correct, Mr. Chair, that had a
large quilt of funding from
state road fund ARPA, Silo, uh,
federal loan.
OK, and I thought you said last
month you had all the AARPA
booked in and under contract and
were cleared up and we just got
the contract now.
Um, yeah, Mr. Chairman, I don't
believe we allocated ARPA to
that. There was this last
legislative session, there was
an $8 million gap that we closed
following the legislative
session from the State Road
Fund.
OK.
OK. Any other questions?
See that make sure you give me
that stuff. Let's figure that
out.
Um, it's got to get done.
It, it, there's no other choice
than to get it done
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank, uh,
just, I think the
You know, the opportunity to
think and to sort of catch up
before we fall too far behind is
great.
Uh, I know, Mr. Chair, we all
share sort of the, the drive to
get on a sustainable path and to
also have, um, I think the sort
of
You know,
they, we can't, you know, it's
not necessarily our job, nor
should it be to pick every
single road project.
We share an equal responsibility
to make sure that there is
sufficient funding.
And we absolutely have to hold
you all accountable to get into
a place of confidence around the
transportation.
Investment schedule for the
whole state. And there's,
there's a lot of room to go
there. The I think the sort of
the bold idea, uh, is exciting.
There's a great deal of detail
there and there's a great deal
of responsibility that'll fall
on the department, uh, in order
to have the confidence, I think
for all New Mexicans that the
the dollars are well invested.
Because they're, it is true, all
of us drive, you know, go use
our transportation system going
to and fro.
Um
It is often something that folks
don't pay attention to until
there are problems, either in
fiscally how it's approached or
just in the sort of the
Um
You know, the state of the
infrastructure. Um, so a lot of
work that will fall on the
department and a lot of
confidence, a very high level of
confidence that would have to be
reached in order to commit
long-term debt capacity and the
increased fees, which I think is
uh again a bold and very
positive idea. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank
Thank you guys. I appreciate
your time.
We are adjourned.
Oh,
I almost forgot you Emily.
Yeah, Senator Rodriguez is
getting her candles ready.
Hi, chair, members of the
committee. I am Emily Hiller,
the LFC analyst for the
Department of Information
Technology. I'm briefly just
gonna go through these section 7
requests. I know that we're a
little bit behind on schedule.
Um, I believe in your binders,
there should be a document, uh,
tab F that has um all of the
OK, well, it looks like we don't
have the documents, but I can
just talk through real briefly,
um, and then we'll get that
information to you all.
it
This is great, and I think that,
thank you, Mr. Chair, that I, I
appreciate that, you know, we
obviously there are a lot of
reauthorizations and others so
excited to sort of hear an
initial sense and appreciate,
yeah. Yeah, so, uh, thank you,
uh, representative Chair, um,
just to briefly go over section
7 requests. The reason why we're
having this conversation outside
of all of the other
non-recurring appropriations.
Section 7 is a little bit
different than Section 5,
non-recurring appropriations,
the expenditure for Section 7
is.
For uh various fiscal years, so
all of the funding in House Bill
2 for Section 7 will be for
expenditure on fiscal years 25,
26, and 27.
Um, as well as these IT requests
go through a vetting process at
the Department of Information
Technology, which is what we are
looking at. You are all getting
that handed out, so I'll just
wait for you all to.
OK. OK. Um, so to jump right
into it, a total of 16 agencies
submitted 31 requests for IT
appropriations, totaling $3170
million including 93 million for
new general fund revenue and
2150 million from new federal
funds.
Requests to continue existing
projects includes the healthcare
authority for 18 million of new
general fund revenue to continue
its Medicaid management
information system replacement
project, and this request has an
associated federal match of $146
million. I know that the
healthcare authority is here too
in the audience if you have any
specific questions. Um,
additionally, the Children,
Youth and Families Department
requested 9.5 million of new
general fund revenue with the
federal match of $6.4 million.
CYFD
that you're requesting less
federal funds for FY 26 because
they are requesting extensions
of previous previous
appropriations, so they have
less federal requests for FY 26,
however, they are requesting to
extend around $40 million
requests for new projects
include 2.5 million for the
taxation and revenue Department
to purchase and implement a
return processing tool for
personal income tax.
3 million for the office of the
sea Engineer to modernize and
replace its 15 year real-time
water measurement system, and
the Department of Health
requested 6 new projects,
however, currently has 7
outstanding projects and has
closed various projects in the
last fiscal year that had made
very little to no progress.
In terms of reauthorization
requests, 13 agencies submitted
30 requests to reauthorize prior
year appropriations through FY
26. Originally these
appropriations totaled 408
million across general fund and
federal funds. However, the
reported balances that are being
requested to be reauthorized
total 2160 million, or roughly
53% of what was originally
appropriated.
2 projects at the Healthcare
Authority, uh,
Account for 6 of these 30
reauthorization requests with a
total of 95 million remaining in
unspent balances.
Additionally, the children,
Youth and Families department is
requesting to reauthorize around
$40 million and the Department
of Public Safety is requesting
to reauthorize previous
appropriations that have seen
little to no expenditures, in
addition to requesting new
general fund revenue.
And I love C staff generally
support reauthorizations for
more recent appropriations,
however, those that were
appropriated.
Around 2018 and that had been
reauthorized various times and
have seen little to no
expenditure are generally not
considered.
Um, chair members of the
committee you have in front of
you an Excel spreadsheet that
has the requests outlined, uh,
of the new requests as well as
what is being requested to be
reauthorized. I will defer to
you of how you would like to
move forward. I can go one by
one or I can just look it over.
I think we're looking at him
right now, so anybody have any
questions?
Representing small.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Thank you
so, um, ballpark, do you, uh,
thank you for sort of breaking
it down for the older
appropriations that have not
moved either in whole or mostly.
Do you have a ballpark number
for that because it seems very
fair at the
That, that there should, it
would be unwise to reauthorize
those at the very least, now.
Yes, uh, Representative, that's
a good question. Um, I don't
have a ballpark number, but a
lot of the reauthorization
requests that we're looking at
are from as early as 2019 and
2020 is mostly all of these.
Multiple reauthorization
requests that have been
reauthorized year over year, um,
and so a majority of what we're
looking at that's being
requested to be reauthorized is
from around 2020, so about 4
years ago.
So out of the 408, it's on page
10 out of the 408 million that
was authorized.
192 in expenditures and 210
total remaining, so 53% have
been spent in
47%.
And Mr. Chair, on that sort of,
so would you say
1/2 or a quarter of the unspent
funds or sort of say 3 years old
or older.
Or, and we can obviously go
through this. There's no, I'm
just curious to sort of
understand a little bit about
what the potential capacity is,
we can go through this, um.
But after, yes, we can go
through this after, um.
But I would say around 25%.
Yeah, that's perfect. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
year.
So, thank you, Mr. Chair.
One of my concerns about so much
Rio is
The technology from 2020 is
obsolete.
And so it makes sense to me that
we're not.
We're not buy this technology at
all. Now, I know that there can
be other things that they can
use it for and for the same for
the same thing, but
But the technology that, that we
asked for is definitely old now,
so.
Before we do any reo, I think we
really need to look at.
Go to lineage line 10, page 27,
intelligent piece policing LED
project because they're
requesting money from this year.
That is from 2023.
And
They haven't spent any money
since 2023.
And they're requesting more
money this year.
Yes, chair, that is correct. Can
you match those up and see why
they're not they'd spend a lot.
2 years ago, money.
And why they're requesting more
money when they haven't spent it
from 2 years ago. Yes, chair,
that is a great question. We
have been in conversation with
the Department of Public Safety,
part of the new request is for a
phase 2 of the intelligence-led
policing project which initially
wasn't in our purview and so
what they're asking for is
additionally is for phase 2, but
what you are saying is that they
haven't spent anything for phase
one. dose two if you didn't pay
for phase 1.
I, I mean, that's the problem
these agencies are going to try
to protect some of this money,
and we're gonna need detailed
reports if they, what they
spent, what they haven't spent
in, and then they'll come back
and they'll ask for.
Let's go move this money to
another general fund idea and
by.
Carbon.
And that's not what the
appropriation is for.
gonna have to do homework to
make sure that they are spending
the deal or DPS if phase one
never started.
Why should we find phase two.
And why won't we do it all at
one time? I mean, that's 2 a
year and 2 years ago, 2023, so.
We're gonna have to do some
homework on this Rios, OK?
Any other questions?
Thank you.
Thank you, chair. OK.
