Okay leory are we good
we're gonna go ahead and get
started with the afternoon
session hope everybody had a
nice lunch.
And uh.
I think everybody I I just
thought I saw a representative
walk and
vincent for them join us i'm
sure so
yeah we'll go ahead and get
started uh in the first topic
this afternoon is to expand the
rural health care work force in
issues that we've been
struggling with over the last
several years and we were going
to have to pres- presenters
today uh first doctor kimberly
petrovic
associate morning in progress.
Recording in progress.
Look at the first slide.
You'll see what what we believe
our colleagues and we believe
are the statements of the
problem so it's a three prompt
problem at this point the first
is as we all know it has to do
with the health care work force
shortages.
Then in addition to that is the
demand for health care
professionals and then finally
as we may realize there are
unique challenges to these rule
and frontier areas especially
while across the state because
that's most places in the state
of new mexico but it also hear
in the southwestern region.
If you go to the next slide then
with the first part of the
problem with the health care
work force shortages I do want
to mention that these links
there are six of them these are
live leagues and these are
represent articles that have
been in the media in the last
one to one and a half years and
a number of these are
specifically related to new
mexico so while we can run the
numbers and crunch the data for
you if you were to need those
numbers these articles
themselves speak to the states.
Knowledge of the problem that
exists with rural health care in
just health care in general.
So I don't know if you would
like to click on any of those
but you can see as evidence to
support ours are problem
statements.
There is a graph there rather
there is a table there and this
is according to the website
immediately under health care
work for shortages there is the
data usa.
Uh website and if you were to
click on this and search for
silver city new mexico not
california but new mexico there
is a wealth of information about
our city in and of itself so one
of the things that you might
notice especially with this
table is the shortage of
healthcare professionals here in
new mexico in sovereign.
The live links will support this
as well.
And then if you were to go to
the next slide.
About the demand for health care
professionals are second part of
the three prong problem
statement.
You can read this for yourselves
but you see that we this is no
secret that we have a dire
health care worker shortage and
if you were to move over to this
table with the three articles
these are more examples of a
immediate coverage here in the
state of new mexico that speak
to this and again these are
recent articles in the last want
to two years some even as early
as june of this year and just a
little summaries in this table
about the policy makers are
interested hopefully in nurse
practitioners.
In especially here in the rural
areas and peace as you may know
or maybe not have if you were to
have a scale of 1 55 being the
most autonomous nps here in the
state have the five at a five
ability to practice as if they
with the same scope as a
internal medicine physicians and
please correct me if i'm wrong
physicians who might be in the
audience but that's another
reason later will get to the fnp
program here and also note that
with this last one we want it
also mentioned kinesiology where
school of nursing and
kinetiology along with our work
force trainings but can easier
often then leads to physical
therapists being a creative
trained educated here in the
state and we need physical
therapists as well among other
up uh types of professions that
would stem from kanuseology.
You may not I don't believe you
have a slide of this but back
with the data dot US a there is
a
or data usa i'm sorry.
If you were to scroll down
through this wealth of
information you would see the
education if you were to click
on the education I can't it
talks about how what is a
percentage of individuals here
in the city in the town who
receive a high school the
plumber one or more years of
college going through to a
bachelor's degree twelve percent
just twelve percent.
And then even things like
masters degree we have eight
point five four five percent
many of whom are social workers.
All about to say then again
these links would help support
that.
If you were to go to the
slide that talks about wm's
service areas versus need.
Uh we would like to thank
again colleagues for pointing
this out but I think victor has
some thoughts on this.
Thank you can
so whenever you look at this
next this next graph we're
looking at the state truck the
state funded colleges in
universities and are very large
service area of w covers the
entire western quarter of the
state if you look to the right
you'll see that the the graphs
for the rns in certifying nurse
specialist that are compared to
the benchmark in twenty of
twenty two most of our area is
below the benchmark for
healthcare professionals the
only county that is in green is
burner wheel so where what we're
doing here at western mexico
regarding the health care
work force
program and trainings is where
our job is to provide a pipeline
for the health care.
Profession such as the nursing
canitiology the masters of
science and nursing so we
currently have three programs at
western new mexico university
under the work force program
training which the first one is
the certified nursing assistant
which is offered every semester
including spot small false bring
and summer and we rotate from
silver city w campus to luna
indemning to our new smith
building where we have now
started to have our c n a
program and kim will talk a
little bit more about our smith
pro- our smile building come
later in the presentation
or their smith on our their
smith yes engineer
so beautiful building that we
just happen to opened and we
started this the cna was the
actually the first program to
get in there this summer we have
between ten to sixteen students
enrolled every every semester so
our goals to maximise it at
sixteen to to accommodate the
the staffed the instruction to
student ratio the next
of
program that we do have is the
floor bottomy technician
of the floor bottomy technician
program or certificate
this program is also ran every
month every semester fall in
spring we don't run it in the in
the summer it's a little bit too
fast pace for that but we also
take we have also been we have
also started to bring it to
silver city it's been held in
luna and damning area just
related to space but now with
the smith are away with the the
smith building and along with
wmu nursing up providing us with
space we have decided to bring
it to grand county
and then the newly program that
we just started this fall we
have the pharmacy tech program
which is a fully online online
program and i'll go ahead and
get through it with a little bit
more detail on each program
coming up but it is if a thirty
three course credit course.
Out of w n m u and it is fully
online where we did find prior
to starting this program is a
lot of our technicians in in our
counties are on the job training
we've i've we did some research
and we found out that you know
walmart cbs albertsons even hms
we would they would fully
support our program and bringing
students to do internships after
they complete the the required
classes and hopefully be able to
provide job security for these
for these students however with
the job training on the job
training and ground county that
is why we fully went online so
any student across the actually
nation can actually take this
program so we started this fall
fall of twenty twenty four
for the future goals of when m u
and and the programs is what i'm
looking at starting is hopefully
medical assistant program this
this program is
highly needed there is not one
program in this in the southern
part of the state that actually
will be available or is
available for us a lot of the
training is done on light or on
on the job training um you reach
out to
I did some research this last
week and there's nineteen
current open positions in just
our town which includes hms
includes healer regional medical
center silver city care center
in a few other other smaller
organizations so what we're
trying to do is we're trying to
build build that pipeline to
assist in further in these
students
or supporting them if this is
the career that they wish to
stay with
mister daniel dot donald that
when I were talking just
previously about how difficult
it is to become to start any
training program and actually
see how
if this is what they're willing
or wanting to do for the rest of
their career hard work you know
i'm i'm an out of a kit for our
cnase up I myself was one.
Um a while back and you know
it's a lot of work in the out
they don't get paid too much so
as much as we want to encourage
them to take this first step
building their foundation into a
better career for them is is our
ultimate goal
and that another another one
that you do a program that you
don't have necessarily have on
that is a medical billing and
coating I didn't and that I
didn't add that because I i'll
be honest I completely forgot
but that's that's in my 3-5 year
plan is a medical billing and
coding program which also help
for online students and
the next one is our emergency
medical technician is what we're
really trying to shoot for
within the next couple of
couple of years hopefully year
it's in really high demand in
our area currently dony on a
community college currently
holds the classes and they're
actually being held in grant
county and those instructors who
are holding these classes are
from grand county so they're
actually employed with the acc
so or trying to do as we we're
looking at add building this
program or falling under an
umbrella of some another program
to to meet the high demand in
this area which which comes from
fire departments emergencies
ambulances and their
transportation
with the trainings that we've
been that i've talked talked a
little bit about currently our
focus has been the recruitment
from our local high schools and
along with our local agencies
local high schools include
coverage high school who is in
who's involved in the dull
enrollment program daming high
school who were currently
getting back up and running to
have an instructor in that
facility
they have a beautiful health
care building and damning at the
damning high school that is
really outstanding I went I was
able to take a look at it this
summer and to see all all what
they could offer so we're
looking at getting them back up
and started
a newly program that was that
was just started in this fall
was at silver high school.
And mcmillan in jennifer janet
genet method on have been the
instructors for that program and
I think they have about
seventeen high school students
from silver high that are in
that class right now
currently they're doing the one
or six part which is book work
quizzes in all that area that
that and then the one or seven
part which is the hands on which
will start in january january to
me we also have a lot of cliff
students that come toward dollar
roman class at w and mark the
letter high school they're not
actually up to date right now
with their program because there
wasn't enough enrollment so we
look at getting them back up and
started in.
Fall of twenty twenty five we do
have a certified instructor out
there they though these are all
the high schools that actually
do
um participate with the wnmu w w
enemy programs
local retention that worked
we're talking about is of course
hms we look at silver city
silver silver health care so
city care center healer regional
medical center for bared medical
center what we've been doing is
our instructors have actually
been contacting these hr
representatives and have been
actually been going to talk to
these students prior to them
finishing giving them a little
bit information on openings on
what the benefits are working
including a state facility
or just at our local hospital so
we've been we've been getting hr
involved with them to assist us
import impossibly retaining
those students who come down our
programs and actually can take
care of our rural area
if you look at the the next line
will we the next pages
how long these programs are
actually currently taking are
certified nursing assistant
class
as I said it's been done and at
both campuses it's about a four
to six week program we're doing
it in four weeks where we're
giving him a little bit a
cushion in case they want a
little bit more extra time in
the lap but we're running in and
less than a semester our flabor
me as a for semester course
which is sixteen weeks and our
pharmacy technician as I said is
a thirty three credit our
program.
Let's see it talks a little bit
about the demand or what are
trainings and what we do I kind
of already set all this but
yeah one of one of the biggest
things that i'm i'm looking
forward to possibly discussing
with you guys you know is the
virtually reality equipment as
what we're looking to move out
move out in the future you know
virtually rowdy virtual reality
has been associated with other
immersive gaming experiences in
futuristic entertainment a lot
of colleges across the nation
and and some in new new mexico
are utilizing this for patient
care experiences it provides a
safe training for students so
that they don't necessarily have
to put their hands on the
patient they don't have to be as
nervous as they can they could
be have them availability to
make mistakes with any without
any source of any sense of
um
you know that damage to
themselves or only patient so
the virtual the v r equipment is
what we're we're definitely
looking forward to
and
it's really I think about it
right
yes and if you look at that
slide closely you'll see that we
would like to ask for funding
for these programs and we
understand that may not happen
but we did want to present that
to you with a request of four
hundred thousand four I believe
you have salaries benefit
benefits in virtual creatory
equipment so
we wanted to make sure to ask
for that if possible and so
mister chairman vice chair
members of the committee members
of the audience you can see
understand how the programs from
work force are health trainings
these trainings can are build
the pipeline and nursing
assistance empties flabatamis
all these individuals who.
Like nurses physical therapists
other health care providers see
people at their most vulnerable
you don't need us unless
something goes wrong usually so
that is one of the reasons for
us to build our pipeline and to
do that here and silver city we
do need to request finding.
Our colleagues are doctors take
a satoque hero sato and
geratonian have
developed an institute the wmu
institute for health and human
performance this is something
that has been shared with
administration and they are uh
in support of this
and canesial among other careers
can lead to physical therapists
again a discipline that works
with people in their most
vulnerable states.
One of the things before going
into this though is with what
victor shared and then moving
into kinnesiology and nursing
again if you go to data usa dot.
Well data usa if you go there
you would see that the silver
city poverty rate is
approximately twenty one point
five percent various statistics
across the us say it's about
eleven point five percent so we
have almost double the poverty
rate here in silver city and I
would imagine surrounding
counties I could look at up for
you if needed but these sorts of
building the pipeline efforts
would contribute theoretically
at least two
decreasing the poverty level
rather the poverty rate and
surely level here in the in the
town so let's go back to the
ihp.
In my apologies I should have
numbered these slides but if you
were to look at the slide that
talks about the the canesialogy
institute of health and human
performance
you can see these five points
here that are colleagues have
developed and
this would be there's something
to be said for physical activity
whenever possible and the
benefits benefits of that I
think a lot of us know this
night not necessarily at the
four for another mind sometimes
because life gets busy but
doctors palton and and sata
would focus on the life span so
it's not just one group of
people they already have a very
run away successful I will class
an exercise class through the
western institute of a lifelong
learning and they develop that
so that has been a run away hit
and then they would be able to
transfer some of those uhm
winning carbonations winning
plans to the ihp.
If you look at the next slide
with the individual who is
stretching.
It's about life long learning
and exercise for individuals
across the life speaking but we
don't want to forget why we're
here and at least here at
western is for our students
entire got a column tocket and
gear it on there my colleagues
they have developed quite a
number of online face to face
hybrid types of courses along
with a developing graduate
students and two maintain state
of the art
opportunities for students in
canadian we need they need
equipment and some of this
equipment well a lot of it runs
in the five to six figures and
our graduates from what I
understand in canadian g do not
have the best preparation going
into their careers or into
advanced education or both
impart of the disadvantage that
students have whether
undergraduate or graduate is the
lack the latest equipment now
gear and tocket are very frugal
like nursers and cna's and
others we are resourceful
but it would be great for our
students to have modern up to
date technology and equipment.
So then
if you were to go to the slide
with the individuals who are
stretching.
Are the funding that would be
needed and it's a modest amount
that they're asking for compared
to
what others might suggest would
be a quarter of a million
dollars so although we may feel
a little uncomfortable asking
for consideration of these funds
um we do have that need and so
if anybody were to be asked it
would be the committee.
The breakdown of the costs for
the funding
target and gear have these even
more detailed if ever you were
to need those.
And then let's move through to
the nursing programs
yes if you could clarify one
thing about the our doctors
tilton and butter saturday or
they on the faculty already so
you're there their salaries are
not included in this request
there this is in a new program
that the two existing faculty
would add is that the third
various student question and
observation yes tacket and
gerrit had been on faculty for a
number of years tackle a couple
years ago is promoted to
professor full professor and
gear it to associate he goes for
ten year next year so they've
been here for a while and have
devised these courses and they
have respectable student
enrollment numbers as well.
Okay thank you surely.
So now with the nursing there is
an additional hand out lots of
information on nursing you can
read this at your leisure your
leisure
um but this has the most recent
and veteran statistics on the
nursing shortage this is from
our crediting body the american
association of colleges of
nursing and there.
Their daughter if you will there
child is the ccne so that's the
commission on college at nursing
education which certifies which
are credits are nursing programs
without these uh we cannot
function we cannot have a
program we'd have to teach out
and we would not have a nursing
program any nursing programs
here in silver city
so these are again the most
veteran statistics you don't get
any better than this so mister
chairman advice chair members of
the cabinet members of the
audience I would like to talk a
little bit about nursing
programs.
Let's start with
our free life insurance as you
may know.
These individuals do not have a
license yet.
So they are not registered
nurses
but we have had quite a bit of
success with this program and
even last year having one
hundred percent first time and
clex pass rate that is the
license or exam I believe we may
be one of the only if not the
only
program with a hundred percent
in the state or my facility
colleagues are faculty
colleagues uh staff and faculty
colleagues work very diligently
to prepare our students so this
is often what students want to
do is become in rn and to do
that they have to get through
the pre license your program
were fortunate this year we have
about thirty four to thirty five
and rolleys of forty that we can
take.
Not everybody unfortunately
makes the um the cut.
But here this particular we have
asked for funding for faculty
through the rps p the research
and public service projects I
believe that might have been
alluded to earlier in another
presentation.
But what we really need and
we're finding this as we've
launched the.
Smith center as were calling the
john arthur and genet
educational center at the
damning location what we're
finding is specially after the
active shooter situation that
occurred here I believe it was
around august twentieth we had
the actor active shooter
situation here was taken as it
was taken very seriously we're
finding that indemning we need
security officers and these may
not be armed
off as soon as i'm not sure that
would need to be discussed with
our president chief floris
my colleagues as easter espinosa
who's the office manager a
brandy hassman who is a
coordinator in the lorenzo signs
who has really surveyed the land
and understands the need for
protection there is security
guard officers.
And so they would be.
Most beneficial to the pre
license.
Version are program the equal
program that happens in damming
per a creditation standards we
need to have an equal
uhm educational program here and
silver and indemning and here we
have security we have protection
there we do not mention was made
recently that there is concern
about the unhoused uh sleeping
in the
area it's a beautiful building
but there are areas that would
shelter a person from the cold
in the wind and to have students
coming and going and others
coming and going that might be
frightening it could be
dangerous maybe not but to have
two security officers one maybe
for the day one for the evening
that would be understandably
very helpful
so that our pre license.
Now let's move on in there is
face to face there is no way we
want to do that program online
there is hands on face to fees
and as victor had talked about a
number of our nursing assistance
they like being nursing
assistance and want to stay
cnased for their career but a
number become cna so they can
get to be an rn.
So if we're going to have a cna
program in a flabodium in all
these other programs that may be
also at the damning location we
need security.
For the onlines we have the rn
to bs and tracks the rn to msn
tracks and then the msn track
program.
The.
So the orange to be a sen has
been here it's since twenty
twelve and a lot a number of
graduates have had their r end
so this post license they can
get their bachelors and the
bachelors as many know for your
own fields is needed to get the
masters which is needed to get
the doctor.
And then my colleague mary
mcbrayer she developed the
rn to mse and track this is
accelerated there are a couple
of accelerated tracks so
somebody who is a very strong
student.
Um can earn a bachelors and then
get into the master's program if
you were to look again at your
leisure
at this hand out you'll see
there are not enough nursing
educators and if we're going to
produce more nurses we need more
people who are nurse educators
and to do that you need an msn
degree that is the gold standard
for teaching in academia in our
nursing programs across the
united states so the orange to
be a sen has been here for a
while we are encouraging
students who are strong
academically to do an
accelerated track or adviser
serene vanoi is extraordinary at
this and then those who want to
go right into the msn program
can do that as you can see there
these programs are fully online
anybody from the united states
can enter these problems just
like our social work programs
and then we would ask for funds
for an fte a one point zero fte
and then these ongoing contracts
that were finding we need for
resources that are online some
of these contracts are five
figures
mid five figures and then last
next to last we have the family
nurse practitioner program so we
in our fields respect physicians
and surgeons we do not believe
it's an us against them kind of
mentality because really the
patient needs to be the center
somebody could argue against
that but I would imagine there
is some agreement in this room
that the patient needs to be the
center of health care and as
earlier presentations have shown
that might not always be the
case for various reasons.
But we are launching we have a a
program director who was
recently hired a doctor cathy
van revenstein this program is
entirely online in there for the
faculty can be as well driving
raven site is in south carolina
and has expertise galore and she
and our colleague jennifer
france whose and fnp both are
fnps it makes sense that the
fmps would develop this program
both have already submitted a
curriculum to
the c suite here are as a as a
basis with the potential launch
of this program in the fall this
time next year before this time
next year so you can see here
about the we have a lot of
request for this program and
again our or advisor serene she
continues to direct students to
check back checkback check back
as this program is being
developed the thing about fmps
as mentioned earlier is they can
practice autonomously it's not
competition with the physicians
and as somebody might have
mentioned or alluded to doctor
at least what i've learned is a
tiddle physician is the
profession nurse practitioner is
the profession so we're not
trying to compete with others in
the health care sector we're
trying to provide for our
patience and the community
were all of new mexico actually
so then this with the nurse
practitioner this may be
commenced indirectly with other
presentations that you may hear
today or tomorrow
so lastly
the support that we are asking
for and we understand
that you get a lot of requests
for things but we would make
good on our request for just
under one point two million
dollars for
of course the work force
education trainings and that
would help lower our poverty
rates and give people a
meaningful career.
And and the pipeline could lead
if chosen to are can easily
programs not everybody wants to
be a nurse
and then our nursing programs
for those who do want to become
nurses and of you see the array
of programs that we have for
nursing.
Victor I know i've talked to
you covered everything thank you
so mister chair madam vice chair
members of the committee members
of the audience if there are
questions.
I'm gonna silence this.
Well thank you thanks for the
presentation let me just before
we go to the committee just
quickly
the status of your requested
this get included in the
universities request to the lfc.
No the again is to observation
no this is different than the
rpsps that we made the request
for the last was since i've been
here for almost six years we
have an rpsp
strictly for nursing two
actually and then there are
other rps peaceful like you
mentioned earlier college of ad
athletics and some others but
this is totally different.
The the thing is it's kind of
out of cycle now so
we could be very supportive of
it that it would it would
almost.
Would fault I can say that
because we've done we've done
some might have cycle things in
the past but typically this
would be rolled over and
included in next year's budget
request but let's see what we
get issues let's start with the
representative vincent.
Thank you mister chair and thank
you for the presentation and of
course someone else about your
your emergency medical
technician because there was my
previous life.
Are you offering from the basic
all the way up to the paramedic
course mister chair
so we'd actually like to start
with the basic and then go to
intermediate for now
our goal would be to all the way
up to paramedic we we'd like to
see if we can start with the
basic internet media to see the
buy and number one from the
community but also the
supporters.
Thank you mister chair and you
know that is seems to be the the
paramedic course is hard to get
to
but you know it's very rewarding
in your in your towns whenever
you can get 'em and i'm a big
fan of your fire tea ferries a
good guy and did do they run a
paramedic level
fire department here
I believe they do out of a
healer regional medical center
which is eloyment enough and
healer regional I guess thank
you mister.
Great thank you mister chairman
just one quick question proceed
your in your presentation by the
way very good so the v r that's
super awesome I think that's
it's really cool that you can do
that and you don't have any.
I guess you could say uh
insurance payouts with that
so mister chairman i'm just
wondering of the ask that you
had I think it was was it to
fifty or maybe it was that two
million dollars I didn't really
track it how much would that
cost to just buy the equipment
and then what would it cost to
keep the
the software up to date and
everything like that mister
chairman.
The.
For the virtual reality
so that the vr was included in
the workforce healthcare
workforce program which is at
the four hundred thousand though
we were requesting
to be honest I don't have the
exact number but I can get you
that we've looked at a few and
we we necessarily didn't I won
and keep it because we do know
about the this up there's also
you know things we need to take
into consideration the cyber
hacks in all that kind of stuff
we definitely have to look into
that first before putting our
are students in university in
some sort of question but I get
we can get you that answer and
get back to you thank you mister
chairman yeah I was just
wondering because you never know
how much this software costs
sometimes it's tens of thousands
of dollars sometimes it's just a
nominal fee so it's just
interesting to know but thank
you all so much for this
presentation very good work that
you guys are doing and keep it
up thank you mister chairman
thank you both thank you
representative representative
her thank you mr chair and my
question and thank you
presenters my questions are
focuses on the the cna program
and are the students given
internships after they go
through these programs for it
you said you do it in four weeks
six to four weeks so there's not
necessarily internships but we
do like I said is we bring in
local hr representatives to try
and um.
Do some recruitment on what what
on what their offer is that the
other areas we.
A lot of our students are
actually we have a large
population of high school
students which we start we're
trying to do the seventeen year
old and up because of the
license or requirement
but also some of these students
that are taking it on the they
let their their cna lapse
they're working already at a
facility where they're actually
pain to go to get their course
to some of them are working home
health agencies amber care home
health ambitious hospitals
things like that or count on our
county or the ones that are
sending them the ones that of
our of our students they
actually are working to get into
the nursing program and I
believe there's a little do we
go back to the point system on
giving for the application are
we having it.
Not any longer ways to give
these to give points to cna's
certified cna's to get into the
nursing program however we do
encourage our our nursing
students to take the cna
correspondent.
But not no no one
is.
No interest no internships no
ma'am and just for a
clarification mister chair and
mister president this says the
rule health care workforce
training update that did you
also finding last year and the
asked to have it put in the rp
sp last year.
No this is this is our first
rodeo
i'm not sure I know that means
i'm sorry that this is not
coming from the east coast I did
neither but this is this is the
first time that we are making
these requests.
But this is that the first year
of all of these programs
at the first year okay all right
thank you for the clarification
thank you mister chair
thank you representative of
senator rodriguez you want to
introduce yourself and then ask
your question thank you mister
chairman i'm nancy senator nancy
rodriguez from santa fe district
twenty four sariums late mister
chairman best we can do these
days was so much going on um I
do have just to add a little bit
on your point mister chairman
as to whether they got before
the live sear recommendation are
into the committee at all on
their request I want to
elaborate just a little bit in
the though it's not in the lsc
recommendation uhm so far
it still may be able to get in
but that is hard to senator t c
penalty said because the the the
budget right now is being
finalised but let me just
mention something that when the
lfc rack is finalized and it
comes directly in two when we
vote at all of csa this is a
final then it goes directly into
the house appropriations
committee than that's when the
additions are made for something
like this so and then of course
from there as we know uhm you
know depending on whether you
can get it into house
appropriations into that
committee or that request put
into with members that it would
go into the senate finance
committee so thank you mister
chairman just wanted to offer a
little hope here so I was not
lost
I would recommend that you
you know work real closely with
your
local representatives and
senators who might be on the LFC
I don't know are you on the
local representative.
No no
representative and he's a he's
an empty so this is something
that uh you know he's been
looking for some big victory to
help him with this political
future so this would be this
would be a good one uh try to
find somebody on that looks like
or senator rodriguez who is who
is on the lfc
but that should be around
through the development of this
budget in once you get to the
regular session it'll be a
different cast to characters
unfortunately so except for him
he'll be run
and did you want to introduce
yourself representative john
since I see your signs pictures
all the return uh but but go
ahead it might be we're online
so people may not have the
benefit of senior picture around
thank you and my apologies for
being like I had.
Constituent issues could not
leave would not leave for them
but this is highly important a
priority in my list to be here
but but I am jennifer jones
representative of district
thirty two it's just south of
here dog county luna and part of
donanna so good to finally make
it thank you and and a nurse the
only nurse in the legislature at
this moment I don't know if
there's going to be any new and
the john arthur and
jennette smith extended
university is in her districts
she also might be somebody to
read through their proposal
because this is hot stuff for
you well mister chair yes and we
were so glad to be able to
open up that new school down in
damning and I I have high hopes
for that in our region and and
growing our own as as we always
talk about here in this
committee so
i'd love to be in touch with you
thank you thank you mister
chairman they need a security
guards down there that's one of
the things that you'll see in
the in the request that's one of
the things they're asking for
a paid or or effectively
let's get that done then thank
you
representative chase.
They can mister chairman happy
to be here it was a beautiful
drive down whom sorry got a late
start happy to join you all and
it's been a long time since i've
been in silver city and it's
beautiful as ever
oh in my district is in
albuquerque right in the
university of mexico area
any questions for
for them okay
representative but should be
started
representative royal cover you
know.
Thank you mr chair had forgotten
our rotation process
and thank you very much for your
extensive home report and for
your requests I am
I feel it I feel the need I see
the need on a regular basis and
and having come from originally
my roots all in this area I
understand
that we have a growing aging
population in my concern mr
chair is
in the area of CNN cnase in
particular because there are
first line
assistance with am trying to
keep our families
at home or if they have to go to
a facility they are our front
line and i.
Excuse me
i'm real concerned because I i'm
I want us to be ready and i'm
not quite sure we're ready for
that for the.
For the big hit of the numbers
that we're going to face so my
question in particular house to
do with.
Whether you have seen a need or
whether you.
Foresee a need.
And have incorporated
cultural and language pertinent
curriculum um to assist.
As our aging population grows
because I know that in
albuquerque in particular.
Um we've had several issues with
not being able to provide
respect care for family members
because there were no spanish
speaking cns or anyone to place
in the home while the family
needed to take very much need it
respect care consequently the
families did not take the
respect care and that poses
another problem if we don't give
that respect care so
can you answer that because they
think whatever you do probably
have uh an impact or will have
an impact around the state as
well absolutely thank you
representing colorado for that
question it's funny you bring
that up we always are really
talking to our students about
this and being the extra years
and eyes of our nursing stuff we
really are heavily focused on
how important to cna actually is
and every single
job can be coming from the home
based primary care all the way
to the facility to the hospital
to the emergency car rooms
but I was actually the cna
instructor previously to coming
into this role and I did it I
was the instructor for about
seven years
my esponen will keep though i'm
just getting my my spanish is
okay but I actually hired
an individual are current
reinstructor his name is edward
marcus he is influenced in
bilingual
and he comes from damning he is
out of the damming area and we
have seen a increase in actually
spanish speaking cna students
since he's come along for the
last year because he can
actually give that instruction
to the students I myself had a
few but I was able to get by he
actually is fluent in spanish
and a lot of the the students
that he's bringing in is he's
born in raised in damien and he
knows that area out there
towards balas and and.
Save more time columbus yes so
he actually has brought in a lot
of students that are looking for
job placement that are spanish
speaking and i've been i've been
actually being able to see him
provide the courses in spanish
and he actually gives those
students and act that's why we
say four to six weeks because he
gives those students a few extra
if they need extra time in the
lab to get that through to
understand them a lot of the
student to to get that
understanding a lot of the
students that he's been teaching
our currently working somewhere
but yes we we have we're
hopefully we will be prepared to
see is what I do know that or
not the aging population is
going to be increasing rapidly
soon
but we're doing our best here in
w to assist with that especially
with the language barriers.
I hope I can at a help answer
that question think of mr chair
and the only thing I would add I
mean that I would ask is that
you modeled us curriculum
documented make it a firm
curriculum and then model it for
other institutions around the
state because it's going to be
very need it thank you thank you
mister chairman thank you
representative senator so the
old opposite thank you mister
chair thank you for the
presentation it really is
excellent in even though it's
out of time I hope I will be
making a available a little
question about that is your
university supporting this
hasn't or if.
Or fps I always forget those
officials r s PS p
r PS p r PS p
special project I know is the
last part of it a mister
chairman vice president members
of the committee represent a
senator uh we are supported by
the university
even this presentation here we
did have better with uhm
administration but that's a very
pragmatic way to answer the
question as far as in the more
macro level absolutely and our
administration has supported us
one hundred percent and if we
were to work with the
representatives and senators who
have been suggested to us I
imagine that we would have their
support as well excellent and
it's okay even if it's if the
support is in neutral their tow
chicago studies got started
because the university it wasn't
on the university's list but it
certainly was important to the
legislature and this is a really
important look like you said for
economic development but also
for health care in your
community.
What to your
how do you I know you said that
you are growing your own but are
there other ways in which you
encourage people this day.
You know because this is going
to open a lot of doors for them
uh mr chair man and vice
president members of the
committee senator
we are trying as far as and
these may be presentations later
today or tomorrow as far as
financial incentives we do have
a number of our students who are
in the prelicensur who graduate
and they work in the area
with our msn program there is
the possibility for highly
achieving students who earn
their msn just like victor
earned his msn as our first
cohort of graduates from our msn
program
to to stay here and work as
educators and in other positions
so sometimes it might be a
little bit more intrinsic than
extrinsic that's what we have to
work with at this time but there
is something to be said for both
types of rewards and do you have
any ideas about what your
admissions process is going to
look like and this actually I
think is related to
representative government a
robot coverage question in that
are you going to give
extra points for by linguist
people to come into your
programmer when you start having
to turn people away how you can
make those decisions.
Well I will be honest we have
never turned to stood in a way
argue our goal is to take every
student and that's why we
increased it from ten to sixteen
there hasn't been much talk
about discussion if we can give
them some sort of incentive for
being bilingual I I can
definitely ask that question and
get into it is far as
students in the cna program I
can't really talk about you know
the the r n I know I state here
you know um but as far as the
seeing a program I think since
i've taken over this position
we've only had two students
after top of my head and I was
because we signed the the the
documents is who were asking to
transfer or get getting get
their license in arizona but as
far as everyone else and in the
see any problem in the cna
program that apply for the new
mexico state licenser they've
been working in new mexico now
what happens after that I can't
follow that but at the very
beginning we've had two so far
that's impressive that you are
able to take everyone who
applies.
Um it what's the drop out.
Anyway.
Yeah i've your son thinking
maybe enable cricky terms or or
or something
because when you have open
ambitions often you have hide
high drop out is that nothing I
hope that's not the case so our
goal was to make sure we have
over ten and that is off also to
fund to pay our instructor okay
because they are paid
what is the stop and.
Yes not faculty.
The paid per credit course
they're paid for critical
adjunct instructors okay adjunct
so we want more that we want ten
so that they the adjunct
constructors can be fully paid
for what we go up to sixteen
because we do understand that
there are some students that
actually
drop out whether they can't keep
up or are any or unforeseen
circumstances occur but over ten
is our goal and we increase that
to sixteen and that is because
the patient you know our goal is
with our with the beds that we
have in the student in the the
nursing facility arch our lab we
want to make sure there's enough
room for this clinical skills to
take place
so i'm sorry okay weren't just
so how what's the percentage of
people who complete the program.
And now i'm good
I would say over ninety percent
they complete it I we really
don't have much drop outs
excellent.
Representative charges
thank you mister chair I do have
a other questions one of them
you talked about
the programs where the students
um go out and do the
internships.
Um and i'm thinking like that
maybe the pharmacy taxer some of
the
cnes but so my question is are
those paid internships to order
the students get any kind of
stipend while they're doing
that.
We have yet to get to an
internship for the pharmacy tech
as we said we just started our
first cohort of students which
was this fall of twenty twenty
four the internship has not been
put into place or a contract
hasn't been right we do have a
few pharmacies that are
interested in working with us I
don't believe they'll be paid
internships however most
sometimes some of the.
The.
The businesses might hire them
on a temporary basis and after
their completion they can you
know because they do on the job
training here now if we prepare
them for the the last internship
with the which I believe is the
last six credit hours they've
already done most of the program
so if they can hire them they
finish and then they go ahead
and take that test locally they
have one year if you hire a
pharmacy tech
they do on the job training and
they have one year at the at the
local pharmacies to take their
to take their certification but
as far as on the job or perform
prepaid to get paid no no matter
I don't have that look so much
to chair then so those students
are basically having to either
figure out so that loans or
maybe have a job in in in
addition to their internship is
is that how it works.
Yes I can answer that question.
I don't I don't know how to
answer the question okay no no
no I I mean I just I just you
got me thinking when you said
that that they were internships
and and that you know
businesses and organizations
around town were interested in
in hosting or
providing interships to those
students yeah okay and then my
other question it's kind of a
little of the subject but you
were talking about mister chair
the need for security and in
that presentation and talked
about unhoused people um and so
I don't know how big you're
unhouse to population here is in
silver city but I get it I guess
I I would think that it gets
pretty cold during the winter
now
so what kind of housing programs
are services do you have for
unhouse people if you know it's
kind of off the subject but that
kind of got my interest.
Mr chairman vice chair members
of the committee representative
shavers.
A debt might be a better
question for our social worker
colleagues but I am aware of
spin the spi and I need to look
up with that stands for exactly
supporting people in need thank
you victor supporting people in
need and one of the things
though
maybe it's only anado at this
time but our social worker
colleagues are including our
dean uh doctor patty west or
curry who is a social worker by
training one of the things that
happens in the warmer climates
such as damien and silver city
is we do have unhouse
individuals who can uh easier
time answer but analyze it easy
but they can survive a little
bit better than perhaps in the
chip the chilly climates so
that's one of the the concerns
we want them to have housing but
we also want safety for our
nursing students in our
colleagues endeming in here
thank you mister chair.
Thank you representative
representative
ferrari thank you mister chair I
was just reading the albuquerque
journal they uh they think tank
proposes creation of a new two
billion dollar fund to help
solve new mexico's health care
worker shortage and it seems to
me that your request for funding
is way less than there even
though we do have more schools
that can help us with social
workers and
you know I like it animals you
and you and then also so it
seems like you have a really
good handle on some different
things that would help us do
that and investing directly to
the schools I think it's a
really good idea so thank you.
Representative thompson thank
you mr chair and thank you so
much for the presentation I am a
pt I wondered if you knew that
because you kept referring it's
like I looked up everyone yes
so thank you for that lots of
people don't know we exist so my
question is about your
caniciology program and getting
I mean there's only one pt
program and your new max quite
unam and I think it only takes
thirty two students now um so do
you have any data in terms of
how how how many of your
students that have graduated
with caniciality from here have
been accepted into the pt score.
Mr chair made invite chair
members of the committee members
of the audience excellent a
student observation as well I
would defer to my colleagues
doctors sato and peltonian
however my understanding as
colleagues might be in
colleagues with them is that we
have students who graduate
whether at the undergrad level
or the graduate level in my
understanding is the dpt is now
needed the doctor yes so that's
another reason why we need the
equipment for these programs is
so that students who do graduate
and they go out of state or they
go to UNM
they have been prepared as
effectively as possible with the
most contemporary teaching
learning strategies but as far
as the number of graduates I
could I could get that for you I
have your email address so if
you would like that certainly it
just add a curiously thank you
so much thank you mister chair.
Thank you representative
thompson and representative
jones are just want to give you
a chance first questions as you
catch up do you have anything
you wanted to ask thank you mr
chair I do have one one question
these students set their wind
and you john arthur internet
smith campus are they are they
mainly doing their clinical work
at members of memorial or is
there any other place where
they're doing clinical work.
Mr chair madam vice chair
members of the committee
representative johns that is.
Yes and no so members is has
been and a standing location for
us with the clinical rotations
now however with more
enrollments and greater need for
clinical sites students are
going to a various sites in last
crucis and some come here to
hill regional so we are trying
to have that to our
that drive there and one of the
the really good things about
some additional state
appropriations that we've
received these last couple of
years has been the creation of
stipends for our students to uh
drive to and from and sometimes
even stay in a hotel overnight I
think earlier somebody mentioned
about gas prices and the
astronomical amount of money for
gas and so you can imagine with
students maybe some people have
ten dollars maybe students do
not and so there has been a
stipend that has been created by
uh my colleague margaret fran
driver in condition in
collaboration with our financial
aid office to allow students to
have a certain amount of money
to drive two members perhaps
it's just up the street to last
cruises appear but yes we have a
very strong good working
relationship with all of our
clinical partners and members in
particular has been very very
good to us all have but members
is more aware now of the john
arthur internet smith
educational center.
Thank you mr chair and thank you
so much I really appreciate that
because I in my district that is
so rural there we mentioned
columbus I know there are people
in columbus down on the border
who want to take part in that
sort of thing but driving that
our round trip just to damning
is a challenge with gas prices
and so really glad to hear that
you've made allowances for that
with the stipend that is uh
that's very very helpful thank
you so much.
That's it.
Thank you I had a few questions
so thank first thank you
a for the work you're doing be
for being so forward thinking
and proposing such great
innovations
my first question though is
about something you kind of
casually mentioned and I had
looked around and i'm not sure
that any of us had heard about
an active shooter incident here
for what was that all about.
Anybody here heard about that.
What we're now vocally it's kind
of a news desert we we don't
know what's going on so there
was actually an act an active
shooter is called think you said
august august twentieth it will
actually wasn't on campus
however it was close by off one
of the streets right here and
then that the individual was at
large so that we locked out the
president and everybody did lock
down the campus um and shelter
in place and I believe it had
lasted for about an hour and a
half to two hours is in the mid
afternoon
but yes that was the it was a
drill for everybody and it was
an actual shooting I believe a
block office so did they
apprehend the individual I want
to be honest so you still out
there
believe there was more than one
individual and fortunately our
police department here in active
police department they were I
believe the cheap floor is he
overseas he directs these
hopefully this is we never had
this happen again but it was
treated as if it was you know it
was very seriously treated so
there were I believe more than
one suspect of three yes and at
least one got away in a
particular automobile and had a
description we were given a
description um of this
individual so that happens here
in silver city and we have a
fully functioning police
department then if we had the
smith center as were calling it
um and no security it's very a
frightening for it for everyone
yeah I think I think you're
smart to be asking for that but
I I was just curious because I
had not heard about an activity
it may have been in the
albuquerque press but I missed
it if it were ok so then first
question a very basic question.
What is a medical what does the
medical assistant do.
Is it like a a cna is it
different from that or what what
does the medical assistant to so
a medical assistant in in art
area and you know
mr off that I can can talk a
little bit with his next
presentation on that umm cnas
are certified nursing assistance
usually we see a lot of our
cna's in the in the.
It are nursing homes healer
regional medical center or
hospitals even have a minor e
r's medical assistance are more
in the primary care level like
in hot and clinic settings such
as doctors officers they do a
variety of of they do a lot of
work actually they do you know
take vitals routine vitals they
do basic exams for for eyes and
ears just to you know see how
they're doing the
assist the doctors in you know
matter getting med uh doctors
refills ordering grabbing
scripts doing a lot of the leg
work that you know cna is
actually do at the hospital or
in a prime
and.
A nursing assistant home but
they these are more i've I feel
like there are a little bit more
administrative whenever it comes
to the the primary care officers
in the doctor so the training is
a different kind of tra- as a
different emphasis then the
cnase get and how long does that
does your
or you just proposing the
medical assistant we would like
to start a medical assistant
problem with that one less than
one but I think when we looked
last time it was about six
months program up north but we
were looking at doing it in a
semester which would be sixteen
weeks
sixteen so who's doing that up
north.
My goodness are the cnn was c n
m has one CNN has one
and one other you know northern
northern the mix I don't
remember okay but thank you
that's helpful than then my my
real.
A concern has to do with the the
online family practitioner
program which I mean it sounds
great and it's away for people
to access but really is that a
good way for well first how many
years does it take to get your
families practitioner complete
your family practitioner program
if you're rodi and ran.
Okay yet again a stu-
observation so every I know we
hear when I first arrived here
in twenty nineteen the plan was
for us to have a bricks and
mortar in person fnp program in
truth or consequences yes and so
we had a work through that but
then the pandemic and so at that
point we started thinking okay
as did a number of nurse
practitioner programs across the
united states what if we did
hybrid and so then as time has
gone on and not just are staying
commit competitive with the
market if you will but a lot
quite a number if you were to
search if any of us were to
search different and p programs
there more and more online and
what that allows you to do then
is to reach outside of new
mexico now granted we want what
we want people to stay here and
we can grow our own we've had
quite a number of people
inquiring about this.
But sort of like social work my
understanding of social work is
you would find your clinical uh
field experience practical there
in your state in your area and
are focuses on rural and front
tier health community health so
a lot of the united states is
not a big city it's not a metro
area uh so our students would be
able to find different
experiences field work if you
will in their states and so they
would take the courses online
with our program I believe
others in the state outside of
the state have fully online
programs and then they would
meet the requirement to be able
to sit for their boards and
board certification which is
part of a creditation as far as
the time frame before covered
are planned was to have three
consecutive semesters face to
face bricks and mortar in truth
or consequence so starting for
spring and summer one year you
could be done than the pandemic
so just like others in the
united states other nursing
programs were all thinking how
can we still do this and now
here we are with many programs
being fully online but you have
your clinical practica in your
area so maybe two years some
require
two years you have a number of
precs if a student were to go
through our msn program and
again my colleagues after being
revinced either in jenna for
free and are working on that
curriculum and working with
those of us who teach in the msn
to really make those certain
courses more rigorous so when
students go into the f and p
program whether they're here in
new mexico or elsewhere they've
already met some of those
requirements or at least will do
well in the f and p version of
those requirements and they can
then just keep going because of
the circle so would would have
been rn who wanted to become.
A family practitioner would they
have to get their msn first.
And then go into the family
nurse practition or or is it is
it broaden off that they could
just go right into it and and
and become one.
Well you could be an honorary
nurse and we have that we do not
have the option to have an
accelerated type of program our
students whether they do a
masters here or outside of new
mexico they need to have that
masters kind of stopping point
there are programs elsewhere in
the
uh stay in that if I understand
correctly in the united states
were you can have an accelerated
the problem with something like
that and it's no offense to
other programs outside of our
own.
Is what do you do if you have to
stop there's no in between do
you get a a masters or an every
program is different in that way
we are not focusing on a d and p
the doctor of nursing practice
we are focusing on the f and p
because here in new mexico and a
number of states now you can
function with full autonomy as
would a primary care physician
so if you not everybody wants to
get a doctorate and we don't
want to push that some want to
have a master's level post
master certificate to practice
as a nurse practitioner more and
more those programs are not
quite as a supported because the
pushes for the doctorate the
doctor which is great but not
again not everybody wants to
doctor it so i'm still a little
because.
I mean the doctor it would be
for faculty to become a faculty
member better close but you
could do that you could be in
the clinical setting one hundred
percent and have a dnpn um
representative of chones can
correct me if i'm wrong but
sometimes it's just the love of
learning and more autonomy that
people will go forward for their
doctor it so i'm still not clear
in order to get into your into
your program to be up to come a
family and respect it
will you take people who don't
have m s n s they all have to
have in the sense first and then
they they can if they want to
become an autonomous
practitioner they would apply to
becoming at the family news
practition yes and we are
looking at requiring a minimum
of approximately two years of rn
experience in two years of our
inexperience okay very good
that's helpful.
Okay I think that.
The covered all my question
anybody have any other lingering
questions.
We're good luck with your
appropriation here you're search
for money here the uh the grand
county prospectors may be
helpful to you and prospecting
for for that money
they they have a lot of context
there
john arthur smith would be very
helpful to you and finding that
money to if you wanted to call
him a retirement to help out
well and mr chair made a vice
president members of the
committee you might see us again
maybe in the future and now that
we've had this uh first go at
this if you will um this is new
to us not just us but to us to
meet with you about these items
so we really appreciate your
time and the questions
will thank you so much thank you
both and good luck with your
with your work and your efforts
at expanding.
The.
So members will now go to our
second panel of the afternoon
and this one is on the new
mexico primary care training
consortium and we've heard a lot
of mention of dan or terror he's
going to be here joining us also
myrial scott the executive
director of the new mexico
primary care training
consortium.
Dan is incidentally the chief
executive officer of the ugle
medical services then we have
robert would occur this healer
regional medical center ceo and
doctor john and the solar the
secretary of the board of
directors of the primary care
training center and who's whose
are lead to presenter in this
destructure of good thank you.
Okay.
He heard me mister chairman.
Okay
just a note of there's two mikes
there are so never let to be on
it once the just make sure
there's only one or the other
ways to get feedback in hideous
noise and understand sir
good afternoon mister chairman
madame vice chair committee
members thank you for the
opportunity to present you today
and first of four most we want
to welcome you to silver city
grant county
in the area that was great to
hear so many people enjoy the
right over the black range we
recommend not being a passenger
with a fast driver that doesn't
usually work out too well
but we're we're really happy to
have the opportunity to talk to
you about residency programs
graduate medical education
and want to start off by
thanking you for the support
you've provided historically for
a physician training programs
so so I wanted to take the
opportunity just to welcome you
almost first and foremost in i'm
gonna go ahead and hand it over
to doctors
thank you
mister chair
and members of the committee i'm
really appreciate the
opportunity to talk with you
today uhm so i'm married scott
and executive director of the
new mexico primary care training
consortium uhm I think some of
you are familiar with our
organization but we provide
support state wide for a primary
care residency program so that
includes family medicine
pediatrics general internal
medicine in psychiatry and we
focus in particular on rural and
underserved areas of the state
and that's what we're going to
be talking more about today i'm
going to go ahead and uhm pass
past the mike to our other
presenters to introduce
themselves and then we'll get
started with the presentation.
I thank you mister chairman of
my share members of the
committee my name is robert with
occur and i'm the ceo of hill
original medical center and will
speak a little bit later about
uh critical access hospitals and
graduate medical education.
Uhm i'm hello mister chairman
and madame vice chair and the
members of the committee i'm
john nenzalem a family doctor.
And that's all I really know so
born in rates and last cruises
new mexico and and um here to
talk about i'm actually the
founding chair of the the n m
pctc and and.
Here there kind of wrap things
up at the end.
Right uhm what I want to start
out with giving giving you some
some data about our state and
also about their specific
programs that we've been
supporting in the state so i'm
in your packet if you
go to that second page that has
the map of new mexico on it and
you all are probably all quite
well aware that new mexico face
as a primary care physician
shortage i'm thirty of our
thirty three counties are what
what are considered whole county
primary care physician shortage
areas an additional two are
partial county primary care
physician shortage areas and
those two or donated sand of all
counties and the only county
that doesn't there is not a
shortage area is los alamos uhm
and since twenty thirteen new
mexico has experienced a net
loss of three hundred and eight
primary care physicians and
since we're in great county I
want to point out specifically
that that includes eight in
great county alone so we we are
facing a a serious issue in
terms of having sufficient
primary care physicians in our
state which means that many
people across our state do not
have access to the healthcare
that they need and so our work
is really too much try to fill
that gap.
So if you are moved to the next
m slide we have had some success
in terms of our rural tracks in
our rural residencies in new
mexico so I just want to know
uhm just just quickly at some
statistics on that um on that
point uhm so the UNM has a
psychiatry residency world track
uhm they just recently published
data regarding regarding that
rural track and what they found
was that residents on the rural
track were more likely to
practice in rural frontier or
underserved areas after
residency compared to non rural
track so it was seventy four
percent versus sixty percent um
and we are working on uh um
developing additional psychiatry
residency training in more rural
areas of the state and so this
is good i'm data uhm tibet uhm
to suggest that that would be
successful
it our new mexico family
medicine residency programs
across all of those family
medicine programs in the state
erm seventy four percent of
graduates of our programs in the
last two years currently
practice in new mexico if you
would like more detail about who
is practicing where there is
also a hand out in your packet
that and gives more detail on
where where the graduates from
the last two years are
practicing
and then finally
our rural new mexico family
medicine residency programs have
strong retention rates in rural
areas so overall sixty seven
percent of rural program
graduates since twenty eighteen
are practicing and world
communities and forty five
percent of those are practicing
in new mexico uhm your second
hand out demonstrates that uhm
the the residency program in
grant county that were currently
working on reopening contributed
quite a lot to uhm to those
statistics um I think you are
may be aware that we have also
had unfortunately some closures
of residency programs in the
state uhm in one of the things
that we want to talk about today
is how we can ensure the
sustainability of those world
residency programs so that that
doesn't happen again.
And I will move to the next
slide
we there is also a the health
resources and services
administration has a rural
residency program development
grant program uhm that that the
new mexico primary care training
consortium was a recipient of
and we are cycle just ended on
that grand july thirty first um
and um we that helped us
establish a new family medicine
residency program and espanola
so that program has been very
successful they filled those
rural programs that have opened
through that grant program have
filled at the same rate as more
established rural programs which
suggest that there is an
appetite for world training so
if we can create more world
training opportunities for
residents in our state we expect
that we will fill those sites
and have more rural physicians
practicing in the state upon
graduation our program
specifically actually did better
than the average um so are they
uh filled one hundred percent of
their positions in the match so
there are four new residents
training in new mexico as of
july first and seventy five
percent of those residents of
three of the four are from new
mexico and that's compared to
just about thirty four percent
uh it's a national average so
we're doing much better in in
our state than their nationally
which is which is good good to
know.
And then finally if you go to
the slide um on national rural
training data uhm I think it's
important to note that family
physicians from a rural
background are more likely to
choose rural practice than those
from an urban background so
thirty nine point two percent
versus thirteen point eight
percent and family medicine
trainees in rural residencies
regardless of their background
so regardless of whether they
are from an urban or overall
background arm if they train in
a rural place are more likely to
practice rural medicine so
that's fifty point nine percent
versus eighteen percent so the
reason that I share all of that
data is to let you know that and
when we build rural residency
programs they do work to retain
rural physicians in our
communities and they do increase
access uhm to to primary care
for our communities but
residency programs as you are
may know are quite challenging
and anywhere and they're
particularly challenging to
develop in sustainable areas so
a residency program when it is
mature right when it already has
residents in it it's already
done all the work of recruiting
faculty and developing those
faculty and has has the program
up and running it regularly cost
a hundred and sixty thousand to
one hundred and eighty thousand
dollars per resident per year
and that's in your typical urban
academic medical center
but but and what we have
realized from our experience
working in rural communities is
that in in rural communities
that can cost substantially more
and particularly uhm starting up
a rural residency so first of
all that that figure one hundred
and sixty to a hundred and
eighty thousand dollars does not
include indirect cost or
clinical operations costs that
may be incurred by the site uhm
that is hosting the residents um
for any facility that trains the
residents and sometimes in rural
places there needs to be
building construction or
renovation to create enough
clinical space for residents.
And they often have to hire and
train new physicians who will be
program directors and other core
faculty in the program so those
start up costs can be really
significant and so we estimate
that it is probably closer for
just ongoing costs to probably
around two hundred fifty
thousand dollars per resident
per year and plus all the
additional costs or start up
with the program
so I think that's that's
important to know that it is not
it it it is not cheap rate to
start to start these real
residency programs the funding
however is really designed the
the primary way that residency
programs are funded is is really
uhm designed for large academic
medical centers in urban areas
it's really not designed for the
kinds of programs that we need
in our state so the most common
way that that graduate medical
education is funded is through
medicare and medicaid funding
and so if you look at the slide
that says residency program
funding very simple um graph
there but we have you know uh
met federal funds through
medicare they're indirect and
direct costs that you may uhm
hear about some facilities are
eligible for some other
facilities eligible for others
which we will go into later and
then medicaid is um is allocated
at this state level in the in
that similarly has indirect and
direct finding sources that may
be different depending on the
facility and that's hosting the
residents
one thing that's important to
notice that they're spending
doesn't begin until residents
start training at the site so
all those start up costs are
won't be funded in this way they
have to be funded in some other
way before you have residents
actually uhm on the site
and so really
we're at a disadvantage for
developing programs in rural and
underserved areas especially
because as programs are more
likely to be housed in critical
access hospitals and federally
qualified health centers.
And so we really need
alternative financing models in
new mexico to support our rural
and community base programs so
before I turn over to my
colleagues to talk about some of
more specific funding gaps and I
want to note that are examples
today are from green county but
the issues that we are talking
about exist across the state so
any critical access hospital are
federally qualified health
center is likely to experience
similar concerns with funding if
they're interested in in hosting
a residency program so I will
now turn it over to mister
ricker
on the next page and your
packets where it talks about
medicare and medicaid funding
for critical access hospitals
and as doctor scotts are
mentioned that.
Uh critical access hospitals do
not
receive the same level of
funding is a pps hospital or
large urban hospital does
we are at a disadvantage in
regards to funding and and
supporting gradual medical
education and training of
physicians and our communities
with medicare there's no direct
direct funding in that
participation and there is some
indirect funding but it's
definitely not as much as you
would get that as I had a large
urban hospital and on medicaid
funding there is this
eligibility for direct payments
but no eligibility for indirect
payments to cover those into
recosts
and so those two slides there
just really show the the
disadvantage that that we have
in in funding uh physician
training programs in rural areas
and and as we go through the the
presentation more that
the committee in in our group's
request and asked and and and
help with with this process.
Actually
I believe so.
Mr chairman committee members
are moving to the slide title
that early qualified health
centers similar to the critical
access hospital funding
mechanisms they're very similar
except for finally qualified
health centers traditionally
will access residency funding
through the teaching health
center which is the national
program to develop resident
programs within federally
qualified health centers those
funding streams are
um to traditionally lower than
what you're going to hear about
today
and they are difficult to get in
the sense that there's limited
funds allocated by congress
every year to either maintain
the current levels of residency
programs and or expand them
accordingly as possible one of
the things I think is important
for me to share is uh hms's
story with family recently
program
he don't medical services with
the first teaching health center
in new mexico it was established
in twenty thirteen
by group of individuals coming
together and applying for that
teaching health center status
one of the leaders was dr john
and his ola it was a one plus
two program meeting the
residence did their first year
with doctor and his all that
memorial medical center
in his program and then they did
completed years two and three at
had all the medical services and
basically doing rotations around
the community
and doing their cot newty
clinics within our facilities
itself.
Send twenty thirteen over
fifteen graduates
again remember that's going to
be one plus two program so
there's a three six residents
six presidents a year
at any given time with two of on
slated to graduate on any given
year of the fifteen residents
that finish the program
initially about five of them
stayed in rural new mexico of
the fifteen there's three that
remain in rome in mexico the
rest move back to their home
communities most of which were
in rural communities around the
country I stressed that because
it goes with a data that was
presented to you about the
likelihood of these graduating
residents from a rural program
to stay in rural new mexico
which again is is helping us
still that void critical
shortage of physicians uhm.
We all know and I think we all
probably many times get a little
fatigued with hearing about the
pandemic but it was the post
pandemic after a physicians work
so hard here locally it had all
the medical services in
collaboration with our local
health care system we started
seeing transitions of our
faculty
um we would either run the
program with two to three
faculty members to oversee the
program and
one of the faculty members move
to reados move to a larger
health care system
one of them moved out of state
and the third move to welcome to
tenants type of work so when we
when we lost our faculty
unfortunately we have to
temporarily close the program
and part of why you see the four
of us up here is because we've
been working on a community
based residency program model.
Then loo of having it's always
been community supported right
around our physician residents
would rotate all over the
community
uhm with mister mike mcmillan's
group in north of petty true
regional medical center are
abstactive to practice in town
or pt practice in town they they
got all those um experiences as
you know for c's also offer
behavioral health comprehensive
behavior health services as well
dental services uhm hms has
thirteen clinical fights over
grant hit dogble county so they
got the most front tier clinic
experiences while they were
here.
The
so we've come together to say
not only how how do we move
forward to reestablish a program
but how do we do it in the way
where we can support each other
not only operationally but
financially so I think what I
really wanted to stress is what
you see sitting here this this
group sitting in front of you
has been working hard since our
closure to come together and not
only get the the needed funding
from you all and from the state
and the federal sources that we
may but to be able to create a
model that can be replicated
in the role communities across
the state to support the the
physician start filling that
position the more more
effectively than the great work
that's already occurred so I
will pause there the slides are
in front of you they're very
similar to uh what mister
whittaker shared with you with
the exception of teaching health
centers themselves so of course
we'll answer questions this will
be done.
So I will I just wanna make talk
about one other area where we
have a funding gap really
quickly and then alternate over
to doctor in the solar to close
one of the other areas that we
are working on his developing a
psychiatry residency in the
southern part of new mexico in
collaboration with unm you all
may be aware of that currently
the only psychiatry residency
program in the state is at unm
um and um they do have rural
tracks uhm but none of those are
currently in the southern part
of the states we're working with
them to establish training in
the southern part of the state
we are struggling with uhm the
the financial support for that
program because
because we need to be partner
and we have strong partners with
independent psychiatric
facilities in last crucials
unfortunately uhm independent
psychiatric facilities are
similarly limited and their
ability to receive medicare and
medicaid funding to support the
the resident costs so
without going into detail um one
issue is that typically medicare
volume is very low in
independent psychiatric
facilities and so that reduces
the amount of uhm funding that
can come from medicare i'm
pretty significantly
and they cannot receive a
indirect medicaid payments at
all and there are restrictions
on the on the direct medicaid
payments that they can receive
and so this is a real gap for us
in terms of being able to find
psychiatry residency programs
outside of an academic a large
academic medical center in in
you all are well aware that we
have a we have a a shortage of a
mental health providers across
our state in the ability to
train psychiatry residents in
the southern part of this state
would really uhm uh would give
us the opportunity to start to
fill that gap uhm and so that I
just want to to point that out
we are but like I said we are
working on a collaboration.
With messier valley hospital and
donate the county uhm to to
develop training in uh indonesia
county and and hopefully in in
the rest of the southern part of
the state uhm we are in the in
the program application stage um
of that of that program and are
still working on the financial
models uhm so I want to turn it
over to doctor in disolam to to
to summarize it and kind of
close art close our discussion
and talk about pain of what
we're asking for.
To tell me when i'm supposed to
say because I was out of the
loop so i'm just getting back in
the loop so
I think was really important to
understand is training
physicians and communities keeps
physicians and communities and
i'll give you a really good
example
the residency training that I
was head of for fifteen years
and last crucials has trained
uhm over a hundred and thirty
physicians so we have about a
sixty seven percent retention
rate for the state of new mexico
and that mirrors much of the
state of new mexico retaining
positions I took a count of
positions and done a county in
the surrounding region and I
mean like uhm household alan
gordo damning thirty physicians
in these commit communities came
out of that residency program
they practice delivering babies
they practice in the e r's the
practice family medicine and
they provide a lot of care to
physician to patience in our
communities they really address
the needs a patience in our
communities and that's why we do
this.
What you heard was that there is
not enough funding to train
these still make these similar
models in rural communities.
The funding is designed to go to
what they call pps or drg
hospitals which are large urban
hospitals the funding model was
created in nineteen sixty five
to train physicians in hospitals
in large urban centers not in
hobs not in silver city not in
gallop and that's where we need
doctors and so we're we're
talking about is how do we get
funding to these federally
qualified health centers how do
we get funding to these critical
access hospitals how do we get
funding in these communities so
they can train the positions
there will likely stay in serve
these communities so
medicare and medicate are the
two main funders medicare.
Being in washington controlled
by washington dc is not changing
rapidly and has not changed much
since nineteen sixty five and
actually has has limited the
amount of training that we can
grow um in programs medicaid
because they're part of mexico
has really made significant
changes and in twenty nineteen
they made funds available to
smaller hospitals outside of
albuquerque and if you notice
all of a sudden we had new
training programs we developed a
program in element gordo we
expended the program in las
crucials we expended a program
in chiprock and we expended this
new program in
espinola.
With
farmington and lovington and las
vegas and last cruces sike
psychiatric residency program
under development because of
these extra funds.
But in these rural communities
in the smaller communities
they're still lacking and they
still face a roadblock of
funding so the very last slide
says to train and retain
primericare physicians and I
would add and psychiatric
physicians in rural and
underserved areas we need a
permanent state fund for
critical access hospitals
federally qualified health
centers and independent
psychiatric facilities which
also fall out of that drg pps
funding mechanism so we can
train positions
in the communities that that we
need so thank you
mr chairman I believe that's
everything in in committee
any idea of how big a fund.
You know I I wish I knew I can
tell you how much you would cost
and how much that would look
like but how that funded is
created and structured I would
need to have.
Some ideas but I am not going to
leave you hanging I could take
some time and talk to experts
nationally and come up with an
idea and I know there are some
models similar to that with
critical access hospital
specifically funding um cancer
programs in the state that could
be a model for us to utilise for
you new mexico medical training
and I also know that there's
models and massachusetts at
eleven fifteen waver that was
done in massachusetts that is a
similar model that was suggested
to us previously by uhm cms.
Well it's an exciting
possibility I mean III.
Can I wish I weren't retiring it
this would be something to kind
of push but they're plenty of
people around the table here who
would be uh I think interested
in.
Picking up the challenge so
let's go to them and find out
what they would question they
have and representative robot
cover yet we're going to start
with you this time and work
around this way.
Thank you mister chair
primary care as my very favorite
topic and field because I think
that it addresses.
Wide bride spectrum i've
prevented of care that would
minimize
costs and
pain and stress an individual so
I i've been thinking that about
this quote a bit and
I don't know if you have the
data but it would be interesting
to know how many.
A current new mexico.
The.
Ah based on students are in
rolled in our UNM.
I have uh.
Medical school part went blank
medical school.
Because
the next part of that question
would be.
What are we doing to retain them
and recruit them into our rule
communities.
And and wait and I think we need
to reverse it I think we know
the need to see here what you
addressed in the last
slide is really important.
Are if anything we do we need to
do in terms of health care and
creating funds for education
health care.
Um.
But i'm also interested in
knowing what can we do to
incentivise.
And in our retraining in our
retaining and recruitment and we
need to pick your brains because
you're on the front lines and
you're working with these
residents what is undermined how
do they what is it that they
look forward to what can we and
still in our institutional
processes that will keep them
here.
The.
Richard chairman representative
that I don't thank you for the
question I i've been listening
to the presentations today and
had a couple of thoughts about
some of the some of the comments
and specific to your question
the landscape is changing
significantly when it comes to
recruitment and retention
the cost have definitely gone up
substantially to to recruit all
health care providers into the
work force.
And.
In our i'll just use a reference
you know uh a graduate position
in this area that finishes a
rense program when I started at
hms and twenty sixteen was about
a hundred ninety thousand
dollars a year salary a new
graduate now in this area is
about two forty to two fifty so
when you talk about recruiting
them from a financial standpoint
the cost has increase of
substantially there's also the
the benefits that come with that
when it comes to sign on bonuses
when it comes to retention
bonuses when it comes to housing
housing the big opportunity for
us we will recruit I qualified
physicians into the area and
have a real trouble assisting
them and finding housing the
retention equation is is also
shifted significantly as well
from the standpoint of our need
as the health care system that
only new mexico but across the
country to create a better work
life balance
it you know working in health
care is is is as many of the
clinicians in the room but
legislators and clinicians know
the demand for health care
services is is increased both
pandemic in the number of
clinicians to serve that demand
is is not there so we're putting
in where we're asking a greater
burden on our clinicians to
serve the population
and and retention is there's a
different equation now than it
was
you know decade to go when I got
into health care
we're having to work to make
sure that we provide um not only
workplace solutions culturally
and with tools and resources
such as dictation describe
artificial intelligence to help
support the time they spend
behind the computer so they can
spend more quality times with
their patient to providing
different levels of supportive
resources such as we've been
discussing medical assistance
operations staff to support with
the scheduling etc so I could
talk for a long time of what I
experienced on the business side
but hopefully they're starting
to touch on some of the
turn to touch on the answer to
your question.
Uhm.
And of course the state of new
mexico not only locally at a
practice level but at the
healthcare system need to
attract providers to our state
as it released to all the things
that you deal with every year at
the legislature related to
malpractice related to housing
etc so i'll pass there will put
in my colleagues when I add to
my thoughts
that's a that's okay I can add
mr chair and represent a very
bill caba
hero we are in the process of
collecting some data on the
pathways so we are looking at uh
students from new mexico who
enter medical school in new
mexico either at borrell or at
university of new mexico and
then whether they enter a
primary care residency program
how many of those graduates
enter a primary care residency
program in our state um so we
are we are working on that we
have a preliminary uhm map that
is not public yet but I uhm I
can uh we can share that with
with you also that you can at
least see some of the
preliminary data that were
collecting and the other uhm we
are also looking at
planning to talk with those
those students who stay in new
mexico through the through the
pathway uhm to find out what
what kept what keeps them what
keeps them in new mexico so that
we can continue to support that
I will say one other additional
piece of information that might
be important in terms of um of
retaining students through the
pathway is that one of the
things that I hear regularly
from medical students is real
concerns about their debt from
medical school um and in a
concern that going into primary
care will leave them with a
substantial debt for for a
longer period of time because
the pay for a primary care is
lower than for other specialties
and so that may be one area that
we want that we may want to take
a look at is is there a way that
we can work on reducing uhm the
the medical school debt for
students so that they're not
making decisions based on that
but rather making decisions.
Based on what they're passionate
about in terms of practicing
medicine
doctor and the solar do you have
anything to earn.
I've out well yes i'm sure to
say uhm uh mister chair and
members of the committee I think
the
I think I think there needs to
be a strategic idea of how we do
this for a first and foremost
you did ask about how many
people from new mexico go to UNM
the vast majority do it's like
seventy to eighty percent and
which is great borrell let much
less so it's a much much smaller
number that that that go there I
think that's an excellent
question to ask because if
you're from new mexico you're
more likely to stay in new
mexico and how you build these
programs I think needs to be
done strategically.
I always say the wrong thing so
i'm gonna say the wrong thing
and you can forgive me but.
I I think the b a t m d student
program is a great idea and you
find these these jams and you
get him out of high school and
you get their base and you get
their mds I think the mistake is
that they go to alva curty for
eight years and so I would love
to tie people to their regions
as much as possible right and
the reason I was saying that is
an issue because.
You and I was not going to like
the fact that i'm saying this
but I would love a beat a md
program that's in western in one
that's an eastern and one that's
an enemies you in and and that
these people are as close to
their communities as possible
for as long as possible and in
the next thing is training in
these communities and that's
another reason why I push this
there is nation national later
that says a person is likely to
practice in the community they
go to medical school it's about
thirty five percent of people
who graduate medical school
practice in that community.
If you do residency training
across the board no matter what
specialty it's about fifty
percent stay in the community if
you do medical school and
residency training that goes up
to above seventy percent and so
these pipeline these sort of
intentional pipeline programs I
think are really important.
The lone forgiveness I think is
a great idea
and loan forgiveness already
does exist preparally qualified
health centers at already tas
exists for critical access
hospitals so if residents could
train there as they're in their
training they could get their
loans partially forgive and
which I
worked at memorial medical
center for the last fifteen
years that's a for profit
hospital and all of the
residents had trained there are
ineligible for that but if they
were training at the clinica.
They would and then.
Lastly is the big.
I'm gonna the big elephant is
the med mel and we've last eight
percent of our physicians this
last year and it's we're losing
more physicians than we can
train and so I and so I think
there needs to be rethought
process around that as well.
That's time think I know I was
about to say thank you matter
mister chair thank you very much
for your thoughtful responses
just to reminder to folks for
minutes i'm giving you four
minutes for questions and answer
so if you can be brief in ball
get more questions the senators
said the old opposite thank you
mister chair.
One of the things are so I had
the opportunity to go you you to
you and them and speak to the
residents because they have this
program where they I don't know
why they have legislature speak
to the residents but about pop
policy and how medical policy
develops and you know it was
interesting as men mail wasn't
on the residents.
The.
You know radar at all but you
know what was on the radio radar
was the quality of the life
during the residency they talked
about the long hours and the
crazy schedules in the low pay
given what they were doing and
and whatever and I was wondering
is there an advantage in rural
hospitals that you can sell
because they looked tired and it
was it was just heartbreaking
and they were they weren't just
family medicine they were all
residents participated in this.
I think that's an excellent uhm
question um.
Mr chair and members of the
committee specifically when it
comes to
physician burn out and there's a
there's a there's a thing called
uhm
it's called something it's not
moral injury I love that who
said that so of course so
uhm moral injury I think is a
big part of that a lot of
physicians go to work right they
become physicians that go
through all the stuff because
they want to make a difference
right and when they become a car
producing profit it burns them
out right um when they get to go
to rural community and serve
people of need and excites them
and we have seen that we have
seen that are are urban
hospitals hospitals are having
trouble matching residents so
getting residents to come to
them but our
most
rural places aren't because I
think there's a mission driven
statement there and so I do
agree with that I do think it's
in sightforward that that
training makes a big difference
and we talk about burn out we
forget it's not necessarily how
much you work it's the reward
you get from it
but also I mean I made a joke
with them I said you know I
always ask a resident at u n
when the greater how long
they've been up
and you know they they laughed
but this is I think it's a real
problem and I I asked them what
project they want to work on in
the legislature and this this
quality of life for residents
was the number one thing so I
hope that's helpful I just want
to thank you for everything you
all do it's really important
work and generate you to help
me thank you mister chairman and
and center office I think just
very briefly
the acg and me which is the
credit body for us and see
programs has taken a really good
stance on resident wellbeing and
have changed the criteria
regarding how many hours they
can give.
I'm not the expert in that area
but it it has gotten much better
over the last several years
regarding resident well being I
just bought them in the last
fall so it it it did looks like
it wasn't that big a deal but I
don't know and then decided to
indulgence offline i'd like to
talk to mister doctor there are
uhm I my mothers of their
curious about whether there's a
connection thank you.
Thank you metro chip.
Thank you senator representative
charges thank you mister chair
so I have a couple of questions
one of them is you talked about
indirect costs.
And I don't remember what you
said doesn't cover a direct cost
but can you kind of dive into
that a little bit and tell us
what that means.
So the federal government when
they increased when they
designed funding the design
funding in two polls i'm direct
cost in indirect cost.
The direct costs of course were
salaries and benefits and and
the cost of the for the
residence themselves but also
part of the faculty salaries in
and the building etcetera the
indirect costs were extra
funding that was added to
hospital training for an extra
cost of having a resident and
that is very much uhm not well
defined and so it could be
because they order more lapse or
it could be because they eat
more or could be because they
leave the lights on I don't know
but it's not well described but
it's for extra cost of training
a resident um to find in
hospitals for medicare that's
typically three to five times
the direct costs so it's a large
chunk of the funding that
hospitals get for the indirect
cost
mister chairman and
representative charges you don't
mind from
an example of that would be the
residents at rotated through the
dog of medical services would
spend a certain amount of time
and caught new any clinic in a
certain in the majority of their
time rotating around the
community getting education so
the interact costs to our system
for example would be staffing up
support staff for when they're
in the clinic but when they're
rotating out in the community
and those that the support staff
are still there so is to help
mint minimize that impact that's
helpful right now that's
actually that is very helpful
i'm any makes sense because if
you are supervising you're
taking time away from patience
and if you are seen patience to
chair then your obviously need
more
money for the support staff that
they are needed to see patience
rates so it's like third of this
circle suspicious circle so the
other question that I have is
in terms of.
In terms of of the training
that's going on right now and I
want to use unm because that's
the only medical school that we
have in the state rate for
medical doctors
and so and so if.
If we were to.
Do we need to increase the
numbers of students of medical
students that are admitted to
UNM to be able to draw more
residents into the community.
Um
chair and members of the
committee the
am typically what it ends up
happening is that that continues
to happen where medical schools
are increased their numbers but
they don't have a place to go to
residency training and so when a
physician graduates from medical
school they have their md but
they can't practice medicine nor
should they because they're
their babies and so
you become a physician in
residency and residency training
is 3-5 3 7 years after
graduation from medical score
that's really where
where that that individual
becomes a practicing position in
the state of new mexico it's
required that you have at least
two years post graduate training
before you can even get licensed
and so that tends to be the
bottle neck so if we graduate
way more students in our state
then we have places to train
them
alright so then that sort of
answers the question I think at
one point in time we had a
presentation or I heard
somewhere that we were having
trouble matching the numbers of
students coming out with
residencies so we really need to
look at increasing residencies
and I just wanted to make one
more quick comment if I can umm
in terms of the medical mail
practice they think that the
information that you have is
maybe incorrect and so if you
can get me your contact
information i'd love to send you
what we have in terms of medical
amount practice and you know the
impact on doctors in new mexico
thank you.
Representative ferrari.
Thank you mister terror and
thank you panel for all the
screen information I think
everything that I was going to
ask about has been covered um
and
just on the idea of what you
just said doctor and disorder
in new mexico the the person
becomes a physician after two
years of residency whereas other
states they become a physician
and then they are practicing
physician during their residency
so that affects how much the
person is probably paid and can
be bill can bill is that right
uhm
mr and members of the committee
representative I I think I may
have miss spoken usually after
medical school you graduate with
your empty
but you can't practice medicine
and you need to have post
graduate training and that's
what residency training is um in
the state in new mexico you need
to have at least two years of
that training before you can
actually get your license of the
license right board
certification actually takes
concompletion of that training
so
most states now across the
country and I know most of this
across the country require two
to three years post graduate
twenty training before they will
license positions
that were worth like everyone
else that okay and
when we've been talking about in
a recruiting teachers and other
professionals to come to new
mexico it seems like we also
have to keep in mind their
spouses and how to
get them jobs or find activities
or things that they're
interested in also as well as
education.
Quality of education for their
children so there is a lot of
things that we need to
that we're all working on in
different aspects so
and also the side dear of two
billion dollar permanent phone
that would help with a lot of
the different issues of
residency in
malpractice and all that
this could be a major part of
that I bet if if that does go
through so thank you.
No questions a representative
block you we're gonna come round
this way
thank you so much mr chairman
think you guys were coming down
uh I just had one one question
but I didn't want to see it's
great to see you again mister
whittaker I believe I saw you
last year indian affairs one we
went to gallop mckinley and
you're in a new role so
congratulations on that uh so I
guess the one question I have we
started a new a nursing program
at new mexico state elmingordo
as you mentioned doctor.
And azola hope it in massacre
your name
but thank you mister chairman so
do we know when when it will
have statistics on that so that
you can find out if they're
working what we need to do to
improve because I know initially
we funded it with with capital
outland I believe maybe some
junior money and then the local
hospital which is now christas
they put some money in there as
well so do we know what you guys
are looking for and that to make
sure it's viable so we can
continue to help produce more
nurses and medical folks mister
chair that's all I had
so
mister chair and members of the
committee I uhm yet we were part
of a residency program
development in element and it
was a one plus two residency
program which means it does the
first year and lost cruises in
the last two in elementary of
their at now christmasim and
graduated it's first second
class last year um and I let the
very first year it kept one
hundred percent of its doctors
in the community and actually
they joined the faculty as part
of the teaching this last year I
think they are left is
once one state
and this next year I can tell
you that several or entertaining
staying as well as and working
in the residency program there
as um as well given the fact
that the program is brand new
and has only to graduate in
classes that's very impressive
thank you so much mister chair
and that's great to hear night I
hope it continues to do well and
i'll do whatever I can to help
it and i'm sure this legislative
body would as well so thank you
so much thank you mister
chairman thank you
representative representative
jones thank you mr chair and
thank you all for your
presentation
thank you especially doctor
terror for the good work you do
my district appreciate that
alight
I would like to
have a little bit more
information about the residents
residency program funding.
I see the slide here but
somebody mentioned I don't
remember who spoke about that
but start up costs that you
really don't this really doesn't
come in to play until you've
taken care of start up costs
could you explain start up cost
to me please sure
mister chair and representative
johns m the start up costs for a
residency programs especially in
rural communities where you
don't you may not already have
an academic infrastructure in
place and for training residents
can be pretty significant so
that could include specifically
things like hiring new faculty
to teach in the program training
those faculty to be prepared to
teach the residents when they
get there you don't necessarily
in your own your own training to
become a physician get specific
training in terms of how to
teach residents
that they there are requirements
for creditation of a program
that include am specific
specifics about this space that
has to be available for
residents in terms of number of
clinical at rooms that they have
to see patience and in the
clinical space so sometimes
buildings may need to be
renovated or even constructed in
rural communities because those
don't already exist so those are
the kinds of start up costs some
of the start up costs that may
uhm be needed in a rural
community leading in those can
be quite significant and I don't
know if anyone else has any
other additional start up costs
well thank you mister chair and
thank you and that kind of fits
into my concern when you're
talking about having
psychiatrists trained in rural
areas I think I don't believe we
even have a psychotrist you know
have and how do you trains you
have to have somebody in place
first before you can even have
someone in residency it seems
daunting to say the least and
you know it it's a great path to
start out on but I know there's
a lot of groundwork to be done
first so I appreciate the
conversation and explanation
thank you thank you mister
chair.
The.
Thank you representative
representative heard in your
next thank you mr chair and
thank you panelis and i'd like a
some clarification when someone
graduates some medical school
and they've been practicing in
some way for two years they can
get a license subsequently they
can get a board certification if
they finish a residency but my
question to you is are are they
limited into where they can
practice in the type of practice
they can do if they only have a
license
mister chair and members of the
committee
representative um
no they're not there they're not
they're not limited they do
typically the post the two years
post graduate training that they
that's required it means two
years after medical school you
have to do at least two years of
some sort of residency to get to
get the license but it's not but
you're not bored certified those
that to your um requirement is a
is an unrestricted license and
they can practice in any setting
however because they're not
bored certified that also limits
their ability to practice in
specific areas
okay so thank you and with
respect to the
the way in which residencies are
given I want to make sure I
understand the two ways in which
that you can get a residence the
through a private hospital it is
one way and then through your
universities you can get a
residency so it's hill dogo and
macea are these private
hospitals.
Um
mr chair members the committee
representative the
dog medical services is a
federally qualified health
center so it's it's a health
it's a company of health clinics
that are uh not for profit so
it's slightly different
you can get training to be a
physician in academic medical
center that used to be like the
gold standard but we've found
that decentralizing training
into communities is probably
better for communities because a
position is more likely to serve
the community of they know what
the community needs and they're
better trained in to meet those
needs of those communities so
they can train in four profit
hospitals they can turn in not
for profit hospitals and they
can train and federally
qualified hell centers and even
rural health centers are other
sorts of
facilities in fact they can even
train in a consortium model and
a consortium is a sponsoring
institution of the residency
program that currently exists in
uhm espinal okay so mr chair and
mr president I mean doctor
president just for clarification
so federally qualified health
centers that is a different type
of residency then would be given
to the university of new mexico
is that correct
mister chair and um uhm
representative actually know it
would be that it would be
considered the same and under
the same uhm uhm certification
requirements and the credition
requirements
alright so i'm just trying to
make clear mister chairman and
doctor presenter the university
of new mexico has a limited
number of residencies so once
those are field a residency
people who don't get into those
residencies can then apply to
the federally quatified
hospitals that we're talking
about now that's a separate set
of residencies is that correct
right it's a it's it's it's a
separate residency then that
exists in.
Um
in unm but after medical school
when they graduate they entered
this program called the match
program.
Um all
residency programs across the
nation and all specialties are
required to get their residence
from this match program and what
they do is they interview at
their various places that they
may want to go so they may
interview and sover city they
may interview and lost crisis
they may interview and you and
and then they rank where they
want to go we interview numerous
applicants from all across the
country and we rank them and a
computer algorithm matches us
and that's why they called the
match program.
That exists simultaneously in
all different residencies but
definitely there were lost
cruises program and the hms
program are separate programs
from unm
thank you mister chair
yes I have other questions my
time is
senator rodriguez thank you
mister chairman and I will be
quick thanks for your work and
your presentations I also have
some questions on the
on the training and the license
let me see if I have it
correctly here I wrote my notes
here okay you get your md doctor
and as all right okay you get
your md than training for two
years required and please start
me as i'm going if I do and but
you can do this training
unrestricted in any thing you
want to train in right now
restrictions
now is this training during the
two years is is this position to
be
actually interacting with
patience directly they are okay
so in a hospital setting for
example okay so they're training
and i'm sure they're under
supervision stricts the
provision during the time
because they just came out of
medical school ok then after
that then they can they become
licensed cause I met their two
years then the licensed the
license is two years that's part
of the
seven years I think you said
seven years total residency
requirement did I hear that
correctly mister chairman doctor
and doesn't I I said any
residency programs can take from
three to seven years depending
on the specialty so family
medicine is three years internal
medicine pediatrics emergency
medicine those are all three
year programs.
Am I being four years general
surgery's five years neural
surgery seven years so just
depends
but you're right that two years
training that they're doing
before they can become eligible
occurs within that three years I
see ok thank you so and what
point do fessions wouldn't it be
a sim in a hospital looking my
daughters at the hospital we
used to see everyone that went
into her room we knew were
doctors were called doctors they
had their little tag and he said
doctor patient doctor tipped
inductors but they were
residents and so whether they
were there for the year or two
or three we don't know that we
never asked but at what point
can they actually achieve the
title to to have that.
Mister chairman.
And that's all I hear mr chair
senator i'm unclear as to the
the question
what yeah I guess when do they
become a fish session that they
can actually carry the title
right then yep I understand the
question so mr
senator rodriguez they when they
graduate from medical school and
they have an md they they are a
physician so they are a doctor
at that point but they cannot
practice independently so they
still have to go through
additional supervised it's
really it's it's a lot a lot of
residency is supervised practice
they are obviously still getting
additional education in kind of
classroom based education but
much of residency is supervised
practice so they are they are
doctors when they graduate from
medical school but not licensed
until after that two years does
that does that make sense yes
you clarified it thank you so
much for that and that's all I
have mister chairman for second
time.
Thank you mister and thank you
very much for your presentation
and I think you have some good
ideas that perhaps others will
want to try to share or an act
the actual physical unm campuses
in my legislative district and I
I would you say about the number
of percentage of students from
all over this state
attending there is is um
comports with what i've heard I
know that
when I was first elected the the
for the.
The gentleman who was president
of you and i'm at that time had
new legislators over for a
gathering and really tried to
emphasize unm is not the
university of all the
it's the university of new
mexico and there are students
all over the stick from all over
this day who attend but
before I was ever
in the legislature I worked at
the health science as center it
is a senior research associate
and at what is now the center
for development and disability
and the part of the periodics
was our
we were in the department of
periodics I I guess I just want
to say I have met with a lot of
residents over that time and
they are literally exhausted I
think senator city a lopez
brought that up I mean I would
be at a really small meeting and
they were having trouble staying
away can they
they told me you're not we we
don't get it sleep and one of my
one of my staff members would
i've been the director of a
program is a physical therapist
into later went to medical
school and she was
telling me
recounting for me how you know
sometimes people say doctors can
really be jerks and she said you
know if you're not a jerk when
you start hurt you can be after
your resident because they'll be
in the middle of something some
emergent situation and us send a
resident off to go find
something they won't tell the
resident what floor or what
rumor wherever and you and
they're afraid to ask because
the emergency situation is.
Two so I just think there's a
way to humanize that experience
and
I know people aren't fortunate
to be in that program
to do in any program my cousins
daughter.
Is it physicians assistant and
she couldn't get in in the I
grew up in arizona and so she
was from arizona she couldn't
get into the UNM program because
there weren't enough slides so
she went to duke university so
now she lives in north carolina
and instead of in new mexico
right next to where her family
familiars but
I I do hope those ideas of yours
come through thank you mister
chairman.
I mean this may be a dumb
question but why would people go
to get their boards is that for
more pay is it
what's the incentive.
Mister chair madam chair the.
Maybe I did miss speak you can
practice anywhere but like if
you go to a hospital you have to
be bored certified in the
specialty before you can get
probably just work at that
hospital and so that that ends
up being a limiting factor
alright that makes sense thank
you so much
and then you talk doctor and
disorder about the ba emd
program and have so you are not
talking about having a medical
school in your talking about the
ba part of it or yeah I mean I I
get it I grew up at chromepoint
new mexico but as rural as you
can get but so how tell me a
little bit more about what how
you see that working.
Mr chairman
vice chair I knew I shouldn't
said anything so
because i'm not in control with
that it's just an idea that i've
had for years that i've been
here because they again I
understand that the longer you
are in the community the longer
you're more likely to serve that
community and anything we can do
to keep positions.
In training or those potential
stars in our communities keep
them in our communities would be
a great idea and so i've always
mentioned that so mister chair
maybe it's more about the beat
the ba part of it trying to keep
closer to their communities in
the exact I mean if we can't
hire positions we can't hire
enough positions to have a
medical school
you know even in every quarter
of the state so
just real briefly what what are
the requirements of a resident
residency program
real briefly there there's an
accreditation council on
graduate medical education
called the ecgmen they set
requirements for residency
training across the nation the
echieme is actually.
Significant you cannot have
um if you graduate from a
separate program other than an
acgma credited program you
cannot get board certified and
license etc so it really is the
central central agency and
every specialty has a review
committee that discusses all of
the requirements and the
hospital has to demonstrate that
it has those requirements the
fuency has to demonstrate that
it has those requirements
they come to visit and then they
monitor they actually monitor
uhm annually to make sure that
those requirements are being met
I was just trying to get the
point across that you know you
have a rural doctor practicing
in wherever they can't have a
residency because the they need
more people to to supervise the
resident cell it in but we have
been talking for several years
about using some state moneys to
open up some more residencies
because we know there that's
always going to be a shortage
area and we want to keep folks
so thank you all for what you do
in for your presentation.
Thank you this is actually a
follow up what would it take to
take the bay md program that is
that you and m state wide would
it be an mo with the various
union of universities around the
state or just i'm just throwing
out their idea because that was
very powerful what you said
about
their usually albuquerque kids
not not always.
There no
okay well it would be great to
have like a western university
kid selected to be in that
program and I or how would that
work if if it could be the.
I understand what i'm talking
about they ba part i'm going to
play speak to the issue of the
the b a m d program is open to
kids from every school all over
the state it's open o they do
recruit they do recruit ok but
the ba part is is was the point
that you made and I guess it's
trying to get the you have to do
your back you and then because
that's where all the supports
are exactly but what i'm
suggesting is maybe they could
have a movie I don't know but it
may be it's a crazy idea was
just to follow up it
may be lack of sleep
from what
representative thomson said.
With is there an idea that's
feasible
so mister chair and and senator
I can just say very briefly that
I do believe that new mexico
state university has either
already developed her has been
working on developing that kind
of a partnership with borrell so
I think that may be an area to
look at to see what what that
process looks like and if that
might be a possibility.
Okay they think it was it it
seems to me that that would be
up to each individual
institution each individual
universe to have an email you
with your name will you with
either you and emerge browsers
only to medical school so it
just seems feasible in doable
and and possibly
it would save them a lot of
money to couldn't be able to
come to you graduate from
western rather than him to go
you now for their
part I don't but represent that
that's always that that's always
a possibility you don't only get
into mid school at you and then
if you went through the b a m d
break so it that option has
always been there
and I believe every school in
the state has the opportunity
scholarship so the undergraduate
is the least expensive portion
of that
so we have two members who still
have other questions near to
senator nation rodriguez
representative of patricia robot
coming on the road thank you
mister chairman I know it's late
and we want to move on but I do
need some clarification about
something brief
represent have advised your
thompson asked about the two
years and whether a person can
practice anywhere and anything
they want to do after the two
years my your response was bad
they they can practice I mean
they can do the kind of medical
service they want to do but they
have to have privileges at a
hospital to do it in a hospital
my question is what about a
clinic so person with two years
of training after they get their
md then they got a training
there to two years and they can
go work in a clinic or open a
clinic mister chairman just more
to be sure I understand.
Mr chair and senator uhm.
Yeah they can the thing with
board certification is in its
changed quite a bit over the
years ago to use the change
and what I mean with that is you
used to be able to graduate with
your md do one year of training
and distinguisher single and you
still can't the problem and now
you can do two years of training
and hang your single the problem
is is is the credentialing part
so I talked about credentialing
in the hospital but there is
also credentially with insurance
and peers and so so
just because you hang your
single doesn't mean that you're
going to get paid it also
impacts your mail practice at
all or so impacts other
parts of supporting your
practice now the state of new
mexico will give you a full
unrestricted license to practice
medicine after two years post
graduate training because you're
not bored certified you can have
all these other hurdles that
have to be addressed
thank you is returned but to be
bought certified mr chairman you
don't need to do additional
training other than the two
years you already have right you
need at least three years for
family medicine
okay for a second time stop
thank you mister chairman yes.
Representative robot trouble you
know
thank you mister tear and
doctor and the sweller you
opened up the r
world here of possibilities and
so thank you.
For your forward thinking
because I love the notion of the
resident being as close to the
communities that you will be
placed in our serving arm
especially from the primary care
standpoint
and
the fact that we need to be more
intentional about our strategic
planning to put those systems
and place because as we've been
hearing
we we hear about the problems
problem problem problem lack of
solutions that you've offered
some very thoughtful solutions
so
I have how does the
new mexico primary care training
consortium
currently interface with
the strategic planning processes
of both institutions you are an
mh and borrow college
whoever can answer
I can into that mr chair and
represent a robot cover there a
few ways that that happens why
is that we have um their members
of our board who are
representatives of each of those
institutions and so they
participate uhm in in our board
and in that um that planning
process um and I think the
we also interface with the unm
in particular in the development
of the rural track residency
programs especially the
psychiatry residency program
that we're developing in
southern new mexico and in terms
of
with with borrell we we do also
work with borrell specifically
as working on a family medicine
residency program in the
lovington hob's area and we have
collaborated with them on that
those are not necessarily
strategic uhm to answer that
part of your question.
I do think we have a little bit
more work to do in that area and
we have started really thinking
about uhm where can we support
rural residency programs where
did the resources exist how can
we uh best utilize and um uh the
resources of those large
institutions unam and borrell um
to support and sustain those
road residency programs and so
those there is questions or ones
that we're that we're asking
right now and I think the other
place where I think this will
happen in doctor in the solar
can speak more and to this is
that at the state level through
their graduate medical education
expension sub committee and
there is a strategic planning
happening and thinking around
where we need to develop these
residency programs at how we can
best utilize our resources
across the state and I say
doctor into solar is the chair
of that subcommittee so I don't
know if you want to mention
anything about that
I really don't have anything
else out to the
that's fine and so I would
encourage you maybe even urge
you to kind of step that up and
notch because if you're request
is to move forward then we
really need the to substantiate
with the data
with um personal testimonies
from residents current residence
that are in this in this
position
and everything else that goes in
place with
strategic planning um to move
forward with any pieces of
legislation that perhaps may
move forward because it's just
we're moving real face it's
already before it I mean I
realize where mid september
already and the session is just
a few months away and if this is
something that will move forward
we'd need as much
logistics and.
All the support of material is
possible so I thank you very
much thank you mr chair.
Clarification that's like your
question
this is what is the
clarification only regarding
something that the doctor said
mister chair and it was
regarding them the medical mail
practice insurance and I think
one of the the statements that
you made as that was one of the
reasons that doctors were
leaving but I thought that the
medical mail practice insurance
was paid by the hospitals and
that by the doctors particularly
when they have the ability to
practice and i've been it there
could you clarify that please
absolutely mister chair and
representative it depends so if
the if the provider is employed
by the hospital yes indeed then
it's paid by the hospital if the
if the employer of the physician
is another group outside of the
hospital or if the physician is
self employed it's paid by that
group or the individual.
Represent her and in just two
clarify the cap on that is seven
hundred and fifty thousand
dollars and the provider only
has to get insurance for two
hundred and fifty thousand up
that so they are not getting
insurance for two million
dollars they're cut there
they're the limit is seven fifty
and they only have to pay for
the insurance up to two hundred
and fifty
thank you a matter thank you.
Okay I have a few questions to
and we have until four o'clock
we still have another fifteen
minutes we're ahead
have you yes thanks to a
ruthless time keeper.
Have the reimbursement
increases in medicaid that we
put through the last two years.
Have you seen any evidence yet
that they're making a difference
good but you you say yes it will
literally be pretty says don't
I will say quickly a a mister
chair
is the committee yes I think
what I have seen in in my work
in talking with partners who are
interested in potentially
developing residency programs in
rural areas at this state it it
that the ability and again this
is you know it
um it depends on the type of
hospital whether this how much
of a difference this makes but
it I it does allow people to
consider the possibility rate at
the very least and because that
funding is um is actually more
widely available across a larger
number of different types of
facilities so yes I absolutely
think it has made a difference
in terms of are being able to
engage partners in in developing
primary care residency programs
jan is that your experience to
no sir
you can because I want to
separate it out mister committee
the
reimbursement rates look so
different across the system of
course right so the work that
you all have done to support
rate increases excellent you've
you've moved a hundred and fifty
percent of medicare rates on the
medicaid side you've provided
for q c's which serve about one
and ten new mexicans across the
state and the primary care rome
with a six percent increase that
went was approved last year
there is not going to affect
until october for us so last
year or two years ago it will be
to affect on july one
and the the the main point that
I want to make is the inflation
rate the cost of care is
substantially more than the six
percent in then some cases even
more than a hundred and fifty
percent of medicare rates I give
an example of the salary cost to
recruit a physician
but just a general general.
Economics right now those rates
are helpful so that the question
was helpful yes sir and thank
you for the the work you've done
on that but keeping up with the
inflation rates from my
experience no
and so when you say inflation in
this context is it
I mean it is it just that the
shortage is such that doctors
can ask for and receive and
nurses can ask for and receive
and dentists can ask for and
receive bigger salaries in the
use of yes or mister chairman
and committee members the due to
the shortage of health care
professionals we see and i'm
gonna talk about more prestation
tomorrow about the movement of
health care professionals
moving across system to system
state to state there's a lot of
transition
it's a it's the traditional
supply and demand equation where
the demand is out pacing the
supply of position to another
healthcare professional this
driving up the cost
substantially and then again to
the second party your question
is the
cost of care in general if we
look at the herself we have to
submit a lot of data that's to
eat season the health resource
service administration on
quality of care
cost to care in access numbers
and the cost of care across the
state of new mexico has gone up
substantially and i'll have that
data ready for you tomorrow to
share the we're we're very
concerned about the invites
driving cars up and we have a
study going on to try to begin
figuring out
because it is for us stripping
the the national inflation
and I apologize actually
misunderstood your question I
thought you were talking about
the increase in the in the
medicaid funding for residency
programs and that was my that
was my response so I apologize
for that so I was talking about
just the the reimbursement for
services offered but but my head
had another question then to
follow up on it all of your
chart show medicaid as a as a
hundred thousand dollars a year.
Resource is that just a fixed
figure or is that a capital
beyond that but it could be less
than what is what is how much is
medicaid pay for a residency
training program at either a
hospital or a clinic sure mister
chair that hundred thousand
dollars per resident per year is
specifically for primary care
and psychiatry residencies so
other types of specialties home
I believe it's fifty thousand
dollars per resident per year
and that is a a fixed uhm amount
but that is only the direct car
so when we there are also for
some types of facilities there
also medicate in direct costs
that would change you know there
is a formula and so they would
be dependent on a number of
different and factors medicaid
beds and um number of residents
at resident fte training at the
site but that hundred thousand
dollars is but that I am choose
because it it seems to me that
if you if you get a hundred
thousand for a resident and then
that resident through their work
that you're generates another
hundred thousand
you actually
have a couple hundred thousand
which is which you say it costs
doesn't it doesn't work out that
way
so you know mister that's a good
question and when we when we
look at the cost of residency
programs and that is actually
something that does not often
get included in in the cost but
an inductory disold may be able
to speak to this as well uhm the
the it it really it really
depends on the facility whether
the having the residents seeing
patience contribute
significantly to
the overall revenue of of the
clinic but doctor and disall me
bill speak to that a little bit
more specifically.
Yes mister mister chair usually
when we talk about graduate
medical education which is
training residents after medical
school you separate the academic
portion from the clinical
portion the clinical portion of
clinical revenue generated subs
so i'm so supports the clinical
work the nurses the maze the
text all of that stuff
everything that we talked about
with the uhm graduate medical
education funding support
specifically the academic
portion of which has no other
reimbursement other than the
graduate metal medical education
funding that we're talking about
so that hundred thousand is for
the
the the time of the doctors who
mentor who supervisor whatever
we call it there's another
receptors uh
the devote themselves to helping
this.
Young new doctor learned the
ropes learn how to do these
things and earning correct
mistakes afterwards and exactly
that the seller in benefits all
the academic support of that all
the computers that telephones
all of the stuff that goes hand
in hand with training of
physician and the clinical money
generated goes for everybody
else goes as a foreign facility
the rant that the immunisations
the nurses they may is the
front's office staff all of that
and and and your answer was
sometimes it's a wash other
times it's a lot
in this chairman and committee
if I may
I have direct experience with
this personally at h m s in all
the years that we ran the
program and I believe our budget
for our program from the
teaching health center funds
with nine hundred thousand
dollars in hms for the
traditionally goal for budget
just on the academic side by
between a hundred and hundred
fifty thousand dollars a year
for each for each resident for
the whole provider total program
right and so yes you're correct
revenue that would generate what
offset some of that but it
depends on on
how projected they are how I
work
fish
well and how many medic and how
many non medicaid people who you
don't get a dime for yet to see
they just will part of this gets
back to what we do to the
futures in the state I mean
yeah they're under herself but
we put some money in there and
we should be I think possibly uh
giving you more money to because
the work you do is so crucial to
what goes on at stake note that
another question the psychiatry
residency proving thank you for
developing that is there some
thought that these new the
status develop now these new
certified comprehensive
community mental health centers
don't know if there's one down
here that I know there's one
less cruises there's one in
there's two in albert I think in
five or six other locations.
Do you have one done here
mister chairman committee member
thank you we do not we are
actively pursuing certification
we ran into a road block in the
first phase related to the
language from santa
are main
behavior health center is
located you'll hear more about
this tomorrow is located at our
crisis three hundred forty which
we've invited you off for a tour
tomorrow and the center language
stated that because it was after
twenty fourteen it wouldn't be
eligible for reimbursement we
understand and we're working
with h c a they've been very
helpful and working with the
current administration to
potentially get in on the
ccbac process in the spring of
twenty five so we haven't given
up we think we figured out how
to allocate that site to work
through that and end those could
potentially be your your
training sites right that's the
thought that that's they would
be the ones that might have a
resident there and right just
real quick mister chairman and
and committee members h m s is
very fortunate we do have one
psychiatrist doctor there are
thirties ago who's gonna call
present with me tomorrow field
meter tomorrow
and and that would be I don't
know the research the training
program for psychiatry but
that's definitely a good start
to move in that direction for us
as well
well I really don't want our
committee to lose side of your
your ask of that we create a
fund
and so I would hope that.
Well I can do it but when are
you prepare a bill to that
effect in and will discuss it at
it our meeting when we endorse
language it would be nice to
have a dollar figure
but you know when we see
what's a nice room figure
a billion dollars
no will it will have whatever
the strategic water reserve gets
will ask for the same amount for
this phone because what it is
doctors are as important as
water well maybe not okay
mr chairman I know about the
amounts from the strategic water
reserve if you don't
know it was five hundred million
we just heard at the lfc five
hundred minute roughly but there
are another six hundred and some
million that are supposed to be
an requested from the federal
government but the status in
fact a partner in that so I
don't know but yes five hundred
million specifically from state
fund now we could do it either
of two ways you tell us which is
best we get a big amount of
money five hundred million one
hundred million
fifty million like the rural
libraries are trying to get and
then you get the interest offer
that it's a permanent phone and
it's just the interest so if you
get a hundred million you
probably getting you know for
five million a year that you you
would use for this program if
you got one if you get ten
million you get four of five
hundred thousand a year but you
know roughly four or five
percent is what they would
anticipate generate or
we just give you a big chunk of
money and try to get it
recurring so that every year
you'd get let's say three
million whatever
something like that mr chairman
I don't know what the figure is
that's why I was asking you
mike.
The leg or like the legacy fund
where they're getting a certain
amount and then it'll go
until it reaches I mean it's
kind of a complicated thing but
they're they're getting a
certain percentage which eats
into the reserve with the idea
that there will be replenishment
so there's another another model
switch is the best
you have to answer now in the
next ten
minutes I would be don't know I
I would say we we if we could
think about it that would be
that would be good but I but but
I do want to say that
sustainability of our rural
programs is really important so
I think that's you know that's
what we need to think about is
is what can be a sustainable
fund i'm just support our rural
programs continuously across the
state
so thank you
and you should make the ask the
overseas as well because we can
write up any bill we want for a
hundred billion dollars and it's
not going to go anywhere unless
lfc is also
on board with it but we but we
start with our and and we have a
chance it turns out that in
november at the eleventh c
meeting in november we will have
a chance to make our case for
some of these proposals we're
coming up with to the lfc so you
might want to have somebody be
there to have to speak in
support of it if if it reaches
that point okay in the two to
three minutes they give us that
but
you think time keeper is
rigorous you know to see there's
okay anything else on this issue
i'm gonna thank you so much for
the presentation but for the
work you're doing on this such a
crucial thing we really need to
to be supportive of you and and
and and increase the residency
programs in the state that's
where we're going to get the
future doctors in the state a
they just have to see i'm I
there's a cynical part of me
may
uh whatever mistrustful of human
nature.
That sees the medical provision
itself is having created this
problem in order to keep the
cost of health care but they
keep the the the reimbursement
for doctor sigh over the years
you know through their
shrinking the availability of
physicians instead of expanding
it but we don't let that keep us
from doing the right thing now
so thank you thanks for doing
all this mister chairman made by
his chair and committee thank
you very much on behalf of the
panel to get this opportunity to
speak with you today and now now
do you want to tell us about
tonight
this is you hear the regional
medical sense good to morning
it's you don't but tonight it's
yes you have to go ahead where
where do we go and and how do we
address the occasion if you're
using kind of mapping
application just put in hill
original medical center of the
the main entrance in the
portugal and come in and there
we sign into and people there
agree to a six clock did we come
in right by it on the highway as
we came in
now no okay alright
will find it okay thank you how
do address for more formally
tired
it's a white contact quite I
guess i'll
very good is there any other
lingering better business we
want to address this afternoon
we will did you want to report
on the letter
we can do that now the still the
screen sense circulate the
letter you know we said at the
last meeting thank you again we
said at the last meeting that we
would create a and I think it
was sternly worded but a.
The
strong a strong letter on
something or other and and we
have copies of you.
Oh yes
well that's right this is a
doctor in get out of ingivanos
or no is it in grilling us in
greeners and with on us that's
what he said.
Oh so it's not even strongly
routed it's a begging letter we
implore you to work swiftly to
implement the plan
that's our next where else will
call you to testify the
committee meaning
who do you think I should send
it.
Yes
mr german i'm sorry just start
talking
I guess I I think we aren't too
perhaps say
as policy makers we
believe it is in the best
interests of
the health of new mexicans the
i'm having it so come on your
smithing is
of such great importance that I
think maybe we want to create a
sense of responsibility to do so
more than just are employing and
I don't want to work smith it
without spending more time.
I think there's to be a strong
expectation on our part as
policy makers that this will
occur we yes and maybe another
sentence rate at the end there
we
know what we have
where is the type.
An emergency room
i'm guessing that they'll want
to it was a very maybe we should
say something like
we were very impressed by the
presentation and
I i'm just guessing that they're
one of that it a little bit
during his compelling
presentation does that do it as
a committee we were impressed
we were impressed by the
presentation and it's potential
i'm i'm working with
representative chases idea we
were impressed by the
presentations of the possibility
that this program will save
money will
um optimize health care for the
the overusers or you know and
you know would be in the best
interest of the state and then
we employ you to work swiftly
and I guess that the word
implement is because they're
going to want to vet it we're
just providing additional
support for it but they're
probably not going to just do it
without any kind of
investigation as free so so so
do we have to say it
I believe that they're the
statement already happened
contract for another thing with
him so it's not like it was a
different way it was okay.
It was the mco
I mean we're not saying they
can't bet it we just aren't
telling them what to do which
isn't telling to do it and if
they need to bet back.
We have a very thrifty attorney
here who has two more words dead
and mister chairman it was a
public member of the public
suggested we need to convey the
urgency and the value.
Oh it's a it's not in here i'm
just suggesting that we make
sure that it expresses that
okay.
We can work on this
but we want to get it out you
know
as a committee we
is this where we heard in succor
right in a nurse who would you
just refresh my memory
here's the guy that
goes out and finds the families
that didn't get carrier services
tracks them down touch to them
engages them and get some to
hook into services and he'll do
it for nothing I mean basically
that is if if if if he doesn't
feel fulfilled the contract
he will charge us yet and he's
pretty much sanity at the bottom
that
this is for a different program
it does is is it so this is for
the overuse and yeah that's what
he does now he does current now
this is for the the um
super utilisers that that the
the the frequent flyers that
keep coming in to emergency
rooms
and with this contract he says
it he doesn't save whatever it's
a hundred and eighty thousand I
can't remember the number but if
he doesn't save the state that
much he wouldn't turn to paid.
So so xander explains that we're
not is is
demanding as we might otherwise
be because we don't want to
violate the procurement code
since it's a contract we're just
saying take a look at it and and
let us know you know basically
if this wouldn't save you money
kind of that's our posture in
this we can't really.
Require it or anything like that
because they have to they have
to follow the procurement code
which means they can't decide
ahead of time who to give the
contract.
Direct
basically yeah it's.
Remember we're not judiciary put
the spend to exam or tell me
just exactly
what it says.
So thank you mister chair so
this is
laying forward the plan and and
saying look at his plan and and
we encourage you to implement a
plan that that plan we're not
saying it has to be with him but
implement that plan as far as I
know no one else is proposing to
implement that plan so it would
probably be with him but we
can't specifically say make a
contract with this person
it's the third.
If that doesn't save medicaid
more than his
contract costs he will he will
charge us ok so what you're
saying is if there's five people
that want to put in for this
kind of service we're asking
them to use this language
as far as an rfp is it correct
yeah okay fair
thank you.
And just to reminder some of
these people were almost daily
visitors to the emergency
department yes the the numbers
were staggering some of them
went three hundred times in a
year we there were one or two
that went three hundred times a
year
each one discussing medicaid
five hundred bucks
each visit so it's put it right
that is three hundred times five
hundred
is hundred and fifty thousand
dollars in emergency room one
guy who went three hundred times
is there a is there a statute
about abusing the emergency room
system
no infector is a federal statute
to require them to treat him but
they show up and as for care
they can't set turn them down
yeah
but this guy thinks he can make
enough dent in it to make it
work.
Any any seem to show that with
custody uses are
pure counselors
people who have been through the
system and he's only got three
two or three of them but they
just go out and make contact and
really establish report and move
it on mr mister chair I I
believe he uses he is a social
workers and other professionals
so it will be a little more
expensive to do but they've had
great success with the care
program in are they on the move
was was there was an immobile
thing or
there has been so many meetings
then sometimes I have to grasp
it
she knows you know anything
about this program julia
you come up and use them like
them.
And juliana coop na work with
actor in request and guard done
us I think you say it correctly
and I don't.
And um represent have been sent
you were about to second the
motion for this latter and you
have so many presentations that
I agree it gets very confusing
doctor and good I know says had
incredible success and other
states finding people who are
the high utilizers and emergency
rooms and savings states so much
money that's how he can say if
we don't save you money well
give you the money back or pay
back
so
I answer the question.
So mister chair and think you
july on a miscoob
yes you entered the question but
at when I wanted to add is that
he demonstrated in the what he
gave us
that positive but the his
outcome says successful outcomes
which was really mind blowing to
us
because he was able to
demonstrate that show us which
lead to the money needs to do
the letter and moving it forward
because whenever we have
positive outcomes like that and
demonstrate it in the material
they provide to us
we've got to incorporate those
kinds of things so that thank
you mister chairman and members
he was given three hundred of
the most difficult car families
to find and he found an
overwhelming majority of those
and engaged half of them and the
way that they do it is there
available twenty four seven
three hundred and sixty five
days a year they literally go
knocking on people's doors and
they say their grammar hey your
daughter lived here and they
have a car a baby where ****
were fd were not line for a
smart and we can offer you all
these services and they say what
do you need today do you need
diapers right now I will go get
you diapers and so they really
former relationship that's night
that people are in a phrase to
engage with them yeah
mr chair I just had that our
home and I I remember it now I
remember it now.
I'll make a couple tweaks and
all of the chairs make sure it
covered everything everybody
talked about and then we'll send
it out and i'm also a key point
to this is that the health care
authority isn't actually the one
who's going to be making the
contract it's going to be the
mco's so we're gonna copy the
mco's on when whenever we send
the letter out.
That's regularly on each year
would have a separate contract
for this rate.
The.
So they could continue doing the
car over.
Is it
the meeting is adjourned and
will
but
resist that it is it's recessed
and will reconvene tomorrow
morning at night
name
and will have dinner tonight at
the health regional medical
center.
The.
